place of rest wherein one receives all that is necessary for one’s well-being

and  happiness,  without  striving,  and  with  freedom  from  pain,  cannot  be

entered.

  In an age like the present, when, in all civilized countries, the string of

life is strained to its highest pitch, when men and women, striving each with

each in every department of life for the vanities and material possessions of

this perishable existence, have developed competition to the utmost limit of

endurance—in such an age the sublimest heights of knowledge are scaled, the

supremest spiritual conquests are achieved; for when the soul is most tired, its

need is greatest, and where the need is great, great will be the effort. Where,

also, the temptations are powerful, the greater and more enduring will be the

victory.

  Men love the competitive strife with their fellows, while it promises, and

seems to bring them gain and happiness; but when the inevitable reaction

comes, and the cold steel of selfish strife which their own hands have forged

enters their own hearts, then, and not till then, do they seek a better way.

  "Blessed are they that mourn,"—that have come to the end of strife, and

have found the pain and sorrow to which it leads; for unto them, and unto

them only, can open the door which leads to the Kingdom of Peace.

  In  searching  for  this  Kingdom,  it  is  necessary  to  fully  understand  the

nature of that which prevents its realization—namely, the strife of nature, the

competitive  laws  operative  in  human  affairs,  and  the  universal  unrest,

insecurity  and  fear  which  accompany  these  factors;  for  without  such  an

understanding there can be no sound comprehension as to what constitutes

the true and false in life, and therefore no real spiritual advancement.

  Before  the  true  can  be  apprehended  and  enjoyed,  the  false  must  be

unveiled; before the real can be perceived as the real, the illusions which

distort it must be dispersed; and before the limitless expanse of Truth can

open before us, the limited experience which  is confined to the world of

visible and superficial effects must be transcended.

  Let, therefore, those of my readers who are thoughtful and earnest, and

who are diligently seeking, or are willing to seek, for that basis of thought

and  conduct  which  shall  simplify  and  harmonize  the  bewildering

complexities and inequalities of life, walk with me step by step as I open up

the way to the Kingdom; first descending into Hell (the world of strife andself-seeking) in order that, having comprehended its intricate ways, we may

afterwards ascend into Heaven (the world of Peace and Love).

  It is the custom in my household, during the hard frosts of winter, to put

out food for the birds, and it is a noticeable fact that these creatures, when

they are really starving, live together most amicably, huddling together to

keep each other warm, and refraining from all strife; and if a small quantity

of  food  be  given  them  they  will  eat  it  with  comparative  freedom  from

contention; but let a quantity of food which is more than sufficient for all be

thrown to them, and fighting over the coveted supply at once ensues.

    Occasionally  we  would  put  out  a  whole  loaf  of  bread,  and  then  the

contention  of  the  birds  became  fierce  and  prolonged,  although  there  was

more than they could possibly eat during several days. Some, having gorged

themselves until they could eat no more, would stand upon the loaf and hover

round  it,  pecking  fiercely  at  all  newcomers,  and  endeavouring  to  prevent

them from obtaining any of the food. And along with this fierce contention

there was noticeably a great fear. With each mouthful of food taken, the birds

would look around in nervous terror, apprehensive of losing their food or

their lives.

  In this simple incident we have an illustration—crude, perhaps, but true—

of the basis and outworking of the competitive laws in Nature and in human

affairs. It is not scarcity that produces competition, it is abundance; so that

the  richer  and  more  luxurious  a  nation  becomes,  the  keener  and  fiercer

becomes the competition for securing the necessaries and luxuries of life.

  Let famine overtake a nation, and at once compassion and sympathy take

the  place  of  competitive  strife;  and,  in  the  blessedness  of  giving  and

receiving, men enjoy a foretaste of that heavenly bliss which the spiritually

wise have found, and which all shall ultimately reach.

  The fact that abundance, and not scarcity, creates competition, should be

held constantly in mind by the reader during the perusal of this book, as it

throws a searching light not only on the statements herein contained, but

upon every problem relating to social life and human conduct. Moreover, if it

be deeply and earnestly meditated upon, and its lessons applied to individual

conduct, it will make plain the Way which leads to the Kingdom.

  Let  us  now  search  out  the  cause  of  this  fact,  in  order  that  the  evils

connected with it may be transcended.  Every phenomenon in social and national life (as in Nature) is an effect,

and  all  these  effects  are  embodied  by  a  cause  which  is  not  remote  and

detached, but which is the immediate soul and life of the effect itself. As the

seed is contained in the flower, and the flower in the seed, so the relation of

cause and effect is intimate and inseparable. An effect also is vivified and

propagated, not by any life inherent in itself, but by the life and impulse

existing in the cause.

  Looking out upon the world, we behold it as an arena of strife in which

individuals,  communities,  and  nations  are  constantly  engaged  in  struggle,

striving with each other for superiority, and for the largest share of worldly

possessions.

  We see, also, that the weaker fall out defeated, and that the strong —

those who are equipped to pursue the combat with undiminished ardour —

obtain the victory, and enter into possession. And along with this struggle we

see the suffering which is inevitably connected with it — men and women,

broken down with the weight of their responsibilities, failing in their efforts

and losing all; families and communities broken up, and nations subdued and

subordinated.

  We see seas of tears, telling of unspeakable anguish and grief; we see

painful partings and early and unnatural deaths; and we know that this life of

strife, when stripped of its surface appearances, is largely a life of sorrow.

Such,  briefly  sketched,  are  the  phenomena  connected  with  that  aspect  of

human life with which we are now dealing; such are the effects as we see

them; and they have one common cause which is found in the human heart

itself.

  As all the multiform varieties of plant life have one common soil from

which to draw their sustenance, and by virtue of which they live and thrive,

so all the varied activities of human life are rooted in, and draw their vitality

from, one common source—the  human  heart. The cause of all suffering

and of all happiness resides, not in the outer activities of human life, but in

the  inner  activities  of  the  heart  and  mind;  and  every  external  agency  is

sustained by the life which it derives from human conduct.

  The organized life-principle in man carves for itself outward channels

along which it can pour its pent-up energies, makes for itself vehicles through

which it can manifest its potency and reap its experience, and, as a result, wehave our religious, social and political organizations.

  All the visible manifestations of human life, then, are effects; and as such,

although they may possess a reflex action, they can never be causes, but must

remain  forever  what  they  are—dead  effects,  galvanized  into  life  by  an

enduring and profound cause.

  It is the custom of men to wander about in this world of effects, and to

mistake its illusions for realities, eternally transposing and readjusting these

effects in order to arrive at a solution of human problems, instead of reaching

down to the underlying cause which is at once the centre of unification and

the basis upon which to build a peace-giving solution of human life.

  The  strife  of  the  world  in  all  its  forms,  whether  it  be  war,  social  or

political  quarrelling,  sectarian  hatred,  private  disputes  or  commercial

competition,  has  its  origin  in  one  common  cause,  namely, individual

selfishness. And I employ this term selfishness in a far-reaching sense; in it

I include all forms of self-love and egotism— I mean by it the desire to

pander to, and preserve at all costs, the personality.

  This element of selfishness is the life and soul of competition, and of the

competitive laws. Apart from it they have no existence. But in the life of

every individual in whose heart selfishness in any form is harboured, these

laws are brought into play, and the individual is subject to them.

    Innumerable economic systems have failed, and must fail, to exterminate

the strife of the world. They are the outcome of the delusion that outward

systems of government are the causes of that strife, whereas they are but the

visible and transient effect of the inward strife, the channels through which it

must necessarily manifest itself. To destroy the channel is, and must ever be

ineffectual, as the inward energy will immediately make for itself another,

and still another and another.

  Strife cannot cease; and the competitive laws must prevail so long as

selfishness is fostered in the heart. All reforms fail where this element is

ignored or unaccounted for; all reforms will succeed where it is recognized,

and steps are taken for its removal.

  Selfishness,  then,  is  the  root  cause  of  competition,  the  foundation  on

which  all  competitive  systems  rest,  and  the  sustaining  source  of  the

competitive laws. It will thus be seen that all competitive systems, all the

visible  activities  of  the  struggle  of  man  with  man,  are  as  the  leaves  andbranches of a tree which overspreads the whole earth, the root of that tree

being individual selfishness, and the ripened fruits of which are pain and

sorrow.

  This tree cannot be destroyed by merely lopping off its branches; to do

this effectively, the root must be destroyed. To introduce measures in the

form of changed external conditions is merely lopping off the branches; and

as the cutting away of certain branches of a tree gives added vigour to those

which  remain,  even  so  the  very  means  which  are  taken  to  curtail  the

competitive strife, when those means deal entirely with its outward effects,

will but add strength and vigour to the tree whose roots are all the time being

fostered and encouraged in the human heart. The most that even legislation

can  do  is  to  prune  the  branches,  and  so  prevent  the  tree  from  altogether

running wild.

  Great efforts are now being put forward to found a "Garden City," which

shall  be  a  veritable  Eden  planted  in  the  midst  of  orchards,  and  whose

inhabitants shall live in comfort and comparative repose. And beautiful and

laudable are all such efforts when they are prompted by unselfish love. But

such a city cannot exist, or cannot long remain the Eden which it aims to be

in its outward form, unless the majority of its inhabitants have subdued and

conquered the inward selfishness.

  Even one form of selfishness, namely, self-indulgence, if fostered by its

inhabitants, will completely undermine that city, levelling its orchards to the

ground, converting many of its beautiful dwellings into competitive marts,

and obnoxious centres for the personal gratification of appetite, and some of

its  buildings  into  institutions  for  the  maintenance  of  order;  and  upon  its

public spaces will rise jails, asylums, and orphanages, for where the spirit of

self-indulgence  is,  the  means  for  its  gratification  will  be  immediately

adopted, without considering the good of others or of the community (for

selfishness is always blind), and the fruits of that gratification will be rapidly

reaped.

  The building of pleasant houses and the planting of beautiful gardens can

never, of itself, constitute a Garden City unless its inhabitants have learned

that self-sacrifice is better than self-protection, and have first established in

their own hearts the Garden City of unselfish love. And when a sufficient

number of men and women have done this, the Garden City will appear, andit will flourish and prosper, and great will be its peace, for "out of the heart

are the issues of life."

    Having found that selfishness is the root cause of all competition and

strife, the question naturally arises as to how this cause shall be dealt with,

for it naturally follows that a cause being destroyed, all its effects cease; a

cause being propagated, all its effects, however they may be modified from

without, must continue.

  Every man who has thought at all deeply upon the problem of life, and

has brooded sympathetically upon the sufferings of mankind, has seen that

selfishness is at the root of all sorrow—in fact, this is one of the truths that is

first apprehended by the thoughtful mind. And along with that perception

there has been born within him a longing to formulate some methods by

which that selfishness might be overcome.

  The first impulse of such a man is to endeavour to frame some outward

law, or introduce some new social arrangements or regulations, which shall

put a check on the selfishness of others.

  The second tendency of his mind will be to feel his utter helplessness

before the great iron will of selfishness by which he is confronted.

  Both these attitudes of mind are the result of an incomplete knowledge of

what  constitutes  selfishness.  And  this  partial  knowledge  dominates  him

because,  although  he  has  overcome  the  grosser  forms  of  selfishness  in

himself, and is so far noble, he is yet selfish in other and more remote and

subtle directions.

  This feeling of "helplessness" is the prelude to one of two conditions—

the  man  will  either  give  up  in  despair,  and  again  sink  himself  in  the

selfishness of the world, or he will search and meditate until he finds another

way out of the difficulty. And that way he will find. Looking deeper and ever

deeper into the things of life; reflecting, brooding, examining, and analysing;

grappling with every difficulty and problem with intensity of thought, and

developing day by day a profounder love of Truth—by these means his heart

will grow and his comprehension expand, and at last he will realize that the

way to destroy selfishness is not to try to destroy one  form of it in other

people, but to destroy it utterly, root and branch, in himself.

  The perception of this truth constitutes spiritual illumination, and when

once it is awakened in the mind, the "straight and narrow way" is revealed,and the Gates of the Kingdom already loom in the distance.

  Then does a man apply to himself (not to others) these words—And why

beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother’s eye, but considerest

not the beam that is in thy own eye? Or how wilt thou say to thy

brother,  let  me  pull  out  the  mote  out  of  thine  eye;  and,  behold,  a

beam is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam

out of thine own eye; and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the

mote out of thine brother’s eye.

  When a man can apply these words to himself and act upon them, judging

himself mercilessly, but judging none other, then will he find his way out of

the hell of competitive strife, then will he rise above and render of non-effect

the laws of competition, and will find the higher Law of Love, subjecting

himself  to  which  every  evil  thing  will  flee  from  him,  and  the  joys  and

blessings which the selfish vainly seek will constantly wait upon him. And

not only this, he will, having lifted himself, lift the world. By his example

many will see the Way, and will walk it; and the powers of darkness will be

weaker for having lived.

  It  will  here  be  asked,  "But  will  not  man  who  has  risen  above  his

selfishness,  and  therefore  above  the  competitive  strife,  suffer  through  the

selfishness and competition of those around him? Will he not after all the

trouble he has taken to purify himself, suffer at the hands of the impure?"

  No, he will not. The equity of the Divine Order is perfect, and cannot be

subverted, so that it is impossible for one who has overcome selfishness to be

subject  to  those  laws  which  are  brought  into  operation  by  the  action  of

selfishness;  in  other  words,  each  individual  suffers  by  virtue  of  his  own

selfishness.

  It is true that the selfish all come under the operation of the competitive

laws, and suffer collectively, each acting, more or less, as the instrument by

which the suffering of others is brought about, which makes it appear, on the

surface, as though men suffered for the sins of others rather than their own.

But the truth is that in a universe the very basis of which is harmony, and

which can only be sustained by the perfect adjustment of all its parts, each

unit receives its own measure of adjustment, and suffers by and of itself.

  Each man comes under the laws of his own being, never under those of

another.  True,  he  will  suffer  like  another,  and  even  through  theinstrumentality of another, if he elects to live under the same conditions as

that other. But if he chooses to desert those conditions and to live under

another and higher set of conditions of which that other is ignorant, he will

cease to come under, or be affected by, the lower laws.

  Let us now go back to the symbol of the tree and carry the analogy a little

further. Just as the leaves and branches are sustained by the roots, so the roots

derive their nourishment from the soil, groping blindly in the darkness for the

sustenance which the tree demands. In like manner, selfishness, the root of

the tree of evil and of suffering, derives its nourishment from the dark soil

of ignorance.  In  this  it  thrives;  upon  this  it  stands  and  flourishes.  By

ignorance I mean something vastly different from lack of learning; and the

sense in which I use it will be made plain as I proceed.

    Selfishness always gropes in the dark. It has no knowledge; by its very

nature it is cut off from the source of enlightenment; it is a blind impulse,

knowing nothing, obeying no law, for it knows none, and is thereby forcibly

bound to those competitive laws by virtue of which suffering is inflicted in

order that harmony may be maintained.

  We live in a world, a universe, abounding with all good things. So great is

the abundance of spiritual, mental and material blessings that every man and

woman on this globe could not only be provided with every necessary good,

but could live in the midst of abounding plenty, and yet have much to spare.

Yet, in spite of this, what a spectacle of ignorance do we behold!

  We  see  on  the  one  hand  millions  of  men  and  women  chained  to  a

ceaseless slavery, interminably toiling in order to obtain a poor and scanty

meal and a garment to cover their nakedness; and on the other hand we see

thousands, who already have more than they require and can well manage,

depriving  themselves  of  all  the  blessings  of  a  true  life  and  of  the  vast

opportunities which their possessions place within their reach, in order to

accumulate more of those material things for which they have no legitimate

use. Surely men and women have no more wisdom than the beasts which

fight over the possession of that which is more than they can all well dispose

of, and which they could all enjoy in peace!

  Such a condition of things can only occur in a state of ignorance deep and

dark; so dark and dense as to be utterly impenetrable save to the unselfish eye

of wisdom and truth. And in the midst of all this striving after place and foodand raiment, there works unseen, yet potent and unerring, the Overruling Law

of Justice, meting out to every individual his own quota of merit and demerit.

It is impartial; it bestows no favours; it inflicts no unearned punishments:

  It knows not wrath nor pardon; utter-true

  It measures mete, its faultless balance weighs;

  Times are as nought, tomorrow it will judge,

  Or after many days.

  The rich and the poor alike suffer for their own selfishness; and none

escapes.  The  rich  have  their  particular  sufferings  as  well  as  the  poor.

Moreover, the rich are continually losing their riches; the poor are continually

acquiring them. The poor man of today is the rich man of tomorrow, and vice

versa.

  There is no stability, no security in hell, and only brief and occasional

periods of respite from suffering in some form or other. Fear, also, follows

men like a great shadow, for the man who obtains and holds by selfish force

will always be haunted by a feeling of insecurity, and will continually fear its

loss; while the poor man, who is selfishly seeking or coveting material riches,

will be harassed by the fear of destitution. And one and all who live in this

underworld of strife are overshadowed by one great fear—the fear of death.

    Surrounded by the darkness of ignorance, and having no knowledge of

those eternal and life-sustaining Principles out of which all things proceed,

men labour under the delusion that the most important and essential things in

life are food and clothing, and that their first duty is to strive to obtain these,

believing that these outward things are the source and cause of all comfort

and happiness.

  It is the blind animal instinct of self-preservation (the preservation of the

body and personality), by virtue of which each man opposes himself to other

men in order to "get a living" or "secure a competency," believing that if he

does not keep an incessant watch on other men, and constantly renew the

struggle, they will ultimately "take the bread out of his mouth."

  It is out of this initial delusion that comes all the train of delusions, with

their attendant sufferings. Food and clothing are not the essential things of

life; not the causes of happiness. They are non-essentials, effects, and, as

such, proceed by a process of natural law from the essentials, the underlyingcause.

  The  essential  things  in  life  are  the  enduring  elements  in  character—

integrity,  faith,  righteousness,  self-sacrifice,  compassion,  love;  and  out  of

these all good things proceed.

  Food and clothing, and money are dead effects; there is in them no life,

no power except that which we invest with them. They are without vice and

virtue, and can neither bless nor harm. Even the body which men believe to

be themselves, to which they pander, and which they long to keep, must very

shortly be yielded up to the dust. But the higher elements of character are life

itself;  and  to  practice  these,  to  trust  them,  and  to  live  entirely  in  them,

constitutes the Kingdom of Heaven.

  The man who says, "I will first of all earn a competence and secure a

good position in life, and will then give my mind to those higher things,"

does not understand these higher things, does not believe them to be higher,

for if he did, it would not be possible for him to neglect them. He believes the

material outgrowths of life to be the higher, and therefore he seeks them first.

He  believes  money,  clothing  and  position  to  be  of  vast  and  essential

importance, righteousness and truth to be at best secondary; for a man always

sacrifices that which he believes to be lesser to that which he believes to be

greater.

    Immediately after a man realizes that righteousness is of more importance

than the getting of food and clothing, he ceases to strive after the latter, and

begins to live for the former. It is here where we come to the dividing line

between the two Kingdoms—Hell and Heaven.

  Once a man perceives the beauty and enduring reality of righteousness,

his whole attitude of mind toward himself and others and the things within

and around him changes. The love of personal existence gradually loses its

hold on him; the instinct of self-preservation begins to die, and the practice of

self-renunciation  takes  its  place.  For  the  sacrifice  of  others,  or  of  the

happiness of others, for his own good, he substitutes the sacrifice of self and

of his own happiness for the good of others. And thus, rising above self, he

rises above the competitive strife which is the outcome of self, and above the

competitive  laws  which  operate  only  in  the  region  of  self,  and  for  the

regulation of its blind impulses.

  He is like the man who has climbed a mountain, and thereby risen aboveall the disturbing currents in the valleys below him. The clouds pour down

their rain, the thunders roll and the lightnings flash, the fogs obscure, and the

hurricanes uproot and destroy, but they cannot reach him on the calm heights

where he stands, and where he dwells in continual sunshine and peace.

  In the life of such a man the lower laws cease to operate, and he now

comes under the protection of a higher Law—namely, the Law of Love; and,

in accordance with his faithfulness and obedience to this Law, will all that is

necessary for his well-being come to him at the time when he requires it.

  The idea of gaining a position in the world cannot enter his mind, and the

external necessities of life, such as money, food and clothing, he scarcely

ever thinks about. But, subjecting himself for the good of others, performing

all his duties scrupulously and without thinking of reward, and living day by

day in the discipline of righteousness, all other things follow at the right time

and in the right order.

  Just as suffering and strife inhere in, and spring from, their root cause,

selfishness, so blessedness and peace inhere in, and spring from, their root-

cause, righteousness. And it is a full and all-embracing blessedness, complete

and  perfect  in  every  department  of  life,  for  that  which  is  morally  and

spiritually right is physically and materially right.

  Such  a  man  is  free,  for  he  is  freed  from  all  anxiety,  worry,  fear,

despondency, all those mental disturbances which derive their vitality from

the elements of self, and he lives in constant joy and peace, and this while

living in the very midst of the competitive strife of the world.

  Yet, though walking in the midst of Hell, its flames fall back before and

around him, so that not one hair of his head can be singed. Though he walks

in the midst of the lions of selfish force, for him their jaws are closed and

their ferocity is subdued. Though on every hand men are falling around him

in the fierce battle of life, he falls not, neither is he dismayed, for no deadly

bullet can reach him, no poisoned shaft can pierce the impenetrable armour of

his  righteousness.  Having  lost  the  little,  personal,  self-seeking  life  of

suffering, anxiety, fear, and want, he has found the illimitable, glorious, self-

perfecting life of joy and peace and plenty.

    "Therefore take no thought, saying ’What shall we eat?’ or, ’What shall

we drink?’ or, ’Wherewithal shall we be clothed? . . .’ For your heavenly

Father  knoweth  ye  have  need  of  all  these  things.  But  seek  ye  first  theKingdom of God, and His Righteousness, and all these things shall be added

unto you."          3. THE FINDING OF A PRINCIPLE

  Be still, my soul, and know that peace is within

  Be steadfast, heart, and know that strength divine

  Belongs to thee; cease thy turmoil, mind,

  And thou the everlasting rest shall find.

 

  HOW THEN SHALL A MAN reach the Kingdom? By what process shall

he find the light which alone can disperse his darkness? And in what way can

he overcome the inward selfishness which is strong, and deeply rooted?

  A man will reach the Kingdom by purifying himself, and he can only do

this  by  pursuing  a  process  of  self-examination  and  self-analysis.  The

selfishness must be discovered and understood before it can be removed. It is

powerless to remove itself, neither will it pass away of itself.

    Darkness ceases only when light is introduced; so ignorance can only be

dispersed by Knowledge; selfishness by Love. Seeing that in selfishness there

is  no  security,  no  stability,  no  peace,  the  whole  process  of  seeking  the

Kingdom resolves itself into a search for a Principle; a divine and permanent

Principle on which a man can stand secure, freed from himself—that is, from

the personal element, and from the tyranny and slavery which that personal

self exacts and demands.

  A man must first of all be willing to lose himself (his self-seeking self)

before he can find himself (his Divine Self). He must realize that selfishness

is not worth clinging to, that it is a master altogether unworthy of his service,

and that divine Goodness alone is worthy to be enthroned in his heart as the

supreme master of his life.

  This means that he must have faith, for without this equipment there can

be neither progress nor achievement. He must believe in the desirability of

purity,  in  the  supremacy  of  righteousness,  in  the  sustaining  power  of

integrity; he must ever hold before him the Ideal and Perfect Goodness, and

strive for its achievement with ever-renewed effort and unflagging zeal.

  This faith must be nurtured and its development encouraged. As a lamp, itmust be carefully trimmed and fed and kept burning in the heart, for without

its  radiating  flame  no  way  will  be  seen  in  the  darkness;  he  will  find  no

pathway out of self. And as this flame increases and burns with a steadier

light, energy, resolution, and self-reliance will come to his aid, and with each

step, his progress will be accelerated until at last the Light of Knowledge will

begin to take the place of the lamp of faith, and the darkness will commence

to disappear before its searching splendour.

  Into his spiritual sight will come the Principles of the divine Life, and as

he approaches them, their incomparable beauty and majestic symmetry will

astonish his vision, and gladden his heart with a gladness hitherto unknown.

  Along this pathway of self-control and self-purification (for such it is)

every soul must travel on its way to the Kingdom. So narrow is this way, and

so overgrown with the weeds of selfishness is its entrance, that it is difficult

to  find,  and,  being  found,  cannot  be  retained  except  by  daily  meditation.

Without  this  the  spiritual  energies  grow  weaker,  and  the  man  loses  the

strength necessary to continue. As the body is sustained and invigourated by

material food, so the spirit is strengthened and renewed by its own food—

namely meditation upon spiritual things.

  He, then, who earnestly resolves to find the Kingdom will commence to

meditate, and to rigidly examine his heart and mind and life in the light of

that Supreme Perfection which is the goal of his attainment.

  On  his  way  to  that  goal,  he  must  pass  through three  Gateways  of

Surrender.  The  first  is the  Surrender  of  Desire;  the  second  is the

Surrender of Opinion; the third is the Surrender of Self. Entering into

meditation, he will commence to examine his desires, tracing them out in his

mind, and following up their effects in his life and upon his character; and he

will quickly perceive that, without the renunciation of desire, a man remains a

slave  both  to  himself  and  to  his  surroundings  and  circumstances.  Having

discovered this, the first Gate, that of the Surrender of Desire, is entered.

Passing through this Gate, he adopts a process of self-discipline which is the

first step in the purification of the soul.

  Hitherto he has lived as a slavish beast; eating, drinking, sleeping, and

pursuing  enjoyment  at  the  beck  and  call  of  his  lower  impulses;  blindly

following and gratifying his inclinations without method, not questioning his

conduct, and having no fixed centre from which to regulate his character andlife.

  Now,  however,  he  begins  to  live  as  a  man;  he  curbs  his  inclinations,

controls  his  passions,  and  steadies  his  mind  in  the  practice  of  virtue.  He

ceases  to  pursue  enjoyment,  but  follows  the  dictates  of  his  reason,  and

regulates his conduct in accordance with the demands of an ideal. With the

introduction of this regulating factor in his life, he at once perceives that

certain habits must be abandoned.

  He begins to select his food, and to have his meals at stated periods, no

longer eating at any time when the sight of food tempts his inclination. He

reduces the number of meals per day and also the quantity of food eaten.

  He  no  longer  goes  to  bed,  by  day  or  night,  to  indulge  in  pleasurable

indolence, but to give his body the rest it needs, and he therefore regulates his

hours  of  sleep,  rising  early,  and  never  encouraging  the  animal  desire  to

indulge in dreamy indolence after waking.

  All  those  foods  and  drinks  which  are  particularly  associated  with

gluttony, cruelty, and drunkenness he will dispense with altogether, selecting

the  mild  and  refreshing  sustenance  which  Nature  provides  in  such  rich

profusion.

  These preliminary steps will be at once adopted; and as the path of self-

government  and  self-examination  is  pursued,  a  clearer  and  ever  clearer

perception of the nature, meaning, and effects of desire will be developed,

until it will be seen that the mere regulation of one’s desires is altogether

inadequate  and  insufficient,  and  that the  desires  themselves  must  be

abandoned, must be allowed to fall out of the mind and to have no part in

the character and life.

  It is at this point where the soul of the seeker will enter the dark Valley of

Temptation, for these desires will not die without a struggle, and without

many a fierce effort to reassert the power and authority with which they have

hitherto been invested. And here the lamp of faith must be constantly fed and

assiduously trimmed, for all the light that it can throw out will be required to

guide and encourage the traveller in the dense gloom of this dark Valley.

  At first his desires, like so many wild beasts, will clamour loudly for

gratification. Failing in that, they will tempt him to struggle with them that

they  may  overthrow  him.  And  this  last  temptation  is  greater  and  more

difficult to overcome than the first, for the desires will not be stilled until theyare utterly ignored; until they are left unheeded, unconditionally abandoned,

and allowed to perish for want of food.

  In passing through this Valley, the searcher will develop certain powers

which are necessary to his further development, and these powers are—self-

control, self-reliance, fearlessness, and independence of thought.

  Here also he will have to pass through ridicule and mockery and false

accusation; so much so, that some of his best friends, yea, even those whom

he most unselfishly loves, will accuse him of folly and inconsistency, and

will do all they can to argue him back to the life of animal indulgence, self-

seeking, and petty personal strife.

  Nearly everybody around him will suddenly discover that they know his

duty better than he knows it himself, and, knowing no other and higher life

than their own of mingled excitement and suffering, they will take great pains

to win him back to it, imagining, in their ignorance, that he is losing so much

pleasure and happiness, and is gaining nothing in return.

  At  first  this  attitude  of  others  toward  him  will  arouse  in  him  acute

suffering; but he will rapidly discover that this suffering is caused by his own

vanity  and  selfishness,  and  is  the  result  of  his  own  subtle  desire  to  be

appreciated, admired, and thought well of; and immediately this knowledge is

arrived at, he will rise into a higher state of consciousness, where these things

can no longer reach him and inflict pain. It is here where he will begin to

stand firm, and to wield with effect the powers of mind already mentioned.

  Let him therefore press on courageously, heeding neither the revilings of

his  friends  without  nor  the  clamourings  of  his  enemies  within;  aspiring,

searching, striving; looking ever toward his Ideal with eyes of holy love; day

by  day  ridding  his  mind  of  selfish  motive,  his  heart  of  impure  desire;

stumbling  sometimes,  sometimes  falling,  but  ever  travelling  onward  and

rising higher; and, recording each night in the silence of his own heart the

journey of the day, let him not despair if but each day, in spite of all its

failures and falls, record some holy battle fought, though lost, some silent

victory attempted, though unachieved. The loss of today will add to the gain

of tomorrow for him whose mind is set on the conquest of self.

  Passing along the Valley, he will at last come to the Fields of Sorrow and

Loneliness. His desires, having received at his hands neither encouragement

nor sustenance, have grown weak, and are now falling away and perishing.He is climbing out of the Valley, and the darkness is less dense; but now he

realizes for the first time he is alone. He is like a man standing upon the

lowest level of a great mountain, and it is night. Above him towers the lofty

peak, beyond which shine the everlasting stars; a short distance below him

are the glaring lights of the city which he has left, and from it there come up

to him the noises of its inhabitants—a confused mingling of shouts, screams,

laughter,  rumblings  of  traffic,  and  the  strains  of  music.  He  thinks  of  his

friends, all of whom are in the city, pursuing their own particular pleasures,

and he is alone upon the mountain.

  That city is the City of Desire and Pleasure, the mountain is the Mountain

of Renunciation, and the climber now knows that he has left the world, that

henceforth  for  him  its  excitements  and  strifes  are  lifeless  things,  and  can

tempt  him  no  more.  Resting  awhile  in  this  lonely  place,  he  will  taste  of

sorrow and learn its secret; harshness and hatred will pass from him; his heart

will grow soft, and the first faint broodings of that divine compassion, which

shall afterwards absorb his whole being, will overshadow and inspire him. He

will begin to feel with every living thing in its strivings and sufferings, and

gradually, as this lesson is learned, his own sorrow and loneliness will be

forgotten in his great calm love for others, and will pass away.

  Here, also, he will begin to perceive and understand the workings of those

hidden laws which govern the destinies of individuals and nations. Having

risen above the lower region of strife and selfishness within himself, he can

now look calmly down upon it in others and in the world, and analyse and

comprehend it, and he will see how selfish striving is at the root of all the

world’s suffering.

  His  whole  attitude  toward  others  and  the  world  now  undergoes  a

complete change, and compassion and love begin to take the place of self-

seeking and self-protection in his mind; and as a result of this, the world

alters in its attitude toward him.

  At this juncture he perceives the folly of competition, and, ceasing from

striving to overtop and get the better of others, he begins to encourage them,

both with unselfish thoughts, and, when necessary, with loving acts; and this

he does even to those who selfishly compete with him, no longer defending

himself against them.

  As a direct result of this, his worldly affairs begin to prosper as neverbefore; many of his friends who at first mocked him commence to respect,

and even to love him, and he suddenly wakes up to the fact that he is coming

in contact with people of a distinctly unworldly and noble type, of whose

existence he had no knowledge while living in his lower selfish nature. From

many parts and from long distances these people will come to him to minister

to  him  and  that  he  may  minister  to  them,  spiritual  fellowship  and  loving

brotherhood will become potent in his life, and so he will pass beyond the

Fields of Sorrow and Loneliness.

  The lower competitive laws have now ceased to operate in his life, and

their results, which are failure, disaster, exposure, and destitution, can

no longer enter into and form part of his experience; and this not merely

because he has risen above the lower forms of selfishness in himself, but

because also, in so rising, he has developed certain power of mind by which

he  is  enabled  to  direct  and  govern  his  affairs  with  a  more  powerful  and

masterly hand.

  He, however, has not yet travelled far, and unless he exercises constant

watchfulness, may at any time fall back into the lower world of darkness and

strife, revivifying its empty pleasures and galvanizing back to life its dead

desires.  And  especially  is  there  danger  when  he  reaches  the  greatest

temptation through which man is called to pass— the temptation of doubt.

  Before reaching, or even perceiving, the second Gate, that of Surrender

of Opinion, the pilgrim will come upon a great soul-desert, the Desert of

Doubt.  And  here  for  a  time  he  will  wander  around,  and  despondency,

indecision, and uncertainty, a melancholy brood, will surround him like a

cloud, hiding from his view the way immediately in front of him.

  A new and strange fear, too, will possibly overtake him, and he will begin

to question the wisdom of the course he is pursuing. Again the allurements of

the world will be presented to him, dressed in their most attractive garb, and

the drowning din and stimulating excitement of worldly battle will once more

assume a desirable aspect.

  "After all, am I right? What gain is there in this? Does not life itself

consist of pleasure and excitement and battle, and in giving these up am I not

giving  up  all?  Am  I  not  sacrificing  the  very  substance  of  life  for  a

meaningless shadow? May it not be that, after all, I am a poor deluded fool,

and that all these around me who live the life of the senses and stand upon itssolid, sure, and easily procured enjoyments are wiser than I?"

  By such dark doubtings and questionings will he here be tempted and

troubled, and these very doubts will drive him to a deeper searching into the

intricacies of life, and arouse within him the feeling of necessity for some

permanent Principle upon which to stand and take refuge.

  He will therefore, while wandering about in this dark Desert, come into

contact  with  the  higher  and  more  subtle  delusions  of  his  own  mind,  the

delusions of the intellect; and, by contrasting these with his Ideal, will learn

to distinguish between the real and the unreal, the shadow and the substance,

between  effect  and  cause,  between  fleeting  appearances  and  permanent

Principles.

  In the Desert of Doubt a man is confronted with all forms of illusion, not

only  the  illusions  of  the  senses,  but  also  those  of  abstract  thought  and

religious  emotion.  It  is  in  the  testing  of,  grappling  with,  and  ultimately

destroying,  these  illusions  that  he  develops  still  higher  powers,  those  of

discrimination,  spiritual  perception,  steadfastness  of  purpose,  and

calmness  of  mind, by the exercise of which he is enabled to unerringly

distinguish the true from the false, both in the world of thought and that of

material appearances.

    Having acquired these powers, and learned how to use them in his holy

warfare  as  weapons  against  himself,  he  now  emerges  from  the  Desert  of

Doubt, the mists and mirages of delusion vanish from his pathway, and there

looms  before  him  the  second  Gate,  the Gateway  of  the  Surrender  of

Opinion.

  As he approaches this Gate, he sees before him the whole pathway along

which he is travelling, and, for a space, obtains a glimpse of the glorious

heights of attainment toward which he is moving; he sees the Temple of the

Higher Life in all its majesty, and already he feels within him the strength

and joy and peace of conquest. With Sir Galahad he can now exclaim:

  "I....saw the Grail,

  The Holy Grail...

  ....And one will crown me king

  Far in the spiritual city."

  for he knows that his ultimate victory is assured.  He  now  enters  upon  a  process  of  self-conquest,  which  is  altogether

distinct from that which he has hitherto pursued. Up to the present he has

been overcoming, transmuting, and simplifying his animal desires; now he

commences  to  transmute  and  simplify  his  intellect.  He  has,  so  far,  been

adjusting his feelings to his Ideals; he now begins to adjust his thoughts to

that  Ideal,  which  also  assumes  at  this  point  larger  and  more  beautiful

proportions,  and  for  the  first  time  he  perceives  what  really  constitutes  a

permanent and imperishable Principle.

  He sees that the righteousness for which he has been searching is fixed

and invariable; that it cannot be accommodated to man, but that man must

reach up to, and obey it; that it consists of an undeviating line of conduct,

apart from all considerations of loss or gain, of reward of punishment; that, in

reality, it consists in abandoning self, with all the sins of desire, opinion, and

self-interest of which that self is composed, and in living the blameless life of

perfect love toward all men and creatures. Such a life is fixed and perfect; it

is without turning, change, or qualification, and demands a sinless and perfect

conduct. It is, therefore, the direct antithesis of the worldly life of self.

    Perceiving this, the seeker sees that, although he has freed himself from

the baser passions and desires which enslave mankind, he is still in bondage

to the fetters of opinion; that although he has purified himself with a purity to

which few aspire, and which the world cannot understand, he is still defiled

with  a  defilement  which  is  difficult  to  wash  away—he  loves  his  own

opinions, and has all along been confounding them with Truth, with the

Principle for which he is seeking.

  He is not yet free from strife, and is still involved in the competitive laws

as they occur in the higher realm of thought. He still believes that he (in his

opinions) is right, and that others are wrong; and in his egotism, has even

fallen  so  low  as  to  bestow  a  mock  pity  on  those  who  hold  opinions  the

reverse of his own. But now, realizing this more subtle form of selfishness

with which he is enslaved, and perceiving all the train of sufferings which

spring  from  it,  having  also  acquired  the  priceless  possession  of  spiritual

discernment,  he  reverently  bends  his  head  and  passes  through  the  second

Gateway toward his final peace.

  And now, clothing his soul with the colourless Garment of Humility, he

bends all his energies to the uprooting of those opinions which he has hithertoloved and cherished.

  He  now  learns  to  distinguish  between  Truth,  which  is  one  and

unchangeable, and his own and others’ opinions about Truth, which are many

and changeable.

  He sees that his opinions about Goodness, Purity, Compassion, and Love

are very distinct from those qualities themselves, and that he must stand upon

those divine Principles, and not upon his opinions. Hitherto he has regarded

his own opinions as of great value, and the opinions of others as worthless,

but now he ceases to so elevate his own opinions and to defend them against

those of others, and comes to regard them as utterly worthless.

  As a direct result of this attitude of mind, he takes refuge in the practice

of pure Goodness, unalloyed with base desire and subtle self-love, and takes

his stand upon the divine Principles of Purity, Wisdom, Compassion, and

Love, incorporating them into his mind, and manifesting them in his life.

  He  is  now  clothed  with  the Righteousness  of  Christ (which  is

incomprehensible to the world) and is rapidly becoming divine. He has not

only  realized  the  darkness  of  desire;  he  has  also  perceived  the  vanity  of

speculative  philosophy,  and  so  rids  his  mind  of  all  those  metaphysical

subtleties which have no relation to practical holiness, and which hitherto

encumbered  his  progress  and  prevented  him  from  seeing  the  enduring

realities in life.

  And  now  he  casts  from  him,  one  after  another,  his  opinions  and

speculations, and commences to live the life of perfect love toward all beings.

With  each  opinion  overcome  and  abandoned  as  a  burden,  there  is  an

increased lightness of spirit, and he now begins to realize the meaning of

being "free."

  The divine flowers of Gladness, Joy, and Peace spring up spontaneously

in his heart, and his life becomes a blissful song. And as the melody in his

heart expands, and grows more and more perfect, his outward life harmonizes

itself with the inward music.

  All the effort he puts forth being now free from strife, he obtains all that

is necessary for his well-being, without pain, anxiety, or fear. He has almost

entirely transcended the competitive laws, and the Law of Love is now the

governing factor in his life, adjusting all his worldly affairs harmoniously,

and without struggle or difficulty on his part.  Indeed, the competitive laws as they occur in the commercial world, have

been  long  left  behind,  and  have  ceased  to  touch  him  at  any  point  in  his

material affairs. Here, also, he enters into a wider and more comprehensive

consciousness,  and  viewing  the  universe  and  humanity  from  the  higher

altitudes of purity and knowledge to which he has ascended, perceives the

orderly sequence of law in all human affairs.

  The  pursuit  of  this  Path  brings  about  the  development  of  still  higher

powers of mind, and these powers are—divine patience, spiritual equanimity,

non-resistance, and prophetic insight. By prophetic insight I do not mean, the

foretelling  of  events,  but  direct  perception  of  those  hidden  causes  which

operate in human life, and, indeed, in all life, and out of which spring the

multifarious and universal effects and events.

  The man here rises above the competitive laws as they operate in the

thought  world,  so  that  their  results,  which  are  violence,  ignominy,  grief,

humiliation and distress and anxiety in all their forms, no longer occur in his

life.

  As he proceeds, the imperishable Principles which form the foundation

and  fabric  of  the  universe  loom  before  him,  and  assume  more  and  more

symmetrical proportions. For him there is no more anguish; no evil can come

near his dwelling; and there breaks upon him the dawning of the abiding

Peace.

  But he is not yet free. He has not yet finished his journey. He may rest

here, and that as long as he chooses; but sooner or later he will rouse himself

to the last effort, and will reach the final goal of achievement—the selfless

state, the divine life.

  He is not yet free from self, but still clings, though with less tenacity, to

the love of personal existence, and to the idea of exclusive interest in his

personal possessions. And when he at last realizes that those selfish elements

must  also  be  abandoned,  there  appears  before  him  the  third  Gate—the

Gateway of Surrender of Self.

  It is no dark portal which he now approaches, but one luminous with

divine glory, one radiant with a radiance with which no earthly splendour can

vie, and he advances toward it with no uncertain step. The clouds of Doubt

have long been dispersed; the sounds of the voices of Temptation are lost in

the valley below; and with firm gait, erect carriage, and a heart filled withunspeakable joy, he nears the Gate that guards the Kingdom of God.

  He has now given up all but self-interest in those things which are his by

legal right, but he now perceives that he must hold nothing as his own; and as

he pauses at the Gate, he hears the command which cannot be evaded or

denied: "Yet lackest thou one thing; sell all that thou hast, and distribute unto

the poor, and thou shall have treasure in Heaven."

  And passing through the last great Gate, he stands glorious, radiant, free,

detached  from  the  tyranny  of  desire,  of  opinion,  of  self;  a  divine  man—

harmless,  patient,  tender,  pure;  he  has  found  that  for  which  he  had  been

searching—the Kingdom of God and His Righteousness.

  The journey to the Kingdom may be a long and tedious one, or it may be

short and rapid. It may occupy a minute, or it may take a thousand ages.

Everything  depends  on  the  faith  and  belief  of  the  searcher.  The  majority

cannot  "enter  in  because  of  their  unbelief";  for  how  can  men  realize

righteousness  when  they  do  not  believe  in  it  nor  in  the  possibility  of  its

accomplishment?

  Neither is it necessary to leave the outer world, and one’s duties therein.

Nay, it can only be found through the unselfish performance of one’s duty.

Some there are whose faith is so great that, when this truth is presented to

them, they can let all the personal elements drop almost immediately out of

their minds, and enter into their divine heritage.

  But all who believe and aspire to achieve will sooner or later arrive at

victory if, amid all their worldly duties, they faint not, nor lose sight of the

Ideal  Goodness,  and  continue,  with  unshaken  resolve  to  "press  on  to

Perfection."        4. AT REST IN THE KINGDOM AND ALL


                            THINGS ADDED


  THE WHOLE JOURNEY from the Kingdom of Strife to the Kingdom of

Love resolves itself into a process which may be summed up in the following

words: The  regulation  and  purification  of  conduct.  Such  a  process

must, if assiduously pursued, necessarily lead to perfection. It will also be

seen that as the man obtains the mastery over certain forces within himself,

he arrives at a knowledge of all the laws which operate in the realm of those

forces, and by watching the ceaseless working of cause and effect within

himself,  until  he  understands  it,  he  then  understands  it  in  its  universal

adjustments in the body of humanity.

    Moreover, seeing that all the laws which govern human affairs are the

direct outcome of the necessities of the human heart, he, having reformed and

transmuted those necessities, has brought himself under the guidance of other

laws which operate in accordance with the altered condition, and that, having

mastered and overcome the selfish forces within himself, he can no longer be

subject to the laws which exist for their governance.

  The process is also one of simplification of the mind, a sifting away of

all but the essential gold in character. And as the mind is thus simplified, the

apparently  unfathomable  complexity  of  the  universe  assumes  simpler  and

simpler aspects, until the whole is seen to resolve itself into, and rest upon, a

few  unalterable  Principles;  and  these  Principles  are  ultimately  seen  to  be

contained in one, namely LOVE.

  The mind thus simplified, the man arrives at peace, and he now really

begins  to  live.  Looking  back  on  the  personal  life  which  he  has  forever

abandoned, he sees it as a horrible nightmare out of which he has awakened;

but looking out and down with the eyes of the spirit, he sees that others

continue to live it. He sees men and women struggling, fighting, suffering

and perishing for that which is abundantly given to them by the bountiful

hand of the Father, if they would only cease from all covetousness, and take

it without hurt or hindrance; and compassion fills his heart, and also gladness,

for he knows that humanity will wake at last from its long and painful dream.

  In the early part of the journey he seemed to be leaving humanity farbehind,  and  he  sorrowed  in  his  loneliness.  But  now,  having  reached  the

highest, having attained the goal, he finds himself nearer to humanity than

ever before—yea, living in its very heart, sympathizing with all its sorrows,

rejoicing in all its joys; for, having no longer any personal considerations to

defend, he lives entirely in the heart of humanity.

  He  lives  no  longer  for  himself;  he  lives  for  others;  and  so  living,  he

enjoys the highest bliss, the deepest peace.

  For a time he searched for Compassion, Love, Bliss, Truth; but now he

has verily become Compassion, Love, Bliss, Truth; and it may literally be

said  of  him  that  he  has  ceased  to  be  a  personality,  for  all  the  personal

elements have been extinguished, and there remain only those qualities and

principles  which  are  entirely  impersonal.  And  those  qualities  are  now

manifested in the man’s life, and henceforth the man’s character.

  And having ceased from the protection of the self, and living constantly

in  compassion,  wisdom  and  love,  he  comes  under  the  protection  of  the

highest Law, the Law of Love; and he understands that Law, and consciously

co-operates with it; yea, is himself inseparably identified with the Law.

    "Forgoing self, the universe grows I": and he whose nature is compassion,

wisdom and love cannot possibly need any protection; for those Principles

themselves constitute the highest protection, being the real, the divine, the

immortal in all men and women, and constituting the indestructible reality in

the cosmic order.

  Neither does he need to seek enjoyment whose very nature is Bliss, Joy,

Peace. As for competing with others, with whom should he compete who has

lovingly identified himself with all? With whom should he struggle who has

sacrificed  himself  for  all?  Whose  blind,  misguided,  and  ineffectual

competition should he fear who has reached the source of all blessedness, and

who receives at the hands of the Father all necessary things?

    Having lost himself (his selfish personality), he has found himself (his

divine nature, Love); and Love and all the effects of Love now compose his

life. He can now joyfully exclaim—

  I have made the acquaintance of the Master of Compassion;

  I have put on the Garment of the Perfect Law,

  I have entered the realm of the Great Reality;    Wandering is ended, for Rest is accomplished;

  Pain and sorrow have ceased, for Peace is entered into;

  Confusion is dissolved, for Unity is made manifest;

  Error is vanquished, for Truth is revealed!

  The Harmonizing Principle, Righteousness, or Divine Love, being found,

all  things  are  seen  as  they  are,  and  not  through  the  illusory  mediums  of

selfishness and opinion; the universe is One, and all its manifold operations

are the manifestation of one Law.

  Hitherto  in  this  work  laws  have  been  referred  to,  and  also  spoken  of

as higher and lower,  and  this  distinction  was  necessary;  but  now  the

Kingdom is reached, we see that all the forces operative in human life are the

varied manifestations of the One Supreme Law of Love. It is by virtue of this

Law that Humanity suffers, that, by the intensity of its sufferings, it shall

become purified and wise, and so relinquish the source of suffering, which is

selfishness.

  The Law and foundation of the universe being Love, it follows that all

self-seeking is opposed to that Law, is an effort to overcome or ignore the

Law, and as a result, every self-seeking act and thought is followed by an

exact quota of suffering which is required to annul its effect, and so maintain

the universal harmony. All suffering is, therefore, the restraint which the Law

of Love puts upon ignorance and selfishness, and out of such painful restraint

Wisdom at last emerges.

  There being no strife and no selfishness in the Kingdom, there is therefore

no suffering, no restraint; there is perfect harmony, equipoise, rest. Those

who have entered it do not follow any animal inclinations (they have none to

follow),  but  live  in  accordance  with  the  highest  Wisdom.  Their  nature  is

Love, and they live in love toward all.

  They are never troubled about "making a living," as they are Life itself,

living in the very Heart of Life; and should any material or other need arise,

that need is immediately supplied without any anxiety or struggle on their

part.

  Should  they  be  called  to  undertake  any  work,  the  money  and  friends

needed to carry out that work are immediately forthcoming. Having ceased to

violate  their  principles,  all  their  needs  are  supplied  through  legitimatechannels.  Any  money  or  help  required  always  comes  through  the

instrumentality  of  good  people  who  are  either  living  in  the  Kingdom

themselves, or are working for its accomplishment.

  Those who live in the Kingdom of Love have all their needs supplied by

the Law of Love, with all freedom from unrest, just as those who live in the

kingdom of self only meet their needs by much strife and suffering. Having

altered the root cause in their heart they have altered all the effects in their

inner and outer life. As self is the root cause of all strife and suffering, so

Love is the root cause of all peace and bliss.

  Those who are at rest in the Kingdom do not look for happiness to any

outward possession. They see that all such possessions are mere transient

effects that come when they are required, and after their purpose is served,

pass away.

  They never think of these things (money, clothing, food, etc.) except as

mere accessories and effects of the true Life. They are therefore freed from

all  anxiety  and  trouble,  and  resting  in  Love,  they  are  the  embodiment  of

happiness.

  Standing  upon  the  imperishable  Principles  of  Purity,  Compassion,

Wisdom and Love, they are immortal, and know they are immortal; they are

one with God (the Supreme Good), and know they are one with God. Seeing

the realities of things, they can find no room anywhere for condemnation. All

the operations that occur upon the earth they see as instruments of the Good

Law, even those called evil.

  All men are essentially divine, though unaware of their divine nature, and

all their acts are efforts, even though many of them are dark and impotent, to

realize some higher good. All so-called evil is seen to be rooted in ignorance,

even those deeds that are called deliberately wicked, so that condemnation

ceases, and Love and Compassion become all in all.

  But let it not be supposed that the children of the kingdom live in ease

and indolence (these two sins are the first that have to be eradicated when the

search for the Kingdom is entered upon); they live in a peaceful activity; in

fact, they only truly live, for the life of self with its train of worries, griefs,

and fears, is not real life.

  They perform all their duties with the most scrupulous diligence, apart

from thoughts of self, and employ all their means, as well as powers andfaculties,  which  are  greatly  intensified,  in  building  up  the  Kingdom  of

Righteousness in the hearts of others and in the world around them. This is

their work—first by example, then by precept.

    Having  sold  all  that  they  have  (renounced  all  self-interest  in  their

possessions), they now give to the poor (give of their rich store of wisdom,

love and peace to the needy in spirit, the weary and broken-hearted), and

follow the Christ whose name is LOVE.

  And they have sorrow no more, but live in perpetual gladness, for though

they see suffering in the world, they also see the final Bliss and the Eternal

Refuge of Love, to which whosoever is ready may come now, and to which

all will come at last.

  The children of the Kingdom are known by their life. They manifest

the fruits of the Spirit—"love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness,

faithfulness,  meekness,  temperance,  self-control"—under  all  circumstances

and vicissitudes. They are entirely free from anger, fear, suspicion, jealousy,

caprice, anxiety, and grief. Living in the Righteousness of God, they manifest

qualities which are the very reverse of those which occur in the world, and

which are regarded by the world as foolishness.

  They demand no rights; they do not defend themselves; do not retaliate;

do good to those who attempt to injure them; manifest the same gentle spirit

toward those who oppose and attack them as toward those who agree with

them; do not pass judgement on others; condemn no person and no system,

and live at peace with all.

  The  Kingdom  of  Heaven  is  perfect  trust,  perfect  knowledge,  perfect

peace.  All  is  music,  sweetness,  and  tranquillity.  No  irritations,  no  bad

tempers, no harsh words, no suspicions, no lust, and no disturbing elements

can enter there.

  Its children live in perfect sweetness, forgiving and forgiven, ministering

to others with kindly thoughts and words, and deeds. And that Kingdom is in

the heart of every man and woman; it is their rightful heritage, their own

Kingdom; theirs to enter now. But no sin can enter therein; no self-born

thought or deed can pass its Golden Gates; no impure desire can defile its

radiant robes.

  All may enter it who will, but all must pay the price, and that is—the

unconditional abandonment of self.  "If thou wilt be perfect, sell all that thou hast"; but at these words the

world turns away "sorrowful, for it is very rich"; rich in money which it

cannot keep; rich in fears which it cannot let go; rich in selfish loves to which

it greedily clings; rich in grievous partings which it would fain escape; rich in

seeking enjoyment; rich in pain and sorrow; rich in strife and suffering; rich

in excitement and woe; rich in all things which are not riches, but poor in

riches themselves which are not to be found outside the Kingdom; rich in all

things that pertain to darkness and death, but poor in those things which are

Light and Life.

  He then, who would realize the Kingdom, let him pay the price and enter.

If he have a great and holy faith he can do it now, and, letting fall from him

like a garment the self to which he has been clinging, stand free. If he have

less faith, he must rise above self more slowly, and find the Kingdom by

daily effort and patient work. The Temple of Righteousness is built and its

four  walls  are  the  four  Principles—  Purity,  Wisdom,  Compassion,  Love.

Peace is its roof; its floor Steadfastness, its entrance-door is Selfless Duty, its

atmosphere is Inspiration, and its music is the Joy of the perfect.

  It  cannot  be  shaken,  and,  being  eternal  and  indestructible,  there  is  no

more need to seek protection in taking thought for the things of tomorrow.

And the Kingdom of Heaven being established in the heart, the obtaining of

the material necessities of life is no more considered, for, having found the

Highest,  all  these  things  are  added  as  effect  to  cause;  the  struggle  for

existence has ceased, and the spiritual, mental, and material needs are daily

supplied from the universal abundance.

  Long I sought thee, Spirit holy,

  Master Spirit, meek and lowly;

    Sought thee with a silent sorrow,

  brooding over the woes of men;

  Vainly sought thy yoke of meekness

  ’Neath the weight of woe and weakness;

  Finding not, yet in my failing,

  seeking over and over again.

  In unrest and doubt and sadness

  Dwelt I, yet I knew thy Gladness  Waited somewhere; somewhere

  greeted torn and sorrowing hearts like mine;

  Knew that somehow I should find thee,

  Leaving sin and woe behind me,

  And at last thy Love would bid me

  enter into Rest divine.

  Hatred, mockery, and reviling

    Scorched my seeking soul defiling

  That which should have been thy Temple,

  wherein thou shouldest move and dwell;

    Praying, striving, hoping, calling;

    Suffering, sorrowing in my falling,

  Still I sought thee, groping blindly in the

    gloomy depths of Hell.

  And I sought thee till I found thee;

  And the dark powers all around me

  Fled, and left me silent, peaceful, brooding

  over thy holy themes;

  From within me and without me

  Fled they when I ceased to doubt thee;

  And I found thee in thy Glory, mighty Master

  of my dreams!

  Yes, I found thee, Spirit holy,

  Beautiful and pure and lowly;

  Found thy Joy and Peace and Gladness;

  found thee in thy House of Rest;

  Found thy strength in Love and Meekness,

  And my pain and woe and weakness left me,

  And I walked the Pathway trodden only by the blest.      PART II: THE HEAVENLY LIFE


                          1. THE DIVINE CENTRE


  THE secret of life, of abundant life, with its strength, its felicity, and its

unbroken peace is to find the Divine Centre within oneself, and to live in and

from  that,  instead  of  in  that  outer  circumference  of  disturbances  —  the

clamours,  cravings,  and  argumentations  which  make  up  the  animal  and

intellectual man. These selfish elements constitute the mere husks of life, and

must be thrown away by him who would penetrate to the Central Heart of

things — to Life itself.

  Not to know that within you that is changeless, and defiant of time and

death, is not to know anything, but is to play vainly with the unsubstantial

reflections in the Mirror of Time. Not to find within you those passionless

Principles which are not moved by the strifes and shows and vanities of the

world, is to find nothing but illusions which vanish as they are grasped.

  He who resolves that he will not rest satisfied with appearances, shadows,

illusions shall, by the piercing light of that resolve, disperse every fleeting

phantasy, and shall enter into the substance and reality of life. He shall learn

how to live, and he shall live. He shall be the slave of no passion, the servant

of no opinion, the votary of no fond error. Finding the Divine Centre within

his  own  heart,  he  will  be  pure  and  calm  and  strong  and  wise,  and  will

ceaselessly radiate the Heavenly Life in which he lives — which is himself.

    Having  betaken  himself  to  the  Divine  Refuge  within,  and  remaining

there, a man is free from sin. All his yesterdays are as the tide-washed and

untrodden sands; no sin shall rise up against him to torment and accuse him

and destroy his sacred peace; the fires of remorse cannot scorch him, nor can

the storms of regret devastate his dwelling-place. His to-morrows are as seeds

which shall germinate, bursting into beauty and potency of life, and no doubt

shall shake his trust, no uncertainty rob him of repose. The Present is his,

only in the immortal Present does he live, and it is as the eternal vault of blue

above  which  looks  down  silently  and  calmly,  yet  radiant  with  purity  and

light, upon the upturned and tear-stained faces of the centuries.

  Men love their desires, for gratification seems sweet to them, but its end

is pain and vacuity; they love the argumentations of the intellect, for egotismseems  most  desirable  to  them,  but  the  fruits  thereof  are  humiliation  and

sorrow. When the soul has reached the end of gratification and reaped the

bitter fruits of egotism, it is ready to receive the Divine Wisdom and to enter

into the Divine Life. Only the crucified can be transfigured; only by the death

of self can the Lord of the heart rise again into the Immortal Life, and stand

radiant upon the Olivet of Wisdom.

  Thou  hast  thy  trials?  Every  outward  trial  is  the  replica  of  an  inward

imperfection.  Thou  shalt  grow  wise  by  knowing  this,  and  shalt  thereby

transmute trial into active joy, finding the Kingdom where trial cannot come.

When wilt thou learn thy lessons, O child of earth! All thy sorrows cry out

against thee; every pain is thy just accuser, and thy griefs are but the shadows

of thy unworthy and perishable self. The Kingdom of Heaven is thine; how

long wilt thou reject it, preferring the lurid atmosphere of Hell — the hell of

thy self-seeking self?

  Where self is not there is the Garden of the Heavenly Life, and

  "There spring the healing streams

    Quenching all thirst!

  there bloom the immortal flowers

    Carpeting all the way with joy!

  there throng Swiftest and sweetest hours!"

  The redeemed sons of God, the glorified in body and spirit, are "bought

with a price," and that price is the crucifixion of the personality, the death of

self; and having put away that within which is the source of all discord, they

have found the universal Music, the abiding Joy.

  Life is more than motion, it is Music; more than rest, it is Peace; more

than work, it is Duty; more than labour, it is Love; more than enjoyment, it is

Blessedness; more than acquiring money and position and reputation, it is

Knowledge, Purpose, strong and high Resolve.

  Let the impure turn to Purity, and they shall be pure; let the weak resort to

Strength, and they shall be strong; let the ignorant fly to Knowledge, and they

shall be wise. All things are man’s, and he chooses that which he will have.

To-day he chooses in ignorance, to-morrow he shall choose in Wisdom. He

shall "work out his own salvation" whether he believe it or not, for he cannot

escape himself, nor transfer to another the eternal responsibility of his ownsoul. By no theological subterfuge shall he trick the Law of his being, which

shall shatter all his selfish makeshifts and excuses for right thinking and right

doing.  Nor  shall  God  do  for  him  that  which  it  is  destined  his  soul  shall

accomplish for itself. What would you say of a man who, wanting to possess

a mansion in which to dwell peacefully, purchased the site and then knelt

down and asked God to build the house for him? Would you not say that such

a man was foolish? And of another man who, having purchased the land, set

the architects and builders and carpenters at work to erect the edifice, would

you not say that he was wise? And as it is in the building of a material house,

even  so  it  is  in  the  building  of  a  spiritual  mansion.  Brick  by  brick,  pure

thought upon pure thought, good deed upon good deed, must the habitation of

a blameless life rise from its sure foundation until at last it stands out in all

the majesty of its faultless proportions. Not by caprice, nor gift, nor favour

does  a  man  obtain  the  spiritual  realities,  but  by  diligence,  watchfulness,

energy, and effort.

  "Strong is the soul, and wise and beautiful;

  The seeds of God-like power are in us still;

  Gods are we, bards, saints, heroes, if we will."

  The spiritual Heart of man is the Heart of the universe, and, finding that

Heart, man finds the strength to accomplish all things. He finds there also the

Wisdom to see things as they are. He finds there the Peace that is divine. At

the centre of man’s being is the Music which orders the stars — the Eternal

Harmony.  He  who  would  find  Blessedness,  let  him  find  himself;  let  him

abandon every discordant desire, every inharmonious thought, every unlovely

habit and deed, and he will find that Grace and Beauty and Harmony which

form the indestructible essence of his own being.

  Men fly from creed to creed, and find — unrest; they travel in many

lands,  and  discover  —  disappointment;  they  build  themselves  beautiful

mansions, and plant pleasant gardens, and reap — ennui and discomfort. Not

until a man falls back upon the Truth within himself does he find rest and

satisfaction; not until he builds the inward Mansion of Faultless Conduct does

he find the endless and incorruptible Joy, and, having obtained that, he will

infuse it into all his outward doings and possessions.

  If a man would have peace, let him exercise the spirit of Peace; if he

would  find  love,  let  him  dwell  in  the  spirit  of  Love;  if  he  would  escapesuffering, let him cease to inflict it; if he would do noble things for humanity,

let him cease to do ignoble things for himself. If he will but quarry the mine

of his own soul, he shall find there all the materials for building whatsoever

he will, and he shall find there also the central Rock on which to build in

safety.

    Howsoever a man works to right the world, it will never be righted until

he  has  put  himself  right.  This  may  be  written  upon  the  heart  as  a

mathematical axiom. It is not enough to preach Purity, men must cease from

lust; to exhort to love, they must abandon hatred; to extol self-sacrifice, they

must  yield  up  self;  to  adorn  with  mere  words  the  Perfect  Life,  they

must be perfect.

  When a man can no longer carry the weight of his many sins, let him fly

to  the  Christ,  whose  throne  is  the  centre  of  his  own  heart,  and  he  shall

become light-hearted, entering the glad company of the Immortals.

  When he can no longer bear the burden of his accumulated learning, let a

man leave his books, his science, his philosophy, and come back to himself,

and he shall find within, that which he outwardly sought and found not — his

own divinity.

  He ceases to argue about God who has found God within. Relying upon

that calm strength which is not the strength of self, he lives God, manifesting

in his daily life the Highest Goodness, which is Eternal Life.                          2. THE ETERNAL NOW


  NOW is thy reality in which time is contained. It is more and greater than

time; it is an ever-present reality. It knows neither past nor future, and is

eternally potent and substantial. Every minute, every day, every year is a

dream  as  soon  as  it  has  passed,  and  exists  only  as  an  imperfect  and

unsubstantial picture in the memory, if it be not entirely obliterated.

  Past  and  future  are  dreams; now is  a  reality.  All  things  are  now;  all

power, all possibility, all action is now. Not to act and accomplish now is not

to act and accomplish at all. To live in thoughts of what you might have done,

or in dreams of what you mean to do, this is folly: but to put away regret, to

anchor anticipation, and to do and to work now, this is wisdom.

  Whilst a man is dwelling upon the past or future he is missing the present;

he is forgetting to live now. All things are possible now, and only now.

Without wisdom to guide him, and mistaking the unreal for the real, a man

says, "If I had done so and so last week, last month, or last year, it would

have been better with me to-day"; or, "I know what is best to be done, and I

will do it to-morrow." The selfish cannot comprehend the vast importance

and value of the present, and fail to see it as the substantial reality of which

past and future are the empty reflections. It may truly be said that past and

future do not exist except as negative shadows, and to live in them — that is,

in the regretful and selfish contemplation of them— is to miss the reality in

life.

  "The Present, the Present is all thou hast

  For thy sure possessing;

  Like the patriarch’s angel, hold it fast,

  Till it gives its blessing.

  "All which is real now remaineth,

  And fadeth never:

  The hand which upholds it now sustaineth

  The soul for ever.

  "Then of what is to be, and of what is done,

  Why queriest thou?

  The past and the time to be are one,  And both are NOW!"

  Man has all power now; but not knowing this, he says, "I will be perfect

next year, or in so many years, or in so many lives." The dwellers in the

Kingdom of God, who live only in the now, say, "I am perfect now," and

refraining from all sin now, and ceaselessly guarding the portals of the mind,

not looking to the past nor to the future, nor turning to the left or right, they

remain eternally holy and blessed." Now is the accepted time; now is the day

of salvation."

  Say to yourself, "I will live in my Ideal now; I will manifest my Ideal

now; I will be my Ideal now; and all that tempts me away from my Ideal I

will not listen to; I will listen only to the voice of my Ideal." Thus resolving,

and thus doing, you shall not de-part from the Highest, and shall eternally

manifest the True.

  "Afoot and light-hearted, I take to the open road.

    Henceforth I ask not good fortune: I myself am good fortune.

    Henceforth I whimper no more, postpone no more, need nothing;

  Done with indoor complaints, libraries, querulous criticisms.

  Strong and content, I take to the open road."

  Cease to tread every byway of dependence, every winding side-way that

tempts thy soul into the shadow-land of the past and the future, and manifest

thy native and divine strength now. Come out into" the open road. "That

which you would be, and hope to be you may be now. Non-accomplishment

resides in your perpetual postponement, and, having the power to postpone,

you also have the power to accomplish — to perpetually accomplish: realize

this truth, and you shall be to-day, and every day, the ideal man of whom you

dreamed.

  Virtue  consists  in  fighting  sin  day  after  day.  but  holiness  consists  in

leaving sin, Unnoticed and ignored, to die by the wayside; and this is done,

can only be done, in the living now. Say not unto thy soul, "Thou shall be

purer to-morrow"; but rather say, "Thou shalt be pure now." To-morrow is

too late for anything, and he who sees his help and salvation in to-morrow

shall continually fail and fall to-day.

  Thou  didst  fall  yesterday?  Didst  sin  grievously?  Having  realized  this,

leave it. instantly-and forever, and watch that thou sinnest not now. The whilethou art bewailing the past, every gate of thy soul remains unguarded against

the entrance of sin now. Thou shalt not rise by grieving over the irremediable

past, but by remedying the present.

  The foolish man, loving the boggy side-path of procrastination rather than

the firm Highway of Present Effort, says, "I will rise early to-morrow; I will

get out of debt to-morrow; I will carry out my intentions to-morrow." But the

wise man, realizing the momentous import of the Eternal Now, rises early to-

day; keeps out of debt to-day; carries out his intentions to-day; and so never

departs from strength and peace and ripe accomplishment.

  That which is done now remains; that which is to be done to-morrow does

not appear. It is wisdom to leave that which has not arrived, and to attend to

that  which  is;  and  to  attend  to  it  with  such  a  consecration  of  soul  and

concentration of effort as shall leave no possible loophole for regret to creep

in.

  A man’s spiritual comprehension being clouded by the illusions of self,

he says, "I was born on such a day, so many years ago, and shall die at my

allotted time." But he was not born, neither will he die, for how can that

which is immortal, which eternally is, be subject to birth and death? Let a

man throw off his illusions, and then he will see that the birth and death of

the body are the mere incidents of a journey, and not its beginning and end.

  Looking back to happy beginnings, and forward to mournful endings, a

man’s eyes are blinded, so that he beholds not his own immortality; his ears

are closed, so that he hears not the ever-present harmonies of Joy; and his

heart is hardened, so that it pulsates not to the rhythmic sounds of Peace.

  The universe, with all that it contains, is now. Put out thy hand, O man,

and receive the fruits of Wisdom! Cease from thy greedy striving, thy selfish

sorrowing, thy foolish regretting, and he content to live.

  Act now, and, lo! all things are done; live now, and, behold! thou art in

the midst of Plenty; be now, and know that thou art perfect.          3. THE "ORIGINAL SIMPLICITY"


  LIFE  is  simple.  Being  is  simple.  The  universe  is  simple.  Complexity

arises in ignorance and self-delusion. The "Original Simplicity" of Lao-tze is

a term expressive of the universe as it is, and not as it appears. Looking

through  the  woven  network  of  his  own  illusions,  man  sees  interminable

complication  and  unfathomable  mystery,  and  so  loses  himself  in  the

labyrinths of his own making. Let a man put away egotism, and he will see

the universe in all the beauty of its pristine simplicity. Let him annihilate the

delusion of the personal "I," and he will destroy all the illusions which spring

from  that  "I."  He  will  thus  "re-become  a  little  child,"  and  will  "revert  to

Original Simplicity."

  When a man succeeds in entirely forgetting (annihilating) his personal

self,  he  be-comes  a  mirror  in  which  the  universal  Reality  is  faultlessly

reflected. He is awakened, and henceforward he lives, not in dreams, but

realities.

    Pythagoras saw the universe in the ten numbers, but even this simplicity

may be further reduced, and the universe ultimately be found to be contained

in the number ONE, for all the numerals and all their infinite complications

are but additions of the One.

  Let life cease to be lived as a fragmentary thing, and let it be lived as a

perfect Whole; the simplicity of the Perfect will then be revealed. How shall

the fragment comprehend the Whole? Yet how simple that the Whole should

comprehend the fragment. How shall sin perceive Holiness? Yet how plain

that Holiness should understand sin. He who would become the Greater let

him abandon the lesser. In no form is the circle contained, but in the circle all

forms are contained. In no colour is the radiant light imprisoned, but in the

radiant light all colours are embodied, Let a man destroy all the forms of self,

and he shall apprehend the Circle of Perfection; let him submerge, in the

silent depths of his being, the varying colours of his thoughts and desires, and

he shall be illuminated with the White Light of Divine Knowledge. In the

perfect chord of music the single note, though forgotten, is indispensably

contained, and the drop of water becomes of supreme usefulness by losingitself in the ocean. Sink thyself compassionately in the heart of humanity, and

thou shalt reproduce the harmonies of Heaven; lose thyself in unlimited love

toward all, and thou shalt work enduring works and shalt become one with

the eternal Ocean of Bliss.

  Man evolves outward to the periphery of complexity, and then involves

backward  to  the  Central  Simplicity.  When  a  man  discovers  that  it  is

mathematically  impossible  for  him  to  know  the  universe  before  knowing

himself, he then starts upon the Way which leads to the Original Simplicity.

He begins to unfold from within, and as he Unfolds himself, he enfolds the

universe.

  Cease to speculate about God, and find the all-embracing Good within

thee, then shalt thou see the emptiness and vanity of speculation, knowing

thyself one with God.

  He who will not give up his secret lust, his covetousness, his anger, his

opinion about this or that, can see nor know nothing; he will remain a dullard

in the school of Wisdom, though he be accounted learned in the colleges.

  If a man would find the Key of Knowledge, let him find himself. Thy sins

are not thyself; they are not any part of thyself; they are diseases which thou

hast come to love. Cease to cling to them, and they will no longer cling to

thee. Let them fall away, and thy self shall stand revealed. Thou shalt then

know thyself as Comprehensive Vision, Invincible Principle, Immortal Life,

and Eternal Good.

  The impure man believes impurity to be his rightful condition, but the

pure man knows himself as pure being; he also, penetrating the Veils, sees all

others as pure being. Purity is extremely simple, and needs no argument to

support  it;  impurity  is  interminably  complex,  and  is  ever  involved  in

defensive argument. Truth lives itself. A blameless life is the only witness of

Truth.  Men  cannot  see,  and  will  not  accept  the  witness  until  they  find  it

within  themselves;  and  having  found  it,  a  man  becomes  silent  before  his

fellows. Truth is so simple that it cannot be found in the region of argument

and advertisement, and so silent that it is only manifested in actions.

  So extremely simple is Original Simplicity, that a man must let go his

hold of everything before he can perceive it. The great arch is strong by

virtue of the hollowness underneath, and a wise man becomes strong and

invincible by emptying himself.    Meekness, Patience, Love, Compassion, and Wisdom — these are the

dominant  qualities  of  Original  Simplicity;  therefore  the  imperfect  cannot

understand it. Wisdom only can apprehend Wisdom, therefore the fool says,

"No man is wise." The imperfect man says, "No man can be perfect," and he

therefore remains where he is. Though he live with a perfect man all his life,

he shall not behold his perfection. Meekness he will call cowardice; Patience,

Love, and Compassion he will see as weakness; and Wisdom will appear to

him  as  folly.  Faultless  discrimination  belongs  to  the  Perfect  Whole,  and

resides not in any part, therefore men are exhorted to refrain from judgement

until they have themselves manifested the Perfect Life.

  Arriving  at  Original  Simplicity,  opacity  disappears,  and  the  universal

transparency becomes apparent. He who has found the indwelling Reality of

his own being has found the original and universal Reality. Knowing the

Divine  Heart  within,  all  hearts  are  known,  and  the  thoughts  of  all  men

become his who has become the master of his own thoughts; therefore the

good man does not defend himself, but moulds the minds of others to his own

likeness.

  As the problematical transcends crudity, so Pure Goodness transcends the

problematical.  All  problems  vanish  when  Pure  Goodness  is  reached;

therefore the good man is called "The slayer of illusions." What problem can

vex where sin is not? O thou who strivest loudly and restest not! retire into

the holy silence of thine own being, and live therefrom. So shalt thou, finding

Pure Goodness, rend in twain the Veil of the Temple of Illusion, and shalt

enter into the Patience, Peace, and transcendent Glory of the Perfect, for Pure

Goodness and Original Simplicity are one.                4. THE UNFAILING WISDOM


  A  MAN  should  be  superior  to  his  possessions,  his  body,  his

circumstances and surroundings, and the opinions of others, and their attitude

towards him. Until he is this, he is not strong and steadfast. He should also

rise superior to his own desires and opinions; and until he is this, he is not

wise.

  The man who identifies himself with his possessions will feel that all is

lost when these are lost; he who regards himself as the outcome and the tool

of  circumstances  will  weakly  fluctuate  with  every  change  in  his  outward

condition; and great will be his unrest and pain who seeks to stand upon the

approbation of others.

  To detach oneself from every outward thing, and to rest securely upon the

inward Virtue, this is the Unfailing Wisdom. Having this Wisdom, a man will

be the same whether in riches or poverty. The one cannot add to his strength,

nor the other rob him of his serenity. Neither can riches defile him who has

washed away all the inward defilement, nor the lack of them degrade him

who has ceased to degrade the temple of his soul.

  To refuse to be enslaved by any outward thing or happening, regarding all

such  things  and  happenings  as  for  your  use,  for  your  education,  this  is

Wisdom. To the wise all occurrences are good, and, having no eye for evil,

they grow wiser every day. They utilize all things, and thus put all things

under their feet. They see all their mistakes as soon as made, and accept them

as  lessons  of  intrinsic  value,  knowing  that  are  no  mistakes  in  the  Divine

Order. They thus rapidly approach the Divine Perfection. They are moved by

none, yet learn from all. They crave love from none, yet give love to all. To

learn, and not to be shaken; to love where one is not Loved: herein lies the

strength which shall never fail a man. The man who says in his heart, "I will

teach all men, and learn from none," will neither teach nor learn whilst he is

in that frame of mind, but will remain in his folly.

  All  strength  and  wisdom  and  power  and  knowledge  a  man  will  find

within himself, but he will not find it in egotism; he will only find it in

obedience, submission, and willingness to learn. He must obey the Higher,and not glorify himself in the lower. He who stands upon egotism, rejecting

reproof, instruction, and the lessons of experience, will surely fall; yea, he is

already fallen. Said a great Teacher to his disciples, "Those who shall be a

lamp unto them-selves, relying upon themselves only, and not relying upon

any external help, but holding fast to the Truth as their lamp, and, seeking

their salvation in the Truth alone, shall not look for assistance to any besides

themselves, it is they among my disciples who shall reach the very topmost

height! But  they  must  be  willing  to  learn."  The  wise  man  is  always

anxious  to  learn,  but  never  anxious  to  teach,  for  he  knows  that  the  true

Teacher is in the heart of every man, and must ultimately be found there by

all. The foolish man, being governed largely by vanity, is very anxious to

teach, but unwilling to learn, not having found the Holy Teacher within who

speaks wisdom to the humbly listening soul. Be self-reliant, but let thy self-

reliance be saintly and not selfish.

  Folly and wisdom, weakness and strength are within a man, and not in

any external thing, neither do they spring from any external cause. A man

cannot be strong for another, he can only be strong for himself; he cannot

overcome for another, he can only overcome of himself. You may learn of

another, but you must accomplish for yourself. Put away all external props,

and rely upon thy Truth within you. A creed will not bear a man up in the

hour  of  temptation;  he  must  possess  the  inward  Knowledge  which  slays

temptation. A speculative philosophy will prove a shadowy thing in the time

of calamity; a man must have the inward Wisdom which puts an end to grief.

    Goodness,  which  is  the  aim  of  all  religions,  is  distinct  from  religions

themselves. Wisdom, which is the aim of every philosophy, is distinct from

all philosophies. The Unfailing Wisdom is found only by constant practice in

pure thinking and well-doing; by harmonizing one’s mind and heart to those

things which are beautiful, lovable, and true.

  In whatever condition a man finds himself, he can always find the True;

and he can find it only by so utilizing his present condition as to become

strong and wise. The effeminate hankering after rewards, and the craven fear

of punishment, let them be put away forever, and let a man joyfully bend

himself to the faithful performance of all his duties, forgetting himself and his

worthless pleasures, and living strong and pure and self-contained; so shall he

surely find the Unfailing Wisdom, the God-like Patience and strength. "Thesituation that has not its Duty, its Ideal, was never yet occupied by man. . . .

Here or nowhere is thy Ideal. Work it out therefrom, and, working, believe,

live, be free. The Ideal is in thyself, the impediment, too, is in thyself: thy

condition  is  but  the  stuff  thou  art  to  shape  that  same  Ideal  out  of.  What

matters whether such stuff be of this sort or that, so the form thou give it be

heroic, be poetic? Oh, thou that pinest in the imprisonment of the Actual, and

criest bitterly to the gods for a kingdom wherein to rule and create, know this

of  a  truth:  the  thing  thou  seekest  is  already  within  thee,  here  and  now,

couldest thou only see!"

  All  that  is  beautiful  and  blessed  is  in  thyself,  not  in  thy  neighbour’s

wealth. Thou art poor? Thou art poor indeed if thou art not stronger than thy

poverty!  Thou  hast  suffered  calamities?  Well,  wilt  thou  cure  calamity  by

adding anxiety to it? Canst thou mend a broken vase by weeping over it or

restore a lost delight by thy lamentations? There is no evil but will vanish if

thou wilt wisely meet it. The God-like soul does not grieve over that which

has been, is, or will be, but perpetually rinds the Divine Good, and gains

wisdom by every occurrence.

  Fear is the shadow of selfishness, and cannot live where loving Wisdom

is. Doubt, anxiety, and worry are unsubstantial shades in the underworld of

self, and shall no more trouble him who will climb the serene altitudes of his

soul. Grief, also, will be for ever dispelled by him who will comprehend the

Law of his being. He who so comprehends shall find the Supreme Law of

Life, and he shall find that it is Love, that it is imperishable Love. He shall

become one with that Love, and loving all, with mind freed from all hatred

and  folly,  he  shall  receive  the  invincible  protection  which  Love  affords.

Claiming nothing, he shall suffer no loss; seeking no pleasure, he shall find

no grief; and employing all his powers as instruments of service, he shall

evermore live in the highest state of blessedness and bliss.

  Know this: — thou makest and unmakest thyself; thou standest and fallest

by what thou art. Thou art a slave if thou prefer-rest to be; thou art a master if

thou wilt make thyself one. Build upon thy animal desires and intellectual

opinions, and thou buildest upon the sand; build upon Virtue and Holiness,

and no wind nor tide shall shake thy strong abode. So shall the Unfailing

Wisdom uphold thee in every emergency, and the Everlasting Arms gather

thee to thy peace.  "Lay up each year Thy harvest of well-doing, wealth that kings

  Nor thieves can take away. When all the things

  Thou callest thine, goods, pleasures, honours fall,

  Thou in thy virtue shalt survive them all."                  5. THE MIGHT OF MEEKNESS


  THE mountain bends not to the fiercest storm, but it shields the fledgling

and the lamb; and though all men tread upon it, yet it protects them, and bears

them up upon its deathless bosom. Even so is it with the meek man who,

though shaken and disturbed by none, yet compassionately bends to shield

the lowliest creature, and, though he may be despised, lifts all men up and

lovingly protects them.

  As glorious as the mountain in its silent is the divine man in his silent

Meekness; like its form, his loving comparison is expansive and sublime.

Truly his body, like the mountain’s base, is fixed in the valleys and the mists;

but the summit of his being is eternally bathed in cloudless glory, and lives

with the Silences.

  He  who  has  found  Meekness  has  found  divinity;  he  has  realized  the

divine consciousness, and knows himself as divine. He also knows all others

as divine, though they know it not themselves, being asleep and dreaming.

Meekness is a divine quality, and as such is all powerful. The meek man

overcomes by not resisting, and by allowing himself to be defeated he attains

to the Supreme Conquest.

  The man who conquers another by force is strong; the man who conquers

himself  by  Meekness  is  mighty.  He  who  conquers  another  by  force  will

himself likewise be conquered; he who conquers himself by Meekness will

never be overthrown, for the human cannot overcome the divine. The meek

man is triumphant in defeat. Socrates lives the more by being put to death; in

the crucified Jesus the risen Christ is revealed, and Stephen in receiving his

stoning  defies  the  hurting  power  of  stones.  That  which  is  real  cannot  be

destroyed, but only that which is unreal. When a man finds that within him

which is real, which is constant, abiding, changeless, and eternal, he enters

into that Reality, and becomes meek. All the powers of darkness will come

against him, but they will do him no hurt, and will at last, depart from him.

  The meek man is found in the time of trial; when other men fall he stands.

His patience is not destroyed by the foolish passions of others, and when they

come  against  him  he  does  not  "strive  nor  cry,"  He  knows  the  utter

powerlessness of all evil, having overcome it in himself, and lives in the

changeless strength and power of divine Good.  Meekness is one aspect of the operation of that changeless Love which is

at the Heart of all things, and is therefore an imperishable quality. He who

lives in it is without fear, knowing the Highest, and having the lowest under

his feet.

  The meek man shines in darkness, and flourishes in obscurity. Meekness

cannot boast, nor advertise itself, nor thrive on popularity. It is practised,

and is seen or not seen; being a spiritual quality it is perceived only by the

eye of the spirit. Those who are not spiritually awakened see it not, nor do

they  love  it,  being  enamoured  of,  and  blinded  by,  worldly  shows  and

appearances. Nor does history take note of the meek man. Its glory is that of

strife  and  self-aggrandizement;  his  is  the  glory  of  peace  and  gentleness.

History chronicles the earthly, not the heavenly acts. Yet though he lives in

obscurity he cannot be hidden (how can light be hid?); he continues to shine

after he has withdrawn himself from the world, and is worshipped by the

world which knew him not.

  That  the  meek  man  should  be  neglected,  abused,  or  misunderstood  is

reckoned by him as of no account, and therefore not to be considered, much

less  resisted.  He  knows  that  all  such  weapons  are  the  flimsiest  and  most

ineffectual of shadows. To them, therefore, who give him evil he gives good.

He resists none, and thereby conquers all.

  He who imagines he can be injured by others, and who seeks to justify

and defend himself against them, does not understand Meekness, does not

comprehend the essence and meaning of life. "He abused me, he beat me, he

defeated me, he robbed me.— In those who harbour such thoughts hatred will

never cease . . . for hatred ceases not by hatred at any time; hatred ceases by

love." What sayest thou, thy neighbour has spoken thee falsely? Well, what

of that? Can a falsity hurt thee? That which is false is false, and there is an

end of it. It is without life, and without power to hurt any but him who seeks

to hurt by it. It is nothing to thee that thy neighbour should speak falsely of

thee, but it is much to thee that thou shouldst resist him, and seek to justify

thyself,  for,  by  so  doing,  thou  givest  life  and  vitality  to  thy  neighbour’s

falseness, so that thou art injured and distressed. Take all evil out of thine

own heart, then shalt thou see the folly of resisting it in another. Thou wilt be

trodden on? Thou art trodden on already if thou thinkest thus. The injury that

thou  seest  as  coming  from  another  comes  only  from  thyself.  The  wrongthought, or word, or act of another has no power to hurt thee unless thou

galvanize it into life by thy passionate resistance, and so receivest it into

thyself. If any man slander me, that is his concern, not mine. I have to do

with my own soul, not with my neighbour’s. Though all the world misjudge

me, it is no business of mine; but that I should possess my soul in Purity and

Love, that is all my business. There shall be no end to strife until men cease

to justify themselves. He who would have wars cease let him cease to defend

any party — let him cease to defend himself. Not by strife can peace come,

but by ceasing from strife. The glory of Cæsar resides in the resistance of his

enemies. They resist and fall. Give to Cæsar that which Cæsar demands, and

Cæsar’s glory and power are gone. Thus, by submission does the meek man

conquer the strong man: but it is not that outward show of submission which

is slavery, it is that inward and spiritual submission which is freedom.

    Claiming no rights, the meek man is not troubled with self-defence and

self-justification; he lives in love, and therefore comes under the immediate

and  vital  protection  of  the  Great  Love  which  is  the  Eternal  Law  of  the

universe. He neither claims nor seeks his own; thus do all things come to

him, and all the universe shields and protects him.

  He who says, "I have tried Meekness, and it has failed," has not tried

Meekness.  It  cannot  be  tried  as  an  experiment.  It  is  only  arrived  at  by

unreserved self-sacrifice. Meekness does not consist merely in non-resistance

in action; it consists pre-eminently in non-resistance in thought, in ceasing

to hold or to have any selfish, condemnatory, or retaliatory thoughts. The

meek man, therefore, cannot "take offence" or have his "feelings hurt," living

above hatred, folly, and vanity. Meekness can never fail.

  O  thou  who  searchest  for  the  Heavenly  Life!  strive  after  Meekness;

increase thy patience and forbearance day by day; bid thy tongue cease from

all harsh words; withdraw thy mind from selfish arguments, and refuse to

brood upon thy wrongs: so living, thou shalt carefully tend and cultivate the

pure and delicate flower of Meekness in thy heart, until at last, its divine

sweetness and purity and beauteous perfection shall be revealed to thee, and

thou  shalt  become  gentle,  joyful,  and  strong.  Repine  not  that  thou  art

surrounded by irritable and selfish people; but rather rejoice that thou art so

favoured as to have thine own imperfections revealed to thee, and that thou

art so placed as to necessitate within thee a constant struggle for self-masteryand  the  attainment,  of  perfection.  The  more  there  is  of  harshness  and

selfishness around thee the greater is the need of thy Meekness and love. If

others seek to wrong thee, all the more is it needful that thou shouldst cease

from all wrong, and live in love; if others preach Meekness, humility, and

love, and do not practice these, trouble not nor be annoyed; but do thou, in

the silence of thy heart, and in thy contact with others, practice these things,

and  they  shall  preach  themselves.  And  though  thou  utter  no  declamatory

word,  and  stand  before  no  gathered  audience,  thou  shalt  teach  the  whole

world. As thou becomest meek, thou shalt learn the deepest secrets of the

universe. Nothing is hidden from him who overcomes himself. Into the cause

of causes shalt thou penetrate, and lifting, one after another, every veil of

illusion, shalt reach at last the inmost Heart of Being. Thus becoming one

with Life, thou shalt know till life, and, seeing into causes, and knowing

realities, thou shalt be no more anxious about thyself, and others, and the

world, but shalt see that all things that are, are engines of the Great Law.

Canopied with gentleness, thou shalt bless where others curse; love where

others hate; forgive where others condemn; yield where others strive; give up

where others grasp; lose where others gain. And in their strength they shall be

weak; and in thy weakness thou shalt be strong; yea, thou shalt mightily

prevail. He that hath not unbroken gentleness hath not Truth:

    "Therefore when Heaven would save a man, it enfolds him with gentleness."                        6. THE RIGHTEOUS MAN


  THE righteous man is invincible. No enemy can possibly overcome or

confound him; and he needs no other protection than that of his own integrity

and holiness.

  As it is impossible for evil to overcome Good, so the righteous man can

never be brought low by the unrighteous. Slander, envy, hatred, malice can

never reach him, nor cause him any suffering, and those who try to injure him

only succeed ultimately in bringing ignominy upon themselves.

  The righteous man, having nothing to hide, committing no acts which

require stealth, and harbouring no thoughts and desires which he would not

like others to know, is fearless and unashamed. His step is firm, his body

upright, and his speech direct and without ambiguity. He looks everybody in

the face. How can he fear any who wrongs none? How can he be ashamed

before any who deceives none? And ceasing from all wrong he can never be

wronged; ceasing from all deceit he can never be deceived.

  The righteous man, performing all his duties with scrupulous diligence,

and living above sin, is invulnerable at every point. He who has slain the

inward enemies of virtue can never be brought low by any outward enemy;

neither does he need to seek any protection against them, righteousness being

an all-sufficient protection.

  The unrighteous man is vulnerable at almost every point; living in his

passions, the slave of prejudices, impulses, and ill-formed opinions, he is

continually suffering (as he imagines) at the hands of others. The slanders,

attacks,  and  accusations  of  others  cause  him  great  suffering  because  they

have  a  basis  of  truth  in  himself;  and  not  having  the  protection  of

righteousness, he endeavours to justify and protect himself by resorting to

retaliation and specious argument, and even to subterfuge and deceit.

  The partially righteous man is vulnerable at all those points where he falls

short  of  righteousness,  and  should  the  righteous  man  fall  from  his

righteousness, and give way to one sin, his invincibility is gone, for he has

thereby  placed  himself  where  attack  and  accusation  can  justly  reach  and

injure him, because he has first injured himself.

  If a man suffers or is injured through the instrumentality of others, let him

look to himself, and, putting aside self-pity and self-defence, he will find inhis own heart the source of all his woe.

  No evil can happen to the righteous man who has cut off the source of

evil in himself; living in the All-Good, and abstaining from sin in thought,

word and deed, whatever happens to him is good; neither can any person,

event, or circumstance cause him suffering, for the tyranny of circumstance is

utterly destroyed for him who has broken the bonds of sin.

  The suffering, the sorrowing, the weary, and broken-hearted ever seek a

sorrowless refuge, a haven of perpetual peace. Let such fly to the refuge of

the righteous life; let them come now and enter the haven of the sinless state,

for sorrow cannot overtake the righteous; suffering cannot reach him who

does  not  waste  in  self-seeking  his  spiritual  substance;  and  he  cannot  be

afflicted by weariness and unrest whose heart is at peace with all.                              7. PERFECT LOVE


  THE Children of Light, who abide in the Kingdom of Heaven, see the

universe, and all that it contains, as the manifestation of one Law — the Law

of  Love.  They  see  Love  as  the  moulding,  sustaining,  protecting,  and

perfecting Power immanent in all things animate and inanimate. To them

Love is not merely and only a rule of life, it is the Law of Life, it is Life

itself. Knowing this, they order their whole life in accordance with Love, not

regarding their own personality. By thus practising obedience to the Highest,

to divine Love, they become conscious partakers of the power of Love, and

so arrive at perfect Freedom as Masters of Destiny.

  The universe is preserved because Love is at the Heart of it. Love is the

only  preservative  power.  Whilst  there  is  hatred  in  the  heart  of  man,  he

imagines the Law to be cruel, but when his heart is mellowed by Compassion

and Love, he perceives that the Law is Infinite Kindness. So kind is the Law

that it protects man against his own ignorance, Man, in his puny efforts to

subvert the Law by attaching undue importance to his own little personality,

brings upon himself such trains of suffering that he is at last compelled, in the

depth of his afflictions, to seek for Wisdom; and finding Wisdom, he finds

Love, and knows it as the Law of his being, the Law of the universe. Love

does not punish; man punishes himself by his own hatred; by striving to

preserve evil which has no life by which to preserve itself, and by trying to

subvert Love, which can neither be overcome nor destroyed, being of the

substance  of  Life.  When  a  man  burns  himself,  does  he  accuse  the  fire?

Therefore,  when  a  man  suffers,  let  him  look  for  some  ignorance  or

disobedience within himself.

  Love is Perfect Harmony, pure Bliss, and contains, therefore, no element

of  suffering.  Let  a  man  think  no  thought  and  do  no  act  which  is  not  in

accordance with pure Love, and suffering shall no more trouble him. If a man

would know Love, and partake of its undying bliss, he must practice it in his

heart; he must become Love.

  He who always acts from the spirit of Love is never deserted, is never left

in a dilemma or difficulty, for Love (impersonal Love) is both Knowledge

and Power. He who has learned how to Love has learned how to master every

difficulty, how to transmute every failure into success, how to clothe everyevent and condition in garments of blessedness and beauty.

  The  way  to  Love  is  by  self-mastery,  and,  travelling  that  way,  a  man

builds himself up in Knowledge as he proceeds. Arriving at Love, he enters

into full possession of body and mind, by right of the divine Power which he

has earned.

    "Perfect Love casteth out fear." To know Love is to know that there is no

harmful power in the whole Universe. Even sin itself, which the worldly and

unbelieving  imagine  is  so  unconquerable,  is  known  as  a  very  weak  and

perishable  thing,  that  shrinks  away  and  disappears  before  the  compelling

power  of  Good.  Perfect  Love  is  perfect  Harmlessness.  And  he  who  has

destroyed, in himself, all thoughts of harm, and all desire to harm, receives

the universal protection, and knows himself to be invincible.

  Perfect Love is perfect Patience. Anger and irritability cannot dwell with

it nor come near it. It sweetens every bitter occasion with the perfume of

holiness, and transmutes trial into divine strength. Complaint, is foreign to it.

He  who  loves  bewails  nothing,  but  accepts  all  things  and  conditions  as

heavenly  guests;  he  is  therefore  constantly  blessed,  and  sorrow  does  not

overtake him.

  Perfect Love is perfect Trust. He who has destroyed the desire to grasp

can never be troubled with the fear of loss. Loss and gain are alike foreign to

him.  Steadfastly  maintaining  a  loving  attitude  of  mind  toward  all,  and

pursuing, in the performance of his duties, a constant and loving activity,

Love protects him and evermore supplies him in fullest measure with all that

he needs.

  Perfect  Love  is  perfect  Power.  The  wisely  loving  heart  commands

without exercising any authority. All things and all men obey him who obeys

the Highest. He thinks, and lo! he has already accomplished! He speaks, and

behold! a world hangs upon his simple utterances! He has harmonized his

thoughts  with  the  Imperishable  and  Unconquerable  Forces,  and  for  him

weakness and uncertainty are no more. His every thought is a purpose; his

every act an accomplishment; he moves with the Great Law, not setting his

puny personal will against it, and he thus becomes a channel through which

the Divine Power can flow in unimpeded and beneficent expression. He has

thus become Power itself.

  Perfect Love is perfect Wisdom. The man who loves all is the man whoknows all. Having thoroughly learned the lessons of his own heart, he knows

the tasks and trials of other hearts, and adapts himself to them gently and

without ostentation. Love illuminates the intellect; without it the intellect is

blind  and  cold  and  lifeless.  Love  succeeds  where  the  intellect  fails;  sees

where the intellect is blind; knows where the intellect is ignorant, Reason is

only completed in Love, and is ultimately absorbed in it. Love is the Supreme

Reality in the universe, and as such it contains all Truth. Infinite Tenderness

enfolds  and  cherishes  the  universe;  therefore  is  the  wise  man  gentle  and

childlike and tender-hearted. He sees that the one thing which all creatures

need is Love, and he gives unstintingly. He knows that all occasions require

the adjusting power of Love, and he ceases from harshness.

  To the eye of Love all things are revealed, not as an infinity of complex

effects, but in the light of Eternal Principles, out of which spring all causes

and effects, and back into which they return. "God is Love;" therefore than

Love there is nothing more perfect. He who would find pure Knowledge let

him find pure Love.

  Perfect Love is perfect Peace. He who dwells with it has completed his

pilgrimage in the underworld of sorrow. With mind calm and heart at rest, he

has banished the shadows of grief, and knows the deathless Life.

  If thou wouldst perfect thyself in Knowledge, perfect thyself in Love. If

thou  wouldst  reach  the  Highest,  ceaselessly  cultivate  a  loving  and

compassionate heart.                          8. PERFECT FREEDOM


  THERE is no bondage in the Heavenly Life. There is Perfect Freedom.

This is its great glory. This Supreme Freedom is gained only by obedience.

He who obeys the Highest cooperates with the Highest, and so masters every

force within himself and every condition without. A man may choose the

lower and neglect the Higher, but the Higher is never overcome by the lower:

herein  lies  the  revelation  of  Freedom.  Let  a  man  choose  the  Higher  and

abandon the lower; he shall then establish himself as an Overcomer, and shall

realize Perfect Freedom.

  To give the reins to inclination is the only slavery; to conquer oneself is

the only freedom. The slave to self loves his chains, and will not have one of

them  broken  for  fear  he  would  be  depriving  himself  of  some  cherished

delight. He clings to his gratifications and vanities, regarding freedom from

them as an empty and undesirable condition. He thus defeats and enslaves

himself.

  By self-enlightenment is Perfect Freedom found. Whilst a man remains

ignorant of himself, of his desires, of his emotions and thoughts, and of the

inward causes which mould his life and destiny, having neither control nor

understanding  of  himself,  he  will  remain  in  bondage  to  passion,  sorrow,

suffering, and fluctuating fortune. The Land of Perfect Freedom lies through

the Gate of Knowledge.

  All  outward  oppression  is  but  the  shadow  and  effect  of  the  real

oppression  within.  For  ages  the  oppressed  have  cried  for  liberty,  and  a

thousand man-made statutes have failed to give it to them. They can give it

only to themselves; they shall find it only in obedience to the Divine Statutes

which are inscribed upon their hearts. Let them resort to the inward Freedom,

and the shadow of oppression shall no more darken the earth. Let men cease

to oppress themselves, and no man shall oppress his brother.

  Men  legislate  for  an outward freedom,  yet  continue  to  render  such

freedom  impossible  of  achievement  by  fostering  an  inward  condition  of

enslavement. They thus pursue a shadow without, and ignore the substance

within. Man will be free when he is freed from self. All outward forms of

bondage and oppression will cease to be when man ceases to be the willing

bond-slave of passion, error, and ignorance. Freedom is to the free.  Whilst men cling to weakness they cannot have strength; whilst they love

darkness they can receive no light; and so long as they prefer bondage they

can enjoy no liberty. Strength, light, and freedom are ready now, and can be

had by all who love them, who aspire to them. Freedom does not reside in

coöperative aggression, for this will always produce, reactively, coöperative

defence  —  warfare,  hatred,  party  strife,  and  the  destruction  of  liberty.

Freedom resides in individual self-conquest. The emancipation of Humanity

is  frustrated  and  withheld  by  the  self-enslavement  of  the  unit.  Thou  who

criest to man and God for liberty, liberate thyself!

  The Heavenly Freedom is freedom from passion, from cravings, from

opinions, from the tyranny of the flesh, and the tyranny of the intellect — this

first, and then all outward freedom, as effect to cause. The Freedom that

begins within, and extends outwardly until it embraces the whole man, is an

emancipation so complete, all-embracing, and perfect as to leave no galling

fetter unbroken. Free thy soul from all sin, and thou shalt walk a freed and

fearless man in the midst of a world of fearful slaves; and, seeing thee, many

slaves shall take heart and shall join thee in thy glorious freedom.

  He who says, "My worldly duties are irksome to me: I will leave them

and go into solitude, where I shall be as free as the air," and thinks to gain

freedom thus, will find only a harder slavery. The tree of Freedom is rooted

in Duty, and he who would pluck its sweet fruits must discover joy in Duty.

    Glad-hearted, calm, and ready for all tasks is he who is freed from self.

Irksomeness and weariness cannot enter his heart, and his divine strength

lightens every burden so that its weight is not felt. He does not run away from

Duty with his chains about him, but breaks them and stands free.

  Make thyself pure; make thyself proof against weakness, temptation, and

sin; for only in thine own heart and mind shalt thou find that Perfect Freedom

for which the whole world sighs and seeks in vain.            9. GREATNESS AND GOODNESS


    GOODNESS, simplicity, greatness — these three are one, and this trinity

of perfection cannot be separated. All greatness springs from goodness, and

all goodness is profoundly simple, without goodness there is no greatness.

Some men pass through the world as destructive forces, like the tornado or

the avalanche, but they are not great; they are to greatness as the avalanche is

to the mountain. The work of greatness is enduring and preservative, and not

violent and destructive. The greatest souls are the most gentle.

  Greatness is never obtrusive. It works in silence, seeking no recognition.

This is why it is not easily perceived and recognized. Like the mountain, it

towers up in its vastness, so that those in its immediate vicinity, who receive

its shelter and shade, do not see it. Its sublime grandeur is only beheld as they

recede from it. The great man is not seen by his contemporaries; the majesty

of his form is only outlined by its recession in time. This is the awe and

enchantment of distance. Men occupy themselves with the small things; their

houses, trees, lands. Few contemplate the mountain at whose base they live,

and  fewer  still  essay  to  explore  it.  But  in  the  distance  these  small  thing

disappear,  and  then  the  solitary  beauty  of  the  mountain  is  perceived.

Popularity,  noisy  obtrusiveness,  and  shallow  show,  these  superficialities

rapidly  disappear,  and  leave  behind  no  enduring  mark:  whereas  greatness

slowly emerges from obscurity, and endures for ever.

  Jewish Rabbi and rabble alike saw not the divine beauty of Jesus; they

saw only an unlettered carpenter. To his acquaintances, Homer was only a

blind beggar, but the centuries reveal him as Homer the immortal poet. Two

hundred years after the farmer of Stratford (and all that is known of him) has

disappeared,  the real Shakespeare  is  discerned.  All  true  genius  is

impersonal.  It  belongs  not  to  the  man  through  whom  it  is  manifested;  it

belongs to all. It is a diffusion of pure Truth: the Light of Heaven descending

on all mankind.

  Every work of genius, in whatsoever department of art, is a symbolic

manifestation of impersonal Truth. It is universal, and finds a response in

every heart in every age and race. Anything short of this is not genius, is notgreatness. That work which defends a religion perishes; it is religion that

lives.  Theories  about  immortality  fade  away;  immortal  man  endures;

commentaries upon Truth come to the dust; Truth alone remains. That only is

true  in  art  which  represents  the  True;  that  only  is  great  in  life  which  is

universally and eternally true. And the True is the Good; the Good is the

True.

  Every immortal work springs from the Eternal Goodness in the human

heart, and it is clothed with the sweet and unaffected simplicity of goodness.

The greatest art is, like nature, artless. It knows no trick, no pose, no studied

effort. There are no stage-tricks in Shakespeare; and he is the greatest of

dramatists because he is the simplest. The critics, not understanding the wise

simplicity  of  greatness,  always  condemn  the  loftiest  work.  They  cannot

discriminate  between  the childish and  the childlike.  The  True,  the

Beautiful, the Great, is always childlike, and is perennially fresh and young.

  The great man is always the good man; he is always simple. He draws

from, nay, lives in, the inexhaustible fountain of divine Goodness within; he

inhabits the Heavenly Places; communes with the vanished great ones; lives

with the Invisible: he is inspired, and breathes the airs of Heaven.

  He  who  would  be  great  let  him  learn  to  be  good.  He  will  therefore

become great by not seeking greatness. Aiming at greatness a man arrives at

nothingness; aiming at nothingness he arrives at greatness. The desire to be

great is an indication of littleness, of personal vanity and obtrusiveness. The

willingness to disappear from gaze, the utter absence of self-aggrandizement

is the witness of greatness.

    Littleness seeks and loves authority. Greatness is never authoritative, and

it  thereby  becomes  the  authority  to  which  the  after  ages  appeal.  He  who

seeks, loses; he who is willing to lose, wins all men. Be thy simple self, thy

better self, thy impersonal self, and lo! thou art great! He who selfishly seeks

authority  shall  succeed  only  in  becoming  a  trembling  apologist  courting

protection behind the back of acknowledged greatness. He who will become

the servant of all men, desiring no personal authority, shall live as a man, and

shall be called great. "Abide in the simple and noble regions of thy life, obey

thy heart, and thou shalt reproduce the foreworld again." Forget thine own

little self, and fall back upon the Universal self, and thou shalt reproduce, in

living and enduring forms, a thousand beautiful experiences; thou shalt findwithin thyself that simple goodness which is greatness.

  "It is as easy to be great as to be small," says Emerson; and he utters a

profound truth. Forgetfulness of self is the whole of greatness, as it is the

whole of goodness and happiness. In a fleeting moment of self-forgetfulness

the smallest soul becomes great; extend that moment indefinitely, and there is

a  great  soul,  a  great  life.  Cast  away  thy  personality  (thy  petty  cravings,

vanities,  and  ambitions)  as  a  worthless  garment,  and  dwell  in  the  loving,

compassionate, selfless regions of thy soul, and thou art no longer small—

thou art great.

    Claiming personal authority, a man descends into littleness; practising

goodness, a man ascends into greatness. The presumptuousness of the small

may, for a time, obscure the humility of the great, but it is at last swallowed

up by it, as the noisy river is lost in the calm ocean.

  The  vulgarity  of  ignorance  and  the  pride  of  learning  must  disappear.

Their worthlessness is equal. They have no part in the Soul of Goodness. If

thou  wouldst  do,  thou  must be.  Thou  shalt  not  mistake  information  for

Knowledge;  thou  must  know  thyself  as  pure  Knowledge.  Thou  shalt  not

confuse  learning  with  Wisdom;  thou  must  apprehend  thyself  as  undefiled

Wisdom.

  Wouldst thou write a living book? Thou must first live; thou shalt draw

around thee the mystic garment of a manifold experience, and shalt learn, in

enjoyment  and  suffering,  gladness  and  sorrow,  conquest  and  defeat,  that

which no book and no teacher can teach thee. Thou shalt learn of life, of thy

soul; thou shalt tread the Lonely Road, and shalt become; thou shalt be.

Thou shalt then write thy book, and it shall live; it shall be more than a book.

Let thy book first live in thee, then shalt thou live in thy book.

  Wouldst thou carve a statue that shall captivate the ages, or paint a picture

that shall endure? Thou shalt acquaint thyself with the divine Beauty within

thee. Thou shalt comprehend and adore the Invisible Beauty; thou shalt know

the Principles which are the soul of Form; thou shalt perceive the matchless

symmetry and faultless proportions of Life, of Being, of the Universe; thus

knowing  the  eternally  True  thou  shalt  carve  or  paint  the  indescribably

Beautiful.

  Wouldst thou produce an imperishable poem? Thou shalt first live thy

poem; thou shalt think and act rhythmically; thou shalt find the never-failingsource of inspiration in the loving places of thy heart. Then shall immortal

lines flow from thee without effort, and. as the flowers of wood and field

spontaneously spring, so shall beautiful thoughts grow up in thine heart and,

enshrined in words as moulds to their beauty, shall subdue the hearts of men.

  Wouldst thou compose such music as shall gladden and uplift the world?

Thou shalt adjust thy soul to the Heavenly Harmonies. Thou shalt know that

thyself, that life and the universe is Music. Thou shalt touch the chords of

Life. Thou shalt know that Music is everywhere; that it is the Heart of Being;

then shalt thou hear with thy spiritual ear the Deathless Symphonies.

  Wouldst  thou  preach  the  living  word?  Thou  shalt  forego  thyself,  and

become that Word. Thou shalt know one thing—that the human heart is

good, is divine; thou shalt live on one thing—Love. Thou shalt love all,

seeing no evil, thinking no evil, believing no evil; then, though thou speak

but little, thy every act shall be a power, thy every word a precept. By thy

pure thought, thy selfless deed, though it appear hidden, thou shalt preach,

down the ages, to untold multitudes of aspiring souls.

  To him who chooses Goodness, sacrificing all, is given that which is

more than and includes all. He becomes the possessor of the Best, communes

with the Highest, and enters the company of the Great.

  The  greatness  that  is  flawless,  rounded,  and  complete  is  above  and

beyond all art. It is Perfect Goodness in manifestation; therefore the greatest

souls are always Teachers.                      10. HEAVEN IN THE HEART


  THE  toil  of  life  ceases  when  the  heart  is  pure.  When  the  mind  is

harmonized with the Divine Law the wheel of drudgery ceases to turn, and all

work is transmuted into joyful activity. The pure-hearted are as the lilies of

the field, which toil not, yet are fed and clothed from the abundant storehouse

of the All-Good. But the lily is not lethargic; it is ceaselessly active, drawing

nourishment  from  earth  and  air  and  sun.  By  the  Divine  Power  immanent

within it, it builds itself up, cell by cell, opening itself to the light, growing

and expanding towards the perfect flower. So is it with those who, having

yielded up self-will, have learned to coöperate with the Divine Will. They

grow in grace, goodness, and beauty, freed from anxiety, and without friction

and  toil.  And  they  never  work  in  vain;  there  is  no  waste  action.  Every

thought, act, and thing done subserves the Divine Purpose, and adds to the

sum-total of the world’s happiness.

  Heaven is in the heart. They will look for it in vain who look elsewhere.

In no outward place will the soul find Heaven until it finds it within itself;

for, wherever the soul goes, its thoughts and desires will go with it; and,

howsoever beautiful may be its outward dwelling-place, if there is sin within,

there will be darkness and gloom without, for sin always casts a dark shadow

over the pathway of the soul—the shadow of sorrow.

  This  world  is  beautiful,  transcendently  and  wonderfully  beautiful.  Its

beauties and inspiring wonders cannot be numbered; yet, to the sin-sodden

mind, it appears as a dark and joyless place. Where passion and self are, there

is hell, and there are all the pains of hell; where Holiness and Love are, there

is Heaven, and there are all the joys of Heaven.

  Heaven is here. It is also everywhere. It is wherever there is a pure heart.

The  whole  universe  is  abounding  with  joy,  but  the  sin-bound  heart  can

neither see, hear, nor partake of it. No one is, or can be, arbitrarily shut out

from Heaven; each shuts himself out. Its Golden Gates are eternally ajar, but

the selfish cannot find them; they mourn, yet see not; they cry, but hear not.

Only to those who turn their eyes to heavenly things, their cars to heavenly

sounds, are the happy Portals of the Kingdom revealed, and they enter and

are glad.

  All life is gladness when the heart is right, when it is attuned to the sweetchords of holy Love. Life is Religion, Religion is life and all is Joy and

Gladness. The jarring notes of creeds and parties, the black shadows of sin,

let them pass away for ever; they cannot enter the Door of Life; they form no

part  of  Religion.  Joy,  Music,  Beauty—these  belong  to  the  True  Order  of

things; they are of the texture of the universe; of these is the divine Garment

of Life woven. Pure Religion is glad, not gloomy. It is Light without darkness

or shadow.

    Despondency,  disappointment,  grief  —  these  are  the  reflex  aspects  of

pleasurable excitement, self-seeking, and desire. Give up the latter, and the

former  will  for  ever  disappear;  then  there  remains  the  perfect  Bliss  of

Heaven.

    Abounding  and  unalloyed  Happiness  is  man’s  true  life;  perfect

Blessedness is his rightful portion; and when he loses his false life and finds

the true he enters into the full possession of his Kingdom. The Kingdom of

Heaven is man’s Home; and it is here and now, it is in his own heart, and he

is  not  left  without  Guides,  if  he  wills  to  find  it.  All  man’s  sorrows  and

sufferings are the result of his own self-elected estrangement from the Divine

Source, the All-Good, the Father, the Heart of Love. Let him return to his

Home; his peace awaits him.

  The Heavenly-hearted are without sorrow and suffering, because they are

without sin. What the worldly-minded call troubles they regard as pleasant

tasks  of  Love  and  Wisdom.  Troubles  belong  to  hell;  they  do  not  enter

Heaven. This is so simple it should not appear strange. If you have a trouble

it. is in your own mind, and nowhere else; you make it, it is not made for you;

it is not in your task; it is not in that outward thing. You are its creator, and it

derives its life from you only. Look upon all your difficulties as lessons to be

learned, as’ aids to spiritual growth, and lo! they are difficulties no longer!

This is one of the Pathways up to Heaven.

  To transmute everything into Happiness and Joy, this is supremely the

work  and  duty  of  the  Heavenly-minded  man.  To  reduce  everything  to

wretchedness  and  deprivation  is  the  process  which  the  worldly-minded

unconsciously pursue. To live in Love is to work in Joy. Love is the magic

that  transforms  all  things  into  power  and  beauty.  It  brings  plenty  out  of

poverty, power out of weakness, loveliness out of deformity, sweetness out of

bitterness, light out of darkness, and produces all blissful conditions out of itsown substantial but indefinable essence.

  He who loves can never want. The universe belongs to Goodness, and it

therefore belongs to the good man. It can be possessed by all without stint or

shrinking, for Goodness, and the abundance of Goodness (material, mental,

and spiritual abundance), is inexhaustible. Think lovingly, speak lovingly, act

lovingly, and your every need shall be supplied; you shall not walk in desert

places, and no danger shall overtake you.

  Love sees with faultless vision, judges true judgement, acts in wisdom.

Look through the eyes of Love, and you shall see everywhere the Beautiful

and True; judge with the mind of Love, and you shall err not, shall wake no

wail  of  sorrow;  act  in  the  spirit  of  Love,  and  you  shall  strike  undying

harmonies upon the Harp of Life.

  Make no compromise with self. Cease not to strive until your whole being

is  swallowed  up  in  Love.  To  love  all  and  always—this  is  the  Heaven  of

heavens. "Let there be nothing within thee that is not very beautiful and very

gentle, and then will there be nothing without thee that is not beautified and

softened by the spell of thy presence." All that you do, let it be done in calm

wisdom, and not from desire, impulse, or opinion; this is the Heavenly way

of action.

  Purify your thought-world until no stain is left, and you will ascend into

Heaven while living in the body. You will then see the things of the outward

world clothed in all beautiful forms. Having found the Divine Beauty within

ourselves, it springs to life in every outward thing. To the beautified soul the

world is beautiful.

    Undeveloped souls are merely unopened flowers. The perfect Beauty lies

concealed within, and will one day reveal itself to the full-orbed light of

Heaven. Seeing men thus, we stand where evil is not, and where the eye

beholds only good. Herein lies the peace and patience and beauty of Love—it

sees no evil. He who loves thus becomes the protector of all men. Though

in their ignorance they should hate him, he shields and loves them.

  What gardener is so foolish as to condemn his flowers because they do

not develop in a day? Learn to love, and you shall see in all souls, even those

called "degraded," the Divine Beauty, and shall know that it will not fail to

come forth in its own season. This is one of the Heavenly Visions; it is out of

this that Gladness comes.  Sin, sorrow, suffering — these are the dark gropings of the unopened soul

for Light. Open the petals of your soul and let the glorious Light stream in.

  Every  sinful  soul  is  an  unresolved  harmony.  It  shall  at  last  strike  the

Perfect Chord, and swell the joyful melodies of Heaven.

  Hell is the preparation for Heaven; and out of the debris of its ruined

hovels are built pleasant mansions wherein the perfected soul may dwell.

  Night is only a fleeting shadow which the world casts, and sorrow is but a

transient shade cast by the self. "Come out into the Sunlight." Know this, O

reader! that you are divine. You are not cut off from the Divine except in

your own unbelief. Rise up, O Son of God! and shake off the nightmare of sin

which binds you; accept your heritage—the Kingdom of Heaven! Drug your

soul no longer with the poisons of false beliefs. You are not "a worm of the

dust" unless you choose to make yourself one. You are a divine, immortal,

God-born being, and this you may know if you will to seek and find. Cling no

longer to your impure and grovelling thoughts, and you shall know that you

are a radiant and celestial spirit, filled with all pure and lovable thoughts.

Wretchedness and sin and sorrow are not your portion here unless you accept

them as such; and if you do this, they will be your portion hereafter, for these

things are not apart from your soul-condition: they will go wherever you go;

they are only within you.

  Heaven, not hell, is your portion here and always. It only requires you to

take that which belongs to you. You are the master, and you choose whom

you will serve. You are the maker of your state, and your choice determines

your condition. What you pray and ask for (with your mind and heart, not

with your lips merely), this you receive. You are served as you serve. You are

conditioned as you condition. You garner in your own.

  Heaven  is  yours;  you  have  but  to  enter  in  and  take  possession;  and

Heaven means Supreme Happiness, Perfect Blessedness; it leaves nothing to

be desired; nothing to be grieved over. It is complete satisfaction now and

in this world. It is within you; and if you do not know this, it is because you

persist in turning the back of your soul upon it. Turn round and you shall

behold it.

  Come and live in the sunshine of your being. Come out of the shadows

and  the  dark  places.  You  are  framed  for  Happiness.  You  are  a  child  of

Heaven. Purity, Wisdom, Love, Plenty, Joy, and Peace—these are the eternalRealities of the Kingdom, and they are yours, but you cannot possess them in

sin; they have no part in the Realm of Darkness. They belong to "the Light

which lighteth every man that cometh into the world," the Light of spotless

Love. They are the heritage of the holy Christ-Child who shall come to birth

in your soul when you are ready to divest yourself of all your impurities.

They are your real self.

  But he whose soul has been safely delivered of the Wonderful Joy-Child

does not forget the travail of the world.                            BOOK FIVE


        BYWAYS OF BLESSEDNESS.                                      FOREWORD


  Along the highways of Burma there is placed, at regular distances away

from the dust of the road, and under the cool shade of a group of trees, a

small wooden building called a “rest-house”, where the weary traveller may

rest  a  while,  and  allay  his  thirst  and  assuage  his  hunger  and  fatigue  by

partaking of the food and water which the kindly inhabitants place there as a

religious duty.

  Along the great highway of life there are such resting places; away from

the  heat  of  passion  and  the  dust  of  disappointment,  under  the  cool  and

refreshing shade of lowly Wisdom, are the humble, unimposing “rest-houses”

of peace, and the little, almost unnoticed, byways of blessedness, where alone

the weary and footsore can find strength and healing.

  Nor can these byways be ignored without suffering. Along the great road

of life, hurrying, and eager to reach some illusive goal, presses the multitude,

despising  the  apparently  insignificant  “rest-houses”  of  true  thought,  not

heeding  the  narrow  little  byways  of  blessed  action,  which  they  regard  as

unimportant; and hour by hour men are fainting and falling, and numbers that

cannot be counted perish of heart-hunger, heart-thirst, and heart-fatigue.

  But he who will step aside from the passionate press, and will deign to

notice and to enter the byways which are here presented, his dusty feet shall

press the incomparable flowers of blessedness, his eyes be gladdened with

their beauty, and his mind refreshed with their sweet perfume. Rested and

sustained, he will escape the fever and the delirium of life, and, strong and

happy, he will not fall fainting in the dust, nor perish by the way, but will

successfully accomplish his journey.

  James Allen

  Broad Park Avenue

    Ilfracombe, England.                          1. RIGHT BEGINNINGS

  “All common things, each day’s events,

  That with the hour begin and end;

  Our pleasures and our discontents

  Are rounds by which we may ascend.”

  “We have not wings, we cannot soar;

  But we have feet to scale and climb.”

    Longfellow.

  “For common life, its wants

  And ways, would I set forth in beauteous hues.”

    Browning.

 

  Life is full of beginnings. They are presented every day and every hour to

every person. Most beginnings are small, and appear trivial and insignificant,

but in reality they are the most important things in life.

  See  how  in  the  material  world  everything  proceeds  from  small

beginnings. The mightiest river is at first a rivulet over which the grasshopper

could leap; the great flood commences with a few drops of rain; the sturdy

oak, which has endured the storms of a thousand winters, was once an acorn;

and  the  smouldering  match,  carelessly  dropped,  may  be  the  means  of

devastating a whole town by fire.

    Consider, also, how in the spiritual world the greatest things proceed from

smallest  beginnings.  A  light  fancy  may  be  the  inception  of  a  wonderful

invention or an immortal work of art; a spoken sentence may turn the tide of

history; a pure thought entertained may lead to the exercise of a world-wide

regenerative power; and a momentary animal impulse may lead to the darkest

crime.

  Have  you  yet  discovered  the  vast  importance  of  beginnings?  Do  you

really know what is involved in a beginning? Do you know the number of

beginnings you are continuously making, and realise their full import? If not,

come with me for a short time, and thoughtfully explore this much ignored by

way  of  blessedness,  for  blessed  it  is  when  wisely  resorted  to,  and  much

strength and comfort it holds for the understanding mind.  A beginning is a cause, and as such it must be followed by an effect, or a

train of effects, and the effect will always be of the same nature as the cause.

The nature of an initial impulse will always determine the body of its results.

A beginning also presupposes an ending, a consummation, achievement, or

goal. A gate leads to a path, and the path leads to some particular destination;

so a beginning leads to results, and results lead to a completion.

  There are right beginnings and wrong beginnings, which are followed by

effects of a like nature. You can, by careful thought, avoid wrong beginnings

and make right beginnings, and so escape evil results and enjoy good results.

  There are beginnings over which you have no control and authority- these

are without, in the universe, in the world of nature around you, and in other

people who have the same liberty as yourself.

  Do not concern yourself with these beginnings, but direct your energies

and attention to those beginnings over which you have complete control and

authority,  and  which  bring  about  the  complicated  web  of  results  which

compose your life. These beginnings are to be found in the realm of your own

thoughts  and  actions;  in  your  mental  attitude  under  the  variety  of

circumstances through which you pass; in your conduct day by day - in short,

in your life as you make it, which is your world of good or ill.

  In aiming at the life of Blessedness one of the simplest beginnings to be

considered and rightly made is that which we all make every day -namely,

the beginning of each day’s life.

  How do you begin each day? At what hour do you rise? How do you

commence your duties? In what frame of mind do you enter upon the sacred

life of a new day? What answer can you give your heart to these important

questions? You will find that much happiness or unhappiness follows upon

the right or wrong beginning of the day, and that, when every day is wisely

begun, happy and harmonious sequences will mark its course, and life in its

totality will not fall far short of the ideal blessedness.

  It is a right and strong beginning to the day to rise at an early hour. Even

if your worldly duty does not demand it, it is wise to make of it a duty, and

begin the day strongly by shaking off indolence. How are you to develop

strength of will and mind and body if you begin every day by yielding to

weakness? Self-indulgence is always followed by unhappiness. People who

lie in bed till a late hour are never bright and cheerful and fresh, but are theprey  of  irritabilities,  depressions,  debilities,  nervous  disorders,  abnormal

fancies, and all unhappy moods. This is the heavy price which they have to

pay for their daily indulgence. Yet, so blinding is the pandering to self that,

like the drunkard who takes his daily dram in the belief that it is bracing up

the nerves which it is all the time shattering, so the lie-a-bed is convinced that

long hours of ease are necessary for him as a possible remedy for those very

moods and weaknesses and disorders of which his indulgence is the cause.

Men and women are totally unaware of the great losses which they entail by

this common indulgence: loss of strength both of mind and body, loss of

prosperity, loss of knowledge, and loss of happiness.

  Begin the day, then, by rising early. If you have no object in doing so,

never  mind;  get  up,  and  go  out  for  a  gentle  walk  among  the  beauties  of

nature, and you will experience a buoyancy, a freshness, and a delight, not to

say a peace of mind, which will amply reward you for your effort. One good

effort is followed by another; and when a man begins the day by rising early,

even though with no other purpose in view, he will find that the silent early

hour is conducive to clearness of mind and calmness of thought, and that his

early morning walk is enabling him to become a consecutive thinker, and so

to see life and its problems, as well as himself and his affairs, in a clearer

light; and so in time he will rise early with the express purpose of preparing

and harmonising his mind to meet any and every difficulty with wisdom and

calm strength.

  There is, indeed, a spiritual influence in the early morning hour, a divine

silence  and  an  inexpressible  repose,  and  he  who,  purposeful  and  strong,

throws off the mantle of ease and climbs the hills to greet the morning sun

will thereby climb no inconsiderable distance up the hills of blessedness and

truth.

  The right beginning of the day will be followed by cheerfulness at the

morning meal, permeating the house-hold with a sunny influence; and the

tasks and duties of the day will be undertaken in a strong and confident spirit,

and the whole day will be well lived.

  Then  there  is  a  sense  in  which  every  day  may  be  regarded  as  the

beginning of a new life, in which one can think, act, and live newly, and in a

wiser and better spirit.

  “Every day is a fresh beginning;  Every morn is the world made new,

  Ye who are weary of sorrow and sinning,

  Here is a beautiful hope for you,

  A hope for me and a hope for you.”

  Do not dwell upon the sins and mistakes of yesterday so exclusively as to

have no energy and mind left for living rightly today, and do not think that

the sins of yesterday can prevent you from living purely today. Begin today

aright, and, aided by the accumulated experiences of all your past days, live it

better than any of your previous days; but you cannot possibly live it better

unless you begin it better. The character of the whole day depends upon the

way it is begun.

  Another beginning which is of great importance is the beginning of any

particular and responsible undertaking. How does a man begin the building of

a house? He first secures a plan of the proposed edifice and then proceeds to

build  according  to  the  plan,  scrupulously  following  it  in  every  detail,

beginning with the foundation. Should he neglect the beginning - namely, the

obtaining  of  a  mathematical  plan  -  his  labour  would  be  wasted,  and  his

building, should it reach completion without tumbling to pieces, would be

insecure and worthless. The same law holds good in any important work: the

right beginning and first essential is a definite mental plan on which to

build.  Nature  will  have  no  slipshod  work,  no  slovenliness,  and  she

annihilates  confusion,  or  rather,  confusion  is  in  itself  annihilation.  Order,

definiteness,  purpose  eternally  and  universally  prevail,  and  he  who  in  his

operations ignores these mathematical elements at once deprives himself of

substantiality, completeness, success.

  “Life without a plan,

  As useless as the moment it began,

  Serves merely as a soil for discontent

  To thrive in, an encumbrance ere half spent.”

  Let a man start in business without having in his mind a perfectly formed

plan to systematically pursue and he will be incoherent in his efforts and will

fail  in  his  business  operations.  The  laws  which  must  be  observed  in  the

building of a house also operate in the building up of a business. A definite

plan is followed by coherent effort; and coherent effort is followed by well-knit and orderly results - to wit, completeness, perfection, success, happiness.

  But not only mechanical and commercial enterprise - all undertakings, of

whatsoever  nature,  come  under  this  law.  The  author’s  book,  the  artist’s

picture, the orator’s speech, the reformer’s work, the inventor’s machine, the

general’s campaign, are all carefully planned in the mind before the attempt

to actualise them is commenced; and in accordance with the unity, solidarity,

and perfection of the original mental plan will be the actual and ultimate

success of the undertaking.

    Successful men, influential men, good men are those who, amongst other

things, have learned the value and utilised the power which lies hidden in

those obscure beginnings which the foolish man passes by as “insignificant.”

  But the most important beginning of all - that upon which affliction or

blessedness inevitably depends, yet is most neglected and least understood -

is the inception of thought in the hidden, but causal region of the mind. Your

whole life is a series of effects having their cause in thought - in your own

thought. All conduct is made and moulded by thought; all deeds, good or bad,

are thoughts made visible. A seed put into the ground is the beginning of a

plant or tree; the seed germinates, the plant or tree comes forth into the light

and  evolves.  A  thought  put  into  the  mind  is  the  beginning  of  a  line  of

conduct: the thought first sends down its roots into the mind, and then pushes

forth into the light in the forms of actions or conduct, which evolve into

character and destiny.

    Hateful,  angry,  envious,  covetous,  and  impure  thoughts  are  wrong

beginnings, which lead to painful results. Loving, gentle, kind, unselfish and

pure thoughts are right beginnings, which lead to blissful results. This is so

simple, so plain, so absolutely true! and yet how neglected, how evaded, and

how little understood!

  The gardener who most carefully studies how, when, and where to put in

his  seeds  obtains  the  best  results  and  gains  the  greater  horticultural

knowledge.  The  best  crops  gladden  the  soul  of  him  who  makes  the  best

beginning. The man who most patiently studies how to put into his mind the

seeds  of  strong,  wholesome,  and  charitable  thoughts,  will  obtain  the  best

results  in  life,  and  will  gain  greater  knowledge  of  truth.  The  greatest

blessedness comes to him, who infuses into his mind the purest and noblest

thoughts.  None but right acts can follow right thoughts; none but a right life can

follow right acts - and by living a right life all blessedness is achieved.

  He who considers the nature and import of his thoughts, who strives daily

to eliminate bad thoughts and supplant them with good, comes at last to see

that thoughts are the beginnings of results which affect every fibre of his

being, which potently influence every event and circumstance of his life. And

when he thus sees, he thinks only right thoughts, chooses to make only those

mental beginnings which lead to peace and blessedness.

  Wrong thoughts are painful in their inception, painful in their growth, and

painful in their fruitage. Right thoughts are blissful in their inception, blissful

in their growth, and blissful in their fruitage.

  Many are the right beginnings which a man must discover and adopt on

his way to wisdom; but that which is first and last, most important and all

embracing, which is the source and fountain of all abiding happiness, is the

right  beginning  of  the  mental  operations  -  this  implies  the  steady

development  of  self-control,  will-power,  steadfastness,  strength,  purity,

gentleness, insight, and comprehension. It leads to the perfecting of life, for

he who thinks perfectly has abolished all unhappiness, his every moment is

peaceful, his years are rounded with bliss - he has attained to the complete

and perfect blessedness.              2. SMALL TASKS AND DUTIES

    “Wrapped in our nearest duty is the key

  Which shall unlock for us the Heavenly Gate:

    Unveiled, the Heavenly Vision he shall see,

  Who cometh not too early nor too late.”

  “Like the star

  That shines afar,

  Without haste

  And without rest,

  Let each man wheel with steady sway

  Round the task that rules the day,

  And do his best.”

    Goethe.

  As pain and bliss inevitably follow on wrong and right beginnings, so

unhappiness and blessedness are inseparably bound up with small tasks and

duties. Not that a duty has any power of itself to bestow happiness or the

reverse  -  this  is  contained  in  the  attitude  of  the  mind  which  is  assumed

towards  the  duty  -  and  everything  depends  upon  the  way  in  which  it  is

approached and done.

  Not only great happiness but great power arises from doing little things

unselfishly, wisely, and perfectly, for life in its totality is made up of little

things. Wisdom inheres in the common details of everyday existence, and

when the parts are made perfect the Whole will be without blemish.

    Everything in the universe is made up of little things, and the perfection

of the great is based upon the perfection of the small. If any detail of the

universe were imperfect the Whole would be imperfect. If any particle were

omitted the aggregate would cease to be. Without a grain of dust there could

be no world, and the world is perfect because the grain of dust is perfect.

Neglect of the small is confusion of the great. The snowflake is as perfect as

the star; the dew drop is as symmetrical as the planet; the microbe is not less

mathematically  proportioned  than  the  man.  By  laying  stone  upon  stone,plumbing and fitting each with perfect adjustment, the temple at last stands

forth in all its architectural beauty. The small precedes the great. The small is

not merely the apologetic attendant of the great, it is its master and informing

genius.

  Vain men are ambitious to be great, and look about to do some great

thing,  ignoring  and  despising  the  little  tasks  which  call  for  immediate

attention, and in the doing of which there is no vainglory, regarding such

“trivialities” as beneath the notice of great men. The fool lacks knowledge

because he lacks humility, and, inflated with the thought of self-importance,

he aims at impossible things.

  The great man has become such by the scrupulous and unselfish attention

which he has given to small duties. He has become wise and powerful by

sacrificing ambition and pride in the doing of those necessary things which

evoke no applause and promise no reward. He never sought greatness; he

sought faithfulness, unselfishness, integrity, truth; and in finding these in the

common round of small tasks and duties he unconsciously ascended to the

level of greatness.

  The  great  man  knows  the  vast  value  that  inheres  in  moments,  words,

greetings,  meals,  apparel,  correspondence,  rest,  work,  detached  efforts,

fleeting obligations, in the thousand-and-one little things which press upon

him for attention - briefly, in the common details of life. He sees everything

as  divinely  apportioned,  needing  only  the  application  of  dispassionate

thought and action on his part to render life blessed and perfect. He neglects

nothing; does not hurry; seeks to escape nothing but error and folly; attends

to every duty as it is presented to him, and does not postpone and regret. By

giving himself unreservedly to his nearest duty, forgetting alike pleasure and

pain, he attains to that combined childlike simplicity and unconscious power

which is greatness.

  The advice of Confucius to his disciples: “Eat at your own table as you

would at the table of a king,” emphasises the immeasurable importance of

little things, as also does that aphorism of another great teacher, Buddha: “If

anything is to be done, let a man do it, let him attack it vigorously.” To

neglect small tasks, or to execute them in a perfunctory or slovenly manner,

is a mark of weakness and folly.

  The giving of one’s entire and unselfish attention to every duty in itsproper  place  evolves,  by  a  natural  growth,  higher  and  ever  higher

combinations of duties, because it evolves power and develops talent, genius,

goodness,  character.  A  man  ascends  into  greatness  as  naturally  and

unconsciously as the plant evolves a flower, and in the same manner, by

fitting,  with  unabated  energy  and  diligence,  every  effort  and  detail  in  its

proper place, thus harmonising his life and character without friction or waste

of power.

  Of the almost innumerable recipes for the development of “will-power”

and “concentration” which are now scattered abroad, one looks almost in

vain for any wholesome hint applicable to vital experience. “Breathings,”

“postures,” “visualisings,” “occult methods” are practices as delusive as they

are artificial and remote from all that is real and essential in life; while the

true path - the path of duty, of earnest and undivided application to one’s

daily task - along which alone will-power and concentration of thought can

be  wholesomely  and  normally  developed,  remains  unknown,  untrodden,

unexplored even by the elect.

  All unnatural forcing and straining in order to gain “power” should be

abandoned. There is no way from childhood to manhood but by growth; nor

is there any other way from folly to wisdom, from ignorance to knowledge,

from weakness to strength. A man must learn how to grow little by little and

day after day, by adding thought to thought, effort to effort, deed to deed.

  It is true the fakir gains some sort of power by his long persistence in

“postures” and “mortifications,” but it is a power which is bought at a heavy

price, and that price is an equal loss of strength in another direction. He is

never  a  strong,  useful  character,  but  a  mere  fantastic  specialist  in  some

psychological trick. He is not a developed man, he is a maimed man.

  True  will-power  consists  in  overcoming  the  irritabilities,  follies,  rash

impulses and moral lapses which accompany the daily life of the individual,

and which are apt to manifest themselves on every slight provocation; and in

developing calmness, self-possession, and dispassionate action in the press

and heat of worldly duties, and in the midst of the passionate and unbalanced

throng.  Anything  short  of  this  is  not  true  power,  and  this  can  only  be

developed along the normal pathway of steady growth in executing ever more

and more masterfully, unselfishly, and perfectly the daily round of legitimate

tasks and pressing obligations.  The master is not he whose “psychological accomplishments,” rounded

by  mystery  and  wonder,  leave  him  in  unguarded  moments  the  prey  of

irritability, of regret, of peevishness, or other petty folly or vice, but he whose

“mastery” is manifested in fortitude, non-resentment, steadfastness, calmness,

and infinite patience. The true Master is master of himself; anything other

than this is not mastery but delusion. The man who sets his whole mind on

the  doing  of  each  task  as  it  is  presented,  who  puts  into  it  energy  and

intelligence, shutting all else out from his mind, and striving to do that one

thing, no matter how small, completely and perfectly, detaching himself from

all reward in his task - that man will every day be acquiring greater command

over his mind, and will, by ever-ascending degrees, become at last a man of

power - a Master.

  Put yourself unreservedly into your present task, and so work, so act, so

live that you shall leave each task a finished piece of labour - this is the true

way  to  the  acquisition  of  will-power,  concentration  of  thought,  and

conservation of energy. Look not about for magical formulas, for strained and

artificial methods. Every resource is already with you and within you. You

have but to learn how wisely to apply yourself in that place which you now

occupy. Until this is done those other and higher places which are waiting for

you cannot be taken possession of, cannot be reached.

  There is no way to strength and wisdom but by acting strongly and wisely

in the present moment, and each present moment reveals its own task. The

great  man,  the  wise  man  does  small  things  greatly  regarding  nothing  as

“trivial” that is necessary. The weak man, the foolish man, does small things

carelessly,  and  meanly,  hankering  the  while  after,  some  greater  work  for

which,  in  his  neglect  and  inability  in  small  matters,  he  is  ceaselessly

advertising his incapacity. The man who leasts governs himself is always

more  ambitious  to  govern  others  and  assume  important  responsibilities.

“Who so neglects a thing which he suspects he ought to do because it seems

too small a thing is deceiving himself; it is not too little but too great for him

that he doeth it not.”

  And just as the strong doing of small tasks leads to greater strength, so the

doing of those tasks weakly leads to greater weakness. What a man is in his

fractional duties that he is in the aggregate of his character. Weakness is as

great a source of suffering as sin, and there can be no true blessedness untilsome measure of strength of character is evolved. The weak man becomes

strong by attaching value to little things and doing them accordingly. The

strong man becomes weak by falling into looseness and neglect concerning

small  things,  thereby  forfeiting  his  simple  wisdom  and  squandering  his

energy. Herein we see the beneficent operation of that law of growth which is

expressed in the little understood words: “To him that hath shall be given,

and from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath.”

Man instantly gains or loses by every thought he thinks, every word he says,

every act he does, and every work to which he puts hand and heart. His

character from moment to moment is a graduating quantity, to or from which

some measure of good is added or subtracted during every moment, and the

gain or loss is involved, even to absoluteness, in each thought, word, and

deed as these follow each other in rapid sequence.

  He who masters the small becomes the rightful possessor of the great. He

who is mastered by the small can achieve no superlative victory.

  Life is a kind of cooperative trust in which the whole is of the nature of,

and dependent upon, the unit.

  A successful business, a perfect machine, a glorious temple, or a beautiful

character is evolved from the perfect adjustment of a multiplicity of parts.

  The foolish man thinks that little faults, little indulgences, little sins, are

of no consequence; he persuades himself that so long as he does not commit

flagrant immoralities he is virtuous, and even holy; but he is thereby deprived

of virtue, and holiness, and the world knows him accordingly; it does not

reverence,  adore,  and  love  him;  it  passes  him  by;  he  is  reckoned  of  no

account; his influence is destroyed. The efforts of such a man to make the

world virtuous, his exhortations to his fellow-men to abandon great vices, are

empty  of  substance  and  barren  of  fruitage.  The  insignificance  which  he

attaches to his small vices permeates his whole character and is the measure

of his manhood: he is regarded as an insignificant man. The levity with which

he commits his errors and publishes his weakness comes back to him in the

form of neglect and loss of influence and respect: he is not sought after, for

who will seek to be taught of folly? His work does not prosper, for who will

lean upon a reed? His words fall upon deaf ears, for they are void of practice,

wisdom, and experience, and who will go after an echo?

  The wise man, or he who is becoming wise, sees the danger which lurksin those common personal faults which men mostly commit thoughtlessly

and  with  impunity;  he  also  sees  the  salvation  which  inheres  in  the

abandonment of those faults, as well as in the practice of virtuous thoughts

and acts which the majority disregard as unimportant, and in those quiet but

momentous daily conquests over self which are hidden from other’s eyes.

  He who regards his molest delinquencies as of the gravest nature becomes

a saint. He sees the far reaching influence, good or bad, which extends from

his every thought and act, and how he himself is made or unmade by the

soundness  or  unsoundness  of  those  innumerable  details  of  conduct  which

combine to form his character and life, and so he watches, guards, purifies,

and perfects himself little by little and step by step.

  As the ocean is composed of drops, the earth of grains, and the stars of

points of light, so is life composed of thoughts and acts; without these, life

would not be. Every man’s life, therefore, is what his apparently detached

thoughts and acts make it. There combination is himself. As the year consists,

of  a  given  number  of  sequential  moments,  so  a  man’s  character  and  life

consists of a given number of sequential thoughts and deeds, and the finished

whole will bear the impress of the parts.

  “All sorts of things and weather

  Must be taken in together,

  To make up a year

  And a sphere.”

  Little  kindnesses,  generosities,  and  sacrifices  make  up  a  kind  and

generous character. Little renounciations, endurances, and victories over self

make up a strong and noble character. The truly honest man is honest in the

minutest details of his life. The noble man is noble in every little thing he

says and does.

  It is a fatal delusion with men to think that life is detached from the

momentary thought and act, and not to understand that the passing thought

and  deed  is  the  foundation  and  substance  of  life.  When  this  is  fully

understood all things are seen as sacred, and every act becomes religious.

Truth is wrapped up in infinitesimal details. Thoroughness is genius.

    “Possessions vanish, and opinions change,

  And passions hold a fluctuating seat:  But, by the storms of circumstance unshaken,

  And subject neither to eclipse nor wane,

  Duty exists.”

  You do not live your life in the mass; you live it in the fragments and

from these the mass emerges. You can will to live each fragment nobly if you

choose,  and,  this  being  done,  there  can  be  no  particle  of  baseness  in  the

finished whole. The saying “Take care of the pence and the pounds will take

care  of  themselves”  is  seen  to  be  more  than  worldly-wise  when  applied

spiritually, for, to take care of the present, passing act, knowing that by so

doing the total sum and amount of life and character will be safely preserved,

is to be divinely wise. Do not long to do great and laudable things; these will

do  themselves  if  you  do  your  present  task  nobly.  Do  not  chafe  at  the

restrictions and limitations of your present duty but be nobly unselfish in the

doing  of  it,  putting  aside  discontent,  listlessness,  and  the  foolish

contemplation of great deeds which lie beyond you - and lo! already the

greatness for which you sighed begins to appear. There is no weakness like

peevishness. Aspire to the attainment of inward nobility, not outward glory,

and begin to attain it where you now are.

  The irksomeness and sting which you feel to be in your task are in your

mind only. Alter your attitude of mind towards it, and at once the crooked

path is made straight, the unhappiness is turned into joy.

  See that your every fleeting moment is strong, pure, and purposeful; put

earnestness and unselfishness into every passing task and duty; make your

every thought, word, and deed sweet and true; thus learning, by practice and

experience, the inestimable value of the small things of life, you will gather,

little by little, abundant and enduring blessedness.    3. TRANSCENDING DIFFICULTIES AND


                                PERPLEXITIES

  And Perplexities “Man who man would be Must rule the empire of himself; in it Must be supreme,

establishing  his  throne  On  vanquished  will,  quelling  the  anarchy  Of  hopes  and  fears,  being  himself

alone.”

    Shelley.

 

  “Have you missed in your aim? Well, the mark is still shining. Did you faint in the race? Well, take

breath for the next.”

  Ellu Wheelar Wilcose.

 

  To  suggest  that  any  degree  of  blessedness  may  be  extracted  from

difficulties and perplexities will doubtless appear absurd to many; but truth is

ever paradoxical, and the curses of the foolish are the blessings of the wise.

Difficulties arise in ignorance and weakness, and they call for the attainment

of knowledge and the acquisition of the strength.

  As understanding is acquired by right living, difficulties become fewer,

and perplexities gradually fade away, like the perishable mists which they

are.

  Your difficulty is not contained, primarily, in the situation which gave

rise to it, but in the mental state with which you regard that situation and

which you bring to bear upon it. That which is difficult to a child presents no

difficulty to the matured mind of the man; and that which to the mind of an

unintelligent man is surrounded with perplexity would afford no ground for

perplexity to an intelligent man.

  To  the  untutored  and  undeveloped  mind  of  the  child  how  great,  and

apparently insurmountable, appear the difficulties which are involved in the

learning of some simple lesson. How many anxious and laborious hours and

days, or even months, its solution costs; and, frequently, how many tears are

shed  in  hopeless  contemplation  of  the  unmastered,  and  apparentlyinsurmountable, wall of difficulty! Yet the difficulty is in the ignorance of the

child  only,  and  its  conquest  and  solution  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the

development  of  intelligence  and  for  the  ultimate  welfare,  happiness,  and

usefulness of the child.

  Even so is it with the difficulties of life with which older children are

confronted,  and  which  it  is  imperative,  for  their  own  growth  and

development, that they should solve and surmount; and each difficulty solved

means so much more experience gained, so much more insight and wisdom

acquired; it means a valuable lesson learned, with the added gladness and

freedom of a task successfully accomplished.

  What is the real nature of a difficulty? Is it not a situation which is not

fully  grasped  and  understood  in  all  it  bearings?  As  such,  it  calls  for  the

development and exercise of a deeper insight and broader intelligence than

has hitherto been exercised. It is an urgent necessity calling forth unused

energy, and demanding the expression and employment of latent power and

hidden resources. It is, therefore, a good angel, albeit disguised; a friend, a

teacher; and, when calmly listened to and rightly understood, leads to larger

blessedness and higher wisdom.

  Without  difficulties  there  could  be  no  progress,  no  unfoldment,  no

evolution; universal stagnation would prevail, and humanity would perish of

ennui. Let a man rejoice when he is confronted with obstacles, for it means

that he has reached the end of some particular line of indifference or folly,

and is now called upon to summon up all his energy and intelligence in order

to extricate himself, and to find a better way; that the powers within him are

crying out for greater freedom, for enlarged exercise and scope.

  No situation can be difficult of itself; it is the lack of insight into its

intricacies, and the want of wisdom in dealing with it, which give rise to the

difficulty. Immeasurable, therefore, is the gain of a difficulty transcended.

    Difficulties do not spring into existence arbitrarily and accidentally; they

have their causes, and are called forth by the law of evolution itself, by the

growing necessities of the man’s being. Herein resides their blessedness.

  There are ways of conduct which end inevitably in complications and

perplexities, and there are ways of conduct which lead, just as inevitably, out

of  troublesome  complexities.  Howsoever  tightly  a  man  may  have  bound

himself round he can always unbind himself. Into whatsover morasses oftrouble and trackless wastes of perplexity he may have ignorantly wandered

he can always find his way out again, can always recover the lost highway of

uninvolved simplicity which leads, straight and clear, to the sunny city of

wise  and  blessed  action.  But  he  will  never  do  this  by  sitting  down  and

weeping in despair, nor by complaining and worrying and aimlessly wishing

he were differently situated. His dilemma calls for alertness, logical thought,

and calm calculation. His position requires that he shall strongly command

himself; that he shall think and search, and rouse himself to strenuous and

unremitting exertion in order to regain himself. Worry and anxiety only serve

to heighten the gloom and exaggerate the magnitude of the difficulty. If he

will but quietly take himself to task, and retrace, in thought, the more or less

intricate way by which he has come to his present position, he will soon

perceive where he made mistakes; will discover those places where he took a

false turn, and where a little more thoughtfulness, judgement, economy, or

self-denial would have saved him. He will see how, step by step, he has

involved himself, and how a riper judgement and clearer wisdom would have

enabled  him  to  take  an  altogether  different  and  truer  course.  Having

proceeded thus far, and extracted from his past conduct this priceless grain of

golden wisdom, his difficulty will already have assumed less impregnable

proportions, and he will then be able to bring to bear upon it the searchlight

of dispassionate thought, to thoroughly anatomize it, to comprehend it in all

its details, and to perceive the relation which those details bear to the motive

source of action and conduct within himself. This being done, the difficulty

will have ceased, for the straight way out of it will plainly appear, and the

man will thus have learned, for all time, his lesson; will have gained an item

of wisdom and a measure of blessedness of which he can never again be

deprived.

  Just  as  there  are  ways  of  ignorance,  selfishness,  folly,  and  blindness

which end in confusion and perplexity, so there are ways of knowledge, self-

denial,  wisdom,  and  insight  which  lead  to  pleasant  and  peaceful

consummations. He who knows this will meet difficulties in a courageous

spirit, and, in overcoming them, will evolve truth out of error, bliss out of

pain, and peace out of perturbation.

  No man can be confronted with a difficulty which he has not the strength

to meet and subdue. Worry is not merely useless, it is folly, for it defeats thatpower and intelligence which is otherwise equal to the task. Every difficulty

can be overcome if rightly dealt with; anxiety is, therefore, unnecessary. The

task which cannot be overcome ceases to be a difficulty, and becomes an

impossibility; and anxiety is still unnecessary, for there is only one way of

dealing with an impossibility - namely, to submit to it. The inevitable is the

best.

    “Heartily know,

  When half-gods go,

  The gods arrive.”

  And  just  as  domestic,  social,  and  economic  difficulties  are  born  of

ignorance  and  lead  to  riper  knowledge,  so  every  religious  doubt,  every

mental-perplexity, every heart-beclouding shadow, presages greater spiritual

gain, is prophetic of a brighter dawn of intelligence for him on whom it falls.

  It is a great day in the life of a man (though at the time he knows it not)

when bewildering perplexities concerning the mystery of life take possession

of his mind, for it signifies that his era of dead indifference, of animal sloth,

of mere vegetative happiness, has come to an end, and that henceforth he is to

live as an aspiring, self-evolving being. No longer a mere human animal, he

will  now  begin  to  live  as  a  man,  exerting  all  his  mental  energies  to  the

solution of life’s problems, to the answering of those haunting perplexities

which are the sentinels of truth, and which stand at the gate and threshold of

the Temple of Wisdom.

  “He it is who, when great trials come,

  Nor seeks nor shuns them, but doth calmly stay.”

  Nor  will  he  ever  rest  again  in  selfish  ease  and  listless  ignorance;  nor

sleekly sate himself upon the swine’s husks of fleshly pleasures; nor find a

hiding-place  from  the  ceaseless  whisperings  of  his  heart’s  dark  and

indefinable interrogatories. The divine within him has awakened; a sleeping

god is shaking off the incoherent visions of the night, never again to slumber,

never again to rest until his eyes rest upon the full, broad day of Truth.

  It is impossible for such a man to hush, for any length of time, the call to

higher  purposes  and  achievements  which  is  aroused  within  him,  for  the

awakened  faculties  of  his  being  will  ceaselessly  urge  him  on  to  the

unravelling of his perplexities; for him there is no more peace in sin, no morerest in error, no final refuge but in Wisdom.

  Great  will  be  the  blessedness  of  such  a  man  when,  conscious  of  the

ignorance of which his doubts and perplexities are born, and acknowledging

and understanding that ignorance, not striving to hide himself from it, he

earnestly applies himself to its removal, seeks unremittingly, day after day,

for  that  pathway  of  light  which  shall  enable  him  to  dispel  all  the  dark

shadows,  dissolve  his  doubts,  and  find  the  solution  to  all  his  pressing

problems. And as a child is glad when it has mastered a lesson long toiled

over, just so a man’s heart becomes light and free when he has satisfactorily

met some worldly difficulty; even so, but to a far greater degree, is the heart

of a man rendered joyous and peaceful when some vital and eternal question

which has been long brooded over and grappled with is at last completely

answered, and its darkness is for ever dispelled.

  Do not regard your difficulties and perplexities as portentous of ill; by so

doing you will make them ill; but regard them as prophetic of good, which,

indeed, they are. Do not persuade yourself that you can evade them; you

cannot. Do not try to run away from them; this is impossible, for wherever

you go they will still be there with you - but meet them calmly and bravely;

confront them with all the dispassion and dignity which you can command;

weigh up their proportions; analyse them; grasp their details; measure their

strength;  understand  them;  attack  them,  and  finally  vanquish  them. Thus

will you develop strength and intelligence; thus will you enter one

of  those  byways  of  blessedness  which  are  hidden  from  the

superficial gaze.                          4. BURDEN-DROPPING

  “This to me is life;

  That if life be a burden, I will join

  To make it but the burden of a song.”

    Bailey.

 

  “Have you heard that it was good to gain the day?

  I also say it is good to fall, battles are lost in the same

  spirit in which they are won.”

  Walt Whitman.

 

  We hear and read much about burden-bearing, but of the better way of

burden-dropping very little is heard or known. Yet why should you go about

with an oppressive weight at your heart when you might relieve yourself of it

and move amongst your fellows heart-free and cheerful? No man carries a

load upon his back except to necessarily transfer something from one place to

another; he does not saddle his shoulders with a perpetual burden, and then

regard himself as a martyr for his pains; and why should you impose upon

your mind a useless burden, and then add to its weight the miseries of self-

condolence and self-pity? Why not abandon both your load and your misery,

and thus add to the gladness of the world by first making yourself glad? No

reason can justify, and no logic support, the ceaseless carrying of a grievous

load. As in things material a load is only undertaken as a necessary means of

transference, and is never a source of sorrow, so in things spiritual a burden

should only be taken up as a means towards some good and necessary end,

which, when attained, the burden is put aside; and the carrying of such a

burden, far from being a source of grief would be a cause for rejoicing.

  We say that bodily mortifications which some religious ascetics inflict

upon themselves are unnecessary and vain; and are the mental mortifications

which so many people inflict upon themselves less unnecessary and vain?

  Where is the burden which should cause unhappiness or sorrow? It does

not exist. If a thing is to be done let it be done cheerfully, and not with inward

groanings and lamentations. It is of the highest wisdom to embrace necessityas a friend and guide. It is of the greatest folly to scowl upon necessity as an

enemy, and to wish or try to overcome or avoid her. We meet our own at

every  turn,  and  duties  only  become  oppressive  loads  when  we  refuse  to

recognize and embrace them. He who does any necessary thing in a niggardly

and complaining spirit, hunting the while after unnecessary pleasures, lashes

himself with the scorpions of misery and disappointment, and imposes upon

himself a doubly-weighted burden of weariness and unrest under which he

incessantly groans.

  “Wake thou, O self, to better things;

  To yonder heights uplift thy wings;

  Take up the psalm of life anew;

  Sing of the good, sing of the true;

  Sing of full victory o’er wrong;

  Make though a richer, sweeter song;

  Out of thy doubting, care and pain

  Weave thou a joyous, glad refrain;

  Out of thy thorns a crown weave thou

  Of rare rejoicing. Sing thou, now.”

  I will give my cheerful, unselfish, and undivided attention to the doing of

all those things which enter into my compact with life, and, though I walk

under colossal responsibilities, I shall be unconscious of any troublesome

weight or grievous burden.

  You say a certain thing (a duty, a companionship, or a social obligation)

troubles you, is burdensome, and you resign yourself to oppression with the

thought: “I have entered into this, and will go through with it, but it is a

heavy and grievous work.” But is the thing really burdensome, or is it your

selfishness that is oppressing you? I tell you that that very thing which you

regard  as  so  imprisoning  a  restriction  is  the  first  gateway  to  your

emancipation; that work which you regard as a perpetual curse contains for

you the actual blessedness which you vainly persuade yourself lies in another

and  unapproachable  direction.  All  things  are  mirrors  in  which  you  see

yourself reflected, and the gloom which you perceive in your work is but a

reflection  of  that  mental  state  which  you  bring  to  it.  Bring  a  right,  an

unselfish, state of heart to the thing, and lo! it is at once transformed, andbecomes a means of strength and blessedness, reflecting back that which you

have brought to it. If you bring a scowling face to your looking glass will you

complain of the glass that it glowers upon you with a deformed visage, or

will  you  put  your  face  right,  and  so  get  back  from  the  reflector  a  more

pleasing countenance?

  If it is right and necessary that a thing should be done then the doing of it

is good, and it can only become burdensome in wishing not to do it. The

selfish wish makes the thing appear evil. If it is neither right nor necessary

that a thing should be done then the doing of it in order to gain some coveted

pleasure is folly, which can only lead to burdensome issues.

  The duty which you shirk is your reproving angel; the pleasure which you

race after is your flattering enemy. Foolish man! when will you turn round

and be wise?

  It is the beneficence of the universe that it is everywhere, and at all times,

urging its creatures to wisdom as it demands coherence of its atoms. That

folly and selfishness entail suffering in ever-increasing degrees of intensity is

preservative and good, for agony is the enemy of apathy and the herald of

wisdom.

  What  is  painful?  What  is  grievous?  What  is  burdensome?  Passion  is

painful; folly is grievous; selfishness is burdensome.

  “It is the dark idolatry of self

  Which, when our thoughts and actions once are done,

    Demands that man should weep, and bleed, and groan.”

    Eliminate passion, folly and selfishness from your mind and conduct and

you  will  eliminate  suffering  from  your  life.  Burden-dropping  consists  in

abandoning the inward selfishness and putting pure love in its place. Go to

your task with love in your heart and you will go to it light-hearted and

cheerful.

  The mind, through ignorance creates its own burdens and inflicts its own

punishments. No one is doomed to carry any load. Sorrow is not arbitrarily

imposed. These things are self-made. Reason is the rightful monarch of the

mind, and anarchy reigns in his spiritual kingdom when his throne is usurped

by  passion.  When  love  of  pleasure  is  to  the  fore,  heaviness  and  anguish

compose the rear. You are free to choose. Even if you are bound by passion,and feel helpless, you have bound yourself, and are not helpless. Where you

have bound you can unbind. You have come to your present state by degrees,

and you can recover yourself by degrees, can reinstate reason and dethrone

passion. The time to avoid evil is before pleasure is embraced, but, once

embraced, its train of consequences should teach you wisdom. The time to

decide is before responsibilities are adopted, but, once adopted, all selfish

considerations, with their attendant grumblings, whinings, and complainings,

should  be  religiously  excluded  from  the  heart.  Responsibilities  lose  their

weight when carried lovingly and wisely.

  What heavy burden is a man weighted with which is not made heavier

and  more  unendurable  by  weak  thoughts  of  selfish  desires?  If  your

circumstances are “trying” it is because you need them and can evolve the

strength  to  meet  them.  They  are  trying  because  there  is  some  weak  spot

within you, and they will continue to be trying until that spot is eradicated.

Be glad that you have the opportunity of becoming stronger and wiser. No

circumstances  can  be  trying  to  wisdom;  nothing  can  weary  love.  Stop

brooding over your own trying circumstances and contemplate the lives of

some of those about you.

  Here is a woman with a large family who has to make ends meet on a

pound a week. She performs all her domestic duties, down to the washing,

finds time to attend on sick neighbours, and manages to keep entirely out of

the two common quagmires - debt and despondency. She is cheerful from

morning to night, and never complains of her “trying circumstances.” She is

perennially cheerful because she is unselfish. She is happy in the thought that

she is the means of happiness to others. Were she to brood upon the holidays,

the pretty baubles, the lazy hours of which she is deprived; of the plays she

cannot see, the music she cannot hear, the books she cannot read, the parties

she cannot attend, the good she might do, the friendships she is debarred from

forming;  of  the  many  pleasures  which  might  only  be  hers  if  her

circumstances were more favourable - if she brooded thus what a miserable

creature she would be! How unbearably laborious her work would become!

How every little domestic duty would hang like a millstone about her neck,

dragging her down to the grave which, unless she altered her state of mind,

she  would  quickly  reach,  killed  by  -  selfishness!  But,  not  living  in  vain

desires for herself, she is relieved of all burdens, and is happy. Cheerfulnessand unselfishness are sworn friends. Love knows no heavy toil.

  Here  is  another  woman,  with  a  private  income  which  is  more  than

sufficient, combined with leisure and luxury, yet, because she is called upon

to  forfeit  a  portion  of  her  time,  pleasure,  and  money  to  discharge  some

obligation which she wishes to be rid of, and which should be to her a work

of loving service, or fostering in her heart some ungratified desire, she is

perpetually  discontented  and  unhappy,  and  complains  of  “trying

circumstances”. Discontent and Selfishness are inseparable companions. Self-

love knows no joyful labour.

  Of the two sets of circumstances above depicted (and life is crowded with

such contrasted instances) which are the “trying” conditions? Is it not true

that  neither  of  them  are  trying,  and  that  both  are  blest  or  unblest  in

accordance  with  the  measure  of  love  or  selfishness  which  is  infused  into

them? Is not the root of the whole matter in the mind of the individual and

not in the circumstance?

  When a man, who has recently taken up the study of some branch of

theology, religion, or “occultism,” says: “If I had not burdened myself with a

wife and family I could have done a great work; and had I known years ago

what I know now I would never have married.” I know that that man has not

yet found the commonest and broadest way of wisdom (for there is no greater

folly than regret), and that he is incapable of the great work which he is so

ambitious to perform. If a man has such deep love for his fellow-men that he

is anxious to do a great work for humanity he will manifest that surpassing

love always and in the place where he now is. His home will be filled with it,

and the beauty and sweetness and peace of his unselfish love will follow

wherever he goes, making happy those about him and transmuting all things

into good. The love that goes abroad to air itself, and is undiscoverable at

home, is not love - it is vanity.

  Have I not seen (Oh, pitiful sight!) the cheerless home and neglected

children  of  the  misguided  missionary  and  religionist?  It  is  on  such  self-

delusion  as  this  that  self-pity  and  self-martyrdom  ever  wait,  and  its  self-

inflicted misery is regarded by the deluded one as a holy and religious burden

which he or she is called upon to bear.

  Only a great man can do a great work; and he will be great wherever he

is,  and  will  do  his  noble  work  under  whatsoever  conditions  he  may  findhimself when he has unfolded and revealed that work.

  Thou who art so anxious to work for humanity, to help thy fellow-men,

begin that work at home; help thyself, thy neighbour, thy wife, thy child. Do

not be deluded; until thou doest, with utmost faithfulness, the nearer and the

lesser thou canst not do the farther and greater.

  If a man has lived many years of his life in lust and selfish pleasure it is in

the order of things that his accumulated errors should at last weigh heavily

upon him, as, until they are thus brought home to him, he will not abandon

them, will not exert himself to find a better life; but whilst he regards his self-

made,  self-imposed  burdens  as  “holy  crosses”  imposed  upon  him  by  the

Supreme,  or  as  marks  of  superior  virtue,  or  as  loads  which  Fate,

circumstances, or other people have heaped undeservedly and unjustly upon

him, he is but lengthening out his folly, increasing the weight of his burdens,

and multiplying his pains and sorrows. Only when such a man wakes up to

the  truth  that  his  burdens  are  of  his  own  making,  that  they  are  the

accumulated effects of his own acts, will he cease from unmanly self-pity and

find the better way of burden-dropping; only when he opens his eyes to see

that his every thought and act is another brick, another stone, built into the

temple  of  his  life  will  he  develop  the  insight  which  will  enable  him  to

recognise  his  own  unstable  handiwork,  the  unflinching  manliness  to

acknowledge it, and the courage to build more nobly and enduringly.

  Painful  burdens  are  necessary,  but  only  so  long  as  we  lack  love  and

wisdom.

  The Temple of Blessedness lies beyond the outer courts of suffering and

humiliation and to reach it the pilgrim must pass through the outer courts. For

a  time  he  will  linger  in  the  outer,  but  only  so  long  as,  through  his  own

imperfect understanding, he mistakes it for the inner. While he pities himself

and confounds suffering with holiness he will remain in suffering: but when,

casting off the last unholy rag of self-pity, he perceives that suffering is a

means and not an end, that it is a state self-originated and self-propagated,

then,  converted  and  right-minded,  he  will  rapidly  pass  through  the  outer

courts, and reach the inner abode of peace.

    Suffering does not originate in the perfect but in the imperfect; it does not

mark the complete but the incomplete; it can, therefore, be transcended. Its

self-born  cause  can  be  found,  investigated,  comprehended,  and  for  everremoved.

  It  is  true  therefore,  that  we  must  pass  through  agony  to  rest,  through

loneliness  to  peace;  but  let  the  sufferer  not  forget  that  it  is  a  “passing

through;” that the agony is a gateway and not a habitation; that the loneliness

is a pathway and not a destination; and that a little farther on he will come to

the painless and blissful repose.

  Little by little is a burden accumulated; imperceptibly and by degrees is

its weight increased. A thoughtless impulse, a gross self-indulgence, a blind

passion yielded to and gratified again and again; an impure thought fostered,

a cruel word uttered, a foolish thing done time after time, and at last the

gathered weight of many follies becomes oppressive. At first, and for a time,

the weight is not felt; but it is being added to day after day, and the time

comes when the accumulated burden is felt in all its galling weight, when the

bitter fruits of selfishness are gathered, and the heart is troubled with the

weariness of life. When this period arrives let the sufferer look to himself; let

him search for the blessed way of burden-dropping, finding which he will

find wisdom to live better, purity to live sweeter, love to live nobler; will

find, in the reversal of that conduct by which his burdens were accumulated,

light-hearted nights and days, cheerful action, and unclouded joy.

  “Come out of the world - come above it -

  Up over its crosses and graves;

  Though the green earth is fair and I love it,

  We must love it as masters, not slaves,

  Come up where the dust never rises -

  But only the perfume of flowers -

  And your life shall be glad with surprises

  Of beautiful hours.”                          5. HIDDEN SACRIFICES

  “What need hath man

  Of Eden passed, or Paradise to come,

  When heaven is round us and within ourselves?”

  ...

    “Lowliness is the base of every virtue:

  Who goes the lowest, builds, doubt not, the safest.”

    Bailey.

 

    “Truth is within ourselves; it takes no rise

  From outward things, whate’er you may believe.”

    Browning.

 

  It is one of the paradoxes of Truth that we gain by giving up; we lose by

greedily grasping. Every gain in virtue necessitates some loss in vice; every

accession  of  holiness  means  some  selfish  pleasure  yielded  up;  and  every

forward step on the path of Truth demands the forfeit of some self-assertive

error.

  He who would be clothed in new garments must first cast away the old,

and he who would find the True must sacrifice the false. The gardener digs in

the weeds in order that they may feed, with their decay, the plants which are

good for food; and the Tree of Wisdom can only flourish on the compost of

uprooted follies. Growth - gain - necessitates sacrifice - loss.

  The true life, the blessed life, the life that is not tormented with passions

and pains, is reached only through sacrifice, not necessarily the sacrifice of

outward things, but the sacrifice of the inward errors and defilements, for it is

these, and these only, which bring misery into life. It is not the good and true

that needs to be sacrificed but the evil and false; therefore all sacrifice is

ultimately gain, and there is no essential loss. Yet at first the loss seems great,

and  the  sacrifice  is  painful,  but  this  is  because  of  the  self-delusion  and

spiritual  blindness  which  always  accompany  selfishness,  and  pain  must

always accompany the cutting away of some selfish portion of one’s nature.

When the drunkard resolves to sacrifice his lust for strong drink he passesthrough a period of great suffering, and he feels that he is forfeiting a great

pleasure; but when his victory is complete, when the lust is dead, and his

mind is calm and sober, then he knows that he has gained incalculably by the

giving up of his selfish animal pleasure. What he has lost was evil and false

and not worth keeping - nay, its keeping entailed continual misery - but what

he has gained in character, in self-control, in soberness had greater peace of

mind, is good and true, and it was necessary that he should acquire it.

  So it is with all true sacrifice; it is at first, and until it is completed,

painful, and this is why men shrink from it. They cannot see any purpose in

abstaining from and overcoming selfish gratification, it seems to them like

losing so much that is sweet; seems to them like courting misery, and giving

up all happiness and pleasure. And this must be so; for if a man could know

that by giving up his particular forms of selfishness his gain in happiness

would be immeasurably greater, unselfishness (which is now so difficult of

attainment) would then be rendered infinitely more difficult of achievement,

for his desire for the greater gain - his selfishness - would thereby be greatly

intensified.

  No man can become unselfish, and thereby arrive at the highest bliss,

until he is willing to lose, looking for neither gain nor reward: it is this state

of mind which constitutes unselfishness. A man must be willing to humbly

sacrifice  his  selfish  habits  and  practices  because  they  are  untrue  and

unworthy, and for the happiness of those about him, without expecting any

reward  or  looking  for  any  good  to  accrue  to  himself;  nay,  he  must  be

prepared to lose for himself, to forfeit pleasure and happiness, even life itself,

if by so doing he can make the world more beautiful and happy. But does he

lose? Does the miser lose when he gives up his lust for gold? Does the thief

lose when he abandons stealing? Does the libertine lose when he sacrifices

his  unworthy  pleasures?  No  man  loses  by  the  sacrifice  of  self,  or  some

portion of self; nevertheless, he thinks he will lose by so doing, and because

he so thinks he suffers and this is where the sacrifice comes in - this is where

he gains by losing.

  All true sacrifice is within; it is spiritual and hidden, and is prompted by

deep humility of heart. Nothing but the sacrifice of self can avail, and to this

must all men come sooner or later during their spiritual evolution. But in

what  does  this  self-abnegation  consist?  How  is  it  practised?  Where  is  itsought and found? It consists in overcoming the daily proneness to selfish

thoughts and acts; it is practised in our common intercourse with others; and

it is found in the hour of tumult and temptation.

  There are hidden sacrifices of the heart which are infinitely blessed both

to  him  that  makes  them  and  those  for  whom  they  are  made,  albeit  their

making costs much effort and some pain. Men are anxious to do some great

thing, to perform some great sacrifice which lies beyond the necessities of

their experience, while all the time, perhaps, they are neglecting the one thing

needful, are blind to that sacrifice which by its very nearness is rendered

imperative.  Where  lurks  your  besetting  sin?  Where  lies  your  weakness?

Where does temptation assail you most strongly? There shall you make your

first sacrifice, and shall find thereby the way unto your peace. Perhaps it is

anger or unkindness. Are you prepared to sacrifice the angry impulse and

word,  the  unkind  thought  and  deed?  Are  you  prepared  to  silently  endure

abuse, attack, accusation, and unkindness, refusing to pay back these in their

own coin? Nay, more, are you prepared to give in return for these dark follies

kindness  and  loving  protection?  If  so,  then  you  are  ready  to  make  those

hidden sacrifices which lead to beatific bliss.

  If you are given to anger or unkindness offer it up. These hard, cruel, and

wrong conditions of mind never brought you any good; they can never bring

you anything but unrest, misery, and spiritual blindness. Nor can they ever

bring to others anything but unhappiness. Perhaps you will say: “But he was

unkind  to  me  first;  he  treated  me  unjustly.”  Perhaps  so,  but  what  a  poor

excuse is this! What an unmanly and ineffectual refuge! For if his unkindness

toward you is so wrong and hurtful yours to him must be equally so. Because

another is unkind to you is no justification of your own unkindness, but is

rather a call for the exercise of great kindness on your part. Can the pouring

in of more water prevent a flood? Neither can unkindness lessen unkindness.

Can fire quench fire? Neither can anger overcome anger.

  Offer up all unkindness, all anger. “It takes two to make a quarrel;” don’t

be the “other one.” If one is angry or unkind to you try to find out where you

have acted wrongly; and, whether you have acted wrongly or not, do not

throw back the angry word or unkind act. Remain silent, self-contained, and

kindly  disposed;  and  learn,  by  continual  effort  in  right-doing,  to  have

compassion upon the wrongdoer.  Perhaps you are habitually impatient and irritable. Know, then, the hidden

sacrifice  which  it  is  needful  that  you  should  make. Give  up  your

impatience. Overcome it there where it is wont to assert itself. Resolve that

you will yield no longer to its tyrannical sway but will conquer it and cast it

out. It is not worth keeping a single hour, nor would it dominate you for

another moment if you were not labouring under the delusion that the follies

and perversities of others render impatience on your part necessary. Whatever

others may do or say, even though they may mock and taunt you, impatience

is not only unnecessary, it can never do any other than aggravate the evil

which it seeks to remove. Calm, strong, and deliberate action can accomplish

much, but impatience and its accompanying irritability are always indications

of weakness and inefficiency. And what do they bestow upon you? Do they

bestow rest, peace, happiness, or bring these to those about you? Do they not,

rather, make you and those about you wretched? But though your impatience

may hurt others it certainly hurts and wounds and impoverishes yourself most

of all.

  Nor can the impatient man know aught of true blessedness, for he is a

continual  source  of  trouble  and  unrest  to  himself.  The  calm  beauty  and

perpetual sweetness of patience are unknown to him, and peace cannot draw

near to soothe and comfort him.

  There is no blessedness anywhere until impatience is sacrificed; and its

sacrifice means the development of endurance, the practice of forbearance,

and the creation of a new and gentler habit of mind. When impatience and

irritability  are  entirely  put  away,  are  finally  offered  up  on  the  altar  of

unselfishness, then is realised and enjoyed the blessedness of a strong, quiet,

and peaceful mind.

  “Each hour we think

  Of others more than self, that hour we live again,

  And every lowly sacrifice we make

  For other’s good shall make life more than self,

  And open the windows of thy soul to light

  From higher spheres. So hail thy lot with lot with joy.”

  Then there are little selfish indulgences, some of which appear harmless,

and are commonly fostered; but no selfish indulgence can be harmless, andmen and women do not know what they lose by repeatedly and habitually

succumbing to effeminate and selfish gratifications. If the God in man is to

rise strong and triumphant, the beast in man must perish. The pandering to

the animal nature, even when it appears innocent and seems sweet, leads

away  from  truth  and  blessedness.  Each  time  you  give  way  to  the  animal

within you, and feed and gratify him, he waxes stronger and more rebellious,

and takes firmer possession of your mind, which should be in the keeping of

Truth. Not until a man has sacrifice some apparently trivial indulgence does

he  discover  what  strength,  what  joy,  what  poise  of  character  and  holy

influence he has all along been losing by that gratification; not until a man

sacrifices his hankering for pleasure does he enter into the fulness of abiding

joy.

  By his personal indulgences a man demeans himself, forfeits self-respect

to  the  extent  and  frequency  of  his  indulgence,  and  deprives  himself  of

exemplary influence and the power to accomplish lasting good in his work in

the world. He also, by allowing himself to be led by blind desire, increases

his  mental  blindness,  and  fails  of  that  ultimate  clearness  of  vision,  that

clarified percipience which pierces to the heart of things and comprehends

the real and the true. Animal indulgence is alien to the perception of Truth.

By the sacrifice of his indulgences man rises above confusion and doubt, and

arrives at the possession of insight and surety.

  Sacrifice  your  cherished  and  coveted  indulgence;  fix  your  mind  on

something higher, nobler, and more enduring than ephemeral pleasure; live

superior to the craving for sense-excitement, and you will live neither vainly

nor uncertainly.

  Very far-reaching in its effect upon others, and rich with the revelations

of Truth for him who makes it, is the sacrifice of self-assertion - the giving up

of  all  interference  with  the  lives,  views,  or  religion  of  other  people,

substituting  for  it  an  understanding  love  and  sympathy.  Self-assertion  or

opinionativeness is a form of egotism or selfishness most generally found in

connection with intellectualism and dialectical skill. It is blindly presumptive

and uncharitable, and, more often than not, is regarded as a virtue; but when

once  the  mind  has  opened  to  perceive  the  way  of  gentleness  and  self-

sacrificing  love  then  the  ignorance,  deformity,  and  painful  nature  of  self-

assertion become apparent.  The victim of self-assertion, setting up his own opinions as the standard

of right and the measure of judgment, regards all those as wrong whose lives

and opinions run counter to his own, and, being eager to put others right, is

thereby  prevented  from  putting  himself  right.  His  attitude  of  mind  brings

about him opposition and contradiction from people who are anxious to put

him right, and this wounds his vanity and makes him miserable, so that he

lives  in  an  almost  continual  fever  of  unhappy,  resentful  and  uncharitable

thoughts. There can be no peace for such a man, no true knowledge, and no

advancement until he sacrifices his desire to bend others to his own way of

thinking and acting. Nor can he understand the hearts of others, and enter

lovingly  into  their  strivings  and  aspirations.  His  mind  is  cramped  and

embittered,  and  he  is  shut  out  from  all  sweet  sympathy  and  spiritual

communion.

  He who sacrifices the spirit of self-assertion, who in his daily contact with

others put aside his prejudices and opinions, and strives both to learn from

others  and  to  understand  them  as  they  are,  who  allows  to  others  perfect

liberty (such as he exercises himself) to choose their own opinions, their own

way in life - such a man will acquire a deeper insight, a broader charity, and a

richer  bliss  than  he  has  hitherto  experienced,  and  will  strike  a  byway  of

blessedness from which he has formerly shut out.

  Then  there  is  the  sacrifice  of  greed  and  all  greedy  thoughts.  The

willingness that others should possess rather than we; the not-coveting of

things for ourselves but rejoicing that they are possessed and enjoyed by

others, that they bring happiness to others; the ceasing to claim one’s “own”,

and the giving up to others, unselfishly and without malice, that which they

exact. This attitude of mind is a source of deep peace and great spiritual

strength.  It  is  the  sacrifice  of self-interest.  Material  possessions  are

temporary, and in this sense we cannot truly call them our own - they are

merely in our keeping for a short time - but spiritual possessions are eternal

and must ever remain with us. Unselfishness is a spiritual possession which is

only secured by ceasing to covet material possessions and enjoyments, by

ceasing to regard things as for our own special and exclusive pleasure, and by

our readiness to yield them up for the good of others.

  The  unselfish  man,  even  though  he  finds  himself  involved  in  riches,

stands aloof, in his mind, from the idea of “exclusive possession”, and soescapes  the  bitterness  and  fear  and  anxiety  which  ever  accompany  the

covetous spirit. He does not regard any of his outward accretions as being too

valuable  to  lose,  but  he  regards  the  virtue  of  unselfishness  as  being  too

valuable to the world - to suffering humanity - to lose or cast away.

  And  who  is  the  blessed  man?  He  who  is  ever  hankering  after  more

possessions, thinking only of the personal pleasure he can get out of them? or

he who is ever ready to give up what he has for the good and happiness of

others? By greed happiness is destroyed; by not-greed happiness is restored.

  Another hidden sacrifice, one of great spiritual beauty and of powerful

efficacy in the healing of human sorrows, is the sacrifice of hatred - the

giving  up  of  all  bitter  thoughts  against  others,  of  all  malice,  dislike,  and

resentment. Bitter thoughts and blessedness cannot dwell together. Hatred is

a fierce fire that scorches up, in the heart of him who harbours it, all the sweet

flowers of peace and happiness, and makes a hell of every place where it

comes.

  Hatred has many names and many forms but only one essence - namely,

burning thoughts of resentment against others. It is sometimes, by its blind

votaries called by the name of religion, causing them to attack, slander, and

persecute each other because they will not accept each other’s views of life

and death, thus filling the earth with miseries and tears.

  All resentment, dislike, ill-thinking, and ill-speaking of others is hatred,

and where there is hatred there is always unhappiness. No one has conquered

hatred while thoughts of resentment towards others spring up in his mind.

This sacrifice is not complete until a man can think kindly of those who try to

do him wrong. Yet it must be made before true blessedness can be realised

and known. Beyond the hard, cruel, steely gates of hatred waits the divine

angel of love, ready to reveal herself to him who will subdue and sacrifice his

hateful thoughts, and conduct him to his peace.

    Whatever others may say of you, whatever they may do to you, never

take offence. Do not return hatred with hatred. If another hates you perhaps

you have, consciously or unconsciously, failed somewhere in your conduct,

or  there  may  be  some  misunderstanding  which  the  exercise  of  a  little

gentleness and reason may remove; but, under all circumstances, “Father,

forgive them” is infinitely better, sweeter, and nobler than “I will hve nothing

more to do with them.” Hatred is so small and poor, so blind and wretched.Love is so great and rich, so far-seeing and blissful.

  “The highest culture is to speak no ill:

  The best reformer is the man whose eyes

  Are quick to see all beauty and all worth;

  And by his own discreet, well-ordered life

  Alone reproves the erring.”

  Sacrifice all hatred, slay it upon the holy altar of devotion - devotion to

others. Think no more of any injury to your own petty self, but see to it that

henceforth you injure and wound no other. Open the flood gates of your heart

for the inpouring of that sweet, great, beautiful love which embraces all with

strong yet tender thoughts of protection and peace, leaving not one, nay, not

even he who hates or despises or slanders you, out in the cold.

  Then there is the hidden sacrifice of impure desires, of weak self-pity and

degrading self-praise, of vanity and pride, for these are unblest attitudes of

mind,  deformities  of  heart.  He  who  makes  them,  one  by  one,  gradually

subduing  and  overcoming  them,  will,  according  to  the  measure  of  his

success, rise above weakness and suffering and sorrow, and will comprehend

and enjoy the perfect and imperishable blessedness.

  Now,  all  these  hidden  sacrifices  which  are  here  mentioned  are  pure,

humble heart-offerings. They are made within; are offered up on the sacred,

lonely, unseen altar of one’s own heart. Not one of them can be made until

the fault is first silently acknowledged and confessed. No man can sacrifice

an  error  until  he  first  of  all  confess  (to  himself)  “I  am  in  error;”  when,

yielding it up, he will perceive and receive the truth which his error formerly

obscured.

  “The  kingdom  of  heaven  cometh  not  by  observation,”  and  the  silent

sacrifice of self for the good of others, the daily giving up of one’s egotistic

tendencies, is not seen and rewarded of men, and brings no loud blazon of

popularity and praise. It is hidden away from the eyes of all the world, nay,

even from the gaze of those who are nearest to you, for no eyes of flesh can

perceive its spiritual beauty. But think not that because it is unperceived it is

therefore futile. Its blissful radiance is enjoyed by you, and its power for good

over  others  is  great  and  far-reaching,  for  though  they  cannot  see  it,  nor,

perhaps understand it, yet they are unconsciously influenced by it. They willnot know what silent battles you are fighting, what eternal victories over self

you are achieving, but, they will feel your altered attitude, your new mind,

wrought of the fabric of love and loving thoughts, and will share somewhat in

its happiness and bliss. They will know nothing of the frequent fierceness of

the fight you are waging, of the wounds you receive and the healing balm you

apply, of the anguish and the after-peace; but they will know that you have

grown  sweeter  and  gentler,  stronger  and  more  silently  self-reliant,  more

patient and pure, and that they are rested and helped by your presence. What

rewards can compare with this? Beside the fragrant offices of love the praises

of men are gross and fulsome, and in the pure flame of a selfless heart the

flatteries of the world are turned to ashes. Love is its own reward, its own

joy, its own satisfaction; it is the final refuge and resting-place of passion-

tortured souls.

  The sacrifice of self, and the acquisition of the supreme knowledge and

bliss which it confers, is not accomplished by one great and glorious act but

by a series of lesser and successive sacrifices in the ordinary life of the world,

by a succession of steps in the daily conquest of Truth over selfishness. He

who each day accomplishes some victory over himself, who subdues and puts

behind him some unkind thought, some impure desire, some tendency to sin,

is everyday growing stronger, purer, and wiser, and every dawn finds him

nearer to that final glory of Truth which each self-sacrificing act reveals in

part.

  Look not outside thee nor beyond thee for the light and blessedness of

Truth, but look within; thou wilt find it within the narrow sphere of thy duty,

even in the humble and hidden sacrifices of thine own heart.                                  6. SYMPATHY

  “When thy gaze

  Turns it on thine own soul, be most severe:

  But when it falls upon a fellow-man

  Let kindliness control it; and refrain

  From that belittling censure that springs forth

  From common lips like weeds from marshy soil.”

  Ella Wheeler Wilcox.

  “I do not ask the wounded person how he feels,

  I myself become the wounded person.”

  Walt Whitman.

  We  can  only  sympathise  with  others  in  so  far  as  we  have  conquered

ourselves.  We  cannot  think  and  feel  for  others  while  we  are  engaged  in

condoling with and pitying ourselves; cannot deal tenderly and lovingly with

others while we are anxious for our own pre-eminence or for the exclusive

preservation  of  ourselves,  our  opinions,  and  our  own  generally.  What  is

sympathy but thoughtfulness for others in the forgetfulness of self?

  To  sympathise  with  others  we  must  first  understand  them,  and  to

understand them we must put away all personal preconceptions concerning

them, and must see them as they are. We must enter into their inner state and

become  one  with  them,  looking  through  their  mental  eyes  and

comprehending the range of their experience. You cannot, of course, do this

with a being whose wisdom and experience are greater than your own; nor

can you do it with any if you regard yourself as being on a higher plane than

others  (for  egotism  and  sympathy  cannot  dwell  together),  but  you  can

practise it with all those who are involved in sins and sufferings from which

you have successfully extricated yourself, and, though your sympathy cannot

embrace and overshadow the man whose greatness is beyond you, yet you

can place yourself in such an attitude towards him as to receive the protection

of his larger sympathy and so make for yourself an easier way out of the sins

and sufferings by which you are still enchained.

    Prejudice and ill-will are complete barriers to the giving of sympathy,

while  pride  and  vanity  are  total  barriers  to  its  reception.  You  cannotsympathise with a person for whom you have conceived a hatred; you cannot

enjoy  the  sympathy  of  one  whom  you  envy.  You  cannot  understand  the

person whom you dislike, or he for whom, through animal impulse, you have

framed an ill-formed affection. You do not, cannot, see him as he is, but see

only your own imperfect notions of him; see only a distorted image of him

through the exaggerating medium of your illgrounded opinions.

  To see others as they are you must not allow impulsive likes and dislikes,

powerful prejudices, or egotistic considerations to come between you and

them.  You  must  not  resent  their  actions  or  condemn  their  beliefs  and

opinions. You must leave yourself entirely out, and must, for the time being,

assume  their  position.  Only  in  this  way  can  you  become  en  rapport  with

them, and so fathom their life, their experience, and understand it, and when a

man is understood it becomes impossible to condemn him. Men misjudge,

condemn, and avoid each other because they do not understand each other,

and they do not understand each other because they have not overcome and

purified themselves.

  Life  is  growth,  development,  evolution,  and  there  is  no  essential

distinction between the sinner and the saint - there is only a difference in

degree. The saint was once a sinner; the sinner will one day be a saint. The

sinner is the child; the saint is the grown man. He who separates himself from

sinners, regarding them as wicked men to be avoided, is like a man avoiding

contact with little children because they are unwise, disobedient, and play

with toys.

  All life is one, but it has a variety of manifestations. The grown flower is

not something distinct from the tree: it is a part of it; is only another form of

leaf. Steam is not something apart from water: it is but another form of water.

And in like manner good is transmuted evil: the saint is the sinner developed

and transformed.

  The sinner is one whose understanding is undeveloped, and he ignorantly

chooses wrong modes of action. The saint is one whose understanding is

ripened, and he wisely chooses right modes of action. The sinner condemns

the sinner, condemnation being a wrong mode of action. The saint never

condemns  the  sinner,  remembering  that  he  himself  formerly  occupied  the

same place, but thinks of him with deep sympathy, regarding him in the light

of a younger brother or a friend, for sympathy is a right and enlightenedmode of action.

  The perfected saint, who gives sympathy to all, needs it of none, for he

has transcended sin and suffering, and lives in the enjoyment of lasting bliss;

but all who suffer need sympathy, and all who sin must suffer. When a man

comes to understand that every sin, whether of thought or deed, receives its

just quota of suffering he ceases to condemn and begins to sympathise, seeing

the  sufferings  which  sin  entails;  and  he  comes  to  such  understanding  by

purifying himself.

  As a man purges himself of passions, as he transmutes his selfish desires

and  puts  under  foot  his  egotistic  tendencies,  he  sounds  the  depths  of  all

human experiences - all sins and sufferings and sorrows, all motives and

thoughts  and  deeds  -  and  comprehends  the  moral  law  in  its  perfection.

Complete self-conquest is perfect knowledge, perfect sympathy, and he who

views men with the stainless vision of a pure heart views them with a pitying

heart, sees them as a part of himself, not as something defiled and separate

and distinct, but as his very self, sinning as he has sinned, suffering as he has

suffered, sorrowing as he has sorrowed, yet, withal, glad in the knowledge

that they will come, as he has come, to perfect peace at last.

  The truly good and wise man cannot be a passionate partisan, but extends

his sympathy to all, seeing no evil in others to be condemned and resisted,

but seeing the sin which is pleasant to the sinner, and the after-sorrow and

pain which the sinner does not see, and, when it overtakes him, does not

understand.

  A man’s sympathy extends just so far as his wisdom reaches, and no

further;  and  a  man  only  grows  wiser  as  he  grows  tenderer  and  more

compassionate. To narrow one’s sympathy is to narrow one’s heart, and so to

darken and embitter one’s life. To extend and broaden one’s sympathy is to

enlighten and gladden one’s life and to make plainer to others the way of

light and gladness.

  To  sympathise  with  another  is  to  receive  his  being  into  our  own,  to

become one with him, for unselfish love indissolubly unites, and he whose

sympathy reaches out to and embraces all humankind and all living creatures

has realised his identity and oneness with all, and comprehends the universal

Love and Law and Wisdom. Man is shut out from Heaven and Peace and

Truth only in so far as he shuts out others from his sympathy. Where hissympathy ends his darkness and torment and turmoil begin, for to shut others

out from our love is to shut ourselves out from the blessedness of love, and to

become cramped in the dark prison of self.

  “Whoever walks a furlong without sympathy walks to his

  own funeral dressed in a shroud.”

  Only when one’s sympathy is unlimited is the Eternal Light of Truth

revealed; only in the Love that knows no restriction is the boundness bliss

enjoyed.

    Sympathy is bliss; in it is revealed the highest, purest blessedness. It is

divine, for in its reciprocal light all thought of self is lost, and there remains

only the pure joy of oneness with others, the ineffable communion of spiritual

identity. Where a man ceases to sympathise he ceases to live, ceases to see

and realise and know.

  One cannot truly sympathise with others until all selfish considerations

concerning them are put away, and he who does this and strives to see others

as they are, strives to realise their particular sins, temptations, and sorrows,

their beliefs, opinions, and prejudices, comes at last to see exactly where they

stand in their spiritual evolution, comprehends the arc of their experience,

and knows that they cannot for the present act otherwise than they do. He

sees  that  their  thoughts  and  acts  are  prompted  by  the  extent  of  their

knowledge,  or  their  lack  of  knowledge,  and  that  if  they  act  blindly  and

foolishly it is because their knowledge and experience are immature, and they

can only come to act more wisely by gradual growth into more enlightened

states  of  mind.  He  also  sees  that  though  this  growth  can  be  encouraged,

helped, and stimulated by the influence of a riper example, by seasonable

words and well-timed instruction, it cannot be unnaturally forced; the flowers

of love and wisdom must have time to grow, and the barren branches of

hatred and folly cannot be all cut away at once.

  Such a man finds the doorway into the inner world of those with whom

he comes in contact, and he opens it and enters in and dwells with them in the

hidden and sacred sanctuary of their being. And he finds nothing to hate,

nothing to revile, nothing to condemn in that sacred place, but something to

love  and  tend,  and,  in  his  own  heart,  room  only  for  greater  pity,  greater

patience, greater love.

  He sees that he is one with them, that they are but another aspect ofhimself,  that  their  natures  are  not  different  from  his  own,  except  in

modification  and  degree,  but  are  identical  with  it.  If  they  are  acting  out

certain sinful tendencies he has but to look within to find the same tendencies

in  himself,  albeit,  perhaps,  restrained  or  purified;  if  they  are  manifesting

certain holy and divine qualities he finds the same pure spirit within himself,

though, perhaps, in a lesser degree of power and development.

  “One touch of nature makes the whole world kin.”

  The sin of one is the sin of all; the virtue of one is the virtue of all. No

man can be separate from another. There is no difference of nature but only

difference of condition. If a man thinks he is separated from another by virtue

of his superior holiness he is not so separated, and his darkness and delusion

are very great. Humanity is one, and in the holy sanctuary of sympathy saint

and sinner meet and unite.

  It is said of Jesus that He took upon Himself the sins of the whole world -

that is, He identified Himself with those sins, and did not regard Himself as

essentially separate from sinners but as being of a like nature with them - and

his realisation of His oneness with all men was manifested in His life as

profound sympathy with those who, for their deep sins, were avoided and

cast off by others.

  And who is it that is in the greatest need of sympathy? Not the saint, not

the enlightened seer, not the perfect man. It is the sinner, the unenlightened

man, the imperfect one; and the greater the sin the greater is the need. “I

came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance” is the statement of

One who comprehended all human needs. The righteous man does not need

your sympathy, but the unrighteous; he who, by his wrong-doing, is laying up

for himself long periods of suffering and woe is in need of it.

  The flagrantly unrighteous man is condemned, despised, and avoided by

those who are living in a similar condition to himself, though for the time

being,  they  may  not  be  subject  to  his  particular  form  of  sin,  for  that

withholding of sympathy and that mutual condemnation which are so rife is

the commonest manifestation of that lack of understanding in which all sin

takes its rise. While a man is involved in sin he will condemn others who are

likewise involved, and the deeper and greater his sin the more severe will be

his condemnation of others. It is only when a man begins to sorrow for his

sin, and so to rise above it into the clearer light of purity and understanding,that he ceases from condemning others and learns to sympathise with them.

But this ceaseless condemnation of each other by those who are involved in

the fierce play of the passions must needs, be, for it one of the modes of

operation of the Great Law which universally and eternally obtains, and the

unrighteous one who falls under the condemnation of his fellows will the

more  rapidly  reach  a  higher  and  nobler  condition  of  heart  and  life  if  he

humbly  accepts  the  censure  of  others  as  the  effect  of  his  own  sin,  and

resolves henceforward to refrain from all condemnation of others.

  The truly good and wise man condemns none, having put away all blind

passion and selfishness he lives in the calm regions of love and peace, and

understands all modes of sin, with their consequent sufferings and sorrows.

Enlightened and awakened, freed from all selfish bias, and seeing men as

they are, his heart responds in holy sympathy with all. Should any condemn,

abuse, or slander him he throws around them the kindly protection of his

sympathy, seeing the ignorance which prompts them so to act, and knowing

that they alone will suffer for their wrong acts.

  Learn, by self-conquest and the acquisition of wisdom, to love him whom

you now condemn, to sympathise with those who condemn you. Turn your

eyes  away  from  their  condemnation  and  search  your  own  heart,  to  find,

perchance, some hard, unkind, or wrong thoughts which, when discovered

and understood, you will condemn yourself.

  Much that is commonly called sympathy is personal affection. To love

them who love us is human bias and inclination; but to love them who do not

love us is divine sympathy.

    Sympathy is needed because of the prevalence of suffering, for there is no

being  or  creature  who  has  not  suffered.  Through  suffering  sympathy  is

evolved. Not in a year or a life or an age is the human heart purified and

softened by suffering, but after many lives of intermittent pain, after many

ages  of  ever  recurring  sorrow,  man  reaps  the  golden  harvest  of  his

experiences, and garners in the rich, ripe sheaves of love and wisdom. And

then he understands, and understanding, he sympathises.

  All  suffering  is  the  result  of  ignorantly  violated  law,  and  after  many

repetitions of the same wrong act, and the same kind of suffering resulting

from  that  act,  knowledge  of  the  law  is  acquired,  and  the  higher  state  of

obedience and wisdom is reached. Then there blossoms the pure and perfectflower of sympathy.

  One aspect of sympathy is that of pity - pity for the distressed or pain-

stricken, with a desire to alleviate or help them bear their sufferings. The

world needs more of this divine quality.

  “For pity makes the world

  Soft to the weak, and noble for the strong.”

  But it can only be developed by eradicating all hardness and unkindness,

all accusation and resentment. He who, when he sees another suffering for his

sin, hardens his heart and thinks or says: “It serves him right”- such a one

cannot exercise pity nor apply its healing balm. Every time a man acts cruelly

towards another (be it only a dumb creature), or refuses to bestow needed

sympathy, he dwarfs himself, deprives himself of ineffable blessedness, and

prepares himself for suffering.

  Another form of sympathy is that of rejoicing with those who are more

successful than ourselves, as though their success were our own. Blessed

indeed is he who is free from all envy and malice, and can rejoice and be glad

when he hears of the good fortune of those who regard him as an enemy.

  The protecting of creatures weaker and more indefensible than oneself is

another  form  in  which  this  divine  sympathy  is  manifested.  The  helpless

frailty of the dumb creation calls for the exercise of the deepest sympathy.

The glory of superior strength resides in its power to shield, not to destroy.

Not by the callous of destruction of weaker things is life truly lived, but by

their preservation:

  “All life

  Is linked and kin,”

  and the lowest creature is not separated from the highest but by greater

weakness, by lesser intelligence. When we pity and protect we reveal and

enlarge the divine life and joy within ourselves. When we thoughtlessly or

callously inflict suffering or destroy, then our divine life becomes obscured,

and its joy fades and dies. Bodies may feed bodies, and passions passions, but

man’s divine nature is only nurtured, sustained, and developed by kindness,

love, sympathy, and all pure and unselfish acts.

  By bestowing sympathy on others we increase our own. Sympathy given

can never be wasted. Even the meanest creature will respond to its heavenlytouch, for it is the universal language which all creatures understand. I have

recently  heard  a  true  story  of  a  Dartmoor  convict  whose  terms  of

incarceration in various convict stations extended to over forty years. As a

criminal  he  was  considered  one  of  the  most  callous  and  hopelessly

abandoned, and the warders found him almost intractable. But one day he

caught a mouse - a weak, terrified, hunted thing like himself - and its helpless

frailty, and the similarity of its condition with his own, appealed to him, and

started  into  flame  the  divine  spark  of  sympathy  which  smouldered  in  his

crime-hardened heart, and which no human touch had ever wakened into life.

  He kept the mouse in an old boot in his cell, fed, tended, and loved it, and

in his love for the weak and helpless he forgot and lost his hatred for the

strong. His heart and his hand were no longer against his fellows. He became

tractable and obedient to the uttermost. The warders could not understand his

change; it seemed to them little short of miraculous that this most hardened of

all criminals should suddenly be transformed into the likeness of a gentle,

obedient  child.  Even  the  expression  of  his  features  altered  remarkably:  a

pleasing smile began to play around the mouth which had formerly been

moved to nothing better than a cruel grin, and the implacable hardness of his

eyes disappeared and gave place to a soft, deep, mellow light. The criminal

was a criminal no longer; he was saved, converted; clothed, and in his right

mind; restored to humaneness and to humanity, and set firmly on the pathway

to divinity by pitying and caring for a defenceless creature. All this was made

known to the warders shortly afterwards, when, on his discharge, he took the

mouse away with him.

  Thus  sympathy  bestowed  increases  its  store  in  our  own  hearts,  and

enriches and fructifies our own life. Sympathy given is blessedness received;

sympathy  withheld  is  blessedness  forfeited.  In  the  measure  that  a  man

increases and enlarges his sympathy so much nearer does he approach the

ideal  life,  the  perfect  blessedness;  and  when  his  heart  has  become  so

mellowed that no hard, bitter, or cruel thought can enter and detract from its

permanent sweetness, then indeed is he richly and divinely blessed.                            7. FORGIVENESS

  “If men only understood

  All the emptiness and acting

  Of the sleeping and the waking

  Of the souls they judge so blindly,

  Of the hearts they pierce so unkindly,

  They, with gentler words and feeling,

  Would apply the balm of healing-

  If they only understood.”

    “Kindness, nobler ever than revenge.”

    Shakespeare.

 

  The  remembering  of  injuries  is  spiritual  darkness;  the  fostering  of

resentment  is  spiritual  suicide.  To  resort  to  the  spirit  and  practice  of

forgiveness is the beginning of enlightenment; it is also the beginning of

peace and happiness. There is no rest for him who broods over slights and

injuries and wrongs; no quiet repose of mind for him who feels that he has

been unjustly treated, and who schemes how best to act for the discomfiture

of his enemy.

  How can happiness dwell in a heart that is so disturbed by ill-will? Do

birds  resort  to  a  burning  bush  wherein  to  build  and  sing?  Neither  can

happiness  inhabit  in  that  breast  that  is  aflame  with  burning  thoughts  of

resentment. Nor can wisdom come and dwell where such folly resides.

    Revenge seems sweet only to the mind that is unacquainted with the spirit

of  forgiveness;  but  when  the  sweetness  of  forgiveness  is  tasted  then  the

extreme bitterness of revenge is known. Revenge seems to lead to happiness

to those who are involved in the darkness of passion; but when the violence

of passion is abandoned, and the mildness of forgiveness is restored to, then it

is seen that revenge leads to suffering.

    Revenge is a virus which eats into the very vitals of the mind, and poisons

the entire spiritual being. Resentment is a mental fever which burns up thewholesome energies of the mind, and “taking offence” is a form of moral

sickness which saps the healthy flow of kindliness and good-will, and from

which men and women should seek to be delivered. The unforgiving and

resentful spirit is a source of great suffering and sorrow, and he who harbours

and encourages it, who does not overcome and abandon it, forfeits much

blessedness, and does not obtain any measure of true enlightenment. To be

hard-hearted is to suffer, is to be deprived of light and comfort; to be tender-

hearted is to be serenely glad, is to receive light and be well comforted. It will

seem strange to many to be told that the hard-hearted and unforgiving suffer

most; yet it is profoundly true, for not only do they, by the law of attraction,

draw  to  themselves  the  revengeful  passions  in  other  people,  but  their

hardness of heart itself is a continual source of suffering. Every time a man

hardens his heart against a fellow-being he inflicts upon himself five kinds of

suffering  -  namely,  the  suffering  of  loss  of  love;  the  suffering  of  lost

communion and fellowship; the suffering of a troubled and confused mind;

the suffering of wounded passion or pride; and the suffering of punishment

inflicted by others. Every act of unforgiveness entails upon the doer of that

act these five sufferings; whereas every act of forgiveness brings to the doer

five  kinds  of  blessedness  -  the  blessedness  of  love;  the  blessedness  of

increased communion and fellowship; the blessedness of a calm and peaceful

mind;  the  blessedness  of  passion  stilled  and  pride  overcome;  and  the

blessedness and kindness and good-will bestowed by others.

  Numbers  of  people  are  today  suffering  the  fiery  torments  of  an

unforgiving spirit, and only when they make an effort to overcome that spirit

can they know what a cruel and exacting taskmaster they are serving. Only

those who have abandoned the service of such a master for that of the nobler

master of forgiveness can realise and know how grievous a service is the one,

how sweet the other.

  Let  a  man  contemplate  the  strife  of  the  world:  how  individuals  and

communities, neighbours and nations, live in continual retaliations towards

each  other;  let  him  realise  the  heartaches,  the  bitter  tears,  the  grievous

partings and misunderstandings - yea, even the blood-shed and woe which

spring  from  that  strife  -  and,  thus  realising,  he  will  never  again  yield  to

ignoble thoughts of resentment, never again take offence at the actions of

others, never again live in unforgiveness towards any being.  “Have good-will

  To all that lives, letting unkindness die

  And greed and wrath; so that your lives be made

  Like soft airs passing by.”

  When a man abandons retaliation for forgiveness he passes from darkness

to light. So dark and ignorant is unforgiveness that no being who is at all wise

or enlightened could descend to it; but its darkness is not understood and

known until it is left behind, and the better and nobler course of conduct is

sought and practised. Man is blinded and deluded only by his own dark and

sinful tendencies; and the giving up of all unforgiveness means the giving up

of pride and certain forms of passion, the abandonment of the deeply-rooted

idea of the importance of one-self and of the necessity for protecting and

defending that self; and when that is done the higher life, greater wisdom, and

pure  enlightenment,  which  pride  and  passion  completely  obscured,  are

revealed in all their light and beauty.

  Then  there  are  petty  offences,  little  spites  and  passing  slights,  which,

while of a less serious nature than deep-seated hatreds and revenges, dwarf

the character and cramp the soul. They are due to the sin of self and self-

importance and thrive on vanity. Whosoever is blinded and deluded by vanity

will  continually  see  something  in  the  actions  and  the  attitudes  of  others

towards him at which to take offence, and the more there is of vanity the

more greatly will the imaginary slight or wrong be exaggerated. Moreover, to

live in the frequent indulgence of petty resentments increase the spirit of

hatred, and leads gradually downward to greater darkness, suffering, and self-

delusion. Don’t take offence or allow your feelings to be hurt, which means -

get  rid  of  pride  and  vanity.  Don’t  give  occasion  for  offence  or  hurt  the

feelings  of  others,  which  means  -  be  gently  considerate,  forgiving,  and

charitable towards all.

  The giving up - the total uprooting - of vanity and pride is a great task;

but it is a blessed task, and it can be accomplished by constant practice in

non-resentment and by meditating upon one’s thoughts and actions so as to

understand and purify them; and the spirit of forgiveness is perfected in one

in the measure that pride and vanity are overcome and abandoned.

  The not-taking-offence and the not-giving-offence go together. When a

man ceases to resent the actions of others he is already acting kindly towardsthem, considering them before himself or his own defence. Such a man will

be gently in what he says and does, will arouse love and kindness in others,

and not stir them up to ill-will and strife. He will also be free from all fear

concerning the actions of others towards him, for he who hurts none fears

none. But the unforgiving man, he who is eager to “pay back” some real or

imaginary  slight  or  injury,  will  not  be  considerate  towards  others,  for  he

considers himself first, and is continually making enemies; he also loves in

the fear of others, thinking that that they are trying to do towards him as he is

doing towards them. He who contrives the hurt of others fears others.

  That is a beautiful story of Prince Dhirgayu which was told by an ancient

Indian teacher to his disciples in order to impress them with the truth of the

sublime percept that “hatred ceases not by hatred at any time; hatred ceases

by not-hatred.” The story is as follows:- Brahmadatta, a powerful king of

Benares, made war upon Dirgheti, the king of Kosala, in order to annex his

kingdom, which was much smaller than his own. Dirgheti, seeing that it was

impossible for him to resist the greater power of bramhadatta, fled, and left

his kingdom in his enemy’s hands. For some time he wandered from place to

place  in  disguise,  and  at  last  settled  down  with  his  queen  in  an  artisan’s

cottage; and the queen gave birth to a son, whom they called Dirghayu.

  Now,  King  Brahmadatta  was  anxious  to  discover  the  hiding-place  of

Dirgheti, in order to put to death the conquered king, for he thought, “Seeing

that I have deprived him of his kingdom he may someday treacherously kill

me if I do not kill him.”

  But  many  years  passed  away,  and  Dirgheti  devoted  himself  to  the

education of his son, who by diligent application, became learned and skillful

and wise.

  And after a time Dirgheti’s secret became known, and he, fearing that

Brahmadatta would discover him and slay all three, and thinking more of the

life of his son than his own, sent away the prince. Soon after the exile king

fell into the hands of Brahmadatta, and was, along with his queen, executed.

  Now Brahmadatta thought: I have got rid of Dirgheti and his queen, but

their son, Prince Dirghayu, lives, and he will be sure to contrive some means

of effecting my assassination; yet he is unknown to any, and I have no means

of discovering him.” So the king lived in great fear and continual distress of

mind.  Soon  after  the  execution  of  his  parents,  Dirghayu,  under  an  assumed

name,  sought  employment  in  the  king’s  stables,  and  was  engaged  by  the

master of elephants.

    Dirghayu quickly endeared himself to all, and his superior abilities came

at last under the notice of the king, who had the young man brought before

him, and was so charmed with him that he employed him in his own castle,

and he proved to be so able and diligent that the king shortly placed him in a

position of great trust under himself.

  One  day  the  king  went  on  a  long  hunting  expedition,  and  became

separated  from  his  retinue,  Dirghayu  alone  remaining  with  him.  And  the

king, being fatigued with his exertions, lay down, and slept with his head in

Dirghayu’s lap. Then Dirghayu thought: This king has greatly wronged me.

He robbed my father of his kingdom, and slew my parents, and he is now

entirely in my power.” And he drew his sword, thinking to slay Brahmadatta.

But, remembering how his father had taught him never to seek revenge but to

forgive to the uttermost, he sheathed his sword.

  At last the king awoke out of a disturbed sleep, and the youth inquired of

him  why  he  looked  so  frightened.  “My  sleep”,  said  the  king  “is  always

restless, for I frequently dream that I am in the power of young Dirghayu and

that he is alone to slay me. While lying here I again dreamed that with greater

vividness than ever before and it has filled me with dread and terror.

  Then the youth, drawing his sword, said: “I am Prince Dirghayu, and you

are in my power: the time of vengeance has arrived.”

  Then the king fell upon his knees and begged Dirghayu to spare his life.

And Dirghayu said: “It is you, O King! who must spare my life. For many

years you have wished to find me in order that you might kill me; and, now

that you have found me, let me beg of you to grant me my life.”

  And there and then did Brahmadatta and Dirghayu grant each other life,

took hands, and solemnly vowed never to harm each other. And so overcome

was the king by the noble and forgiving spirit of Dirghayu that he gave him

his daughter in marriage, and restored to him his father’s kingdom.

  Thus hatred ceases by not-hatred- by forgiveness, which is very beautiful,

and is sweeter and more effective than revenge. It is the beginning of love, of

that divine love that does not seek its own; and he who practises it, who

perfects himself in it, comes at last to realise that blessed state wherein thetorments of pride and vanity and hatred and retaliation are forever dispelled,

and good-will and peace are unchanging and unlimited. In that state of calm,

silent bliss, even forgiveness passes away, and is no longer needed, for he

who has reached it sees no evil to resent but only ignorance and delusion on

which to have compassion, and forgiveness is only needed so long as there is

any tendency to resent, retaliate, and take offence. Equal love towards all is

the  perfect  law,  the  perfect  state  in  which  all  lesser  states  find  their

completion. Forgiveness is one of the doorways in the faultless temple of

Love Divine.                          8. SEEING NO EVIL

  The solid, solid universe

  Is pervious to love;

  With bandaged eyes he never errs,

    Around, below, above.

  His blinding light

  He flingeth white

  On God’s and Satan’s brood,

  And reconciles

  By mystic wiles

  The evil and the good.”

  Emerson.

  “If thou thinkest evil, be thou sure

  Thine acts will bear the shadow of the stain;

  And if they thought be perfect, then thy deed

  Will be as of the perfect, true, and pure.”

  After Confucius.

 

  After  much  practice  in  forgiveness  and  having  cultivated  the  spirit  of

forgiveness up to a certain point, knowledge of the actual nature of good and

evil dawns upon the mind, and a man begins to understand how thoughts and

motives are formed in the human heart, how they develop, and how take birth

in the form of actions. This marks the opening of a new vision in the mind,

the commencement of a nobler, higher, diviner life; for the man now begins

to perceive that there is no necessity to resist or resent the actions of others

towards  him,  whatever  those  actions  may  be,  and  that  all  along  his

resentment has been caused by his own ignorance, and that his own bitterness

of spirit is wrong. Having arrived thus far he will take himself with some

such questionings as these: “Why this continual retaliation and forgiveness?

Why  this  tormenting  anger  against  another  and  then  this  repentance  andforgiveness? Is not forgiveness the taking back of one’s anger, the giving up

of one’s resentment; and if anger and resentment are good and necessary why

repent of them and give them up? If it is so beautiful, so sweet, so peaceful to

get rid of all feelings of bitterness and to utterly and wholly forgive, would it

not be still more beautiful and sweet and peaceful never to grow bitter at all,

never to know anger, never to resent as evil the action of another, but always

to live in the experience of that pure, calm, blissful love which is known

when an act of forgiveness is done, and all unruly passion towards another is

put  away?  If  another  has  done  me  wrong  is  not  my  hatred  towards  him

wrong, and will one wrong right another? Moreover, has he by his wrong

really injured me, or has he injured himself? Am I not injured by my own

wrong rather than by his? Why, then, do I grow angry? why do I resent,

retaliate, and engage in bitter thoughts? Is it not because my pride is piqued

or my vanity wounded or my selfishness thwarted? Is not because my blind

animal passions are aroused and allowed to subdue my better nature? Seeing

that I am hurt by another person’s attitude towards me because of my own

pride or vanity or ungoverned and unpurified passions, would it not be better

to look to the wrong in myself rather than the wrong in another, to get rid of

pride and vanity and passion, and so avoid being hurt at all?

  By  such  self-questionings  and  their  elucidation  in  the  light  of  mild

thoughts and dispassionate conduct a man, gradually overcoming passion and

rising out of the ignorance which gave rise to passion, will at last reach that

blessed state in which he will cease to see evil in others, and will dwell in

universal  good-will  and  love  and  peace.  Not  that  he  will  cease  to  see

ignorance and folly; not that he will cease to see suffering and sorrow and

misery; not that he will cease to distinguish between acts that are pure and

impure, right and wrong, for, having put away passion and prejudice, he will

see these things in the full, clear light of knowledge, and exactly as they are;

but he will cease to see anything-any evil power- in another which can do

him injury, which he must violently oppose and strive to crush, and against

which he must guard himself. Having arrived at right understanding of evil

by purging it away from his own heart he sees that it is a thing that does not

call for hatred and fear and resentment but for consideration, compassion, and

love.

  Shakespeare through one of his characters says: “There is no darkness butignorance.” All evil is ignorance, is dense darkness of mind, and the removal

of sin from one’s mind is a coming out of darkness into spiritual light. Evil is

the negation of good, just as darkness is the negation, or absence of light, and

what is there in a negation to arouse anger or resentment? When night settles

down  upon  the  world  who  is  so  foolish  as  to  rail  at  the  darkness?  The

enlightened man, likewise, does not accuse or condemn the spiritual darkness

in men’s hearts which is manifested in the form of sin, though by gentle

reproof he may sometimes point out where the light lies.

  Now the ignorance to which I refer as evil, or as the source of evil, is

two-fold. There is wrong-doing which is committed without any knowledge

of good and evil, and where there is no choice - this is unconscious wrong-

doing. Then there is wrong-doing which is done in the knowledge that it

ought not to be done - this is conscious wrong-doing; but both unconscious

and conscious wrong-doing arise in ignorance-that is, ignorance of the real

nature and painful consequences of the wrong-doing.

  Why does a man continue to do certain things which he feels he ought not

to do? If he knows that what he is doing is wrong where lies the ignorance?

  He  continues  to  do  those  things  because  his  knowledge  of  them  is

incomplete.  He  only  knows  he  ought  not  to  do  them  by  certain  precepts

without  and  qualms  of  conscience  within,  but  he  does  not  fully  and

completely understand what he is doing. He knows that certain acts bring him

immediate pleasure, and so, in spite of the troubled conscience which follows

that pleasure, he continues to commit them. He is convinced that the pleasure

is good and desirable, and therefore to be enjoyed. He does not know that

pleasure and pain are one, but thinks he can have the one without the other.

He has no knowledge of the law which governs human actions, and never

thinks of associating his sufferings with his own wrongdoing, but believes

that  they  are  caused  by  the  wrong-doing  of  others  or  are  the  mysterious

dispensations  of  Providence,  and  therefore  not  to  be  inquired  into  or

understood. He is seeking happiness, and does those things which he believes

will bring him most enjoyment, but he acts in entire ignorance of the hidden

and inevitable consequences which attach to his actions.

  Said a man to me once who was the victim of a bad habit: “I know the

habit is a bad one, and that it does me more harm than good” I said: “If you

know that what you are doing is bad and harmful why do you continue to doit?” And he replied: “Because it is pleasant, and I like it.

  This man, of course, did not really know that his habit was bad. He had

been told that it was, and he thought he knew or believed it was, but in reality

he thought it was good, that it was conducive to his happiness and well-being,

and therefore he continue to practise it. When a man knows by experience

that a thing is bad, and that every time he does it he injuries body or mind, or

both; when his knowledge of that thing is so complete that he is acquainted

with its hole train of baneful effects, then he cannot only not do it any longer,

he cannot even desire to do it, and even the pleasure that was formerly in that

thing becomes painful. No man would put a venomous snake in his pocket

because it is prettily coloured. He knows that a deadly sting lurks in those

beautiful markings. Nor, when a man knows the unavoidable pain and hurt

which lie hidden in wrong thoughts and acts, does he continue to think and

commit  them.  Even  the  immediate  pleasure  which  formerly  he  greedily

sought is gone from them; their surface attractiveness has vanished; he is no

longer ignorant concerning their true nature; he sees them as they are.

  I knew a young man who was in business, and although a member of a

church, and occupying the position of voluntary religious instructor, he told

me  that  it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  practise  lying  and  deception  in

business, otherwise sure and certain ruin would follow. He said he knew

lying was wrong, but while he remained in business he must continue to do it.

Upon questioning him I found, of course, that he had never tried truth and

honesty in his business, had not even thought of trying the better way, so

firmly convinced was he that it was not possible for him to know whether or

not it would be productive or ruin. Now, did this young man know that lying

was wrong? There was a preceptial sense only in which he knew, but there

was a deeper and more real sense in which he did not know. He had been

taught to regard lying as wrong, and his conscience bore out that teaching,

but he believed that it brought to him profit, prosperity and happiness, and

that  honesty  would  bring  him  loss,  poverty,  and  misery  -  in  a  word,  he

regarded lying, deep in his heart, as the right thing to do, and honesty as the

wrong practice. He had no knowledge whatever of the real nature of the act

of lying: how it is, on the instant of its committal, loss of character, loss of

self-respect, loss of power, usefulness, and influence, and loss of blessedness;

and how it unerringly leads to loss of reputation and loss of material profitand prosperity. Only when such a man begins to consider happiness of others,

prefers to embrace the loss which he fears rather than clutch at the gain which

he  desires,  will  he  obtain  that  real  knowledge  which  lofty  moral  conduct

alone can reveal; and then, experiencing the greater blessedness, he will see

how, all along, he has been deceiving and defrauding himself rather than

others, has been living in darkest ignorance and self-delusion.

  These two common instances of wrong-doing will serve to illustrate and

make plainer, to those of my readers who, while searching for Truth, are as

yet doubtful, uncertain, and confused, the deep Truth that all sin, or evil, is a

condition of ignorance and therefore to be dealt with in a loving and not a

hateful spirit.

  And  as  with  bad  habits  and  lying  so  with  all  sin  -  with  lust,  hatred,

malice, envy, pride, vanity, self-indulgence and selfishness in all its forms; it

is a state of spiritual darkness, the absence of the Light of Truth in the heart,

the negation of knowledge.

  Thus when, by overcoming the wrong condition in one’s own heart, the

nature  of  evil  is  fully  realised  and  mere  belief  gives  place  to  living

knowledge, evil can no longer be hatefully condemned and violently resisted,

and the wrong-doer is thought of with tender compassion.

  And this brings us to another aspect of evil-namely, that of individual

freedom; the right of every person to choose his own actions. Along with the

seeing of evil in others is the desire to convert or coerce others into one’s

own ways of thinking and acting. Probably the commonest delusion in which

men are involved is that of thinking that what they themselves believe and

think and do is good, and all that is otherwise is evil, and therefore to be

powerfully  condemned  and  resisted.  It  is  out  of  this  delusion  that  all

persecutions springs. There are Christians who regard all Atheists as men

wholly evil, as given up to the service of an evil power; and there are Atheists

who  firmly  believe  that  all  Christians  are  doing  the  greatest  harm  to  the

whole human race by their “superstitious and false doctrines.” The truth is

that neither the Christian nor the Atheist is evil, nor in the service of evil, but

each  is  choosing  his  own  way,  and  is  pursuing  that  course  which  he  is

convinced is right.

  Let  a  man  quietly  contemplate  the  fact  that  numbers  of  followers  of

various  religions  the  world  over  are,  as  they  ever  were,  engaged  incondemning each other as evil and wrong, and regarding themselves as good

and right, and it will help him to realise how all evil is merely ignorance,

spiritual darkness; and earnest meditation on that fact will be found to be one

of  the  greatest  aids  in  developing  greater  kindness,  charity,  insight  and

breadth of mind.

  The  truly  wise  and  good  man  sees  good  in  all,  evil  in  none.  He  has

abandoned the folly of wanting others to think and act as he thinks and acts,

for  he  sees  men  are  variously  constituted,  are  at  different  points  in  their

spiritual evolution, and must, of necessity, think and act differently. Having

put  away  hatred,  condemnation,  egotism,  and  prejudice  he  has  become

enlightened,  and  sees  that  purity,  love  compassion,  gentleness,  patience,

humility, and unselfishness are manifestations of light and knowledge; while

impurity, hatred, cruelty, passion, darkness and ignorance; and that whether

men are living in light or darkness they are one and all doing that which they

think is necessary, are acting in accordance with their own measure of light or

darkness. The wise man understands and understanding, he ceases from all

bitterness and accusation.

  Every man acts in accordance with his nature, with his own sense of right

and wrong, and is surely gathering in the results of his own experience. There

is one supreme right which every being possesses - to think and act as he

chooses.  If  he  chooses  to  think  and  act  selfishly,  thinking  of  his  own

immediate happiness only and not of that of others, then he will rapidly bring

upon  himself,  by  the  action  of  the  moral  law  of  cause  and  effect,  such

afflictions as will cause him to pause and consider, and so find a better way.

There  is  no  teacher  to  compare  with  experience,  no  chastisement  so

corrective  and  purifying  as  that  which  men  ignorantly  inflict  upon

themselves. The selfish man is the ignorant man; he chooses his own way,

but it is a way which leads to suffering, and through suffering to knowledge

and bliss. The good man is the wise man; he likewise chooses his own way,

but he chooses it in the full light of knowledge, having passed through the

stages of ignorance and suffering, and arrived at knowledge and bliss.

  A man begins to understand what “seeing no evil” is when, putting away

all personal desires in his judgments of others, he considers them from their

own standpoint, and judges their actions not from his own standard but from

theirs. It is because men setup arbitrary standards of right and wrong, and areanxious that all should conform to their particular standard, that they see evil

in each other. A man is only rightly judged when he is judged not from my

standard or yours but from his own, and to deal with him thus is not judgment

it is Love. It is only when we look through the eyes of Impersonal Love that

we  become  enlightened,  and  see  others  as  they  really  are;  and  a  man  is

approaching that Love when he can say in his heart: “Who am I that I should

judge another? Am I so pure and sinless that I arraign men and pass the

judgment of evil upon them? Rather let me humble myself, and correct mine

own errors, before assuming the position of supreme judge of those of other

men.”

  It was said by one of old to those who were about to stone, as evil, a

woman taken in the act of committing one of the darkest sins: “He that is

without  sin  let  him  cast  the  first  stone”;  and  though  he  who  said  it  was

without sin yet he took up no stone, nor passed any bitter judgment, but said,

with infinite gentleness and compassion: “Neither do I condemn thee; go, and

sin no more.”

  In the pure heart there is no room left where personal judgements and

hatreds can find lodgement, for it is filled to overflowing with tenderness and

love; it sees no evil; and only as men succeed in seeing no evil in others will

they become free from sin and sorrow and suffering.

  No  man  sees  evil  in  himself  or  his  own  acts  except  the  man  who  is

becoming enlightened, and then he abandons those acts which he has come to

see are wrong. Every man justifies himself in what he does, and, however

evil  others  may  regard  his  conduct,  he  himself  thinks  it  to  be  good  and

necessary; If he did not he would not, could not do it. The angry man always

justifies  his  anger;  the  covetous  man  his  greed;  the  impure  man  his

unchastity;  the  liar  considers  that  his  lying  is  altogether  necessary;  the

slanderer believes that, in vilifying the characters of those whom he dislikes,

and warning other people against their “evil” natures, he is doing well; the

thief  is  convinced  that  stealing  is  the  shortest  and  best  way  to  plenty,

prosperity, and happiness; and even the murderer thinks that there is a ground

of justification for his deed.

  Every man’s deeds are in accordance with the measure of his own light or

darkness, and no man can live higher than he is or act beyond the limits of his

knowledge.  Nevertheless,  he  can  improve  himself,  and  thereby  graduallyincrease his light and extend the range of his knowledge. The angry man

indulgence in raillery and abuse because his knowledge does not extend to

forbearance  and  patience.  Not  having  practised  gentleness,  he  does  not

understand it, and cannot choose it; nor can he know, by its comparison with

the light of gentleness, the darkness of anger. It is the same with the liar, the

slanderer, and the thief; he lives in this dark condition of mind and action

because  he  is  limited  to  it  by  his  immature  knowledge  and  experience,

because never having lived in the higher conditions, he has no knowledge of

them, and it is, to him, as if they were non-existent: “The light shineth in the

darkness and the darkness comprehendenth it not. Nor can he understand

even  the  conditions  in  which  he  is  living,  because,  being  dark,  they  are

necessarily devoid of all knowledge.

  When  a  man  driven  by  repeated  sufferings  to  at  last  reflect  upon  his

conduct, comes to see that his anger or lying, or whatever ignorant condition

he may have been living in, is productive only of trouble and sorrow then he

abandons it, and commences to search for, and practise, the opposite and

enlightened condition; and when he is firmly established in the better way, so

that his knowledge of both conditions is complete, then he realises in what

great darkness he had formerly lived. This knowledge of good and evil by

experience constitutes enlightenment.

  When a man begins to look, as it were, through the eyes of others, and to

measure them by their own standard and not by his, then he ceases from

seeing  of  evil  in  others,  for  he  knows  that  every  man’s  perception  and

standard of good and evil is different; that there is no vice so low but some

men regard it as good; no virtue so high but some men regard it as evil; and

what a man regards as good that to him is good; what he regards as evil that

to him is evil.

  Nor will the purified man, who has ceased to see evil in others, have any

desire to win men to his own ways or opinions, but will rather help them in

their own particular groove, knowing that an enlarged experience only, and

not  merely  change  of  opinion  can  lead  to  higher  knowledge  and  greater

blessedness.

  It will be found that men see evil in those who differ from them, good in

those  who  agree  with  them.  The  man  who  greatly  loves  himself  and  is

enamoured of his opinions will love all those who agree with him and willdislike all those who disagree with him. “If ye love them that love ye, what

reward  have  ye?....  Love  your  enemies,  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you.”

Egotism and vanity make men blind. Men of opposing religious views hate

and persecute each other; men of opposing political views fight and condemn

each other. The partisan measures all men by his own standard, and sets up

his judgements accordingly. So convinced is he that he is right and others

wrong that he at last persuades himself that to inflict cruelty on others is both

good and necessary in order to coerce them into his way of thinking and

acting, and so bring them to the right - his right - against their own reason and

will.

  Men  hate,  condemn,  resist  and  inflict  suffering  upon  each  other,  not

because they are intrinsically evil, not because they are deliberately “wicked”

and are doing, in the full light of truth, what they know to be wrong, but

because  they  regard  such  conduct  as  necessary  and  right.  All  men  are

intrinsically good, but some are wiser than others, are older in experience

than  others.  I  recently  heard,  in  substance,  the  following  conversation

between two men whom I will call D- and E-. The third person referred to as

X is a prominent politician:-

  E. Every man reaps the result of his own thoughts and deeds, and suffers for his own wrong.

  D. If that is so, and if no man can escape from the penalty of his evil deeds, what an inferno some of

our men in power must be preparing for themselves.

  E. Whether a man is in power or not, so long as he lives in ignorance and sin, he will reap sorrow

and suffering.

  D. Look, for instance, at X-, a man totally evil, given up entirely to selfishness and ambition; surely

great torments are reserved for so unprincipled a man.

  E. But how do you know he is so evil.

  D. By his works, his fruits. When I see a man doing evil I know that he is evil; and I cannot even

think  of  X-  but  I  burn  with  righteous  indignation.  I  am  sometimes  inclined  to  doubt  that  there  is  an

overruling power for good when I see such a man in a position where he can do so much harm to others.

  E. What evil is he committing?

  D. His whole policy is evil. He will ruin the country if he remains in power.

  E.  But  while  there  are  large  numbers  of  people  who  think  of  X-  as  you  do  there  are  also  large

numbers,  equally  intelligent,  who  look  on  him  as  good  and  able,  who  admire  him  for  his  excellent

qualities, and regard his policy as beneficent and making for national progress. He owes his position tothese people; are they also evil?

  D. They are deceived and mislead. And this only makes - X’s evil all the greater, in that he can so

successfully employ his talents in deceiving others in order to gain his own selfish ends. I hate the man.

  E. May it not be possible that you are deceived?

  D. In what way?

  E.  Hatred  is  self-deception;  love  is  self-enlightenment.  No  man  can  see  either  himself  or  others

clearly until he ceases from hatred and practises love.

  D. That sounds very beautiful, but it is impracticable. When I see a man doing evil to others, and

deceiving and misleading them, I must hate him. It is right that I should do so. X- is without a spark of

conscience.

  E. X- may or may not be all you believe to be, but, even if he is, according to your own words, he

should be pitied and not condemned.

  D. How so?

  E. You say he is without a conscience.

  D. Entirely so.

  E. Then he is a mental cripple. Do you hate the blind because they cannot see, that dumb because

they cannot speak, or the deaf because they cannot hear? When a captain has lost his rudder or broken

his  compass  do  you  condemn  him  because  he  did  not  keep  his  ship  off  the  rocks?  Do  you  hold  him

responsible for the loss of life? If a man is totally devoid of conscience he is without the means of moral

guidance, and all his selfishness must, perforce, appear to him good and right and proper. X- may appear

evil to you, but is he evil to himself? Does he regard his own conduct as evil?

  D. Whether he regards himself as evil or not he is evil.

  E. If I were to regard you as evil because of your hatred for X- should I be right?

  D. No.

  E. Why not?

  D. Because in such  a  case  hatred  is  necessary,  justifiable  and  righteous.  There  is  such  a  thing  as

righteous anger, righteous hatred.

  E.  Is  there  such  a  thing  as  righteous  selfishness,  righteous  ambition,  righteous  evil?  I  should  be

quite  wrong  in  regarding  you  as  evil,  because  you  are  doing  what  you  are  convinced  is  right,  because

you regard your hatred for X- as part of your duty as a man and a citizen; nevertheless, there is a better

way that that of hatred, and it is the knowledge of this better way that prevents me from hating X- as you

do, because however wrong his conduct might appear to me, it is not wrong to him nor to his supporters;

moreover, all men reap as they sow.  D. What, then, is that better way?

  E. It is the way of Love; the ceasing to regard others as evil. It is a blessed and peaceful state of

heart.

  D. Do you mean that there is a state which a man can reach wherein he will grow angry when he

sees people doing evil?

  E.  No,  I  do  not  mean  that,  for  while  a  man  regards  others  as  evil  he  will  continue  to  grow  angry

with them; but I mean that a man can reach a state of calm insight and spotless love wherein he sees no

evil to grow angry with, wherein he understands the various natures of men - how they are prompted to

act, and how they reap, as the harvest of their own thoughts and deeds, the tares of sufferings and the

corn of bliss. To reach that state is to regard all men with compassion and love.

  D. The state that you picture is a very high one- it is, no doubt, a very holy and beautiful one- but it

is a state that I should be sorry to reach; and I should pray to be preserved from a state of mind were I

could not hate a man like X- with an intense hatred.

  Thus by this conversation it will be seen that D- regarded his hatred as

good. Even so all men regard that which they do as necessary to be done. The

things which men habitually practice those things they believe in. When faith

in a thing wholly ceases it ceases to be practised. D-’s individual liberty is

equal to that of other men, and he has a right to hate another if he so wishes,

nor will he abandon his hatred until he discovers, by the sorrow and unrest

which  it  entails,  how  wrong  and  foolish  and  blind  it  is,  and  how,  by  its

practice, he is injuring himself.

  A great Teacher was once asked by one of His disciples to explain the

distinction between good and evil, and holding His hand with the fingers

pointing downward, He said: “Where is my hand pointing?”

  And the disciple replied: “It is pointing downward.”

  Then, turning His hand upward, the Teacher asked: “Where now is my

hand pointing?”

  And the disciple answered: “It is pointing upward.”

  “That,” said the Teacher, “is the distinction between evil and good.”

  By  this  simple  illustration  He  indicated  that  evil  is  merely  wrongly-

directed energy, and good rightly-directed energy, and that the so-called evil

man becomes good by reversing his conduct.

  To understand the true nature of evil by living in the good is to cease to

see other men as evil. Blessed is he who, turning from the evil in othersexerts himself in the purification of his own heart. He shall one day become

of “too pure eyes to behold evil.”

    Knowing the nature of evil, what does it behove a man to do? It behoves

him to live only in that which is good: therefore if a man condemn me, I will

not condemn him in return; if he revile me I will give him kindness; if he

slander me I will speak of his good qualities, if he hate me then he greatly

needs, and shall receive, my love. With the impatient I will be patient; with

the greedy I will be generous, and with the violent and quarrelsome I will be

mild and peaceable. Seeing no evil, whom should I hate or who regard as

mine enemy?

  “Were mankind murderous or jealous upon you, my brother, my sister?

  I’m so sorry for you. They are not murderous or jealous upon me;

  All has been gentle with me, I keep no account with lamentation;

  What have I to do with lamentation?”

  He who sees men as evil imagines that behind those acts which are called

“wicked” there is a corporate and substantial evil prompting those particular

sins but he of stainless vision sees the deeds, themselves as the evil, and

knows that there is no evil power, no evil soul or man behind those deeds.

The substance of the universe is good; there is no substance of evil. Good

alone is permanent; there is no fixed or permanent evil.

  As brothers and sisters, born of the same parents and being of one house-

hold, love each other through all vicissitudes, see no evil in each other, but

overlook all errors, and cling together in the strong bonds of affection-even

so the good man sees humanity as one spiritual family, born of the same

Father-Mother, being of the same essence and making for the same goal, and

he regards all men and women as his brothers and sisters, makes no divisions

and distinctions, sees none as evil, but is at peace with all. Happy is he who

attains to this blessed state.                                9. ABIDING JOY

  “Who carry music in their heart

  Through dusky alne and wrangleing mart,

  plying their daily toil with busier feet,

  Because their secret souls a holier repeat.”

  “Serene will be our days and bright,

  And happy will our nature be,

  When love is an unerring light,

  And joy its own security.

    Wordsworth.

 

    ABIDING joy! Is there such a thing? Where is it? Who possesses it? Yea;

there is such a thing. It is where there is no sin. It is possessed by the pure

hearted.

  As darkness is a passing shadow, and light is substance that remains, so

sorrow is fleeting, but joy abides for ever. No true thing can pass away and

become lost; no false thing can remain and be preserved. Sorrow is false, and

it cannot live; joy is true, and it cannot die. Joy may become hidden for a

time, but it can be always be recovered; sorrow may remain for a period, but

it can be transcended and dispersed.

  Do not think your sorrow will remain; it will pass away like a cloud. Do

not believe that the torments of sin are ever your portion; they will vanish

like a hideous nightmare. Awake! arise! Be holy and Joyful!

  You are the creator of your own shadows; you desire and then you grieve;

renounce and then you all rejoice.

  You are not the impotent slave of sorrow; the Never-Ending Gladness

awaits your Home-coming.You are not the helpless prisioner of the darkness

and dreams of sin; even now the beautiful light of holiness shines upon your

sleeping lids, ready to greet your awakening vision.

  In the heavy, troubled sleep of sin and self the abiding joy is lost and

forgotten;  its  undying  music  is  no  more  heard,  and  the  fragrance  of  its

fadeless flowers no longer cheers the heart of the wayfarer.  But when sin and self are abandoned, when the clinging to things for

personal pleasure is put away, then the shadows of grief disappear, and the

heart is restored to its Imperishable Joy.

  Joy comes and fills the self-emptied heart; it abides with the peaceful; its

reign is with the pure.

  Joy flees from the selfish; it deserts the quarrel-some; it is hidden from

the impure. Joy is as an angel so beautiful and delicate and chaste that she

can  only  dwell  with  holiness.  She  cannot  remain  with  selfishness;  she  is

wedded to Love. Every man is truly happy in so far as he is unselfish; he is

miserable in so far as he is selfish. All truly good men, and by good men I

mean those who have fought victoriously the battle against self, are men of

joy. How great is the jubiliation of the saint! No true teacher promises sorrow

as the ultimate of life; he promises joy. He points to sorrow, but only as a

process which sin has rendered necessary. Where self ends grief passes away.

Joy is the companion of righteousness. In the divine life tender compassion

fills the place where weeping sorrow sat. During the process of becoming

unselfish there are periods of deep sorrow. Purification is necessarily severe.

All becoming is painful. Abiding joy is its completion is realised only in the

perfection of being, and this is

  “A state

  Where all is lovelines, and power and love,

  With all sublimest qualities of mind,

  .. Where all

  Enjoy entire dominion o’er themselves.

  Acts, feelings, thoughts, conditions, qualities.”

    Consider how a flower evolves and becomes; at first there is a little germ

groping  its  way  in  the  dark  soil  towards  the  upper  light;  then  the  plant

appears, and leaf is added unto leaf; and finally the perfected flower appears,

in the sweet perfume and chaste beauty of which all effort ceases.

  So, with human life; at first the blind groping for the light in the dark soil

of selfishness and ignorance; then the coming into the light, and the gradual

overcoming  of  selfishness  with  its  accompanying  pain  and  sorrow;  and

finally the perfect flower of a pure, unselfish life, giving forth, without effort,

the perfume of holiness and the beauty of joy.  The  good,  the  pure,  are  the  superlatively  happy.  However  men  may

argumentatively deny or qualify this, humanity instinctively knows it to be

true.  Do  not  men  everywhere  picture  their  angels  as  the  most  joyful  of

beings? There are joyful angels in bodies of flesh; we meet them and pass on;

and how many of those who come in contact with them are sufficiently pure

to see vision within the form - to see the incorruptible angel in its common

instrument of clay?

  “They needs must grope who cannot see, The blade before the ear must be; The outward symbols disappear From him

whose inward sight is clear.”

  Yes; the pure are the joyful. We look almost in vain for any expressions

of sorrow in the words of Jesus. The “Man of Sorrows” is only completed in

the Man of Joy.

  “I, Buddha, who wept with all my brother’s tears, Whose heart was broken by a whole world’s woe, Laugh and am glad,

for there is Liberty!”

  In sin, and in the struggle against sin, there is unrest and affliction, but in

the perfection of Truth, in the path of Righteousness, there is abiding joy.

    “Enter the Path! There spring the healing streams Quenching all thirst! There bloom th’ immortal flowers Carpeting all

the way with joy! There throng Swiftest and sweetest hours!”

  Tribulation lasts only so long as there remains some chaff of self which

needs to be removed. The tribulum, or threshing-machine, ceases to work

when all the grain is separated from chaff; and when the last impurities are

blown away from the soul, tribulation has completed its work, and there is no

more need for it; then abiidng joy is realised.

  All the saints and prophets and saviours of the race have proclaimed with

rejoicing the “Gospel” or the “Good News.” All men know what Good News

is  -  An  impending  calamity  avoided,  a  disease  cured,  friends  arrived  or

returned in safety, difficulties overcome, success in some enterprise assured -

but what is the “Good News” of the saintly ones? This: that there is peace for

the troubled, healing for the afflicted, gladness for the grief-stricken, victory

for the sinful, a homecoming for the wanderer, and joy for the sorrowing and

broken-hearted.  Not  that  these  beautiful  realities  shall  be  in  some  future

world,  but  they  are  here  and  now,  that  they  are  known  and  realised  and

enjoyed; and are, therefore, proclaimed that all may accept them who will

break the galling bonds of self and rise into the glorious liberty of unselfish

love.  Seek the highest Good, and as you find it, as you practise it and realise it,

you will taste the deepest, sweetest joy. As you succeed in forgetting your

own selfish desires in your thoughtfulness for others, in your care for others,

in your service for others, just so far and no further will you find and realise

the abiding joy in life.

  Inside the gateway of unselfishness lies the elysium of Abiding Joy, and

whosoever will may enter in, whosoever doubts let him come and see.

  And knowing this - that selfishness leads to misery, unselfishness to joy,

not merely for one’s self alone - for if this were all how unworthy could be

our endeavours! - but for the whole world and because all with whom we live

and  come  in  contact  will  be  the  happier  and  truer  for  our  unselfishness;

because Humanity is one, and the joy of one is the joy of all - knowing this

let us scatter flowers and not thorns in the common ways of life - yea, even in

the highway of our enemies let us scatter the blossoms of unselfish love - so

shall the pressure in their footprints fill the air with the perfume of holiness

and gladen the world with the aroma of joy.                                  10. SILENTNESS

  “Be still! The crown of life is silentness.

  Give thou a quiet hour to each long day,

  Too much of time we spend in profitless

  And foolish talk. Too little do we say.

  “If thou wouldst gather words that shall avail,

  Learning a wisdom worthy to express,

  Leave for a while thy chat and empty tale-

  Study the golden speech of silentness.”

    A.L.Salmon.

 

  “Be still, my soul.

  Rest awhile from the feverish activities in

  which you lose yourself.

  Be not afraid to be left alone with yourself

  for one short hour.”

  Ernest Crosly.

 

  In the words of a wise man there is great power, but his silence is more

powerful  still.  The  greatest  men  teach  us  most  effectively  when  they  are

purposely silent. The silent attitude of the great man noted, perhaps, by one

or two of his disciples only is recorded and preserved through the ages; while

the obtrusive words of the merely clever talker, heard, perhaps, by thousands,

and  at  once  popularised,  are  neglected  and  forgotten  in,  at  most,  a  few

generations. The silence of Jesus, when asked by Pilate “What is Truth?” is

the impressive, the awful silence of profound wisdom; it is pregnant with

humility  and  reproof,  and  perpetually  rebukes  that  shallowness  that,

illustrating the truth that “fools step in where angels fear to tread,” would in

terms of triteness parcel out the universe, or think to utter the be-all and the

end-all  of  the  mystery  of  things  in  some  textual  formula  or  theological

platitude.  When,  plied  with  questions  about  Brahma  (God)  by  the

argumentative Brahmans, Buddha remained silent, he taught them better thanthey knew, and if by his silence he failed to satisfy the foolish he thereby

profoundly instructed the wise. Why all this ceaseless talk about God, with its

accompaniment of intolerance? Let men practise some measure of kindliness

and good-will, and thereby acquaint themselves with the simple rudiments of

wisdom. Why all these speculative arguments about the nature of God? Let

us first understand somewhat of ourselves. There are no greater marks of

folly  and  moral  immaturity  than  irreverence  and  presumption;  no  greater

manifestations of wisdom and moral maturity than reverence and humility.

Lao-Tze, in his own life, exemplified his teaching that the wise man “teaches

without words.” Disciples were attracted to him by the power which ever

accompanies a wise reserve. Living in comparative obscurity and silence, not

courting the ear of men, and never going out to teach, men sought him out

and learned of him wisdom.

  The silent acts of the Great Ones are beacons to the wise, illuminating

their pathway with no uncertain radiance, for he would attain to virtue and

wisdom must learn, not only when to speak and what to say, but also when to

remain silent and what not to say. The right control of the tongue is the

beginning of wisdom; the right control of the mind is the consummation of

wisdom. By curbing his tongue a man gains possession of his mind, and to

have complete possession of one’s mind is to be a Master of Silence.

  The fool babbles, gossips, argues, and bandies words. He glories in the

fact that he has had the last word and has silenced his opponent. He exults in

his  own  folly,  is  ever  on  the  defensive,  and  wastes  his  energies  in

unprofitable channels. He is like a gardener who continues to dig and plant in

unproductive soil.

  The wise man avoids idle words, gossip, vain argument, and self-defence.

He is content to appear defeated; rejoices when he is defeated, knowing that,

having found and removed another error in himself he has thereby become

wiser. Blessed is he who does not strive for the last word!

    “Backward I see in my own days where I sweated through

  fog with linguists and contenders;

  I have no mockings or arguments, I witness and wait“

    Silence under provocation is the mark of a cultured and sympathetic soul.

The thoughtless and unkind are stirred by every slight provocation, and will

lose their mental balance by even the appearance of a personal encroachment.The self-possession of Jesus is not a miracle; it is the flower of culture, the

diadem of wisdom. When we read of Jesus that “He answered never a word”

and of Buddha that “He remained silent,” we get a glimpse of the vast power

of silence, of the silent majesty of true greatness.

  The silent man is the powerful man. The victim of garrulity is devoid of

influence; his spiritual energies are dissipated. Every mechanic knows that

before a force can be utilised and definitely directed it must be conserved and

stored; and the wise man is a spiritual mechanic who conserves the energies

of his mind, holds them in masterful abeyance, ready at any moment to direct

them, with effective purpose, to the accomplishment of some necessary work.

  The true strength is in silentness. It is well said that “The dog that barks

does not bite.” The grim and rarely broken silence of the bull-dog is the

necessary adjunct to that powerfully concentrated and effectual action for

which the animal is known and feared. This, of course, is a lower form of

silentness,  but  the  principle  is  the  same.  The  boaster  fails;  his  mind  is

diverted from the main purpose; and his energies are frittered away upon self-

glorification.  His  forces  are  divided  between  his  task  and  the  reward  to

himself, the greater portion going to feed the lust of reward. He is like an

unskilful general who loses the battle through dividing his forces instead of

concentrating them upon a point. Or he is like a careless engineer who leaves

open the waste-valve of his engine and allows the steam to run down. The

modest, silent, earnest man succeeds: freed from vanity, and avoiding the

dissipation  of  self-glorification,  all  his  powers  are  concentrated  upon  the

successful performance of his task. Even while the other man is talking about

his powers he is already about his work, and is so much nearer than the other

to its completion. It is a law everywhere and always that energy distributed is

subject unto energy conserved. The noisy and boasting Charles will ever be

thrown by the quiet and modest Orlando.

  It is a law universally applicable that quietness is strength. The business

man  who  succeeds  never  talks  about  his  plans,  methods,  and  affairs,  and

should he, turned giddy by success, begin to do this he will then commence

to fail. The man of great moral influence never talks about himself and his

spiritual victories, for, should he do so, in that moment his moral power and

influence  would  be  gone,  and,  like  Samson,  he  would  be  shorn  of  his

strength. Success, worldly or spiritual, is the willing servant of strong, steady,silent, unflinching purpose. The most powerful disintegrating forces make no

noise. The greatly-overcoming mind works silently.

  If you would be strong, useful, and self-reliant learn the value and power

of silentness. Do not talk about yourself. The world instinctively knows that

the vain talker is weak and empty, and so it leaves him to his own vanity. Do

not talk about what you are going to do but do it, and let your finished work

speak for itself. Do not waste your forces in criticising and disparaging the

work of others but set about to do your own work thoroughly and well. The

worst work with earnestness and sweetness behind it is altogether better than

barking  at  others.  While  you  are  disparaging  the  work  of  others  you  are

neglecting your own. If others are doing badly help and instruct them by

doing better yourself. Neither abuse others nor account their abuse of any

weight. When attacked remain silent: in this way you will conquer yourself,

and will, without the use of words, teach others.

  But the true silence is not merely a silent tongue; it is a silent mind. To

merely hold one’s tongue, and yet to carry about a disturbed and rankling

mind, is no remedy for weakness and no source of power. Silentness, to be

powerful, must envelop the whole mind, must permeate every chamber of the

heart; it must be the silence of peace. To this broad, deep, abiding silentness a

man attains only in the measure that he conquers himself. While passions,

temptations, and sorrows disturb, the holier, profounder depths of silence are

yet to be sounded. To smart under the words and actions of others means that

you are yet weak, uncontrolled, unpurified. So rid your heart of the disturbing

influences of vanity and pride and selfishness that no petty spite can reach

you,  no  slander  or  abuse  disturb  your  serene  repose.  As  the  storm  rages

ineffectually against a well-built house, while its occupant sits composed and

happy by his fire side within, so no evil without can disturb or harm him who

is well fortified with wisdom; self-governed and silent, he remains at peace

within. To this great silence the self-conquered man attains.

  “Envy and calumny, and hate and pain,

  And that unrest which men miscall delight,

  Can touch him not, nor torture him again“

  There is no commoner error amongst men than that of supposing that

nothing  can  be  accomplished  without  much  talking  and  much  noise.  The

busy, shallow talker regards the quiet thinker or silent doer as a man wasted;he thinks silentness means “doing nothing, and that hurrying, bustling, and

ceaseless talking means “doing much.” He also confounds popularity with

power. But the thinker and doer is the real and effectual worker. His work is

at the root and core and substance of things, and as Nature silently, yet with

hidden and wondrous alchemy, transmutes the rude elements of earth and air

into tender leaves, beautiful flowers, delectable fruits, - yea into a myriad

forms of beauty - even so does the silent purposeful worker transform the

ways of men and the face of the world by the might and magic of his silently-

directed  energy.  He  wastes  no  time  and  force  in  tinkering  with  the  ever-

changing and artificial surface of things, but goes to the living vital centre,

and  works  therefrom  and  thereon;  and  in  due  season,  perhaps  when  his

perishable form is withdrawn from the world, the fruits of his obscure but

imperishable labours come forth to gladden the world. But the words of the

talker perish. The world reaps no harvest from the sowing of sound.

  He who conserves his mental forces also conserves his physical forces.

The strongly quiet, calm man lives to a greater age, and in the possession of

better health than the hurrying, noisy man. Quiet, subdued mental harmony is

conducive to physical harmony - health. The followers of George Fox are

today the healthiest, longest-lived and most successful portion of the British

community, and they live quiet, unostentatious, purposeful lives, avoiding all

worldly excitements and unnecessary words. They are a silent people, all

their meetings being conducted on the principle that “Silence is Power.”

    Silentness is powerful because it is the outcome of self-conquest, and the

more successfully a man governs himself the more silent he becomes. As he

succeeds in living to a purpose and not to the pleasures of self he withdraws

himself from the outer discords of the world and reaches to the inward music

of peace. Then when he speaks there is purpose and power behind his words,

and when he maintains silence there is equal or even greater power therein.

He does not utter that which is followed by pain and tears; does not do that

which  is  productive  of  sorrow  and  remorse.  But,  saying  and  doing  those

things only which are ripe with thoughtfulness, his conscience is quiet, and

all his days are blessed.                                    11. SOLITUDE

  “Why idly seek from outward things

  The answer inward silence brings?

  Why climb the far-off hills with pain,

  A nearer view of heaven to gain?

  In lowliest depths of bosky dells

  The hermit Contemplation dwells,

  Whence, piercing heaven, with screened sight,

  He sees at noon the stars, whose light

  Shall glorify the coming night.”

    Whittier.

  “In the still hour when passion is at rest

  Gather up stores of wisdom in thy breast.”

    Wordsworth.

 

  Man’s essential being is inward, invisible, spiritual, and as such it derives

its life, strength, from within, not from without. Outward things are channels

through which its energies are expended, but for renewal it must fall back on

the inward silence.

  In so far as man strives to drown this silence in the noisy pleasures of the

senses, and endeavours to live in the conflicts of outward things, just so much

does he reap the experiences of pain and sorrow, which, becoming at last

intolerable, drive him back to the feet of inward Comforter, to the shrine of

the peaceful solitude within.

  As  the  body  cannot  thrive  on  empty  husks,  neither  can  the  spirit  be

sustained on empty pleasures. If not regularly fed the body loses its vitality,

and, pained with hunger and thirst, cries out for food and drink. It is the same

with the spirit: it must be regularly nourished in solitude on pure and holy

thoughts or it will lose its freshness and strength, and will at last cry out in its

painful and utter starvation. The yearning of an anguish-stricken soul for light

and consolation is the cry of a spirit that is perishing of hunger and thirst. All

pain and sorrow is spiritual starvation, and aspiration is the cry for food. It isthe Prodigal Son who, perishing of hunger, turns his face longingly towards

his Father’s home.

  The pure life of the spirit cannot be found; but is lost, in the life of the

senses. The lower desires are ever clamorous for more, and they afford no

rest. The outward world of pleasure, personal contact, and noisy activities is a

sphere of wear and tear which necessitates the counterbalancing effect of

solitude. Just as the body requires rest for the recuperation of its forces, so the

spirit  requires  solitude  for  the  renewal  of  its  energies.  Solitude  is  as

indispensable to man’s spiritual welfare as sleep is to his bodily well-being;

and pure thought, or meditation, which is evoked in solitude, is to the spirit

what activity is to the body. As the body breaks down when deprived of the

needful rest and sleep, so do the spirits of men break down, being deprived of

the  necessary  silence  and  solitude.  Man,  as  a  spiritual  being,  cannot  be

maintained  in  strength,  uprightness,  and  peace  except  he  periodically

withdraw  himself  from  the  outer  world  of  perishable  things  and  reach

inwardly towards the abiding and imperishable realities. The consolations of

the creeds are derived from the solitude which those creeds enforce. The

regular observance of the ceremonies of formal religion, attended, as they are,

with concentrated silence and freedom from worldly distractions, compels

men  to  do  unconsciously  that  which  they  have  not  yet  learned  to  do

consciously - namely, to concentrate the mind periodically on the inward

silence, and meditate, though very briefly, on high and holy things. The man

who has not learned to control and purify his mind in seasons of chosen

solitude, yet whose awakening aspirations grope for something higher and

nobler than he yet possesses, feels the necessity for the aid of ceremonial

religion; but he who has taken himself in hand with a view to self-conquest,

who withdraws into solitude in order to grapple with his lower nature, and

masterfully bend his mind in holy directions, requires no further aid from

book or priest or Church. The Church does not exist for the pleasure of the

saint but for the elevation of the sinner.

  In solitude a man gathers strength to meet the difficulties and temptations

of life, knowledge to understand and conquer them, and wisdom to transcend

them. As a building is preserved and sustained by virtue of the foundation

which  is  hidden  and  unobserved,  so  a  man  is  maintained  perpetually  in

strength and peace by virtue of his lonely hour of intense thought which noeye beholds.

  It is in solitude only that a man can be truly revealed to himself, that he

can come to understand his real nature, with all its powers and possibilities.

The voice of the spirit is not heard in the hubbub of the world and amid the

clamours of conflicting desires. There can be no spiritual growth without

solitude.

  There are those who shrink from too close a scrutiny of themselves, who

dread too complete a self revelation, and who fear that solitude which would

leave them alone with their own thoughts and call up before their mental

vision the wraith of their desires. And so they go where the din of pleasure is

loudest and where the reproving voice of Truth is drowned. But he who loves

Truth, who desires and seeks wisdom, will be much alone. He will seek the

fullest, clearest revelation of himself, will avoid the haunts of frivolity and

noise, and will go where the sweet, tender voice of the spirit of Truth can

speak within him and be heard.

  Men go after much company and seek out new excitements, but they are

not  acquainted  with  peace;  in  diverse  paths  of  pleasure  they  search  for

happiness but they do not come to rest; through diverse ways of laughter and

feverish delirium they wander after gladness and life, but their tears are many

and grievous, and they do not escape death.

  Drifting upon the ocean of life in search of selfish indulgences men are

caught in its storms and only after many tempests and much privation do they

fly to the Rock of Refuge which rests in the deep silence of their own being.

  While  a  man  is  absorbed  in  outward  activities  he  is  giving  out  his

energies and is becoming spiritually weaker, and in order to retain his moral

vigour he must resort to solitary meditation. So needful is this that he who

neglects it loses or does not attain the right knowledge of life; nor does he

comprehend  and  overcome  those  most  deeply  rooted  and  subtlest  of  sins

which appear like virtues deceiving the elect, and to which all but the truly

wise succumb.

  “True dignity abides with him alone,

  Who, in the silent hour of inward thought,

  Can still suspect and still revere himself

  In lowliness of heart.”  He  who  lives,  without  ceasing  in  outward  excitement  lives  most  in

disappointments and griefs. Where the sounds of pleasure are greatest heart-

emptiness is the keenest and deepest. He, also, whose whole life, even if not

one of lust for pleasure, is centered in outward works, who deals only with

the changing panorama of visible things, never falling back, in solitude, upon

the inner and invisible world of permanent being, such a man does not attain

knowledge and wisdom, but remains empty; he cannot aid the world, cannot

feed its aspirations, for he has no food to offer it, his spiritual store being

empty. But he who courts solitude in order to search for the truth of things,

who subdues his senses and makes quite his desires, such a man is daily

attaining knowledge and wisdom; he becomes filled with the spirit of truth;

he  can  aid  the  world,  for  his  spiritual  store  is  full,  and  is  kept  well

replenished.

  While a man is absorbed in the contemplation of inward realities he is

receiving  knowledge  and  power;  he  opens  himself,  like  a  flower,  to  the

universal light of Truth, and receives and drinks in its life-imparting rays; he

also goes to the eternal foundation of knowledge and quenches his thirst in its

inspiring waters. Such a man gains, in one hour of concentrated thought,

more essential knowledge than a whole year’s reading could impart. Being is

infinite and knowledge is illimitable and its source inexhaustible, and he who

draws upon the innermost depths of his being drinks from the spring of divine

wisdom which can never run dry, and quaffs the waters of immortality.

  It  is  this  habitual  association  with  the  deep  realities  of  being,  this

continual  drinking  in  of  the  Water  of  Life  at  its  perennial  source,  that

constitutes genius. The resources of genius are inexhaustible because they are

drawn from the original and universal source, and for the same reason the

works of genius are ever new and fresh. The more a genius gives out the

fuller he becomes. With the accomplishment of every work his mind extends

and expands, reaches out more vastly, and sees wider and ever wider ranges

of power. The genius is inspired. He has bridged the gulf between the finite

and  infinite.  He  needs  no  secondary  aids,  but  draws  from  that  universal

spring which is the source of every noble work. The difference between a

genius and an ordinary man is this - the one lives in inward realities, the other

in outward appearances; the one goes after pleasure, the other after wisdom;

the one relies on books, the other relies upon his own being. Book-learning isgood when its true place is understood, but is not the source of wisdom. The

source of wisdom is in life itself, and is comprehended by effort, practice,

and experience. Books give information but they cannot bestow knowledge;

they can stimulate but cannot accomplish - you must put forth effort, and

achieve for yourself. The man who relies entirely upon books, and does not

go to the silent resources within himself, is superficial, and becomes rapidly

exhausted. He is uninspired (though he may be extremely clever), for he soon

reaches  the  end  of  his  stock  of  information,  and  so  becomes  void  and

repetitious. His works lack the sweet spontaneity of life and ever-renewed

freshness of inspiration. Such a man has cut himself off from the infinite

supply and deals, not with life itself, but with dead or decaying appearances.

Information is limited; knowledge is boundless.

  The inspiration of genius and greatness is fostered, evolved, and finally

completed  in  solitude.  The  most  ordinary  man  who  conceives  a  noble

purpose, and, summoning all his energies and will, broods upon and ripens

his purpose in solitude will accomplish his object and become a genius. The

man who renounces the pleasure of the world, who avoids popularity and

fame,  and  who  works  in  obscurity  and  thinks  in  solitude  for  the

accomplishment of a lofty ideal for the human race, becomes a seer and a

prophet. He who silently sweetens his heart, who attunes his mind to that

which  is  pure  and  beautiful  and  good,  who  in  long  hours  of  lonely

contemplation strives to reach to the central an eternal heart of things, brings

himself in touch with the inaudible harmonies of being, opens himself for the

reception of the cosmic song, and becomes at last a singer and a poet.

  And so with all genius: it is the child of solitude - a very simple-hearted

child  -  wide-eyed  and  listening  and  beautiful,  yet  withal  to  the  noise-

enamoured world an incomprehensible mystery, of which it is only now and

then vouchsafed a glimpse from beyond the well-guarded Portals of Silence.

  “In man’s self arise

  August anticipations; symbols, types

  Of a dim splendour ever on before

  In that eternal circle life pursues.”

  St.Paul, the cruel persecutor and blind bigot, after spending three years

alone  in  the  desert,  comes  forth  a  loving  apostle  and  an  inspired  seer.

Gautama Siddhartha, the man of the world, after six years (in the forest) oflonely  struggle  with  his  passions  and  intense  meditation  upon  the  deep

mysteries  of  his  nature,  becomes  Buddha,  the  enlightened  one,  the

embodiment of calm, serene wisdom, to whom a heart-thirsty world turns to

refreshing  waters  of  immortality.  Lao-tze,  an  ordinary  citizen  filling  a

worldly office, in his search for knowledge courts solitude, and discovers

Tao, the Supreme Reason, by virtue of which he becomes a world-teacher.

Jesus, the unlettered carpenter, after many years of solitary communion upon

the mountains with the Unfailing Love and Wisdom, comes forth a blessed

saviour of mankind.

  Even after they had attained, and had scaled the lofty heights of divine

knowledge these Great Souls were much alone, and retired frequently for

brief seasons of solitude. The greatest man will fall from his moral height and

lose his influence if he neglects that renewal of power which can only be

obtained  in  solitude.  These  Masters  attained  their  power  by  consciously

harmonising  their  thoughts  and  lives  with  the  creative  energies  within

themselves,  and  by  transcending  individuality  and  sinking  their  petty

personal will in the Universal Will they became Masters of Creative Thought,

and stand as the loftiest instruments for the outworking of cosmic evolution.

  And this is not miraculous, it is a matter of law; it is not mysterious

except in so far as law is mysterious. Every man becomes a creative master in

so far as he subordinate himself to the universally good and true. Every poet,

painter, saint, and sage is the mouth-piece of the Eternal. The perfection of

the message varies with the measure of individual selflessness. In so far as

self intervenes the distinctness of the work and message becomes blurred.

Perfect selflessness is the acme of genius, the consummation of power.

  Such  self-abnegation  can  only  be  begun,  pursued,  and  completed  in

solitude. A man cannot gather together and concentrate his spiritual forces

while  he  is  engaged  in  spending  those  forces  in  worldly  activities,  and

although  after  power  is  attained  the  balance  of  forces  can  be  maintained

under all circumstances, even in the midst of the antagonistic throng, such

power is only secured after many years of frequent and habitual solitude.

  Man’s true Home is in the Great Silence - this is the source of all that is

real and abiding within him; his present nature, however, is dual, and outer

activities are necessary. Neither entire solitude nor entire action is the true

life in the world, but that is the true life which gathers, in solitude, strengthand wisdom to rightly perform the activities of life; and as a man returns to

his  home  in  the  evening,  weary  with  labour,  for  that  sweet  rest  and

refreshment which will prepare him for another day’s toil, so must he would

not break down in the labour of life come away form the noise and toil of the

world’s great workshop and rest for brief periods in his abiding Home in the

Silence. He who does this, spending some portion of each day in sacred and

purposeful solitude, will become strong and useful and blessed.

    Solitude is for the strong, or for those who are ready to become strong.

When a man is becoming great, he becomes solitary. He goes in solitude to

seek, and that which he seeks, he finds, for there is a Way to all knowledge,

all wisdom, all truth, all power. And the Way is for ever open, but it lies

through soundless solitudes and the unexplored silences of man’s being.                          12. STANDING ALONE

  “By all means use to be alone,

  Salute thyself; see what thy soul doth wear.”

    George Herbert.

 

  He that has light within his own clear breast

  My sit in the center and enjoy bright day.”

  Milton.

 

  In the life of blessedness self-reliance is of the utmost importance. If there

is no peace there must be strength; if there is to be security there must be

stability; if there is to be lasting joy there must be no leaning upon things

which at any moment may be snatched away for ever.

  A man does not commence to truly live until he finds an immovable

center within himself on which to stand, by which to regulate his life, and

from which to draw his peace. If he trusts to that which fluctuates he also will

fluctuate; if he leans upon that which may be withdrawn he will fall and be

bruised; if he looks for satisfaction in perishable accumulations he will starve

for happiness in the midst of plenty.

  Let a man learn to stand alone, looking to no one for support; expecting

no favours, craving no personal advantages; not begging, nor complaining,

not craving, nor regretting, but relying upon the truth within himself, deriving

his satisfaction and comfort from the integrity of his own heart.

  If a man can find no peace within himself where shall he find it? If he

dreads to be alone with himself what steadfastness shall he find in company?

If he can find no joy in communion with his own thoughts how shall he

escape misery in his contact with others? The man who has yet found nothing

within himself upon which to stand will nowhere find a place of constant rest.

  Men everywhere are deluded by the superstition that their happiness rests

with  other  people  and  with  outward  things,  and,  as  a  result,  they  live  in

continual disappointments, regrets, and lamentations. The man who does not

look for happiness to any others or to external things, but finds within himself

its  inexhaustible  source,  will  be  self-contained  and  serene  under  allcircumstances, and will never become the helpless victim of misery and grief.

The man who looks to others for support, who measures his happiness by the

conduct of others and not by his own, who depends upon their co-operation

for his peace of mind - such a man has no spiritual foothold, his mind is

tossed hither and thither with the continual changes going on around him, and

he lives in that ceaseless ebb and flow of the spirits which is wretchedness

and unrest. He is a spiritual cripple, and has yet to learn how to maintain his

mental center of gravity, and so go without the aid of crutches.

  As a child learns to walk in order to go about from place to place of itself

strong and unaided, so should a man learn to stand alone, to judge and think

and act for himself, and to choose, in the strength of his own mind, the oath-

way which he shall walk.

  Without  is  change  and  decay  and  insecurity,  within  is  all  surety  and

blessedness. The soul is sufficient of itself. Where the need is there is the

abundant supply. Your eternal dwelling-place is within; go there and take

possession of your mansion; there you are a king, elsewhere you are a vassal.

Be  contended  that  others  shall  manage  or  mismanage  their  own  little

kingdom, and see to it that you reign strongly over your own. Your entire

well-being  and  the  well-being  of  the  whole  world  lies  there.  You  have  a

conscience, follow it; you have a mind, clarify it; you have a judgment, use

and  improve  it;  you  have  a  will,  employ  and  strengthen  it;  you  have

knowledge, increase it; there is a light within your soul, watch it, tend it,

encourage it, shield it from the winds of passion, and help it to burn with a

steadier  and  ever  steadier  radiance.  Leave  the  world  and  come  back  to

yourself. Think as a man, act as a man, live as a man. Be rich in yourself, be

complete in yourself. Find the abiding center within you and obey it. The

earth is maintaining its orbit by its obedience to its center the sun. Obey the

center of light that is within you; let others call it darkness if they will. You

are responsible for yourself, are accountable to yourself, therefore rely upon

yourself. If you fear yourself who will place confidence in you? If you are

untrue to yourself where shall you find the sweet satisfaction of Truth?

  The  great  man  stands  alone  in  the  simple  dignity  of  independent

manhood; he pursues his own path fearlessly, and does not apologise or “beg

leave.” Criticism and applause are no more to him than the dust upon his

coat, of which he shakes himself free. He is  not guided by the changingopinions of men but guides himself by the light of his own mind. Other men

barter away their manhood for messes of flattery or fashion.

  Until  you  can  stand  alone,  looking  for  guidance  neither  to  spirits  nor

mortals, gods nor men, but guiding yourself by the light of the truth within

you,  you  are  not  unfettered  and  free,  not  altogether  blessed.  But  do  not

mistake  pride  for  self-reliance.  To  attempt  to  stand  upon  the  crumbling

foundation of pride is to be already fallen. No man depends upon others more

than the proud man. He drinks in their approbation and resents their censure.

He mistakes flattery for sound judgment, and is most easily hurt or pleased

by the opinions of others. His happiness is entirely in the hands of others. But

the self-reliant man stands, not upon personal pride, but on an abiding law,

principle, ideal, reality within himself. Upon this he poises himself, refusing

to be swept from his strong foothold either by the waves of passion within or

the storms of opinion without, but should he at any time lose his balance he

quickly regains himself, and is fully restored. His happiness is entirely in his

own hands.

  Find your center of balance and succeed in standing alone, and, whatever

your work in life may be, you will succeed; you will accomplish what you set

your mind upon, for the truly self-reliant man is the invincible man. But

though you do not rely upon others, learn of them. Never cease to increase in

knowledge, and be ever ready to receive that which is good and useful. You

can  not  have  too  much  humility;  the  most  self-reliant  men  are  the  most

humble. “No aristocrat, no prince born to the purple, can begin to compare

with the self-respect of the saint. Why is he lowly, but that he knows that he

can well afford it, resting on the largeness of God in him.” Learn of all men,

and especially of the masters of Truth, but do not lose your hold upon the

truth that the ultimate guidance is in yourself. A master can say: “Here is the

path,” but he can neither compel you to walk it nor walk it for you. You must

put forth your own efforts, must achieve by your own strength, must make his

truth your truth by your own unaided exertions; you must implicitly trust

yourself.

  “This thing is God - to be Man with thy might,

  To grow great in the strength of thy spirit,

  And live out thy life as the light.”

  You are to be master of yourself, lord over yourself, not fawning andimitating,  but  doing  your  work  as  a  living,  vital  portion  of  the  universe;

giving  love  but  not  expecting  it;  giving  sympathy  but  not  craving  for  it;

giving aid but not depending upon it. If men should censure your work, heed

them not. It sufficeth that your work be true: rest you in this sufficiency. Do

not ask: “Will my work please?” but: “Is it real?” If your work be true the

criticism of men cannot touch it; if it be false their disapproval will not slay it

quicker than it will die of itself. The words and acts of Truth cannot pass

away  until  their  work  is  fully  accomplished;  the  words  and  acts  of  error

cannot remain, for they have no work to do. Criticism and resentment are

alike superfluous.

  Free yourself from the self-imposed tyranny of slavish dependence, and

stand alone, not as an isolated unit, but as a sympathetic portion of the whole.

Find the Joy that results from well -earned freedom, the peace that flows from

wise self-possession, the blessedness that inheres in native strength.

  “Honour to him who, self-complete, if lone,

  Carves to the grave one pathway all his own,

  And heeding naught that men may think or say,

  Asks but his soul if doubtful of the way.”        13. UNDERSTANDING THE SIMPLE LAWS


                                    OF LIFE

  “Watch narrowly

  The demonstration of a truth, its birth,

  And you trace back the effluence to its spring

  And source within us.”

    Browning.

  “More is the treasure of law than gems;

  Sweeter than comb its sweetness. Its delights,

    Delightful past compare.”

  The Light of Asia.

 

    WALKING those byways which I have so far pointed out, resting in their

beauty  and  drinking  in  their  blessedness,  the  pilgrim  along  life’s  broad

highway will in due time come to one wherein his last burden will fall from

him, where all his weariness will pass away, where he will drink of light-

hearted liberty, and rest in perpetual peace. And this most blessed of spiritual

byways,  the  richest  source  of  strength  and  comfort,  I  call The  Right

Understanding of the Simple Laws of Life. He who comes to it leaves

behind him all lack and longing, all doubt and perplexity, all sorrow and

uncertainty. He lives in the fulness of satisfaction, in light and knowledge, in

gladness and surety. He who comprehends the utter simplicity of life, who

obeys its laws and does not step aside into the dark paths and complex mazes

of selfish desire, stands where no harm can reach him, where no enemy can

lay him low - and he doubts, desires, and sorrows no more. Doubt ends where

reality begins; painful desire ceases where the fulness of joy is perpetual and

complete; and when the Unfailing and Eternal Good is realised what room is

there for sorrow?

    Human life when rightly lived is simple with a beautiful simplicity, but it

is not rightly lived while it is bound to a complexity of lusts, desires, and

wants- these are not the real life but the burning fever and painful disease

which  originate  in  an  unenlightened  condition  of  mind.  The  curtailing  ofone’s  desires  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom;  their  entire  mastery  its

consummation.  This  is  so  because  life  is  bounded  by  law,  and,  being

inseparable from law, life has no need that is not already supplied. Now lust,

or desire, is not need, but a rebellious superfluity, and as such it leads to

deprivation and misery. The prodigal son, while in his father’s house, not

only  had  all  that  he  required,  but  was  surrounded  by  a  superabundance.

Desire was not necessary, because all things were at hand; but when desire

entered his heart he “went into a far country,” and “began to be in want,” and

it was only when he became reduced to the utmost extremity of starvation

that  he  turned  with  longing  towards  his  father’s  home.  This  parable  is

symbolical of the evolution of the individual and the race. Man has come into

such  a  complexity  of  cravings  that  he  lives  in  continual  discontent,

dissatisfaction,  want,  and  pain;  and  his  only  cure  lies  in  a  return  to  the

Father’s Home - that is, to actual living or being as distinguished from

desiring. But a man does not do this until he is reduced to the last extremity

of spiritual starvation; he has then reaped the experience of pain and sorrow

as the result of desire, and looks back with longing towards the true life of

peace and plenty; and so he turns round, and begins his toilsome journey

back towards his Home, towards that rich life of simple being wherein is

emancipation from the thraldom and fever and hunger of desire, and this

longing for the true life, for Truth, Reality, should not be confounded with

desire: it is aspiration. Desire is the craving for possession: aspiration is

the  hunger  of  the  heart  for  peace.  The  craving  for  things  leads  ever

farther and farther from peace, and not only ends in deprivation but is, in

itself, a state of perpetual want. Until it comes to an end rest, satisfaction, is

an impossibility. The hunger for things can never be satisfied, but the hunger

for peace can and the satisfaction of peace is found, is fully possessed, when

all selfish desire is abandoned. Then there is fulness of joy, abounding plenty,

and rich and complete blessedness. In this supremely blessed state life is

comprehended in its perfect symmetry and simplicity and the acme of power

and usefulness is attained. Then even the hunger for peace ceases, for peace

becomes  the  normal  condition,  is  fully  possessed,  constant  and  never-

varying. Men, immersed in desire, ignorantly imagine that the conquest of

desire, leads to inactivity, loss of power, and lifelessness. Instead, it leads to

highly concentrated activity, to the full employment of power, and to a life so

rich, so glorious, and so abundantly blessed as to be incomprehensible tothose who hunger for pleasures and possessions. Of this life only can it be

said:

  “Here are no sounds of discord - no profane

  Or senseless gossip of unworthy things-

  Only the songs of chisels and of pens,

  Of busy brushes, and ecstatic strains

  Of souls surcharged with music most divine

  Here is no idle sorrow, no poor grief

  For any day or object left behind -

  For time is counted precious, and herein

  Is such complete abandonment of Self

  That tears turn into rainbows, and enhance

  The beauty of the land where all is fair.”

  When a man is rescued from selfish desire his mind is unencumbered, and

he is free to work for humanity. No longer racing after those gratifications

which leave him hungry still, all his powers are at his immediate command.

Seeking no rewards he can concentrate all his energies upon the faultless

completion  of  his  duties,  and  so  accomplish  all  things  and  fulfill  all

righteousness.

  The fully enlightened and fully blessed man is not prompted to action be

desire but works fromknowledge. The man of desire needs the promise of

reward to urge him to action. He is as a child working for the possession of a

toy. But the man of knowledge, living in the fulness of life and power, can at

any moment bring his energies into requisition for the accomplishment of that

which is necessary. He is, spiritually, a full-grown man; for him all rewards

have ceased; to him all occurrences are good; he lives always in complete

satisfaction. Such a man has attained to life, and his delight (and it is a sweet,

perpetual, and never-failing delight) is in obedience to the simple demands of

exact and never-failing law.

  But this life of supreme blessedness is an end, and the pilgrim who is

striving  towards  it,  the  prodigal  returning  to  it,  must  travel  thither,  and

employ means to get there. He must pass through the country of his animal

desires,  disentangling  himself  from  their  intricacies,  simplifying  them,

overcoming them; this is the way, and he has no enemies but what springwithin himself. At first the way seems hard because, blinded by desire, he

does not perceive the simple structure of life, and its laws are hidden from

him;  but  as  he  becomes  more  simple  in  his  mind  the  direct  laws  of  life

become unfolded to his spiritual perception, and at once the point is reached

where these laws begin to be understood and obeyed; then the way becomes

plain and easy; there is no more uncertainty and darkness, but all is seen in

the clear light of knowledge.

  It will help to accelerate the progress of the searcher for the true and

blessed life if we now turn to a consideration of some of these simple laws

which are rigidly mathematical in their operations.

  “The elementary laws never apologise.”

  All life is one, though it has a diversity of manifestations; all law is one,

but it is applicable and operative in a variety of ways. There is not one law

for matter and another for mind, not one for the material and visible and

another for the spiritual and invisible; there is the same law throughout. There

is not one kind of logic for the world and another for the spirit, but the same

logic  is  applicable  to  both.  Men  faithfully,  and  with  unerring  worldly

wisdom, observe certain laws or rules of action in material things, knowing

that to ignore or disobey them would be great folly on their part, ending in

disaster for themselves and confusion for society and the state, but they err in

supposing and believing that the same rules do not apply in spiritual things,

and thereby suffer for their ignorance and disobedience.

  It is a law in worldly things that a man shall support himself, that he shall

earn his living, and that “He that will not work, neither shall he eat.” Men

observe  this  law,  recognising  its  justice  and  goodness,  and  so  earn  the

necessary material sustenance. But in spiritual things men, broadly speaking,

deny  and  ignore  the  operation  of  this  law.  They  think  that,  while  it  is

absolutely just that a man should earn his material bread, and that the man

who shirks this law should wander in rags and want, it is right that they

should beg for their spiritual bread, think it to be just that they should receive

all spiritual blessings without either deserving or attempting to earn them.

The result is that most men wander in spiritual beggary and want - that is, in

suffering and sorrow - deprived of spiritual sustenance, of joy and knowledge

and peace.

  If you are in need of any worldly thing - food, clothing, furniture, or other