any rate, until they strike a nobler attitude, wretched failures. I can bring to

my mind many such men that I have known. How can it be otherwise? How

can a man who has no faith in himself ever win the confidence of others, or

accomplish anything worthy? Moreover such a man has not, cannot possibly

have, any faith in human nature; despising himself, he despises all; and as a

result, by the unerring law of cause and effect, all men despise him. Yet it is a

strange fact that the men who maintain this faith-destroying attitude of mind

invariably profess to have the greatest faith in God; yea, look upon it as an

infallible witness to their superior spiritual faith. But I ask this question, Does

not true faith, like true charity, begin at home? In the growth of the soul faith

in one’s self comes first, next faith in human nature, and finally faith in God.

That  faith  which  professes  to  have  the  latter  to  the  exclusion  of  the  two

former is false faith, the outcome of fake humility.

  Another kind of false humility is that of personal  abasement to an

individual  or  to  established  authority.  This  is  humility  materialised  or

subverted. It is the worship of Dagon, the bowing of the knee to Baal, the

slavish  adoration  of  the  Golden  Calf.  No  man  can  persist  in  it  without

undermining his character, and ultimately dissipating his spiritual and mental

energies.  Humility  to  man  or  to  any  temporal  authority  is  degrading  and

slavish; humility to the Most High is grandly beautiful.

  Spiritual  humility  is  closely  allied  to  faith,  and  the  more  there  is  of

humility the more there is of faith. It is the key-note of all real greatness. In

proof of this I have only to refer to the great sages, saints, and reformers of

all time. The greatest of them are those who had the greatest share of spiritual

humility.  True  humility,  as  distinguished  from  false,  has  a  strengthening

power, an upbuilding force. It inspires and invigorates the soul, spurring is to

greater and ever greater endeavour.

  Of what, then, does this humility consist? Is it the bending of the knee to

ask  personal  favours  of  Deity?  Is  it  the  blind  petitioning  of  God  to

accomplish  for  us  our  petty  and  narrow  designs?  Nay,  these  are  its

counterfeits. True humility is far above and. beyond all this. It is the deepest

and holiest aspiration of the human heart, where deep within, hidden from all

sacrilegious gaze, it works, a silent mighty power, purifying, transforming,

the man of flesh and self; entering its solitary grandeur, the alienated soul

returns to the foot-stool of its God, and bathes, in blissful rapture, in the lightof His all-embracing Love. It is a state that can only be entered into by rising

above one’s lower self. It is in fact the submergence of the self in the non-

self; the submission of passion and intellect to the Supreme; it is the attitude

of a human soul adoring its highest conception.

  Such humility takes its possessor above all that is mean and poor in his

nature, into the very presence of God, making him calm, strong, noble, self-

reliant, and Godlike. It is the Wine of Life to all aspiring souls. The soul that

has not felt its power is dead.

  It may sound like a paradox, but it is nevertheless true, that the more a

man has of humility the more he has of independence. But the seeming

paradox will be made clear if we think for a moment of the lives of such

teachers of humility as Jesus, Buddha, Confucius, Socrates, Jacob Boehme,

George  Fox,  and  indeed  of  all  the  great  religious  reformers.  These  men

walked erect, because, yielding themselves up to the simplicity’ of humility,

they walked with God.

  The humility that causes a man to go, metaphorically speaking, on all

fours is spurious, and is as debasing and destructive as the real humility is

elevating and strengthening. Why should we go amongst our fellows like

cringing, fearful beasts, calling ourselves miserable sinners? Shall we ever

rise above sin by so doing? Is it possible to rise by ceaselessly contemplating

our  absolute  unworthiness?  No,  we  can  only  rise  by  continually

contemplating the Highest. There may be much that is unworthy in a man’s

heart, but there is also a sacredness, a dignity, a divinity about it; let us dwell

upon that. Let us continually contemplate the goodness, the purity, and the

essential beauty of human nature, Let us ceaselessly search for the Divinity in

our own souls, and, finding it through the door of humility, we shall then

recognise  the  invisible  God  in  all  men.  By  so  doing,  we  rise  above  the

binding limitations of our selfish desires, and enter the larger, healthier, holier

life of Love.                  10. SPIRITUAL STRENGTH


  All things are holy to the holy mind,

  All uses are legitimate and pure,

  All occupations blest and sanctified,

  And every day a Sabbath.

  A clear and firm head must precede and accompany a clean and gentle

heart. Without the first the second is impossible, for the qualities of purity

and gentleness can only be reached through a clear perception of right and

wrong, and by the exercise of an irresistible will. The strength of a powerful

animal, or of that animal force in man which enables him to gain the victory

over others by attack and resistance, is weakness compared with that quiet,

patient, invincible will by which a man overcomes himself, and tames to

obedience, and trains to the service of holy purposes, the savage passions of

his nature.

  Every dog can bark and fight, and every foolish man can rail, abuse,

fence with hard words, and give way to fits of bad temper; these things are

easy and natural to him, and require no effort and no strength. But the wise

man  puts  away  all  such  follies,  and  trains  himself  in  self-control—trains

himself to act  unerringly from fixed principles, and not from the fleeting

impulses of an unstable nature.

  He who succeeds in so training himself is able to train others, in a small

degree by precept, but largely and chiefly by practice or example, for it is

pre-eminently  the  prerogative  of  the  wise  to  teach  by  their  actions.  The

mockeries  of  Herod,  the  accusations  of  tie  people,  and  the  fanatical

persecutions  of  the  priests  all  failed  to  draw  from  Jesus  the  word  of

complaint, bitterness, or self-defence. Such sublime acts of silence and self-

control continue to reach, for ages, both individuals and nations, with far

greater power and effect than all the words and books uttered and written by

the world’s vast army of priests and learned commentators.

  To retaliate and fight belongs to the animal in man as it belongs to the

beast of the forest; but to refuse to be swayed from the practice of a divineprinciple by any external pressure—to stand firm and unalterable in goodness

and truth alike amid blame and praise—this belongs to the divine in man and

in the universe.

  To alter one’s conduct in order to please others, or to avoid their censure

or misunderstanding can never lead to spiritual strength.

  That divine kindness which always accompanies spiritual understanding

and strength is something very different from merely saying pleasant words

—for pleasant words are not always true words—but consist in doing what

is best for the eternal welfare of the other person or persons.

  The weak father, who is unfit to train children only considers how he can

escape  trouble  with  his  children,  and  so  he  slurs  over  their  acts  of

disobedience and selfishness, and tries to please them. But the strong father,

who considers the future character and welfare of his children, knows how

and when to administer a severe reproof; fully understanding that the few

minutes’  pain  caused  by  his  rebuke  may  save  his  child  from  years  of

suffering as a result of loose living which is fostered by parental neglect. The

strong, kind, unselfish father, whose care is for his children’s good, and not

for his own immediate comfort, knows not only how to be tender in affection,

but tender  in  discipline, knows how to stretch out the strong and (to the

child at the time) severe arm of restraint to save his little ones when they

would ignorantly wander away in wrong paths.

  So  the  man  of  spiritual  strength  cannot  be  merely  a  weak  framer  of

smooth words, but a doer of right actions, an utterer of words that are vital

and true, and, therefore, eternally kind.

  The spiritually weak man shrinks from right when it is brought (as by its

nature it must be brought) in opposition to his desires, and he embraces sin

because  it  is  pleasant.  The  spiritually  strong  man  shrinks  from  sin,  more

especially when it is presented to him in a pleasant garb, and embraces right,

even though by so doing he will bring upon himself the odium of those who

are ignorant of divine principles and their beneficent application.

  The man of spiritual understanding is as unbending as a bar of steel where

right is concerned, knowing that right alone is good; he is as unresisting as

water where self is concerned, knowing that self alone is evil. Acting from

imperishable principles and not from the fleeting desires of self, his actions

partake of the imperishable nature of the principles from which they spring,and  continue  to  afford  instruction  and  inspiration  through  unnumbered

generations.

  It is always the portion of one who so acts to be misunderstood. The

majority live in their desires and impulses, following them blindly as they are

brought into operation by external stimuli, and do not understand what is

meant by acting dispassionately from right and fixed principles, with entire

freedom from self-interest. Such will necessarily misunderstand and misjudge

the right-doer, regarding him as cold and cruel in his unbending adherence to

right,  or  as  weak,  cowardly  in  his  quiet  refusal  to  passionately  defend

himself. He will, therefore, "be accused of many things", but this will not

cause him any suffering, nor will he be troubled or disturbed thereby, for the

truth which he practises is a source of perpetual joy, and he will be at rest in

the knowledge that there are those who will understand and follow,’ that he is

working for the ultimate good even of his accusers; and that by manifesting

the truth in his daily actions, he is in the company of those divinely strong

ones who are leading the world into ways of quietness and peace.

  The end.                        BOOK SIXTEEN


              OUT FROM THE HEART.              1. THE HEART AND THE LIFE


  AS THE HEART, SO IS THE LIFE. The within IS ceaselessly becoming

the without. Nothing remains unrevealed. That which is hidden is but for a

time; it ripens and comes forth at last. Seed, tree, blossom, and fruit are the

fourfold order of the universe. From the state of a man’s heart proceed the

conditions of his life. His thoughts blossom into deeds; and his deeds bear the

fruitage of character and destiny.

  Life is ever unfolding from within, and revealing itself to the light, and

thoughts engendered in the heart at last reveal themselves in words, actions,

and things accomplished.

  As the fountain from the hidden spring, so flows forth a man’s life from

the secret recesses of his heart. All that he is and does is generated there. All

that he will be and do will take its rise there.

    Sorrow and happiness, suffering and enjoyment, fear and hope, hatred

and love, ignorance and enlightenment, are nowhere but in the heart. They

are solely mental conditions.

  Man is the keeper of his heart; the watcher of his mind; the solitary guard

of his citadel of life. As such, he can be diligent or negligent. He can keep his

heart more and more carefully. He can more strenuously watch and purify his

mind; and he can guard against the thinking of unrighteous thoughts—this is

the way of enlightenment and bliss.

  On  the  other  hand,  he  can  live  loosely  and  carelessly,  neglecting  the

supreme task of rightfully ordering his life—this is the way of self-delusion

and suffering.

  Let a man realize that life in its totality proceeds from the mind, and lo,

the way of blessedness is opened up to him! For he will then discover that he

possesses the power to rule his mind, and to fashion it in accordance with his

Ideal. So will he elect to strongly and steadfastly walk those pathways of

thought and action which are altogether excellent. To him, life will become

beautiful  and  sacred;  and  sooner  or  later,  he  will  put  to  flight  all  evil,

confusion,  and  suffering.  For  it  is  impossible  for  a  man  to  fall  short  of

liberation, enlightenment, and peace, who guards with unwearying diligencethe gateway of his heart.          2. THE NATURE AND POWER OF MIND


  MIND  IS  THE  ARBITER  of  life.  It  is  the  creator  and  shaper  of

conditions, and the recipient of its own results. It contains within itself both

the power to create illusion and to perceive reality. Mind is the infallible

weaver of destiny. Thought is the thread, good and evil deeds are the "warp

and  woof"  or  foundation,  and  the  web,  woven  upon  the  loom  of  life,  is

character. Mind clothes itself in garments of its own making.

  Man,  as  a  mental  being,  possesses  all  the  powers  of  mind,  and  is

furnished  with  unlimited  choice.  He  learns  by  experience,  and  he  can

accelerate or retard his experience. He is not arbitrarily bound at any point,

but he has bound himself at many points, and having bound himself he can,

when he chooses, liberate himself.

  He can become bestial or pure, ignorant or noble, foolish or wise, just as

he chooses. He can, by reoccurring practice, form habits, and he can, by

renewed effort, break them off. He can surround himself with illusions until

Truth  is  completely  lost,  and  he  can  destroy  each  of  those  illusions  until

Truth  is  entirely  recovered.  His  possibilities  are  endless;  his  freedom  is

complete.

  It is the nature of the mind to create its own conditions, and to choose the

states in which it shall dwell. It also has the power to alter any condition, to

abandon any state. This it is continually doing as it gathers knowledge of

state after state by repeated choice and exhaustive experience.

  Inward processes of thought make up the sum of character and life. Man

can modify and alter these processes by bringing will and effort to bear upon

them. The bonds of habit, impotence, and sin are self-made, and can only be

destroyed by one’s self. They exist nowhere but in one’s mind, and although

they are directly related to outward things, they have no real existence in

those things.

  The outer is moulded and animated by the inner, and never the inner by

the outer. Temptation does not arise in the outer object, but in the lust of the

mind for that object. Nor do sorrow and suffering belong by nature to the

external things and happenings of life, but in an undisciplined attitude of

mind toward those things and happenings.

  The mind that is disciplined by Purity and fortified by Wisdom avoids allthose lusts and desires which are inseparately bound up with affliction, and so

arrives at enlightenment and peace.

  To  condemn  others  as  evil,  and  to  curse  at  outside  conditions  as  the

source of evil, increases and does not lessen, the world’s suffering and unrest.

The outer is but the shadow and effect of the inner, and when the heart is pure

all outward things are pure.

  All growth and life is from within outward; all decay and death is from

without  inward.  This  is  the  universal  law.  All  evolution  proceeds  from

within.  All  adjustment  must  take  place  within.  He  who  ceases  to  strive

against others, and employs his powers in the transformation, regeneration,

and  development  of  his  own  mind,  conserves  his  energies  and  preserves

himself. And as he succeeds in harmonizing his own mind, he leads others by

consideration and charity into a like blessed state.

  The way of enlightenment and peace is not gained by assuming authority

and guidance over other minds, but by exercising a lawful authority over

one’s own mind, and by guiding one’s self in pathways of steadfast and lofty

virtue.

  A man’s life proceeds from his heart and his mind. He has compounded

that mind by his own thoughts and deeds. It is within his power to refashion

that mind by his choice of thought. In this manner he can transform his life.

Let us see how this is to be done.                      3. FORMATION OF HABIT


  EVERY ESTABLISHED mental condition is an acquired habit, and it has

become  such  by  continuous  repetition  of  thought.  Despondency  and

cheerfulness, anger and calmness, covetousness and generosity—indeed, all

states  of  mind—are  habits  built  up  by  choice,  until  they  have  become

automatic. A thought constantly repeated at last becomes a fixed habit of the

mind, and from such habits proceeds one’s life.

  It is in the nature of the mind to acquire knowledge by the repetition of its

experiences. A thought which is very difficult, at first, to hold and dwell

upon, at last becomes, by constantly being held in the mind, a natural and

habitual practice.

  A boy, when commencing to learn a trade, cannot even handle his tools

right, much less use them correctly, but after long repetition and practice, he

plies them with perfect ease and consummate skill. Likewise, a state of mind,

at first apparently incapable of realization, is, by perseverance and practice, at

last  acquired  and  built  into  the  character  as  a  natural  and  spontaneous

condition.

  In this power of the mind to form and reform its habits, its conditions, is

contained the basis of a man’s salvation. It is the open door to perfect liberty

by the mastery of self. For as a man has the power to form harmful habits, so

he equally has the same power to create habits that are essentially good. And

here we come to a point which needs some clarifying, and which calls for

deep and earnest thought on the part of my reader.

  It is commonly said to be easier to do wrong than right, to sin than to be

holy. Such a condition has come to be regarded, almost universally, as a self-

evident truth.

  No less a teacher than the Buddha has said: "Bad deeds, and deeds hurtful

to ourselves, are easy to do; what is beneficial and good, that is very difficult

to do."

  And with regards to humanity generally, this is true, but it is only true as

a passing experience, a fleeting factor in human evolution. It is not a fixed

condition of things. It is not the nature of an eternal truth. It is easier for men

to do wrong than right, because of the prevalence of ignorance, because the

true nature of things, and the essence and meaning of life, are not understood.  When a child is learning to write, it is extremely easy to hold the pen

wrongly, and to form his letters incorrectly, but it is painfully difficult to hold

the pen and to write properly. This is because of the child’s ignorance of the

art of writing, which can only be dispelled by persistent effort and practice,

until,  at  last,  it  becomes  natural  and  easy  to  hold  the  pen  correctly,  and

difficult, as well as altogether unnecessary, to do the wrong thing.

  It is the same in the vital things of mind and life. To think and do rightly

requires much practice and renewed effort. But the time comes at last when it

becomes habitual and easy to think and do rightly, and difficult, as it is then

seen to be altogether unnecessary, to do that which is wrong.

  Just as an artisan becomes, by practice, accomplished in his craft, so you

can become, by practice, accomplished in goodness. It is entirely a matter of

forming new habits of thought. And he to whom right thoughts have become

easy and natural, and wrong thoughts and acts difficult to do, has attained to

the highest virtue, to pure spiritual knowledge.

  It  is  easy  and  natural  for  men  to  sin  because  they  have  formed  by

incessant repetition, harmful and unenlightened habits of thought. It is very

difficult for the thief to refrain from stealing when the opportunity occurs,

because he has lived so long in covetous and greedy thoughts.

  But such difficulty does not exist for the honest man who has lived so

long with upright and honest thoughts. He has thereby become so enlightened

as to the wrong, folly, and fruitlessness of theft, that even the remotest idea of

stealing does not enter his mind. The sin of theft is a very extreme one, and I

have introduced it in order to more clearly illustrate the force and formation

of habit. But all sins and virtues are formed in the same way.

  Anger  and  impatience  are  natural  and  easy  to  thousands  of  people,

because they are constantly repeating angry and impatient thoughts and acts.

And  with  each  repetition  the  habit  is  more  firmly  established  and  more

deeply rooted.

    Calmness and patience can become habitual in the same way—by first

grasping through effort, a calm and patient thought, and then continuously

thinking it, and living in it, until "use becomes second nature," and anger and

impatience pass away forever. It is in this manner that every wrong thought

may be expelled from the mind; that every untrue act may be destroyed; that

every sin may be overcome.                        4. DOING AND KNOWING


  LET A MAN REALIZE that his life, in its totality, proceeds from his

mind. Let him realize that the mind is a combination of habits which he can,

by patient effort, modify to any extent, and over which he can thus gain

complete ascendancy, mastery, and control. At once, he will have obtained

possession  of  the  key  which  shall  open  the  door  to  his  complete

emancipation.

  But freedom from the ills of life (which are the ills of one’s mind) is a

matter  of  steady  growth  from  within,  and  not  a  sudden  acquisition  from

without.  Hourly  and  daily  must  the  mind  be  trained  to  think  stainless

thoughts,  and  adapt  right  and  dispassionate  attitudes  under  those

circumstances in which it is prone to fall into wrong and passion. Like the

patient sculptor upon his marble, the aspirant to the Right Life must gradually

work upon the crude material of his mind until he has wrought out of it the

Ideal of his holiest dreams.

  In working toward such supreme accomplishment, it is necessary to begin

at the lowest and easiest steps, and proceed by natural, progressive stages to

the higher and more difficult. This law of growth, progress, evolution, and

unfoldment,  by  gradual  and  ever  ascending  stages,  is  absolute  in  every

department of life, and in every human accomplishment. Where it is ignored,

total failure will result.

  In acquiring education, in learning a trade, or in pursuing a business, this

law is fully recognized and minutely obeyed by all. But in acquiring Virtue,

in learning Truth, and in pursuing the right conduct and knowledge of life, it

is unrecognized and disobeyed by nearly all. Hence Virtue, Truth, and the

Perfect Life remain unpracticed, unacquired, and unknown.

  It  is  a  common  error  to  suppose  that  the  Higher  Life  is  a  matter  of

reading, and the adoption of theological or metaphysical hypotheses, and that

Spiritual Principles can be understood by this method. The Higher Life is

higher  living  in  thought,  word,  and  deed,  and  the  knowledge  of  those

Spiritual Principles which are imminent in man and in the universe can only

be acquired after long discipline in the pursuit and practice of Virtue.

  The lesser must be thoroughly grasped and understood before the greater

can be known. Practice always precedes real knowledge.  The  schoolmaster  never  attempts  to  teach  his  pupils  the  abstract

principles  of  mathematics  at  the  start.  He  knows  that  such  a  method  of

teaching would be in vain, and learning impossible. He first places before

them a simple sum, and, having explained it, leaves them to do it. When, after

repeated failures and ever renewed effort, they have succeeded in doing it

correctly,  a  more  difficult  task  is  set  before  them,  and  then  another  and

another.  It  is  not  until  the  pupils  have,  through  many  years  of  diligent

application, mastered all the lessons in arithmetic, that he attempts to unfold

to them the underlying mathematical principles.

  In learning a trade, say that of a mechanic, a boy is not at first taught the

principles of mechanics, but a simple tool is put in his hand and he is told

how rightly to use it. He is then left to do it by effort and practice. As he

succeeds in plying his tools correctly, more and more difficult tasks are set

before him, until after several years of successful practice, he is prepared to

study and grasp the principles of mechanics.

  In a properly governed household, the child is first taught to be obedient,

and to conduct himself properly under all circumstances. The child is not

even told why he must do this, but is commanded to do it. Only after he has

far succeeded in doing what is right and proper, is he told why he should do

it. No father would attempt to teach his child the principles of ethics before

exacting from him the practice of family duty and social virtue.

  Thus practice ever precedes knowledge even in the ordinary things of the

world, and in spiritual things, in the living of the Higher Life, this law is rigid

in its demands.

  Virtue can only be known by doing, and the knowledge of Truth can only

be arrived at by perfecting oneself in the practice of Virtue. To be complete

in the practice and acquisition of Virtue is to be complete in the knowledge of

Truth.

  Truth can only be arrived at by daily and hourly doing the lessons of

Virtue, beginning with the simplest, and passing on to the more difficult. A

child  patiently  and  obediently  learns  his  lessons  at  school  by  constantly

practicing,  ever  exerting  himself  until  all  failures  and  difficulties  are

surmounted.  Likewise  does  the  child  of  Truth,  undaunted  by  failure,  and

made stronger by difficulties, apply himself to right-doing in thought and

action. As he succeeds in acquiring Virtue, his mind unfolds itself in theknowledge of Truth, and it is a knowledge in which he can securely rest.            5. FIRST STEPS IN THE HIGHER LIFE


  SEEING THAT THE PATH OF VIRTUE is the Path of Knowledge, and

that  before  the  all-embracing  Principles  of  Truth  can  be  comprehended,

perfection  in  the  more  lowly  steps  must  be  acquired,  how,  then,  shall  a

disciple of Truth begin?

  How shall one who aspires to the righting of his mind and the purification

of his heart—that heart which is the fountain and repository of all the issues

of life—learn the lessons of Virtue? How does he thus build himself up in the

strength of knowledge, destroying ignorance and the ills of life? What are the

first lessons, the first steps? How are they learned? How are they practiced?

How are they mastered and understood?

  The first lessons consist in overcoming those wrong mental conditions

which  are  most  easily  eradicated,  and  which  are  the  common  barriers  to

spiritual progress, as well as in practicing the simple domestic and social

virtues. The reader will be better aided if I group and classify the first ten

steps in three lessons as follows: Vices of the Body to be Overcome and

Eradicated

  (First Lesson: Discipline of the Body)

  1st step: Idleness, Laziness or Indolence

  2nd step: Self-Indulgence or Gluttony

  (Second Lesson: Discipline of Speech)

  3rd step: Slander

  4th step: Gossip and Idle Conversation

  5th step: Abusive and Unkind Speech

  6th step: Frivolity or Irreverent Speech

  7th step: Critical, Captious or Fault-finding Speech

  (Third Lesson: Discipline of Tendencies)

  8th step: Unselfish Performance of Duty

  9th step: Unswerving Rectitude or Moral Integrity

  10th step: Unlimited Forgiveness

  The  two  vices  of  the  body,  and  the  five  of  the  tongue,  are  so  called

because they are manifested in the body and tongue. Also, by so definitelyclassifying them, the mind of the reader will be better helped. But it must be

clearly understood that these vices arise primarily in the mind, and are wrong

conditions of the heart worked out in the body and the tongue.

  The existence of such chaotic conditions is an indication that the mind is

altogether unenlightened as to the real meaning and purpose of life, and their

eradication is the beginning of a virtuous, steadfast, and enlightened life.

  But how shall these vices be overcome and eradicated? By first, and at

once,  checking  and  controlling  their  outward  manifestations  and  by

suppressing the wrong act. This will stimulate the mind to watchfulness and

reflection until, by repeated practice, it will come to perceive and understand

the dark, wrong, and erroneous conditions of mind, out of which such acts

spring. It will then abandon them entirely.

  It  will  be  seen  that  the  first  step  in  the  discipline  of  the  mind  is  the

overcoming of indolence or laziness. This is the easiest step, and until it is

perfectly  accomplished,  the  other  steps  cannot  be  taken.  The  clinging  to

indolence  constitutes  a  complete  barrier  to  the  Path  of  Truth.  Indolence

consists  in  giving  the  body  more  ease  and  sleep  than  it  requires,  in

procrastinating,  and  in  shirking  and  neglecting  those  things  which  should

receive immediate attention.

  This condition of laziness must be overcome by rousing up the body at an

early  hour,  giving  it  just  the  amount  of  sleep  it  requires  for  complete

recuperation, and by doing promptly and vigorously, every task, every duty,

no matter how small, as it comes along.

  On no account should food or drink be taken in bed. And to lie in bed

after one has awakened, indulging in ease and reverie, is a habit fatal to

promptness and resolution of character, and purity of mind. Nor should one

attempt to do his thinking at such a time. Strong, pure, and true thinking is

impossible under such circumstances. A man should go to bed to sleep, not to

think. He should get up to think and work, not to sleep.

  The  next  step  is  the  overcoming  of  self-indulgence  or  gluttony.  The

glutton is he who eats for animal gratification only, without considering the

true end and object of eating. He eats more than his body requires, and is

greedy after sweet things and rich dishes.

  Such undisciplined desire can only be overcome by reducing the quantity

of food eaten, and the number of meals per day, and by resorting to a simpleand uninvolved diet. Regular hours should be set apart for meals, and eating

at other times should be rigidly avoided. Suppers should be abolished, as they

are altogether unnecessary, and promote heavy sleep and cloudiness of mind.

  The pursuit of such a method of discipline will rapidly bring the once

ungoverned appetite under control, and as the sensual sin of self-indulgence

is taken out of the mind, the right selection of foods will be instinctively and

infallibly adapted to the purified mental condition.

  It should be well borne in mind that a change of heart is the needful thing,

and that any change of diet which does not promote this end is futile. When

one  eats  for  enjoyment,  he  is  gluttonous.  The  heart  must  be  purified  of

sensual craving and gustatory lust.

  When the body is well controlled and firmly guided; when that which is

to be done is done vigorously; when no task or duty is delayed; when early

rising  has  become  a  delight;  when  frugality,  simplicity,  temperance,  and

abstinence are firmly established; when one is contented with the food which

is  put  before  him,  no  matter  how  scanty  and  plain,  and  the  craving  for

gustatory pleasure is at an end—then the first two steps in the Higher Life are

accomplished.  Then  is  the  first  great  lesson  in  Truth  learned.  Thus  is

established in the heart the foundation of a poised, self-governed, virtuous

life.

  The next lesson is the lesson of Virtuous Speech, in which there are five

orderly steps. The first of these is overcoming the habit of slanderous speech.

Slander  consists  of  inventing  or  repeating  unkind  and  evil  reports  about

others, in exposing and magnifying the faults of others, or of absent friends,

and in introducing unworthy insinuations. The elements of thoughtlessness,

cruelty, insincerity, and untruthfulness enter into every slanderous act.

  He who aims at the living of the right life will commence to check the

cruel word of slander before it has gone forth from his lips. He will then

check and eliminate the insincere thought which gave rise to it.

  He will watch that he does not vilify or defame anyone. He will refrain

from disparaging, defaming, and condemning the absent friend, whose face

he has so recently smiled into or kissed, or whose hand he has shaken. He

will not say of another that which he dare not say to his face. Thus, coming at

last to think sacredly of the character and reputation of others, he will destroy

those wrong conditions of mind which give rise to slander.  The next step is the overcoming of gossip and idle conversation. Idle

speech consists in talking about the private affairs of others, in talking merely

to pass away the time, and in engaging in aimless and irrelevant conversation.

Such an ungoverned condition of speech is the outcome of an ill-regulated

mind.

  The man of virtue will bridle his tongue, and thus learn how rightly to

govern the mind. He will not let his tongue run idly and foolishly, but will

make  his  speech  strong  and  pure,  and  will  either  talk  with  a  purpose  or

remain silent.

  Abusive and unkind speech is the next vice to be overcome. The man

who abuses and accuses others has himself wandered far from the Right Way.

To hurl hard words and names at others is to sink deeply into folly. When a

man is inclined to  abuse, curse, and condemn others, let him restrain his

tongue and look within himself. The virtuous man refrains from all abusive

language and quarrelling. He employs only words that are useful, necessary,

pure, and true.

  The sixth step is the overcoming of levity, or irreverent speech. Light and

frivolous talking; the repeating of crude jokes; the telling of vulgar stories,

having no other purpose than to raise an empty laugh; offensive familiarity,

and the employment of contemptuous and disrespectful words when speaking

to or of others, and particularly of one’s elders and those who rank as one’s

teachers, guardians or superiors—all of this will he put away by the lover of

Virtue and Truth.

  Upon  the  altar  of  irreverence  absent  friends  and  companions  are

immolated  for  the  passing  excitement  of  a  momentary  laugh,  and  all  the

sanctity of life is sacrificed to the zest for ridicule. When respect towards

others and the giving of reverence where reverence is due are abandoned,

Virtue is abandoned. When modesty, significance, and dignity are eliminated

from  speech  and  behaviour,  Truth  is  lost.  Yea,  even  its  entrance  gate  is

hidden away and forgotten.

    Irreverence is degrading even in the young, but when it accompanies grey

hairs, and appears in the demeanour of the preacher—this is indeed a piteous

spectacle. And when this can be imitated and followed after, then are the

blind leading the blind, then have elders, preachers, and people lost their way.

  The virtuous will be of earnest and reverent speech. He will think andspeak  of  the  absent  as  he  thinks  and  speaks  of  the  dead—tenderly  and

sacredly.  He  will  put  away  thoughtlessness,  and  watch  that  he  does  not

sacrifice  his  dignity  to  gratify  a  passing  impulse  to  frivolity  and

superficiality.  His  humour  will  be  pure  and  innocent,  his  voice  will  be

subdued and musical, and his soul will be filled with grace and sweetness as

he succeeds in conducting himself as becomes a man of Truth.

  The last step in the second lesson is the overcoming of criticism, or fault-

finding speech. This vice of the tongue consists in magnifying and harping on

small  or  apparent  faults,  in  foolish  quibbling  and  hair-splitting,  and  in

pursuing vain arguments based upon groundless suppositions, beliefs, and

opinions.

  Life  is  short  and  real,  and  sin,  sorrow  and  pain  are  not  remedied  by

carping and contention. The man who is ever on the watch to catch at the

words of others in order to contradict and dispute them, has yet to reach the

higher way of holiness, the truer life of self-surrender. The man who is ever

on the alert to check his own words in order to soften and purify them will

find the higher way and the truer life. He will conserve his energies, maintain

his composure of mind, and preserve within himself the spirit of Truth.

  When the tongue is well controlled and wisely subdued; when selfish

impulses and unworthy thoughts no longer rush to the tongue demanding

utterance; when the speech has become harmless, pure, gentle, gracious, and

purposeful, and no word is uttered but in sincerity and honesty—then are the

five steps to virtuous speech accomplished, then is the second great lesson in

Truth learned and mastered.

  And now some will ask, "But why all this discipline of the body and

restraint of the tongue? Surely the Higher Life can be realized and known

without such strenuous labour, such incessant effort and watchfulness?" No,

it cannot. In the spiritual as the material, nothing is done without labour, and

the higher cannot be known until the lower is fulfilled.

  Can a man make a table before he has learned how to handle a tool and

drive  a  nail?  And  can  a  man  fashion  his  mind  in  accordance  with  Truth

before he has overcome the slavery of his body?

  As the intricate subtleties of language cannot be understood and wielded

before the alphabet and the simplest words are mastered, neither can the deep

subtleties of the mind be understood and purified before the ABC of rightconduct is perfectly acquired.

  As for the labour involved—does not the youth joyfully and patiently

submit himself to a seven-years’ apprenticeship in order to master a craft?

And does he not, day by day, carefully and faithfully carry out every detail of

his  master’s  instructions,  looking  forward  to  the  time  when,  perfected

through obedience and practice, he shall be himself a master?

  Where is the man who sincerely aims at excellence in music, painting,

literature, or in any trade, business, or profession who is not willing to give

his whole life to the acquirement of that particular perfection? Shall labour,

then,  be  considered  where  the  very  highest  excellence  is  concerned—the

excellence of Truth?

  He who says, "The Path which you have pointed out is too difficult; I

must have Truth without labour, salvation without effort," that man will not

find his way out of the confusions and sufferings of selfhood. He will not find

the calm, well-fortified mind and the wisely ordered life. His love is for ease

and enjoyment, and not for Truth.

  He who, deep in his heart, adores Truth, and aspires to know it, will

consider no labour too great to be undertaken, but will adopt it joyfully and

pursue  it  patiently.  By  perseverance  in  practice  he  will  come  to  the

knowledge of Truth.

  The necessity for this preliminary discipline of the body and tongue will

be more clearly perceived when it is fully understood that all these wrong

outward conditions are merely the expressions of wrong conditions of the

heart.  An  indolent  body  means  an  indolent  mind;  an  ill-regulated  tongue

reveals an ill-regulated mind, and the process of remedying the manifested

condition is really a method of rectifying the inward state.

    Moreover, the overcoming of these conditions is only a small part of what

is  really  involved  in  the  process.  The  ceasing  from  evil  leads  to,  and  is

inseparably connected with, the practice of good. While a man is overcoming

laziness  and  self-indulgence,  he  is  really  cultivating  and  developing  the

virtues  of  abstinence,  temperance,  punctuality,  and  self-denial.  He  is

acquiring the strength, energy, and resolve which are indispensable to the

successful accomplishment of the higher tasks. While he is overcoming the

vices  of  speech,  he  is  developing  the  virtues  of  truthfulness,  sincerity,

reverence, kindliness, and self-control, and is gaining that mental steadinessand fixedness of purpose, without which the more remote subtleties of the

mind  cannot  be  regulated,  and  the  higher  stages  of  conduct  and

enlightenment cannot be reached.

  Also, as he has to do right, his knowledge deepens, and his insight is

intensified. Just as a child’s heart is glad when a school task is mastered, so

with each victory achieved, the man of virtue experiences a bliss which the

seeker after pleasure and excitement can never know.

  And now we come to the third lesson in the Higher Life, which consists

of  practicing  and  mastering,  in  one’s  daily  life,  three  great  fundamental

Virtues:

  1) Unselfish Performance of Duty

  2) Unswerving Rectitude (Moral Integrity)

  3) Unlimited Forgiveness

    Having prepared the mind by overcoming the more surface and chaotic

conditions mentioned in the first two lessons, the striver after Virtue and

Truth is now ready to enter upon greater and more difficult tasks, and to

control and purify the deeper motives of the heart.

  Without  the  right  performance  of  duty,  the  higher  virtues  cannot  be

known, and Truth cannot be apprehended. Duty is generally regarded as an

irksome labour, a compulsory something which must be toiled through, or be

in some way avoided. This way of regarding duty proceeds from a selfish

condition of mind, and a wrong understanding of life. All duty should be

regarded  as  sacred,  and  its  faithful  and  unselfish  performance  one  of  the

leading rules of conduct. All personal and selfish considerations should be

extracted and cast away from the doing of one’s duty, and when this is done,

duty ceases to be irksome, and becomes joyful. Duty is only irksome to him

who craves some selfish enjoyment or benefit for himself. Let the man who is

chafing under the irksomeness of his duty look to himself, and he will find

that his wearisomeness proceeds, not from the duty itself, but from his selfish

desire to escape it.

  He who neglects duty, be it great or small, or of a public or private nature,

neglects Virtue. He who in his heart rebels against duty, rebels against Virtue.

When Duty becomes a thing of love, and when every particular duty is done

accurately, faithfully, and dispassionately, there is much subtle selfishness

removed from the heart, and a great step is taken towards the heights ofTruth. The virtuous man concentrates his mind on the perfect doing of his

own duty, and does not interfere with the duty of another.

  The ninth step is the practice of Unswerving Rectitude or Moral Integrity.

This Virtue must be firmly established in the mind, and so enter into every

detail  of  a  man’s  life.  All  dishonesty,  deception,  trickery,  and

misrepresentation must be forever put away, and the heart purged of every

vestige of insincerity and deception. The least digression from the path of

rectitude or righteousness is a deviation from Virtue.

  There  must  be  no  extravagance  and  exaggeration  of  speech,  but  the

simple  truth  should  be  stated.  Engaging  in  deception,  no  matter  how

apparently  insignificant,  for  boastful  pride,  or  with  the  hope  of  personal

advantage, is a state of delusion which one should make efforts to dispel. It is

demanded of the man of Virtue that he shall not only practice the most rigid

honesty  in  thought,  word,  and  deed,  but  that  he  shall  be  exact  in  his

statements, omitting and adding nothing to the actual truth.

  In thus shaping his mind to the principle of Rectitude or moral integrity,

he will gradually come to deal with people and things in a just and impartial

spirit, considering equity before himself, and viewing all things with freedom

from personal bias, passion, and prejudice. When the Virtue of Rectitude is

fully practiced and comprehended, so that all temptation to untruthfulness

and insincerity has ceased, then is the heart made purer and nobler. Then is

character  strengthened,  and  knowledge  enlarged,  and  life  takes  on  a  new

meaning and a new power. Thus is the ninth step accomplished.

  The tenth step is the practice of Unlimited Forgiveness. This consists in

overcoming the sense of injury which springs from vanity, selfishness and

pride; and in exercising disinterested charity and large-heartedness towards

all. Spite, retaliation, and revenge are so utterly ignoble, so base, and so small

and foolish, as to be altogether unworthy of being noticed or harboured. No

one who fosters such conditions in his heart can lift himself above folly and

suffering, and guide his life aright. Only by casting them away, and ceasing

to be moved by them, can a man’s eyes be opened to the true way of life.

Only by developing a forgiving and charitable spirit can he hope to approach

and perceive the strength and beauty of a well-ordered life.

  In the heart of the strongly virtuous man, no feeling of personal injury can

arise.  He  has  put  away  all  retaliation,  and  has  no  enemies.  If  other  menshould  regard  themselves  as  his  enemies,  he  will  regard  them  kindly,

understanding their ignorance, and making full allowance for it.

  When this state of heart is arrived at, then the tenth step in the discipline

of one’s self-seeking inclinations is accomplished. Then the third great lesson

in Virtue and Knowledge is learned and mastered.

    Having thus laid down the first ten steps and three lessons in right-doing

and right-knowing, I leave those of my readers who are prepared for them to

learn and master them in their everyday life.

  There  is,  of  course,  a  still  higher  discipline  of  the  body,  a  more  far-

reaching discipline of the tongue, and greater and more all-embracing virtues

to acquire and understand before the highest state of bliss and knowledge can

be  grasped.  But  it  is  not  my  purpose  to  deal  with  them  here.  I  have

expounded only the first and easiest lessons on the Higher Path, and by the

time these are thoroughly mastered, the reader will have become so purified,

strengthened, and enlightened, that he will not be left in the dark as to his

future progress.

  Those of my readers who have completed these three lessons will already

have  perceived,  beyond  and  above,  the  high  altitudes  of  Truth,  and  the

narrow and precipitous track which leads to them, and will choose whether

they shall proceed.

  The straight Path which I have laid down can be pursued by all with

greater profit to themselves and to the world. And even those who do not

aspire to the attainment of Truth, will develop greater intellectual and moral

strength, finer judgment, and deeper peace of mind by perfecting themselves

in this Path. Nor will their material prosperity suffer by this change of heart;

nay, it will be rendered truer, purer, and more enduring. For if there is one

who is capable of succeeding and fitted to achieve, it is the man who has

abandoned  the  petty  weaknesses  and  everyday  vices  of  his  kind,  who  is

strong enough to rule his body and mind, and who pursues with fixed resolve

the path of unswerving integrity and sterling virtue.            6. MENTAL CONDITIONS AND THEIR


                                    EFFECTS


    WITHOUT GOING into the details of the greater steps and lessons in the

right life (a task outside the scope of this small work) a few hints concerning

those mental conditions from which life in its totality springs seem in order.

These hints will prove helpful to those who are ready and willing to penetrate

further into the inner realm of heart and mind where Love, Wisdom, and

Peace await the rapidly progressing student of life.

  All sin is ignorance. It is a condition of darkness and undevelopment. The

wrong-thinker and the wrong-doer is in the same position in the school of life

as the ignorant pupil in the school of learning. He has yet to learn how to

think and act correctly, that is, in accordance with Law. The pupil in learning

is not happy so long as he does his lessons wrongly. Likewise, unhappiness

cannot be escaped while sin remains unconquered.

  Life is a series of lessons. Some are diligent in learning them, and they

become pure, wise, and altogether happy. Others are negligent, and do not

apply themselves. They remain impure, foolish, and unhappy.

  Every  form  of  unhappiness  springs  from  a  wrong  condition  of  mind.

Happiness  is  inherent  in  right  conditions  of  mind.  Happiness  is  mental

harmony,  unhappiness  is  mental  inharmony.  While  a  man  lives  in  wrong

conditions of mind, he will live a wrong life, and will suffer continually.

    Suffering is rooted in error. Bliss is inherent in enlightenment. There is

salvation for man only in the destruction of his own ignorance, error, and

self-delusion. Where there are wrong conditions of mind there is bondage and

unrest. Where there are right conditions of mind there is freedom and peace.

  Here  are  some  of  the  leading  wrong  mental  conditions  and  their

disastrous effects upon one’s life:

  1. Hatred—which leads to injury, violence, disaster, and suffering.

  2. Lust—which  leads  to  confusion  of  intellect,  remorse,  shame,  and

wretchedness.

  3. Covetousness—which leads to fear, unrest, unhappiness, and loss.

  4. Pride—which leads to disappointment, humiliation, and lack of self-knowledge.

  5. Vanity—which leads to distress and mortification of spirit.

  6. Condemnation—which leads to persecution and hatred from others.

  7. Ill-will—which leads to failures and troubles.

  8. Self-indulgence—which leads to misery, loss of judgment, grossness,

disease, and neglect.

  9. Anger—which leads to the loss of power and influence.

  10. Desire  or  Self-slavery—which  leads  to  grief,  folly,  sorrow,

uncertainty, and loneliness.

  The  above  wrong  conditions  of  mind  are  merely  negations.  They  are

states of darkness and deprivation and not of positive power. Evil is not a

power; it is ignorance and misuse of good. The hater is he who has failed to

do the lesson of Love correctly, and he suffers in consequence. When he

succeeds in doing it rightly, the hatred will have disappeared, and he will see

and understand the darkness and impotence of hatred. This is so with every

wrong condition.

  The following are some of the more important right mental conditions

and their beneficial effects upon one’s life:

  1. Love—which leads to gentle conditions, bliss, and blessedness.

  2. Purity—which  leads  to  intellectual  clearness,  joy,  invincible

confidence.

  3. Selflessness—which  leads  to  courage,  satisfaction,  happiness,  and

abundance.

  4. Humility—which leads to calmness, restfulness, knowledge of Truth.

  5. Gentleness—which  leads  to  emotional  equilibrium,  contentment

under all circumstances.

  6. Compassion—which leads to protection, love, and reverence from

others.

  7. Goodwill—which leads to gladness, success.

  8. Self-control—which  leads  to  peace  of  mind,  true  judgment,

refinement, health, and honour.

  9. Patience—which leads to mental power, far-reaching influence.

  10. Self-conquest—which leads to enlightenment, wisdom, insight, andprofound peace.

  The above right conditions of mind are states of positive power, light,

joyful possession, and knowledge. The good man knows. He has learned to

do his lessons correctly, and thereby understands the exact proportions which

make up the sum of life. He is enlightened, and he knows good and evil. He

is supremely happy, doing only that which is divinely right.

  The  man  who  is  involved  in  the  wrong  conditions  of  mind,  does  not

know. He is ignorant of good and evil, of himself, of the inward causes which

make his life. He is unhappy, and believes other people are entirely the cause

of his unhappiness. He works blindly, and lives in darkness, seeing no central

purpose in existence, and no orderly and lawful sequence in the course of

things.

  He who aspires to the attainment of the Higher Life in its completion—

who would perceive with unveiled vision the true order of things and the

meaning of life—let him abandon all the wrong conditions of the heart, and

persevere unceasingly in the practice of good. If he suffers, or doubts, or is

unhappy, let him search within until he finds the cause, and having found it,

let him cast it away. Let him so guard and purify his heart that every day less

of evil and more of good shall issue therefrom. So he will daily become

stronger, nobler, and wiser. So will his blessedness increase, and the Light of

Truth, growing ever brighter and brighter within him, will dispel all gloom,

and illuminate his Pathway.                              7. EXHORTATION


    DISCIPLES OF TRUTH, lovers of Virtue, seekers of Wisdom; you, also,

who are sorrow stricken, knowing the emptiness of the self-life, and who

aspire to the life that is supremely beautiful, and serenely joyful—take now

yourselves in hand, enter the Door of Discipline, and know the Better Life.

  Put away self-delusion. Behold yourself as you are, and see the Path of

Virtue as it is. There is no lazy way to Truth. He who would stand upon the

mountain’s  summit  must  strenuously  climb,  and  must  rest  only  to  gather

strength. But if the climbing is less glorious than the cloudless summit, it is

still glorious. Discipline in itself is beautiful, and the end result of discipline

is sweet.

  Rise early and meditate. Begin each day with a conquered body, and a

mind  fortified  against  error  and  weakness.  Temptation  will  never  be

overcome by unprepared fighting. The mind must be armed and arrayed in

the silent hour. It must be trained to perceive, to know, to understand. Sin and

temptation disappear when right understanding is developed.

  Right understanding is reached through unabated discipline. Truth cannot

be  reached  but  through  discipline.  Patience  will  increase  by  effort  and

practice, and patience will make discipline beautiful.

  Discipline is irksome to the impatient man and the lover of self, so he

avoids it, and continues to live loosely and confusedly.

  Discipline  is  not  irksome  to  the  lover  of  Truth,  and  he  will  find  the

infinite patience which can wait, work, and overcome. Just as the joy of the

gardener who sees his or her flowers develop day by day, so is the joy of the

man  of  discipline  who  sees  the  divine  flowers  of  Purity,  Wisdom,

Compassion, and Love, grow within his heart.

  The loose-liver cannot escape sorrow and pain. The undisciplined mind

falls, weak and helpless, before the fierce onslaught of passion.

  Array well your mind, then, lover of Truth. Be watchful, thoughtful, and

resolute. Your salvation is at hand; your readiness and effort are all that are

needed. If you fail ten times, do not be disheartened. If you should fail a

hundred times, rise up and pursue your way. If you should fail a thousand

times, do not despair. When the right Path is entered, success is sure if thePath is not utterly abandoned.

  First strife, and then victory. First labour, and then rest. First weakness,

and then strength. In the beginning the lower life, and the glare and confusion

of battle, and at the end the Life Beautiful, the Silence, and the Peace.

  All common things, each day’s events, That with the hour begin and end;

Our pleasures and our discontents Are rounds by which we may ascend. We

have not wings, we cannot soar; But we have feet to scale and climb.

    LONGFELLOW                  BOOK SEVENTEEN


            THROUGH THE GATES OF


            GOOD, OR CHRIST AND


                              CONDUCT.                              INTRODUCTION


  THE genius of the present age in matters spiritual is towards simplicity,

and the hunger of the human heart is for Truth naked and uninvolved. That

hunger  will  eventually  bring  about  (is  already  bringing  about)  its  own

satisfaction, and here and there are men and women who, passing through the

Gateway of Self-conquest, are entering into possession of the Transcendent

Righteousness.

  The closing years of the nineteenth century witnessed the culmination of

Formalism, and the spiritual reaction is now firmly established. Already "the

end of old faiths and beginning of the new" is discernible to all who have

removed  from  their  mental  vision  somewhat  of  the  textual  dust  of  dying

creeds, and have penetrated, however faintly, that sublime region of Truth

which is discoverable only by practice, and which is made manifest by pure

thoughts and holy deeds.

  The  universal  decay  of  effete  religious  systems  which  the  world  is

witnessing today is matter for rejoicing; it is the death which precedes Life; it

is the passing away of the false in order that the True may be more fully

revealed. The True can, at worst, but remain hidden. It endures. It remains

forever.  Its  invincibility  cannot  be  qualified,  and  he  who  has  but  one

momentary glimpse of the True can never again be anxious for its safety.

That about which men are anxious is the false, which they mistake for the

True, and this, in spite of all their anxiety, must fade away at last.

  In  the  lives  of  all  the  Great  Teachers  we  see  a  manifestation  of  that

Universal  Truth,  the  majesty  and  splendour  of  which  is  as  yet  but  dimly

comprehended  by  mankind,  but  which  must,  during  the  gradual

transformation and transmutation which the accumulating ages shall effect, at

last become the possession of all. That Truth, as manifested by the Teachers,

was written by them, as it only can be written, in thoughts and deeds of the

loftiest moral excellence which have been permanently impressed upon the

mind of mankind by their embodiment in preceptial form. It is to the sweet

lives  and  inspiring  words  of  these  mighty  Teachers  that  the  eyes  of  a

hungering and thirsty world are again being turned, and the Light of Life isbeing lighted up, the world over, in hearts that are ready to attune themselves

to the Eternal Song of Love and Peace. What religions have failed to do,

Religion will accomplish; what the Priest has obscured, the Spirit of Truth in

the  heart  of  man  will  make  plain,  and  the  world  is  now  finding  spiritual

healing  and  refreshment  in  turning  away  from  traditional  and  historic

accretions, and going back to the pure Fountain of Truth as revealed to them

so simply, clearly and beautifully by their blameless Teachers, and which had

its inexhaustive spring within themselves.

  To aid men and women (more particularly those in Christian countries)

more speedily to find this abiding Truth, these articles, setting forth the life

and precepts of Jesus, were written. Formalism and self were heavy burdens

to carry, and in directing the minds of men to blamelessness of conduct and

purity of heart, I know I can leave the result with the Supreme Law, and that

there  are  those  who  will  read  and,  having  read,  will  pass  from  the

burdensome complexities of ignorance and formalism to the joyful simplicity

of Enlightenment and Truth.

  James Allen.                    1. THE GATE AND THE WAY


  Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way, which leadeth unto Life, and

few there be that find it.

  JESUS

  A good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good

things.

  JESUS

  The supreme aim of all religions is to teach men how to live; and the

learning and the living are religion itself. The purification of the human heart,

the building up of a blameless life, and the perfecting of the soul, these are

the great underlying and enduring factors in all religions and creeds the world

over. That which is vital in every religion is the striving after, and the practice

of, Goodness; all things else are accretions, superfluities, illusions. Goodness

— and by Goodness I mean sinlessness — is the beautiful and imperishable

form of Religion, but creeds and religions are the perishable garments, woven

of the threads of opinion, in which men clothe it. One after another religions

come and go, but Religion, being Life itself, endures forever. Let men cease

to quarrel over the garments and strive to perceive the universality and beauty

of the indwelling form; thus will they become wedded to it, will become one

with the supreme Goodness. Religion is Goodness; Goodness is Religion.

  We know nothing higher than Goodness. We can conceive of nothing

more beautiful than Goodness. Beholding the Perfect Goodness, men call it

God. Seeing that Goodness practiced by man, men worship him as God.

  We  behold  Jesus  as  a  sinless  man;  in  him  is  the  Perfect  Goodness

revealed, not obscurely and metaphysically, but in all his words and deeds;

and it is by virtue of his sinlessness that he is accepted as an Exemplar and

universal Teacher.

  The Teachers of mankind are few. A thousand years may pass by without

the  advent  of  such  a  one;  but  when  the  True  Teacher  does  appear,  the

distinguishing feature by which he is known is his  life. His conduct is

different from that of other men, and his teaching is never derived from any

man or book, but from  his  own  life. The Teacher first  lives, and then

teaches others how they may likewise live. The proof and witness of histeaching  is  in  himself,  his  life.  Out  of  millions  of  preachers,  one  only  is

ultimately accepted by mankind as the true Teacher, and the one who is thus

accepted  and  exalted  is he  who  lives.  All  the  others  are  mere

disquisitionaries  and  commentators,  and  as  such  they  rapidly  pass  out  of

human ken.

  Jesus, the Teacher, lived, in all its perfection, and in the face of the most

adverse  conditions,  the  divine  life  of  Love;  he  pursued  the  true  life  of

Goodwill,  as  distinguished  from  the  false  life  of  self-seeking,  which  the

majority elect to follow. In him there was no element of selfishness, all his

thoughts, words and acts being prompted by the spirit of Love. To this spirit

of Love he so entirely subjected his personality that he became one with it, so

much  so  that  he  literally  became  Divine  Love  personified.  His  complete

victory over the personality was accomplished by obedience to the Divine

Law of Love within himself, by virtue of which he became divine, and his

whole teaching is to the effect that all who practice the same obedience will

realize the same divine Life, will become consciously divine.

  The unalterable meekness, undying compassion, sweet forgiveness, and

unending love and patience of Jesus are the themes of a thousand hymns, the

subject of millions of heartfelt prayers; and this is so because those qualities

are recognized everywhere and by all men as being distinctively divine. To

make  the  practice  of  these  qualities  the  chief  object  of  life  constitutes

Religion! to deny them, and to continue to live in their selfish opposites —

pride, condemnation, harshness, hatred, and anger — constitutes irreligion.

  Men  everywhere,  in  their  inmost  hearts  though  they  may  deny  it

argumentatively, know that Goodness is divine; and Jesus is worshipped as

God, not for any claim he made, nor because of any miraculous circumstance

connected  with  his  life,  but  because  he  never  departed  from  the  Perfect

Goodness, the Faultless Love. "God is Love," Love is God. Man knows no

God except Love manifesting in the human heart and life in the form of

stainless thoughts, blameless words, and deeds of gentle pity and forgiveness,

and he can only know this God in the measure that he has realized Love in

his  own  heart  by  self-subjugation.  The  God  which  forms  the  subject  of

theological argument, and whose existence or non-existence men are so eager

to prove, is the God of hypothesis and speculation. He who, by overcoming

self, has found, dwelling within him, the Supreme Love, knows what thatLove is far beyond the reach of all selfish argument, and can only be lived;

and he lives, leaving vain argument to those who will not come up higher.

    Having  by  obedience,  entered  into  full  possession  of  the  Divine  Life,

Jesus gave to the world certain spiritual rules, by the observance of which all

men could become sons of God, could live the Perfect Life. These rules or

precepts  are  so  simple,  direct,  and  unmistakable  that  it  is  impossible  to

misunderstand  them.  So  plain  and  unequivocal  are  they  that  even  an

unlettered child could grasp their meaning without difficulty. All of them are

directly related to human conduct and can be applied only by the individual

in his own life. To carry out the spirit of these rules in one’s daily conduct

constitutes  the  whole  duty  of  life,  and  lifts  the  individual  into  the  full

consciousness of his divine origin and nature, of his oneness with God, the

Supreme Good. It is here, however, where the difficulty arises, for, although

there  are  millions  of  men  and  women  worshipping  Jesus  as  God  in  a

miraculous or metaphysical sense, there are really very few who believe in

his precepts, and who attempt to carry them out in their life. In the precepts

themselves there can be no difficulty or misunderstanding; all this lies in the

unbelief  of  those  who  read  the  precepts.  Men  do  not  carry  out  the

precepts of Jesus because they do not believe it possible to do so, and so they

never try; whilst there are others who, believing it possible and necessary to

carry them out, are not willing to make the personal sacrifices which those

precepts demand. Yet, apart from the earnest striving to live out the teachings

of  Jesus  there  can  be  no  true  life.  To  merely  call  Jesus  "Lord"  does  not

constitute discipleship, but to weave his words into the fabric of one’s life, to

put into execution his divine and self-perfecting precepts, this, and this only,

constitutes discipleship.

  Let it be understood thus early that with the almost innumerable creeds

which have been built upon the Hebrew Scriptures, I have absolutely nothing

to do. I have to do entirely with the life and teaching of Jesus, and with the

vital realities in the human heart to which that teaching is directed. I have to

do  with  Goodness,  not  with  speculation;  with  Love,  not  with  theological

theories; with self-perfection, not with fleeting opinions.

  Jesus was a supremely good man; this all men know, and to know this is

all-embracing and all-sufficient. He has left precepts which, if a man will

guide  his  conduct  by  them,  will  lead  him  unerringly  to  the  SupremeGoodness; to know this is gladdening and glorious.

  A good man is the flower of humanity, and to daily grow purer, nobler,

more Godlike, by overcoming some selfish tendency, is to be continually

drawing nearer to the Divine Heart. "He that would be my disciple let him

deny  himself  daily,"  is  a  statement  which  none  can  misunderstand  or

misapply, howsoever he may ignore it. Nowhere in the universe is there any

substitute for Goodness, and until a man has this, he has nothing worthy or

enduring. To the possession of Goodness there is only one way, and that is,

to  give  up  all  and  everything  that  is  opposed  to  Goodness. Every

selfish desire must be eradicated; every impure thought must be yielded up;

every clinging to opinion must be sacrificed; and it is in the doing of this that

constitutes the following of Christ. That which is above all creeds, beliefs and

opinions  is  a  loving  and  self-sacrificing  heart.  The  life  of  Jesus  is  a

demonstration of this truth, and all His teaching is designed to bring about

this holy and supreme consummation.

  To dwell in love always and towards all is to live the true life, is to have

Life itself. Jesus so lived, and all men may so live if they will humbly and

faithfully carry out his precepts. So long as they refuse to do this, clinging to

their desires, passions and opinions, they cannot be ranked as his disciples;

they  are  the  disciples  of  self.  "Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you:  whosoever

committeth sin is the servant of sin," is the searching declaration of Jesus. Let

men cease to delude themselves with the belief that they can retain their bad

tempers, their lusts, their harsh words and judgments, their personal hatreds,

their petty contentions and darling opinions, and yet have Christ. All that

divides man from man, and man from Goodness is not of Christ, for Christ is

Love.

  To continue to commit sin is to be a doer of sin, a follower of self, and

not a doer of righteousness and a follower of Christ. Sin and Christ cannot

dwell together, and he who accepts the Christ life of pure Goodness, ceases

from sin. To follow Christ means to give up all, in our mind and conduct, that

antagonizes  the  spirit  of  Love,  and  this,  we  shall  find  as  we  proceed,

necessitates complete self-surrender, refusing to harbour any thought that is

not pure, compassionate and gentle. The Christ-spirit of Love puts an end, not

only to all sin, but to all division and contention. If I contend for an opinion,

say, about the divinity of Jesus Christ, against the opinion of another as to hisnon-divinity, I at once create division and strife, and depart from the Christ,

the spirit of Love. When Christ is disputed about, Christ is lost.

  It is no less selfish and sinful to cling to opinion than to cling to impure

desire. Knowing this, the good man gives up himself unreservedly to the

spirit  of  Love,  and  dwells  in  Love  towards  all,  contending  with  none,

condemning none, hating none, but loving all, seeing behind their opinions,

their creeds and their sins, into their striving, suffering and sorrowing hearts.

"He that loveth his life shall lose it." Eternal Life belongs to him who will

obediently  relinquish  his  petty,  narrowing,  sin-loving,  strife-producing

personal self, for only by so doing can he enter into the large, beautiful, free

and glorious life of abounding Love. Herein is the Path of Life; for the strait

Gate  is  the  Gate  of  Goodness,  and  the  narrow  Way  is  the  Way  of

Renunciation,  or  self-sacrifice.  So  strait  is  the  Gate  that  no  sin  can  pass

through, and so narrow is the Way that he who essays to walk it can take with

him no selfish thought as his companion.              2. THE LAW AND THE PROPHETS


  Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do

ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets.

  JESUS

  If thou wilt enter info life; keep the Commandments

  JESUS

  The commandments and precepts of Jesus were given to men to be kept.

This is so simple and self-evident a truth that there ought to be no necessity to

state it; yet, after the precepts of Jesus have been before the world for nearly

nineteen hundred years, this necessity not only exists, but is very great, so

widespread is the belief that the tasks embodied in the precepts are not only

utterly impracticable, but altogether impossible of human accomplishment.

This disbelief in the possibility of carrying out the divine commands is the

primary  delusion,  due  to  ignorance,  in  which  men  are  caught,  and  it  is

impossible for any man to comprehend spiritual things until he destroys it.

  The words of Jesus are the direct outcome of an intimate knowledge of

divine Law, and his every utterance is in harmonious relationship with the

Eternal Substance. This a man finds as he moulds the spiritual life contained

in  those  words  into  his  own  life  —  that  is,  as  he  succeeds  in  living  the

precepts.

  Let us now examine these precepts, and see how they are to be carried

out, and what they imply and involve. Most of them are embodied in the

Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and  all  of  them  are  directly  related  to  individual

conduct,  so  that  there  are  only  two  possible  ways  of  dealing  with  them,

namely, to practice them or to ignore them.

  It is not necessary for me to refer to them all separately, as, not only have

my readers the Bible at their command, but each precept is based upon the

same divine principle, and to learn the spirit of one is to know the spirit of

them all. Indeed, seeing that not only all the precepts, but that the whole duty

of  life  in  its  human  and  divine  relationship  has  been  embodied  in  the

seventeen words, "all things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto

you, do ye even so unto them," it is only necessary to refer to the other

precepts in order to elucidate the carrying out of this one, for in learning thisone precept, the whole range of spiritual life and knowledge is involved:

"This is the Law and the Prophets."

  The  precept  is  extremely  simple;  this  is  why  men  have  failed  to

understand it and to put it into effect. Its application, however, to the soul of

the individual leaves no room for selfishness and self-compromise, and so

comprehensive is it that to carry it out in its entirety means the attainment of

Christ-like perfection of character. But before a man can put it into practice,

he must strive  to  understand  it, and even this initial step necessitates a

self-surrender which few are willing to make. A man can learn nothing unless

he regards himself as a learner. Before a man can learn anything of the divine

spirit within, he must come to the feet of Christ divested of all of his desires,

his opinions and views, yea, even of his cherished ideal, regarding himself as

a  little  child,  knowing  nothing,  blind  and  ignorant,  seeking  knowledge.

Before this attitude of humility is adopted, the attainment of divine life and

knowledge is impossible; but he who will adopt it will rapidly enter into the

highest revelations, and the carrying out of the precept will soon become easy

and natural to him.

    Having  clothed  himself  with  humility  the  first  questions  a  man  asks

himself are: "How am I acting towards others?" "What am I doing to others?"

"How am I thinking of others?" "Are my thoughts of and acts to-ward others

prompted by unselfish love, as I would theirs should be to me, or are they the

outcome  of  personal  dislike,  of  petty  revenge,  or  of  narrow  bigotry  and

condemnation?" As a man, in the sacred silence of his soul, asks himself

these searching questions, applying all his thoughts and acts to the spirit of

the primary precept of Jesus, his understanding will become illuminated so

that he will unerringly see where he has hitherto failed; and he will also see

what he has got to do in rectifying his heart and conduct, and the way in

which it is to be done. Such a man has become a disciple of Christ at whose

feet he sits, and whose commands he is prepared to carry out no matter at

what sacrifice to himself.

  One hour’s daily meditation upon this precept, combined with a sincere

wish to learn its meaning and a determination to carry it out, would rapidly

lift a man above his sinful nature into the clear light and freedom of divine

Truth, for it would compel him to re-model his entire life, and to turn right

round in his attitude towards others. Let a man, before acting, ask himself thequestion, "Should I like others to do this to me?" and he will soon find his

way out of his spiritual darkness, for he will then begin to live for others

instead of for himself; will adjust his thoughts and conduct to the Principle of

divine Love, instead of blindly following his selfish inclinations. However

others act towards him, he will begin to act towards all in a calm, quiet,

forgiving spirit. If others attack his attitude, his beliefs, his religion, he will

not  retaliate,  and  will  cease  from  attacking  others,  realizing  that  it  is  his

supreme duty to carry out his divine Master’s commands; and the carrying

out  of  those  commands  will  demand  the  re-adjustment,  not  only  of  his

thoughts and acts, but of every detail of his life, even down to his eating and

drinking and clothing.

  As  he  proceeds  in  this  new  life,  the  Teachings  of  Jesus  will  become

luminous with a new light, vital with a new life, and he will feel that every

precept is for him, and that he must carry them out, ceasing to accuse others

because they do not carry them out. As he reads the words "Judge not," he

will know that he must cease from all harsh and unkind judgment, that he

must think kindly of all, just as much so of those who are unkind to him as of

those who are kind to him; that if others judge and condemn him, he must not

do so to them, and, putting aside all personal considerations, must deal with

them in the spirit of equity, wisdom and love. It will thus be seen that even in

carrying out the one simple precept, "Judge not," a man must necessarily rise

above much that is merely personal and selfish, and will develop unusual

spiritual strength. This course of conduct, diligently pursued, will lead to the

observance of the precept, "Resist not evil," for if a man ceases to judge

others as evil, he will cease to resist them as evil.

  Of late years much has been written about non-resistance to evil, but he

who would comprehend the spiritual significance of this, or indeed of any

precept, must not rest content with mere dialectic definitions of it, but must

assiduously practise it; he can only find its meaning by doing it. And in the

doing of this precept, a man will destroy in himself the eye of evil, and in its

place he will learn to look through the eye of good, the eye of Truth; when he

will see that evil is not worth resisting, and that the practice of the good is

supremely excellent.

  Whilst a man is engaged in resisting evil, he is not only practicing the

good,  he  is  actually  involved  in  the  like  passion  and  prejudice  which  hecondemns in another, and as a direct result of his attitude of mind, he himself

is  resisted  by  others  as  evil.  Resist  a  man,  a  party,  a  law,  a  religion,  a

government  as  evil,  and  you  yourself  will  be  resisted  as  evil.  He  who

considers it as a great evil that he should be persecuted and condemned, let

him cease to persecute and condemn. Let him turn away from all that he has

hitherto regarded as evil, and begin to look for the good, taking passion,

resentment and retaliation out of his heart, and he will very soon see that

what he has all along been resisting as evil has no existence as such, and that

it was merely an exaggerated and illusionary reflection of the passion and

folly which were in himself. So deep and far-reaching is this precept that the

practice of it will take a man far up the heights of spiritual knowledge and

attainment, and when, by following its demands, he has so far purified and

overcome himself as to see good and not evil in all men and all things, he will

then be prepared to carry out a still higher precept {though one contained in

the primary precept), namely, "Love your enemies."

  Over none of the precepts do men stumble more than this one, and the

cause for such stumbling is near at hand and very plain. It is to be expected

that men who regard fighting, retaliation, and hatred towards their enemies as

indications of nobility of character should look upon this precept as not only

an impracticable, but a very foolish command. And from their standpoint of

knowledge they are right. If man be regarded as a mere animal cut off from

the Divine, those fierce, destructive qualities which are esteemed noble in the

beast, are noble in man.

  To  such  men,  living  in  their  animal  qualities  and  instincts,  meekness,

forgiveness and self-denying love appear as cowardice, effeminacy and weak

sentimentality.  If,  however,  we  recognize  in  man  certain  divine  qualities,

more active in some than others, but possessed in a measure by all, such as

love,  purity,  compassion,  reason,  wisdom,  etc.,  which  lift  him  above  the

animal, then the precept, "Love your enemies," not only appears practicable,

but is seen to represent the rightful and legitimate state of man. To the man,

therefore, who says, "This is an impossible precept," I would say, "You are

right, to you it is impossible; but it is only your unbelief in the efficacy of

those qualities which constitute Goodness, and your belief in the power of the

animal  forces,  that  make  it  so;  reverse  your  attitude  of  mind,  and  the

impossibilities will fade away."  No man can carry out and understand this precept who is not willing to

renounce his animal nature. He who would find the Christ, the pure spirit of

Truth,  must  cease  to  warp  and  blind  his  spiritual  vision  by  flattering  his

feelings  and  passions.  The  source  of  all  enmity  within  himself  must  be

destroyed. Hatred is none the less hatred when it is called dislike. Personal

antipathies, however natural they may be to the animal man, can have no

place in the divine life. Nor can a man see spiritual things or receive spiritual

truths while his mind is involved in malice, dislike, animosity, revenge, or

that  blind  egotism  which  thinks  "I,  in  my  views,  am  right,  and  you  are

wrong."

  The  keeping,  then,  of  the  commandment,  "Love  your  enemies,"

necessitates the removal, from the heart, of all hatred and egotism, and as this

is accomplished, the Principle of Divine Love, which is unchangeably the

same towards all, — the just and the unjust, the sinful and the saintly, —

takes the place, in the consciousness, of those violent animal and personal

loves which are continually changing, and coming and going, and which are

inseparably linked with their opposite of violent hatred. It is impossible to

love  one’s  enemies  whilst  living  in  the  animal  personality,  for  that

personality  is  of  the  very  nature  of  blind  love  and  hatred;  it  is  only  by

deserting the personal elements, that the impersonal, divine Love which does

not alter with the changing attitudes of others, is found, and can become the

dominating  factor  in  one’s  conduct;  and  when  that  is  done,  the  disciple

realizes that his true nature is divine.

  The Love, then, which enables a man to deal kindly with his enemies, and

to do to others as he would like others to do to him, irrespective of their

attitude of mind, is not an emotion, impulse or preference, but a state of

divine knowledge arrived at by practice; and as this knowledge is perfected in

the mind, the Eternal Principles of the Divine Law of which the Prophets

spoke, and on which they stood, are comprehended.

  He who will keep the precepts of Jesus, will conquer himself and will

become divinely illuminated. He who will not keep them will remain in the

darkness of his lower nature, shut out from all understanding of Spiritual

Principles and of the Divine Law. Herein, also, resides the infallible test of

discipleship, for it was none other than Jesus the Christ who said, "He that

loveth  me  not  keepeth  not  my  sayings,"  and  "He  that  hath  mycommandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me."                3. THE YOKE AND THE BURDEN


  Take my yoke upon you, and learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly in

heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My

burden is light.

  JESUS

  Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

  JESUS

    Humanity  is essentially divine. Every precept of Jesus rests upon this

truth.  If  man  were  not  divine,  the  precepts  would  be  both  worthless  and

meaningless, as there would be nothing within him (no divine spirit) to which

they could appeal. The very fact that man is capable of loving his enemies,

and of returning good for evil, is an attestation of his inward and essential

divinity. If sin were man’s natural and rightful condition, it would be right

that he should remain in it, and there would be no necessity to exhort him to

virtue and holiness, for it would be impossible for him to act otherwise than

in accordance with his original nature. Whenever men exhort their fellows to

virtue,  nobility  of  action,  purity  of  thought,  and  unselfishness,  they

unconsciously  assert  and  emphasize  man’s  originally  divine  nature,  and

proclaim, though perhaps they know it not, his superiority to sin, and his

God-like power to overcome it.

  So long, however, has man dwelt in the habitations of sin, that he has at

last come to regard himself as native to it, and as being cut off from the

Divine Source, which he believes to be outside and away from him. He has

thereby lost the consciousness and knowledge of his own divinity, of his

essential oneness with God, the Spirit of Good. Humanity at present is in the

position  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  wandering  in  the  Far  Country  of  Sin,  and

attempting to live upon the swinish husks of base desires and false beliefs;

and  every  divine  precept  and  command  is  a  call  to  man  to  return  to  his

Father’s House, his Original Innocence, and to recover and re-establish the

knowledge of his substantial oneness with the Divine.

  The whole of the teaching of Jesus is an exhortation to men to do as he

did,  to  live  as  he  lived;  he  thereby  recognizes  and  affirms  the  inherent

equality of Humanity with Himself, and in declaring "I and my Father are

One," he speaks not alone for himself but for all men. The difference betweenthe life of Jesus and that of other men is not arbitrarily imposed, nor does it

exist in essentiality, it is self-imposed and exists in individual choice. Jesus

fully recognized his oneness with the Father (the Divine Source), and lived

consciously in that oneness; other men (speaking broadly) not only do not

recognize their oneness with the Divine, but do not believe it; it is therefore

impossible for them, by virtue of their unbelief, to rise to the dignity and

majesty  of  the  Divine  Life.  Whilst  a  man  regards  himself  as  being  the

creature  of  sin,  believing  himself  to  be  originally  degraded,  he  must

necessarily remain degraded, and subject to sin; but let him realize that he is

originally divine, that he is not, never was and never can be, cut off from the

Divine except in his own ignorance and willful choice, and he will at once

rise above sin, and commence to manifest the Divine Life.

  Man  is  primarily  a  spiritual  being,  and  as  such,  is  of  the  nature  and

substance of the Eternal Spirit, the Unchangeable Reality, which men call

God. Goodness, not sin, is his rightful condition; perfection, not imperfection,

is his heritage, and this a man may enter into and realize now if he will grant

the  condition,  which  is  the  denial  or  abandonment  of  self,  that  is,  of  his

feverish desires, his proud will, his egotism and self-seeking — all that which

St. Paul calls the "natural man."

  In  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  Jesus  describes  the  way  of  action  and

thought by which the divine life is to be lived, and after having laid down the

whole duty of man as a spiritual being, a son of God, He exhorts men to live

as becomes their divine relationship, in the words, "Be ye therefore perfect,

even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect." In sounding this high call

to  perfection,  Jesus,  far  from  commanding  an  impossibility,  merely  urges

men to live their true life of divine perfection, and to give up their false life of

self-seeking and sin.

  The "yoke" which Jesus calls upon men to take upon themselves is the

yoke of obedience — obedience to the divine nature which is in every man,

no longer obeying the lower desires and impulses; and the "burden" is the

burden of a sinless life. Such a yoke is "easy," because it entails no suffering,

and such a burden is "light," for it is relieved of the weight of sorrow, anxiety

and fear. It is the life of self-seeking which is so uneasy, while the burden of

sin, even of the mildest forms of sin, is heavy and wearisome. To know the

truth of this, a man has only to look around upon the world, and then withinhis own soul.

  Jesus recognized the divine in all men, even those called "evil," and he

dwelt upon it and reiterated it. The idea of man being innately degraded, a

lost  creature,  incapable  of  lifting  himself  to  the  heights  of  Goodness  and

Righteousness, nowhere enters into either the words, conceptions, or teaching

of Jesus. On the other hand, the whole of his teaching affirms and emphasises

man’s innate Goodness, and his unlimited capacity for practicing goodness.

When he says, "Condemn not and ye shall not be condemned; forgive and ye

shall be forgiven; give and it shall be given unto you; good measure pressed

down, shaken together, and running over shall men give into your bosoms,"

he plainly tells us that if we will only put away all resentment, and treat

others with kindness, forgiveness and gentle consideration, we shall then find

that  men  are  so  intrinsically  good  that  they  will  heap  kindnesses  without

number upon us. He who would find how good at heart men are, let him

throw away all his ideas and suspicions about the "evil" in others, and find

and practice the good within himself.

  Jesus also speaks of the "righteous," and those who "hunger and thirst for

righteousness," of "the meek," "the merciful," "the pure in heart," and "the

peacemakers," and declares that all such are blessed. He draws our attention

to the fact that those who regard themselves as evil, are so far from being evil

that they know how to give good gifts to their children, and that even the

publicans  and  sinners  return  love  for  love.  His  testimony  to  the  guileless

innocence of little children seems to have been much overlooked and ignored

by those who call themselves his followers, and in all his references to and

treatment  of,  the  fallen;  he  looks  behind  and  away  from  the  surface

defilement (which other men regard as the real man, and dwell upon and

exaggerate its enormity), and sees and brings forth the divine beauty and

goodness hidden away under the accumulation of sin.

  He speaks of sinners as "captives" and "blind," and that it was his mission

to preach deliverance and restore sight, clearly indicating that sin is foreign to

man, and that sinlessness is his true state; and he even declares that men shall

do greater works than he did.

  Nowhere in the whole range of history or inspiration is there to be found

such  testimony  to  the  lofty  nobility  and  essential  purity  and  goodness

(doubtless more or less latent) of human heart than in the words and deeds ofJesus. In his divine goodness he knew the human heart, and he knew that it

was good.

  Man has within him the divine power by which he can rise to the highest

heights of spiritual achievement; by which he can shake off sin and shame

and sorrow, and do the will of the Father, the Supreme Good; by which he

can conquer all the powers of darkness within, and stand radiant and free; by

which he can subdue the world, and scale the lofty pinnacles of Truth. This

can man, by choice, by resolve, and by his divine strength, accomplish; but

he can only accomplish it in and by obedience; he must choose meekness and

lowliness  of  heart;  he  must  abandon  strife  for  peace;  passion  for  purity;

hatred for love; self-seeking for self-sacrifice, and must overcome evil with

good; for this is the holy Way of Truth; this is the safe and abiding salvation;

this is the yoke and burden of the Christ.                  4. THE WORD AND THE DOER


    Whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken

him  unto  a  wise  man  which  built  his  house  upon  a  rock:  and  the  rain

descended, and the floods came, and the wind blew and beat upon that house;

and it fell not, for it was founded upon a rock.

  JESUS

  If ye continue in my word, then ye are my disciples indeed; and ye shall

know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free.

  JESUS

  The Gospel of Jesus is a Gospel of living and doing. If it were not this,

it would not voice the Eternal Truth. Its Temple is Purified Conduct, the

entrance-door to which is Self-surrender. It invites men to shake off sin,

and promises, as a result, joy and blessedness and perfect peace.

  There is one characteristic in the teachings of all those Great Souls who

have been worshipped by mankind as saviours, and that is that they bring to

light and appeal directly to, the simple facts and truths of the soul

and  of  life;  and  in  the  teaching  of  Jesus  this  feature  stands  out  pre-

eminently. Strictly speaking, he put forward no theory, advanced no creed,

laid  no  claim  to  any  particular  "views,"  and  propounded  no  speculative

philosophy. He was content to state that which is.

  Men  are  so  taken  up  with  their  pleasures,  theories,  theologies,  and

philosophies that they cannot comprehend the simple facts of life, and it is

supremely the office of the true teacher to bring men back to the simple and

beautiful realities of their own souls. The false teacher, he who can perceive

the simple truths of Duty and of Conduct, and does not see himself and other

men as they are, when asked to point out the Way of Truth, will declare that

it lies entirely in the acceptance of his own particular theology, and will warn

the questioner against all other systems of theology. Not so, however, the true

Teacher, he who knows the human heart, and who sees life as it is; and

particularly not so, Jesus, who when questioned of the Way of Life, always

told his questioner to go and do certain things. Never once did he refer a

questioner to any views, theories, or deftly woven philosophies of his own, or

indeed  of  other  men.  He  referred  them  to  duty  and  to  purity  of  life  and

conduct, and the only things he warned them against were their own sins.And, truly, this is all that is needful. A man either abandons sin or clings to it;

if the former, he does all and realizes the Law of Life; if the latter, he does

nothing, and remains ignorant, blind, without understanding.

  Truth is contained in conduct, and not in any system of thought; and to

live purely and blamelessly is infinitely superior to all wordy doctrines. Let a

man carefully study every system of theology, and he will at last find that one

selfless thought, one pure deed, puts them all to shame. Truth is divorced

from the controversies of the creeds, but it shines with undimmed luster in

the self-forgetting deed. How beautifully this is illustrated in the parables of

Jesus, and how forcibly it is brought out in many of the incidents of his life;

particularly  in  that  one  recorded  in  the  tenth  chapter  of  Luke,  where  the

lawyer asks, "Master, what shall I do to inherit Eternal Life?" The answer of

Jesus is to ask him to repeat the chief commandment, which being done,

Jesus simply says, "This do, and thou shalt live." Whereupon the lawyer,

wishing to draw Jesus into an argument, in order, no doubt, to confound him,

asks, "And who is my neighbour?"

  We then have the incomparable parable of the good Samaritan, wherein

Jesus  shows  in  the  simplest  language  and  imagery,  yet  forcibly  and

unmistakably,  that  religious  observances  are  so  many  vain  and  useless

burdens unless accompanied by good deeds, and that the so-called worldly

man who does unselfish deeds has already found Eternal Life; while the so-

called religious man who shuts up his soul against mercy and unselfishness,

is  shut  out  from  Life.  To  comprehend  the  full  force  of  this  parable  it  is

necessary to bear in mind that the Priests and the Levites were regarded by

the  Jews  as  being  the  highly  favoured  and  chosen  of  God,  whereas  the

Samaritans were regarded as being entirely outside the pale of salvation.

  Jesus recognized no religion outside of conduct; and truly there is none.

Pure  Goodness  is  Religion,  and  outside  it  there  is  no  religion.  There  are

innumerable doctrines, and there is much strife and heated controversy, but a

man is only truly religious when he succeeds in rising above these and this,

and reaches that loving place in his heart where all hateful distinctions are

burnt away by the pure flames of compassion and love. And in this divine

place Jesus stood, and he calls other men thither to receive rest and peace.

  That Jesus was meek, and lowly, and loving, and compassionate, and

pure, is very beautiful, but it is not sufficient; it is necessary, reader, that youalso should be meek, and lowly, and loving and compassionate and pure.

That Jesus subordinated his own will to the will of the Father, it is inspiring

to know, but it is not sufficient; it is necessary that you, too, should likewise

subordinate your will to that of the overruling Good. The grace and beauty

and  goodness  that  were  in  Jesus  can  be  of  no  value  to  you,  cannot  be

understood by you, unless they are also in you, and they can never be in you

until you practice them, for, apart from doing, the qualities which constitute

Goodness do not, as far as you are concerned, exist. To adore Jesus for his

divine qualities is a long step towards Truth, but to practice those qualities is

Truth itself; and he who truly adores the perfection of another will not rest

content in his own imperfection, but will fashion his soul after the likeness of

that other. To us and to all there is no sufficiency, no blessedness, no peace to

be derived from the goodness of another, not even the goodness of God; not

until  the  goodness  is  done  by  us,  not  until  it  is  by  constant  effort,

incorporated into our being, can we know and possess its blessedness and

peace. Therefore, thou who adorest Jesus for his divine qualities, practice

those qualities thyself, and thou too shalt be divine.

  The  teaching  of  Jesus  brings  men  back  to  the  simple  truth  that

righteousness, or right doing, is entirely a matter of individual conduct, and

not a mystical something apart from a man’s thoughts and actions, and that

each must be righteous for himself; each must be a doer of the word, and it is

a  man’s  own  doing  that  brings  him  peace  and  gladness  of  heart,  not  the

doings of another.

  Millions of people worship Jesus and call him Lord, but Jesus does not

leave us in any difficulty or doubt as to who are his disciples, as to who have

entered into Life! His words are directness and simplicity itself, "Not every

one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven;

but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in Heaven." And again,

"Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?" And they

are  the  doers  of  the  Father’s  will  who  shape  their  conduct  to  the  divine

precepts.

  The doer of the word demonstrates and proves its truth in his own mind

and  life.  He  thus  knows  the  Eternal  Rock  as  a  substantial  reality  within

himself, and he builds thereon the Temple of Righteousness which no rains of

grief, no winds of temptation and no floods of sin can destroy or undermine.It is only the doer of forgiveness who tastes the sweets of forgiveness; it is

only he who practices love and mercy and righteousness who receives into

his heart the overflowing measure of their blessedness; and none but he who

dwells in peace toward all can know the boundless and immeasurable peace.

Thus is the doer of the word the disciple indeed, and continuing in that word,

becoming one with it in heart and mind, he knows the Truth which frees the

soul from the bondage of sin.              5. THE VINE AND THE BRANCHES


  I am the Vine, ye are the branches; he that abideth in Me, and I in him,

the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without Me ye can do nothing.

  JESUS

  Come unto Me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you

rest.

  JESUS

  The Christ is the Spirit of Love, which is the abiding and indwelling

Reality in man. Yet though its perfected Temple is the human form, and it

can only visibly and consciously manifest itself in and through the human

personality, it is impersonal in its nature, is a universal and eternal Principle,

and is at once the source and the substance of Life.

  In this Principle of Love, all Knowledge, Intelligence, and Wisdom are

contained, and until a man realizes it as the one vital Reality of his being, he

does not fully comprehend the Christ. Such glorious realization is the crown

of  evolution,  the  supreme  aim  of  existence.  Its  attainment  is  complete

salvation, emancipation from all error, ignorance, and sin.

  This principle is in all men, but is not manifested by all; and it is not

known  and  manifested  by  men  because  they  continue  to  cling  to  those

personal  elements  which  obscure  its  presence  and  power.  Every  personal

element in human nature is changeable and perishable, and to cling to them is

to embrace negations, shadows, death. In the material world, an object cannot

be perceived until all intervening obstacles are removed; and in the spiritual

region an abiding Principle cannot be apprehended until every impermanent

element is relinquished. Before a man can know Love as the abiding Reality

within  him,  he  must  utterly  abandon  all  those  human  tendencies  which

frustrate its perfect manifestation. By so doing he becomes one with Love —

becomes Love itself; he then discovers that he is, and always has been, divine

and one with God.

  Jesus,  by  his  complete  victory  over  the  personality,  realized  and

manifested his oneness with the Supreme Spirit; and, subordinating his entire

nature and life to impersonal Love, he became literally an embodiment of the

Christ. He is therefore truly called the Christ.  "When Jesus said, "Without Me ye can do nothing," he spoke not of his

perishable form, but of the Universal Spirit of Love of which his conduct was

a perfect manifestation; and this utterance of his is the statement of a simple

truth; for the works of man are vain and worthless when they are done for

personal  ends,  and  he  himself  remains  a  perishable  being,  immersed  in

darkness and fearing death, so long as he lives in his personal gratifications.

The animal in man can never respond to and know the divine; only the divine

can respond to the divine. The spirit of hatred in man can never vibrate in

unison with the Spirit of Love; Love only can comprehend Love, and become

linked with it. Man is divine; man is of the substance of Love; this he may

realize  if  he  will  relinquish  the  impure,  personal  elements  which  he  has

hitherto been blindly following, and will fly to the impersonal Realities of the

Christ Spirit; and these Realities are Purity, Humility, Compassion, Wisdom,

Love.

  Every  precept  of  Jesus  demands  the  unconditional  sacrifice  of  some

selfish, personal element before it can be carried out. Man cannot know the

Real whilst he clings to the unreal; he cannot do the work of Truth whilst he

clings  to  error.  Whilst  a  man  cherishes  lust,  hatred,  pride,  vanity,  self-

indulgence, covetousness, he can do nothing, for the works of all these sinful

elements are unreal and perishable.

  Only when he takes refuge in the Spirit of Love within, and becomes

patient,  gentle,  pure,  pitiful,  and  forgiving,  does  he  work  the  works  of

Righteousness, and bear the fruits of Life. The vine is not a vine without its

branches, and even then it is not complete until those branches bear fruit.

Love is not complete until it is lived by man; until it is fully understood by

him and manifested in his conduct. A man can only consciously ally himself

to the Vine of Love by deserting all strife, and hatred, and condemnation, and

impurity, and pride, and self-seeking and by thinking only loving thoughts

and  doing  loving  deeds.  By  so  doing,  he  awakens  within  him  the  divine

nature which he has heretofore been crucifying and denying.

  Every time a man gives way to anger, impatience, greed, pride, vanity, or

any form of personal selfishness, he denies the Christ, he shuts himself out

from Love. And thus only is Christ denied, and not by refusing to adopt a

formulated creed. Christ is only known to him who by constant striving has

converted himself from a sinful to a pure being, who by noble, moral efforthas succeeded in relinquishing that perishable self which is the source of all

suffering and sorrow and unrest, and has become rational, gentle, peaceful,

loving, and pure.

  Man’s only refuge from sin is sinless Love, flying to and dwelling in

which, and abandoning all else as evanescent, unreal, and worthless, daily

practicing  love  towards  all  in  heart  and  mind  and  deed,  harbouring  no

injurious or impure thoughts, he discovers the imperishable Principles of his

being, enters fully into the knowledge of his oneness with eternal Life, and

receives the never-ending Rest.                        6. SALVATION THIS DAY


  This day is salvation come to this house.

  JESUS TO ZACCHAEUS

    Behold, the Kingdom of God is within you.

  JESUS

  I have tried to show, in the five foregoing chapters, that the Teaching of

Jesus is based entirely on the perfection of conduct, and can be summed up in

the one word Goodness. Jesus manifested this Goodness in his life, and his

Teaching is vitally powerful because it is rooted in his life, his conduct. His

command, "Follow me," is literal and actual, not in the sense of a slavish

imitation of the external details of his life, but in scaling (as he scaled) the

heights of Goodness and Pity and Love by the conquest of self. The glory of

his  Teaching  is  embodied  in  his  precepts,  as  the  splendour  of  his  life  is

wrapped up in them, and he who adopts those precepts as the guides of his

life will so perfect his conduct by purifying the inward springs of thought and

action as to become a spiritualized and sinless being, fulfilling the whole duty

of  life  and  the  purpose  of  existence.  Herein  also  is  contained  complete

salvation, namely, freedom from sin.

  The word salvation is only mentioned by Jesus twice, and only one of

these utterances (that to Zacchaeus) can be said to have any vital significance

for  us;  yet  in  that  one  brief  statement  we  are  fully  enlightened  as  to  its

meaning  by  virtue  of  its  pointed  application  to  the  altered  conduct  of

Zacchaeus.  This  man,  we  infer,  had  hitherto  been  hard,  exacting,  and

grasping, but though he had not yet seen in person the new Teacher, his

message had reached his ears, and he had opened his heart to the Good News

that man can and should repent, and abandon selfish and sinful practices for

good  and  sinless  conduct.  And  this  he  had  done,  and,  having  proved  its

blessedness, no wonder that when Jesus came to his house he "received him

joyfully," and told him how he had abandoned wrong-doing for right-doing;

evil for good; the selfish for the unselfish life. Jesus did not inquire into the

"religious views" of Zacchaeus, did not impose upon him any change of view

or opinion; did not demand that he believe anything about Jesus as being the

Messiah,  the  Son  of  God,  etc.  Zacchaeus  had  changed  his  conduct;  had

completely turned round in his attitude toward others; had abandoned greedfor generosity, extortion for charity, honesty for dishonesty, selfishness for

unselfishness, evil for good, — and this was sufficient, as Jesus declared in

the words, "This day is salvation come to this house."

  The only salvation recognized and taught by Jesus is salvation from sin,

and the effects of sin, here and now; and this must be old selfishness, the old

life of self, in any or every shape, only by doing this, and turning to the new

life of gentleness, and purity, and humility, and unselfish love, can a man be

said to be saved from sin; and then he is saved indeed, for, no more practicing

it,  it  can  trouble  him  no  more.  Herein  also  is  Heaven,  not  a  speculative

heaven beyond the tomb, but a real, abiding, and ever present Heaven in the

heart; a Heaven from which all the hellish desires and moods and sufferings

are banished, where Love rules, and from which Peace is never absent.

  Good  news indeed is that message of Jesus which reveals to man his

divine possibilities; which says in substance to sin-stricken humanity, "Take

up thy bed and walk;" which tells man that he need no longer remain the

creature of darkness and ignorance and sin if he will but believe in Goodness,

and will watch and strive and conquer until he has actualized in his life the

Goodness that is sinless. And in thus believing and overcoming, man not only

has the guide of that Perfect Rule which Jesus has embodied in his precepts,

he has also the inward Guide, the Spirit of Truth in his own heart, "The Light

which lighteth every man that cometh into the world," which, as he follows it,

will infallibly witness to the divine origin of those precepts.

  He who will humbly pass through the Gate of Good, resolving that every

element of his nature that is not pure and true and lovable shall be abandoned,

that every violation of the Divine precepts shall be abolished, to him, faithful,

humble, true, will be revealed the sublime Vision of the Perfect One, and, day

by day purifying his heart and perfecting his conduct in accordance with his

vision, he will sooner or later rise above all the subtleties of his lower nature,

will wash away every ignominious stain from his soul, and realize the perfect

goodness of the eternal Christ.

 

                         SECOND PART


                      BOOKS OF POEMS,


  MEDITATIONS AND THOUGHTS                        BOOK EIGHTEEN


            THE DIVINE COMPANION.                                  FOREWORD


  It cannot be said of this book that James Allen wrote it at any particular

time or in any one year, for he was engaged in it over many years and those

who  have  eyes  to  see  and  hearts  to  understand  will  find  in  its  pages  the

spiritual history of his life. It was his own wish that The Divine Companion

should be the last MS of his to be published. " It is the story of my soul," he

said,  "  and  should  be  read  last  of  all  my  books,  so  that  the  student  may

understand and find my message in its pages. Therefore hold it back until you

have published everything else." There remain now only his dramatic works

and a few poems to be included in the next edition of Poems  of  Peace.

That The Divine Companion will prove a companion indeed to thousands

who have read his books in the past, I have no doubt. To read it is to hear

again the voice of the writer, and to study its message is to once again sit at

his feet. He trod the Way himself - every bit of it, and he therefore speaks as

one having authority. Lovers of James Allen’s works will indeed be filled

with joy to know that there is yet another book from his inspired pen, and

will eagerly welcome The Divine Companion.

  LILY L. ALLEN                    PART I: THE DIVINE


                            COMPANION

  I, the Spirit of Truth

  Am the Friend of the forsaken and the Companion of the wise,

  I restore the one, and I gladden the other, and all men I protect, though

they know me not.

  The Divine Companion                          TRUTH AS AWAKENER


  1

  REJOICE! for the Morning has dawned:

  The Truth has awakened us;

  We have opened our eyes and, the dark night of error is no more.

  Long have we slept in matter and Sensation;

  Long did we struggle in the painful nightmare of evil;

  But now we are awake in Spirit and Truth:

  We have found the Good, and the struggle with evil is ended:

  We slept, yet knew not that we slept:

  We suffered, yet knew not why we suffered:

  We were troubled in our dreaming, yet none could awake us, for all were

dreaming like ourselves;

  Then there came a pause in our dreaming;

  Our sleep was stayed;

  Truth spoke to us, and we heard;

  And lo! we opened our eyes, and saw.

  We slumbered and saw not;

  We slept and knew not;

  But now we are awake and see;

  Yea, we know we are awake because we have seen Holiness, and we love

sin no more;

  We have beheld Truth, and error has ceased to attract us.

  Yea, we have seen the Truth!

  Not as a dream in the night, but as a Reality with our awakened eyes;

  As a beautiful land afar have we seen it,

  And we shall press forward until we reach and possess it.

  How beautiful is Truth!

  How glorious is the Realm of Reality!

  How Ineffable is the bliss of Holiness!

  We have abandoned error for truth, and illusion for Reality.  We have turned our backs on error and confusion,

  And have set our faces towards the harmony of Justice and Truth.

  2

  To sin is to dream,

  And to love sin is to love darkness.

  The awakened do not prefer dreaming to intelligent action;

  They do not choose darkness rather than light.

  They who love darkness are involved in the darkness;

  They have not yet seen the light.

  He who has seen the light does not choose to walk in darkness.

  To see the Truth is to love it, and in comparison error has no beauty,

  The dreamer is now in pleasure, now in pain;

  This hour in confidence, the next in fear.

  He is without stability and has no abiding refuge.

  When the monsters of remorse and retribution pursue him, whither can he

fly?

  There is no place of safety unless he awake.

  Let the dreamer struggle with his dream;

  Let him strive to realise the illusory nature of all self-seeking desire,

  And lo! he will open his spiritual eyes upon the world of Light and Truth;

  He will awake, and will see all things in their right relations and true

proportions;

  He will be happy, sane, and peaceful seeing things as they are.

  Truth is the light of universe, the day of the mind;

  In it there is no error, no anguish, and no fear.

  He who has awakened into the light of day is no more burdened with the

troubles of his dreams.

  They are remembered as dreams only as illusions that are dispelled.

  The unawakened one knows neither waking nor dreaming;

  He is in confusion, he knows not himself;

  Neither knows he others, and his judgment is without knowledge.

  The awakened one knows both waking and dreaming;  He is established in wisdom;

    Knowing himself, he knows others, and he judges with knowledge.

  He is the understander, the knower of hearts,

  And, walking in the light of Truth, he knows that every dreamer will at

last awake.

  3

  Truth awakens us out of the slumber of ignorance,

  Out of the deep sleep of sin.

  It calls, and they who hear and awake, become wise and blessed.

  Truth appears to men, and they see it not.

  It calls to them, and they hear not.

  It speaks to them through their actions,

  It cries aloud to them in their sufferings,

  It shines upon them in all their ways,

  But they hear not, neither do they see,

  For their ears are deaf in slumber, and their eyes are holden with sleep.

  Truth is manifest in the actions of the wise,

  Its light illuminates their precepts,

  But the sleeper in error has no eyes for the manifest,

  And the light of Truth, falling upon his

  sleeping lids, calls forth no visual response.

  Where there is no understanding, the repetition of precepts is vain.

  Right comprehension is needed.

  The sinless mind is the seeing mind.

  He who has right comprehension interprets the divine precepts by the

light of his own spotless deeds.

  He does not repeat in error, but understands by the Spirit of Truth.

  And this is the Spirit of Truth,–

  To be free from sin to abide in good deeds, and to live in peace with all.

  They that do evil, know not the Truth.

  The Truth is in them that do good.

  The deeds of Truth shine like the stars at night, dispelling darkness.  Truth reveals the everlasting Good;

  It turns night to day, and changes the appearance of all things,

  So that sin and sorrow are not, and evil is no more.

  4

  We are awake, and see!

  And we know we are awake because we see Good.

  And  we  know  we  are  of  the  Spirit  of  Good  because  our  lusts  have

departed from us,

  And the bondage of hatred is broken. We are wedded to purity;

  We have put on the Raiment of Righteousness,

  And we serve the Spirit of Love;

  Therefore are we awake;

  Therefore we know that truth has roused us from the sleep of evil.

  We are free and happy because we walk in the Light.

  And we see all things clearly in that Light;

  And we know the way we walk and whither we go.

  But when our lusts affrighted us and hatred enchained us;

  When darkness enfolded us, and the dream of evil held us,

  Then were we bound and miserable;

  We saw only our fitful dreams;

  We knew not the way we walked, nor whither we went.

  He that hates men as evil is in sin,

  And he that is in sin is unawakened.

  The awakened one is the lover of all men, and there is no hatred in him,

  And this is the sign that he has awakened in the Truth–

  That he loves them that hate him.

  Truth ends the dream of evil;

  It dispels the illusions of hatred;

  It liberates the sleeper from darkness and dreams.

  Awake, Ye that sleep in error!

  Rouse yourselves, Ye that dream in sin!

  The splendour of a higher life is round about you,  Even the life of Good. Open your eyes, and see.

  Be alert, and listen that ye may hear the call of Truth,

  Even the Voice of the Great Awakener.                            TRUTH AS CONSOLER


  1

  THE knowledge of Truth is an abiding consolation.

  When all else fails, the Truth does not fail.

  When a heart is desolate, and the world affords no shelter,

  Truth provides a peaceful refuge and a quiet rest.

  The cares of life are many, and its path is beset with difficulties;

  But Truth is greater than care, and is superior to all difficulties.

  Truth lightens our burdens; It lights up our pathway with the radiance

  of joy. Loved ones pass away, friends fail, and possessions disappear.

  Where then is the voice of comfort?

  Where is the whisper of consolation?

  Truth is the Comforter of the comfortless,

  and the Consoler of them that are deserted.

  Truth does not pass away, nor fail, nor disappear.

  Truth bestows the consolation of abiding peace.

  Troubles come to all.

  Even the wise cannot escape them.

  But the wise have a sure and safe refuge in the Eternal Good.

  They have a Comforter, even Truth,

  Who  removes  the  sting  from  affliction,  and  disperses  the  clouds  of

trouble.

  Night descends upon the pure as upon the impure;

  But it holds no terrors for the pure,

  For the Light of Truth shines in the darkness with assuring radiance.

  Sweet is the sleep of the innocent.

  And they that rest upon the bosom of Truth repose in peace.

  Day lights up the way both of the wise and the foolish;

  But the foolish are enveloped with the darkness of error,

  They stumble and are bruised, and have no comforter.

  But the wise walk in the Light of Truth;  And should they stumble they are lifted up;

  Lo! they are healed and comforted.

  They that have the knowledge of Truth have the satisfaction of peace.

  They are not immune from the vicissitudes of life;

  They  are  not  released  from  the  cares  and  responsibilities  of  worldly

duties;

  They are not unassailed by external foes;

  But they are restful at heart;

  Their minds abide in the Great Calm.

  2

  The worldly - minded have no comforter;

  But if they forsake the world, and fly to Truth,

  They will receive the sweet gift of Consolation

  The world is the place of pleasure and pain;

  The Truth is the abode of joy and peace.

  They that relinguish the excitements and dissatisfactions of the world for

the sake of Truth,

  Will find an unfailing Companion and Friend, even the Eternal.

  Distress is in the world.

  Yea, grief and sorrow abound.

  But the Truth is calm;

  It allays grief, and soothes away all sorrow.

  Hear ye the lamentations of the world!

  Wilder are they than the tempest;

  Deeper than the ocean’s roar.

  Truth alone can still the tempests of passion and the storms of grief.

  Come ye up into the Calm.

  Resort ye to the Great Silence.

  Men are. swept along by the force of turbulent passions;

  But when, sorrow arrests them they cry out in anguish.

  Love of worldly pleasure has brought them low, and the world can offer

them no comfort.  The world distresses, but the Truth consoles.

  They whom the world has destroyed and deserted,

  Who are cast down by pain and sorrow,

  Even they are befriended by the Truth when they turn to Truth.

  None are despised by Truth;

  None are turned away;

  None are left comfortless.

  Ye that are weary with pleasure-seeking;

  Ye that are pain-stricken;

  Ye that are lonely and desolate–

  Come ye to the Truth.

  The Truth is above pleasure and pain.

  Be ye lifted up;

  Be ye rested;

  Be ye healed;

  Be ye befriended and comforted.

  3

  He who clings to his delusions, loving self and sin,

  He cannot find the Truth,

  Cannot receive the consolation of Truth.

  All that demeans and defiles must be abandoned.

  Truth is not found if the love of self is not renounced.

  They who lie or deceive;

  Who hate or envy;

  Who lust or covet;

  Who think only of their own pleasure;

  Whose aims are for self and the glory of self in all that they do,–

  From such Truth is hidden by a veil of darkness,

  Even they thick veil of error;

  From such the consolation of Truth is withheld because they seek for self

only, and not for Truth.

  They who are truthful and sincere;  Who love men and rejoice in their success;

  Who are pure and generous;

  Who seek the good of others in all that they do,–

  To them Truth is revealed;

  Such stand face to face with Good, and receive the consolation of Truth.

  The foolish seek satisfaction in sensual pleasures;

  The vain are pleased with the flatteries of the world;

  The one leads to misery and emptiness;

  The other to disappointment and humiliation.

  The wise abide in the joy of Truth;

  And there are no pitfalls for the humble,

  Their feet are steadfast in the way of peace.

  We have cancelled our compact with the world.

  Its pleasures are put away, abandoned, renounced.

  We perform the necessary uses of the world, but we no longer rest upon

its forms,

  No more seek satisfaction in its thirsty desires.

  Our hearts are set upon the good of all.

  Thus have we found the abiding sweetness of religion.

  We have found a quiet trust and a patient happiness.

  We have resorted to the Faithful One, the ever-present Comforter,

  Even the Spirit of Holiness.

  We have taken shelter in His high Abode.

  And no temptation shall draw us back into the tempestuous ways of the

world,

  For our refuge is a refuge indeed.

  4

  The way of self is the way of sorrow;

  But Truth refreshes the weary, and lifts up the oppressed.

  There is gladness for the grief-stricken,

  And healing for them that are afflicted with the sorrows of the world.

  There is a place of freedom where the chains of sin are broken,  Where weeping is not, and lamentation is no more heard.

  There is a Friend for the friendless,

  And consolation for them that have no comforter

  Come; see; and receive.

  Truth meets all needs, and is ready to receive all who come.

  The righteous rest there;

  They have received the fulness of joy.

  Let also the unrighteous come;

  Yea, let them that are weary of sin, come;

  And they that are burdened and oppressed with the sorrows of self,

  Let them enter and be glad.

  There is a Home for the homeless, and a Country for the exiled;

  For  the  wanderer  there  is  a  happy  Way,  and  the  lost  have  a  City  of

Refuge.

    Whosoever will turn, let him turn and come.

  Truth brings joy out of sorrow, and peace out of perturbation;

  It  points  the  selfish  to  the  Way  of  Good,  and  sinners  to  the  Path  of

Holiness.

  Its spirit is the doing of righteousness.

  To the earnest and faithful it brings consolation;

  Upon the obedient and skilful it bestows the crown of peace.

  I take refuge in Truth:

  Yea, in the spirit of Good, in the knowledge of Good, and in the doing of

Good I abide,

  And I am reassured and comforted.

  It is to me as though malice were not, and hatred had vanished away.

  Lust is confined to the nethermost darkness,

  It hath no way in Truth’s transcendent Light.

  Pride is broken up and dissolved.

  And vanity is melted away as a mist.

  I  have  set  my  face  towards  the  Perfect  Good,  and  my  feet  in  the

Blameless Way;  And because of this I am consoled.

  I am strengthened and comforted, having found refuge in Truth.                      TRUTH AS REDEEMER


  1

  TRUTH is our Redeemer.

  Truth purifies our hearts and bestows upon us the glorious gift of divine

Love.

  There is no salvation in selfishness.

  Self is the vessel of sin and the receptacle of sorrow;

  But when we fly to Truth, self is ended, and Love abides for ever.

  We have tried the ways of self, and we know how hard they are.

  We also look upon the weary multitudes, and compassion is stirred within

us:

  But now we have found the Truth the pilgrimage of self is ended,

  Our feet are rested, and there is no more weariness of heart.

  The nature of self is error;

  It cannot, therefore, comprehend Truth.

  The experience of self is suffering;

  It cannot, therefore, apprehend bliss.

  When the vessel of self is broken, and its contents of error and suffering

are scattered,

  Then is Truth revealed and realised.

  Truth alone can comprehend Truth, and bliss apprehendeth bliss.

  How can self know Love, seeing that its nature is its own gratification?

  How can it know peace, seeing that it cannot bestow Love?

  How  can  it  enter  into  salvation,  seeing  that  it  dreads  the  loss  of  its

perishable lusts and empty pleasures?

  Self is the way of darkness and the path of pain.

  The redeemed have put away self, and have accepted Truth.

  Self regards error as Truth, when it is pleasing;

  It regards Truth as error, when it is displeasing;  Seeking pleasure and dreading pain, it does not know good and evil.

  Truth knows Truth as Truth, and error as error;

  It avoids evil and chooses good, without considerations of pleasure and

pain.

  Divine Love is the perfect flower of Truth;

  For when Truth fills the heart Love blossoms out in the life.

  By this flower is Truth known,

  For wheresoever-impartial Love is, there is Truth.

  Just deeds, pure actions, works untainted with self, minds controlled and

calm,–

  These are the angelic messengers of Truth;

  The possessors of these are the redeemed;

  Their habitation is peace.

  2

  Truth is the Saviour of the world.

  There is no other Saviour.

  There can be no compromise with Truth;

  It says "Give up self."

  Truth is our Redeemer only when we yield up all to it.

  Self cannot be saved.

  It must be abandoned.

  It must be left to the darkness in which  it originated and to which it

belongs.

  The light of Salvation is only for them that press forward, and leave all

selfishness behind.

  And they who turn not back enter the presence of the Redeemer,

  They are clothed with His Glory.

  Who can see the glory of the redeemed?

  The redeemed behold it,

  And them that are about to be redeemed, see it dimly:

  But the eyes of the world are holden with the thought of self.

  The redeemed are silent in the midst of men.  They accuse not, condemn not, revile not.

  When smitten, they are not angry,

  And when mocked, they make no sign.

  Vet him that smote them they succour in his sorrow;

  And when they that mocked them are brought low,

  They lift them up and bless them.

  The utterance of Truth is deeds.

  The redeemed are freed from all selfishness.

  They are made perfect in Truth.

  The thought of self being eliminated, there is nothing remaining in them

that can give rise to selfishness.

  They are calm and just, doing that which is right, and passion is purged

from their actions.

  He who comes to the feet of Truth,

  Earnest in thought, strong in will, and contrite in heart,

  Will be lifted up and saved.

  He will overcome all that defiles, and all that causes sorrow.

  The light of Truth will light up his mind, dispelling all darkness,

  And he will stand among them to whom the Cosmic Glory is unveiled.

  For, to the redeemed, the narrow confines of self are burst and broken

asunder,

  And the mind is conscious of the Eternal.

  The universe is known as it is;

  Yea, its perfection and the splendour of its Law are revealed.

  So large, so boundless, so all-embracing is the life of the redeemed in

Truth.

  3

    Immortal Truth redeems us from mortal error.

  Clinging no more to the perishable, we fly to the Imperishable,

  And find the Rock of Safety.

  The body grows old, it withers and decays:

  Passions burn out, leaving only the ashes of regret:    Pleasures cease to satisfy and pains fill up their places;

  But Truth is imperishable;

  It never grows old, nor does it wither and decay;

  It does not consume, and it leaves behind no sorrow and no pain.

  To set the mind upon that which is perishable;

  To be consumed by violent passions;

  To live in unhappiness and misery,–

  This it is to be unredeemed.

  The redeemed having the knowledge of the Imperishable and being in

possession of righteousness,

  Live in happiness and joy,

  For Truth is always bright and beautiful.

  Yea, Truth is always peace - bestowing;

  It calms the storms of strife;

  To the passion - driven it brings quiet;

  Upon the dark waters of anguish it pours the oil of stillness;

  The mind that is troubled it restores, and envelops it with silence.

  The redeemed are satisfied;

  They are in security and peace;

  They are not overtaken by the storms of passion,

  Nor attacked and laid low by fierce desires:

  They abide in the Place of Safety.

  What enemy shall overcome the redeemed!

  Have they not slain the supreme enemy, even self!

  Have they not taken his stronghold even their own hearts!

  Yea, they have purified their hearts, and the impure cannot overcome the

pure.

  Out of the black night!

  Out of the fierce war;

  Out of the confusion and the conflict have the redeemed come;

  And now they dwell in the Light;

  They abide with peace, and darkness and strife are no more.  4

  The unredeemed are in the confines of self;

  They are surrounded with darkness;

  They seek for self only.

  The redeemed are in the glory of the universal, the impersonal;

  They are surrounded with light;

  They seek the good of all.

  Truth is the breaker of bonds;

  It liberates the slave;

  It sets the captive free.

  Who chooses bondage rather than liberty?

  Who prefers darkness to light?

  He who has not known liberty loves his chains;

  And he who has not seen the light prefers to remain in darkness.

  And when liberty is made known it is desired.

  When light is perceived, there is no longer a dwelling - place in darkness.

  The desires of the flesh are a tormenting fever;

  The hatreds, conflicts, and covetings of the mind are a consuming fire:

  But there is a healing for the fever, and a water for the quenching of the

fire.

  Truth is the healer of the mind;

  It is a sweet medicine to the afflicted,

  And a draught of cool water to them that are troubled with thirst.

  There is no unrest in Truth.

  The unredeemed are in the way of sorrow;

  Pain and weariness are their companions.

    Reaching after pleasures, they grasp sorrows;

  Striving eagerly for self, happiness departs from them.

  But the redeemed are in the Way of Gladness;

  Strength and joy are their companions;

  And not departing from Good they dwell in the House of Happiness.

  From what, then, are we redeemed?  From what are we saved, and where is our salvation?

  We are redeemed from self and passion,

  From sin and sorrow,

  From unholiness and unrest,

  Even from these are we taken away,

  We are saved from lust and hatred,

  From pride and vanity,

  From covetousness and envy,

  Even from these are we drawn away.

  We are saved by the Truth;

  By the practice of Truth,

  By the knowledge of Truth,

  And by the power of Truth.

  Our salvation is from the Truth.

  In Truth we rest.

  Truth is the Redeemer of the world.                    TRUTH AS RECONCILER


  1

  TRUTH is the Reconciler of Extremes.

  It neutralises all opposites.

  It harmonises all discords and contradictions.

  It brings back to us harmony and peace.

  When we were in error we saw all things as erroneous.

  Yea, when we were blind to our own error we saw error in all else;

  We saw good as evil, and evil as good;

  Light as darkness, and darkness as light;

  But now we have plucked out the eye of error from ourselves, we see the

Supreme Good.

  Truth reconciles man to man;

  It reconciles man to the universe;

  It bestows upon him the knowledge of the Good Law;

  It reveals the hidden justice in all events.

  In error is unrest, and anger, and perturbation.

  Trouble and turmoil is ever with him, who sees injustice, confusion, and

contradiction;

  But he who sees Justice, Order, and Harmony is calm and filled with

peace.

  Error sees error; and Truth sees Truth.

  Error, being darkness, cannot penetrate the light;

  But Truth, being light, can penetrate the darkness.

  Truth reconciles darkness with light.

  Error is the Great Unrest;

  Truth is the Great Peace.

  He who looks with the eye of error is restless as the shifting winds.

  But restful as the stable mountain is he who looks with the eye of Truth.  We are reconciled to the world;

  We are reconciled to humanity;

  And being thus reconciled we are at rest.

  Where unrest is, there is no reconciliation;

  And they who are not so reconciled have not received the Truth.

  2

  All things are proportionate;

  All circumstances are just;

  All events are of causation.

  He  who  has  received  the  Light  of  Truth  sees  all  things  in  their  right

relations.

  All things are ruled by causation;

  All things are of the nature of causation;

  There is nothing which is not contained in cause and effect.

  Cause and effect are one:

  The Divine Law is one

  Out of chaos into Cosmos have we come;

  Out of confusion into harmony;

  Out of bewilderment into peace perpetual.

  There is good in all things.

  Out of evil comes suffering;

  Out of suffering comes sorrow;

  And from sorrow is lowly wisdom born.

  Though the night be long, the Morning comes;

  And with it comes sunshine and singing.

  Though the world be in its long night, the Great Day will dawn.

  Lo! we behold the splendour of its Light!

  There are no more any enemies;

  All are our own, our beloved;

  Both them that bless and them that curse all are friendly to us.

  The inward enemy being overcome, all outward foes have vanished away.

  There is no more enmity.  Men and things are in their right places.

  There is no more strife;

  No more fighting;

  No more warfare.

  We behold the fray, but do not engage in it;

  We hear the tumult, and we make no sound.

  But though quiescent, we watch;

  Though silent, we are not indifferent.

    Perceiving the Divine Order, we are reconciled to all things;

  And being so reconciled, we are in perfect peace.

  3

    Wherefore should we mourn and be sorrowful?

  The very ground of lamentation is dissolved;

  The foundation of sorrow is cut away;

  And as for sin and evil–they were, but are not.

  The sphere of controversy is broken:

  About what should we contend?

  The world of division is annulled:

  What have we to defend?

  Can  Truth  fail,  that  we  should  argue,  that  we  should  be  anxious  and

concerned?

  Because Truth endures for ever, our peace can never fail.

  The seed fails in its appointed place;

  The flower appears, and also the fruit in its season;

  Day warms, and night cools; Light is shed, and rain falls;

  Snow covers, and frost binds.–

  Are these things opposed?

  Are they enemies?

  They work together as one.

  Who, then, shall stir us up to wrath?

  Who shall draw us into the lists of contention?

  With them that agree with us we are at peace?  And with that oppose us we are also at peace.

  Friends are not near, nor enemies far;

  Praise and blame are not asunder.

  Truth draws all things together;

  It resolves all opposites into one.

  Yea, forces that seemed divided are now united;

    Things that seemed to contend are now in agreement;

  And events that seemed adverse are now friendly.

  How foolish we were in our fear!

  How blind in our bigotry!

  How hateful in our heart!

  We were as the beasts that rage and kill,

  Or as the blind beetle that dashes on to its death!

  All things are in unison;

  And fear, and blindness, and hatred are no more.

    Having departed from the lesser, the Greater is revealed:

    Having renounced the part, the Whole is received:

    Having abandoned the imperfect, what remains but the Perfect!

  4

  Truly all things are reconciled, and peace awaits.

  The Door of Truth is open.

  None hinders, but man holds back.

  He holds back for a time, and in the hour of ripeness he comes forward.

    Whosoever will come, let him come! Let him enter and be glad.

  All things are now.

  All Light, all Law, all Truth is now.

  Time and Eternity are one;

  Matter and Spirit are one;

  Death and Life are one;

  The blind see not,

  But they that have eyes know the things which they see.

  We strive not;  We stand apart and are silent.

  Men hurry to and fro a little while;

  A little time they come, and a little time they go:

  How eager they are I How anxious!

  How fierce!

  Better than all worldly gain is the spirit of peace.

  Better than rule and riches is the Reconciliation of Truth.

  Fires burn out, and storms subside;

  But serenity remains.

    Calmness preserves and restores, and Tranquillity is a great possession.

  Who condemns our aloofness?

  Him our peace enfolds;

  Even him our reconciliation embraces.

  Apart, we are not separate:

  Aloof, we are not estranged:

  Engaging with none, and joining with none, Yet we belong to all.

  For the Perfect Reconciliation is not partial, but just.

  He who sees all sides, sees the Whole;

  And seeing the Whole, he is satisfied;

  Being satisfied, he is peace with all. Seers of the great Glory;

  Hearers of the Heavenly Harmony;

    Knowers of the Perfect Law–

  Great is your gladness!

  Wondrous is your wisdom!

  Deep is your peace!

  More powerful is one day of your silence than a thousand years of noise.

  All parties, all sides, all religions are reconciled.

  Love supports all, sustains all, nourishes ad.

  The Great Reconciler is come;

  He is here, and we have found Him.

  We sought Him, and He turned not away;

  And because of this, we have received the world;  And peace does not depart from us.                        TRUTH AS PROTECTOR


  1

  GOOD deeds are Truth.

  Our good deeds remain with us, they save and protect us.

  Evil deeds are error.

  Our evil deeds follow us, they overthrow us in the hour of temptation.

  The evil-doer is not protected from sorrow;

  But the good-doer is shielded from all harm.

  The fool says unto his evil deed–

  "Remain thou hidden, be thou unexposed,"

  But his evil is already published, and his sorrow is sure.

  If we are in evil, what shall protect us?

  What keep us from misery and confusion?

  Nor man nor woman, nor wealth nor power, nor heaven nor earth shall

keep us from confusion.

  From the results of evil there is no escape;

  No refuge and no protection.

  If we are in Good, what shall overthrow us?

  What bring us to misery and confusion?

  Nor man nor woman, nor poverty nor sickness, nor heaven nor earth shall

bring us to confusion.

  The effects of Good appear, though the cause be forgotten,

  And its refuge and protection is at hand.

  What can amulets and charms avail?

  What can the muttering of set prayers avail?

  What can the observance of formal rites avail?

  They cannot avail, they are empty;

  They are without efficacy, and are void of protection.

    Righteousness avails.

  The doing of good deeds avails.

  A pure heart and a blameless life avail.  They are filled with joy and peace.

  Truth is a happy retreat and an eternal protection.

  In Truth there is no more doubt and uncertainty.

  There is safety and security:

  There is a straight way and a quiet rest.

  2

  The righteous know the protection of Truth.

  Their minds are free, and they are happy-hearted.

  Empty excuses and vain quibbles they harbour not.

  They scheme not how to protect themselves;

  Their deeds are invincible defenders;

  Their lives bear witness, and they are not ashamed.

  The unrighteous are overtaken with shame and confusion.

  They try to hide, but cannot;

  They have no place of concealment:

  Their deeds accuse them, and they have no protection.

  How happy are the righteous!

  They are relieved from all anxiety.

  Walking with Truth, they walk in perfect freedom.

  How fearless are the righteous!

  They have no dark forebodings;

  They dread no evil;

  When evil threatens they are calm and unafraid.

  Truth shields from the afflictions of the mind.

  It fortifies against misery;

  It destroys self - delusion and sorrow.

  The Light of Truth reveals error and the cause of error;

  It also reveals the effects of error;

  It frees the mind from all subjection to evil.

  He that is established in Truth is established in safety.

  Truth cannot proceed from error, nor error from Truth.

  Good cannot be the effect of evil, nor evil the effect of Good.  This is little understood.

  But the righteous understand, and, understanding, they are glad;

  They rejoice in the Law of Truth.

  The understanding mind is not misled by appearances:

  It rejoices in Good against all appearances.

  When events press, it does not think, "The Good has failed ";

  When  outward  things  fail,  it  does  not  say,  "Righteousness  has  not

supported me ";

  When  persecution  comes,  it  cannot  say,  "Lo!  Truth  affords  me  no

protection!"

  Truth is in the thought, and not in the thing;

  It resides in the hearts, and not in the outward habit;

  It destroys the inward enemies, and the outward reverses have no more

power;

  Their sting is gone, their evil is dispersed.

  The peace of the perfect ones can never be destroyed.

  3

  The pure in heart are protected from within.

  The perfect indeed are guarded by Good:

  They are upheld by the Good Law.

  By the knowledge of Truth they are lifted up:

  They stand and do not fall.

  Truth cannot be overtaken by error;

  It cannot be overturned by man.

  Error passes away but the Truth remains.

  Men fall, but the Truth remains.

  Truth cannot change;

  It is eternal and indestructible.

  Herein is the salvation of the wise;

  Herein is the protection of the pure;

  Herein is the joy of the perfect–

  That, being one with Truth, they have come to peace eternal.  He who is one with Truth, reflects Truth.

  He is steadfast, fearless, serene.

  He changes not, but is always true.

  When tried, he does not falter;

  When assailed, he does not fall.

    Permanent  in  purity  and  peace,  he  is  established  in  gentleness  and

strength.

  Who mourns for sin?

  Who gropes for deliverance?

  Who searches for the permanent?

  Let him make himself pure:

  Let him come to Truth;

  Let him find peace in the practice of Good.

    Things are impermanent;

  They have no abiding protection.

  Truth is permanent;

  Its protection abides through all changes.

  Ill deeds are exposed in torment and confusion;

  Good deeds are established in bliss and wisdom.

  Truth is a Friend that does not disappoint;

  A Protector that never fails.

  The world fails;

  It fades and passes like a dream Truth stands;

  It becomes more distinct and real.

  They who have found Truth are satisfied.

    Protected by Truth, they have found a

  Protector indeed.

  The patient are protected from impatience.

  The pure are protected from impurity.

  The humble are protected from pride.

  The loving are protected from hatred.

  Greed flees from the presence of the open-handed;  Into the habitations of the peaceful strife cannot come;

  And folly walks not where tread the footsteps of the wise.

  Truth is its own security;

  It protects without premeditation.

  It dispenses with disguises, and shields by its own inherent reality.

  Its light disposes of all darkness;

  It exposes the false and reveals the true.

  Error falls before Truth;

  Its shield is shattered, its sword broken;

  Yea, it is laid low, and cannot rise.

  It is helpless and has nor champion nor defender.

  Truth does not fall before error.

  The powerless cannot overcome the powerful.

  The lesser cannot subdue the greater.

  The slave does not command the master.

  All things are subject to Truth.

  Truth is a shield to the righteous;

  A shelter to the pure;

  A light upon the pathway of the just.

  Truth is supreme;

  Truth is invincible;

  Truth is triumphant for ever and ever.                    PART II: THE DIVINE


                              DIALOGUE

  I, the Master,

  Dwell in the hearts of all men, but all men do not consciously dwell with

me:

  He that abides with me in all his thoughts and deeds, has reached the

Divine Consummation.

  The Divine Dialogue between the Master and the Disciple                                      SALUTATION


    REJOICE, all ye who seek Truth!

  Be glad and not sorrowful, all ye who love Truth!

  For your sorrows shall pass away as the mists of the morning;

  Your doubts shall be as the darkness that is not;

  And as a dream of the night shall your afflictions be.

  The disciple cried, and lo! the Master heard;

  The disciple was ready, and lo! the Master was at hand;

  The disciple sought, and behold! the Master revealed.                    1. OF SEEKING AND FINDING


    Disciple. Where is knowledge?

  Where is Truth?

  Where is peace?

  I am sorrowful, and find no comfort in men;

  I have gone astray, and find no surety in the teachings of men;

  Yea, even in myself I find no Truth, and no remedy for my doubt and

sorrow

  I have striven in the pride of my heart:

  I have contended with men for my opinions;

  I have mistaken evil for good, and have called ignorance knowledge;

  And now I am alone, and there is none to hear me,

  And if I cry, there is none to hear my voice.

  Master. Nay, I am with thee, and I hear thy voice.

    Disciple. Who art thou that dost assure, me?

  Master. I am the Spirit of Truth.

    Disciple. O Master! O Spirit of Truth!

  Why didst thou not come to me before?

  Why didst thou leave me so long desolate?

  Master. Thou wert not desolate till now;

  Pride was thy companion, and pride satisfied thee.

  Where pride is, there I cannot come,

  And he who listens to its flatteries, cannot hear my Voice.

  Self - glory blinded thee, so that my Form thou couldst not see:

  Self - exultation deafened thee, and when I called, thou didst not hear;

  Self - seeking led thee astray, and my Way was hidden from thee.

  But now, having put away pride, thou hast both seen and heard.

  Ask, and I will answer;

  Seek, and thou shalt find.

    Disciple. Comfort me, O Master! for I am weary;

  Strengthen me, for I am weak;  Teach me, for I am lacking in knowledge.

  Master. He who deserts self, and takes refuge in me, is never deserted;

  My Word is his comfort,

  My Law his strength,

  And my commands his Instruction and Knowledge.

    Disciple. Speak thy Word, and I will listen;

  Reveal thy Law, and I will walk therein;

    Command me, and I, thy servant, will obey;

  For thou art the Master whom I so long sought,

  And having found thee, let me not depart from thee.

  Master. He who follows self, abandons me;

  But he who abandons self, lo! he is with me always.

    Disciple. Hitherto I have clung to self;

  I have followed after vain and empty desires;

  And caught in the toils of self - delusion, I have not known thy presence;

  But now, O Master! I have found thee;

  And having found thee, let me remain with thee;

  Let me be thy child, obeying thy voice;

  Let me be thy pupil, receiving thy instruction;

  Let me become thy disciple, and follow wheresoever thou dost lead.

  Master. Thy humility, O disciple! hath made the mine.

  Thou hast entered the Gateway leading to my Kingdom,

  Even to the Kingdom of a righteous life.

    Henceforth thou wilt follow Truth and not self;

    Striving, thou hast entered;

    Searching, thou hast revealed;

    Seeking, thou hast found.

  Ask whatsoever thou wilt and I will not withhold instruction.                      2. OF ENTERING THE WAY


    Disciple. Teacher of teachers, instruct thou me.

  Master. Ask, and I will answer.

    Disciple. I have read much, but am ignorant still;

  I have studied the doctrines of the schools, but have not become wise

thereby;

  I know the Scriptures by heart, but peace is hidden from me.

  Point out to me, O Master! the way of knowledge,

  Reveal to me the high way of divine wisdom,

  Lead thou thy child into the path of peace.

  Master. The way of knowledge, O disciple, is by searching the heart;

  The highway of wisdom is by the practice of righteousness;

  And by a sinless life is found the way of peace.

    Disciple. Bear with me, O Master! in my uncertainty.

  I am bewildered by the multitude of opinions,

  And by the number of schools am I confounded;

    Delusion blinds me, doubt encompasses me,

  And I cannot find the way wherein I should walk.

  Teach me how to search,

  How to practise,

  How to wear the garment of a blameless life.

  Master. Delusion and doubt, O disciple! are within thyself;

    Within thyself, also, are reality and certainty.

  By thine own errors only art thou blinded,

  Remove those errors, and thou shalt behold Truth.

    Engage, therefore, in holy meditation;

  Search thy heart with the searching of Truth,

  And cast out there from all that is of self.

    Disciple. What is of self?

  Master. Desire and passion and egotism.

  From desire and passion and egotism springs self - delusion;  And self-delusion is the obscuration of Truth.

  Renounce desire;

  Overcome passion;

  Put away egotism,

  Then will delusion be dispelled, and all thy doubts will vanish.

    Disciple. O Master! great is the task which thou hast set before me,

    Laborious the work which thou commandest me to do,

  Steep and strange the way of renunciation which thou hast pointed out to

me.

  Desire is deeply rooted in my nature,

  And passion binds me fast to earthly things,

  Yea, desire and passion are my very self;

  Must I renounce myself?

  Must I yield up that which seems so sweet?

  All men long to preserve the self;

  They pray for its eternal preservation and possession,

  And must I let it perish?

  Master. Thou must, for thou hast vowed to follow me.

    Disciple. Yea, I have vowed, and I will follow thee.

  Master. Seest thou how all men suffer?

  This is because they long to preserve the self;

  This is because they labour for its eternal preservation and possession.

  In desire and egotism and passion are turmoil and unrest,

  In me alone is peace;

  Weary and pain - stricken is the world because it knows not me;

  But in me there is no weariness,

  And pain and sorrow cannot come to my abode.

  My abode is a purified heart;

  The upright mind is my temple;

  And the blameless life is my holy habitation.

    Disciple. I will take refuge in thee;

  In thy abode;  In thy temple;

  Yea, even in thy holy habitation.

  Master. The purified heart is not stained by desire;

  The upright mind is not impelled by passion;

  And in the blameless life there is no thought of self.

  Search thy heart, and follow Truth;

  Put away the self of desire and passion and egotism,

  Deny, overcome, and abandon it;

  Let no vestige of it remain with thee,

  For it is the author of all confusion,

  The source of all affliction,

  The spring of pain and sorrow and unrest.

  Rest thou in me.

    Disciple. Thou hast pointed out to me the way of Truth,

  Even the holy way of selfishness.

  That way will I walk;

  My resolution, O Master of Truth! is fixed in thee.

  I will put away desire, and will cling to thee;

  I will be deaf to the voices of passion, and will listen only to thy voice;

  I will not seek my own, but will obey the holy Law.

  Lo! I have put my feet upon thy way.

  Lead thou thy servant unto light and peace.

  Master. Thou hast entered, O disciple! the path of righteousness;

  Thy feet are set upon the way of wisdom;

  Thou shalt comprehend my Law,

  The light of knowledge shall illumine thee.

  And I will guide thy footfalls unto peace.          3. OF DISCIPLINE AND PURIFICATION


    Disciple. I am in sorrow, O Master!

  My feet are weary, and darkness is closing around me;

  Desert me not, but come now to my assistance!

  My desires are strong, and they cry out for their habitual pleasures;

  My passions are violent, and overwhelm me with their strength;

  And the voices of my false opinions weary me with their demands.

  The way is dark and difficult to follow;

  Shed upon me, O Master! the light of thy knowledge,

  Comfort me with the balm of thy instruction.

  Master. Thy sorrow, O disciple! is of the self;

  In me there is no sorrow.

  The darkness which surrounds thee is the shadow cast by the self;

  There is no darkness in me.

  Truth is serene and sorrowless;

  There is no weeping and weariness and lamentation in Truth.

  Even now, though thou seest it not, my light is shining on thy pathway;

  But thou seest only the dark illusions of thy worldly self;

  Press forward, and think only of Truth;

  Look not behind thee, nor let thy mind swerve from thy holy resolution;

  Great is the conquest Which thou hast entered

  upon, Even the mighty conquest of thy self;

  Be faithful, and thou shalt overcome.

    Disciple. Lead me, O Master! for my darkness is very great;

  Clouds of selfish thoughts envelop me,

  And the enemies within my mind assail me continually;

  In the snares of my own making my feet are caught,

  And when I think to walk firmly I stumble and fall;

  Yea, my falls are many and grievous, and my wounds frequent and sore.

  Will the darkness lift, O Master?

  Will trial end in victory?  And will there be an end to my many sorrows?

  Master. When thy heart is pure, the darkness will disappear;

  When thy mind is freed from passion, thou wilt reach the end of trial,

  And when the thought of self - preservation is yielded up, there will be no

more cause for sorrow.

  Thou art now upon the way of discipline and purification;

  All my disciples must walk that way.

  Before thou canst enter the white light of Knowledge,

  Before thou canst behold the full glory of Truth,

  All thy impurities must be purged away,

  The delusions dispelled,

  And thy mind fortified with endurance.

  Though darkness surroundeth thee,

  Though temptation assaileth thee on every hand,

  Though thou art sore distressed, and seest not before thee,

  Yet relax not thy faith in Truth;

  Forget not that Truth is eternally supreme,

    Remember that I, the Lord of Truth, am watching over thee.

    Disciple. Great is my faith in Truth;

  And I will not forget, but will remember thee.

  Master. Walking faithfully the path of discipline and purification,

  Not forsaking and abandoning it,

  And not longing to enjoy the pleasures which thou hast left behind thee,

  Thou wilt learn those things which are necessary for thee;

  Thou wilt learn of the nature of sin and the meaning of temptation;

  Of suffering and sorrow, and their cause and cure;

  Of the fleeting nature of thy self, and its pleasures;

  Of the permanence of Truth and its abiding peace;

  Of what are the marks of ignorance, and what constitutes knowledge;

  Of what makes evil and what is eternally good;

  Of the painfullness of self and the bliss of Truth wilt thou learn,

  Thou wilt also learn of illusion and Reality.  Be faithful and endure, and I will teach thee all things.

    Disciple. I will not turn my face from thee,

  Nor will I desert thy holy Way.

  Master. Hear me again, O disciple!

  Walking faithfully the path of discipline and purification,

  Not abandoning it, but submitting to its austerities,

  Thou wilt acquire the three lesser powers of discipleship;

  Thou wilt also receive the three greater powers;

  And the lesser and the greater powers will render the invincible;

  By their aid thou wilt subdue all sin;

  Thou wilt overcome to the uttermost;

  Thou wilt achieve the Supreme Conquest.

    Disciple. What are the lesser and the greater powers?

  Master. Self - control, self - reliance, and watchfulness–

  These are the three lesser powers.

    Steadfastness, Patience, and Gentleness–

  These are the three greater powers.

  When thy mind is well controlled, and in thy keeping,

  When thou reliest upon no external help, but upon Truth alone,

  And when thou art ceaselessly watchful over thy thoughts and actions–

  Then will the three lesser powers be thine,

  And with these powers thou wilt dispel the Great Darkness,

  Thou wilt approach the Supreme Light;

    Approaching the Supreme Light, thou wilt become steadfastly fixed in

Truth.

  Thou wilt become patient with an infinite patience,

  And gentle with a gentleness which nothing can change or mar;

  Then will the three greater powers be thine;

  Then wilt thou come to the end of the path of discipline,

  And wilt ascend unto the higher path of knowledge;

  Walking the path of knowledge thy sorrow will cease.

  Thy darkness will pass away for ever,  And joy and light will wait upon thy footsteps.

    Disciple. I am reassured, O Master! and am strong to proceed:

  I am obedient to thee, and will submit to thy discipline,

  For thou hast comforted me with the word of knowledge;

  Thou hast strengthened me with the exhortation of Truth.

  Thou hast instructed me with the instruction of enlightenment.

  Master. Blessed is he who obeys the Truth,

  He  shall  not  remain  comfortless,  but  shall  receive  the  benediction  of

peace.                          4. OF RENUNCIATION


 

    Disciple. Teacher divine! Thy light is breaking in upon my mind,

  I now know the cause of my sorrow and suffering;

  I apprehend the sorrows of mankind,

  For my sufferings are the sufferings of the world;

  I see that sorrow and suffering are rooted in self.

  That evil and woe are in the desires of self,

  And that all the desires of self must be relinguished,

  Guide me, O Master! into the way of self-sacrifice;

  Teach me how to abolish self from the mind;

  Reveal to me the truth about renunciation.

  Master. Renunciation, O disciple! is twofold;

  There is renunciation in the letter;

  There is also renunciation in the spirit.

  The renunciation of outward things and particular acts only–

  This is the false renunciation in the letter;

  The renunciation of inward desires and defilements–

  This is the true renunciation in the spirit.

  Beware, O learner! of the renunciation which is false;

  Perform thou the renunciation which is true.

    Disciple. Instruct me further in the renunciation which is according to

Truth,

  Then I will embrace and perform it;

  So shall I avoid the renunciation which is erroneous and misleading.

  Master. Seek no gratification in the things which thou doest;

  Look not for reward in the things wherein thou strivest;

  Do all thy duties meekly, putting away desire–

  This is the true renunciation.

  Do not think of gain or loss to thyself,–

  Think not to obtain pleasure and avoid pain in thy acts;  Do all things faithfully that are necessary to be done–

  This also is the true renunciation.

  Sever not thyself from the world,

  But relinguish all love for the world and its pleasures;

  Do thy work in the world without thought of personal ends–

  This, again, is the true renunciation.

  Not by the outer things of the world is a man defiled;

  He is defiled by the low desires of his heart.

  To renounce the world, and not to relinguish to clinging to self–

  This is the false renunciation.

  Not from riches or poverty,

  Not from wife or children,

  Not from power and servitude–

  Not from these things do afflictions spring.

  From indolence and self - indulgence,

  From lust and covetousness,

  From hatred and pride–

  From these things only do afflictions spring.

  Renounce the evil within, and the things of the world will not defile thee;

  Put away all thought of self, and whatsoever thou doest it will bring to

thee no suffering;

  In  all  thy  duties  forsake  the  thought  of  self,  and  sorrow  will  never

overtake thee.

  He who quitteth a duty that is irksome,

  Seeking happiness thereby;

  He who fleeth from the scene of temptation.

  Seeking strength thereby;

  He who abandoneth his obligations,

  Seeking bliss thereby,–

  Such a man, O disciple! falsely renounces;

  He is deluded, and will not attain to purity of heart.

  As a brave soldier, when death is inevitable does not desert his post,  Thinking of duty only, and not of self-preservation,

  So he who renounces truely, remains in his place in the world,

    Performing all his duties steadfastly, not thinking of self.

  Renounce self, O disciple!

  Renounce all the tendencies of self;

  Renounce all the passions and prejudices of self;

  Renounce all the errors and egotism of self;

  Such is the true renunciation;

  Such is the sacrifice which leads to enlightenment and peace.

    Disciple. What, O Master! are the tendencies of the self?

  Master. Lust and self-indulgence,

  Self - seeking and avarice,

  Hatred and anger,

  Vanity and pride,

  Doubt and fear–

  These are the tendencies of self;

  These are the things that must be renounced

  ; Disciple. And these things, O spirit immaculate! I will renounce;

  I will obliterate them from my mind;

  I will abolish them from my inmost heart;

  For now I see how they lead men into ways of blindness;

  That they make snares of suffering for the feet of men;

  That they dig deep pits of sorrow for men to fall therein.

  I rejoice, O Divine One! in that which thou hast revealed to me;

  For thou hast opened unto me the highway of holiness;

  Thou hast pointed out to me the straight path

  of peace;

  Thou hast shown me how to walk the sure way of wisdom.

  Thee will I follow; lead me to thy Law.

  Master. Blessed is he who follows where I lead;

  He shall ascend unto high and Heavenly Places;

  He shall behold with the vision that is faultless;  He shall see with the eye of truth which comprehendeth all things.                        5. OF PURITY OF HEART


    Disciple. While I am undergoing thy discipline and purification,

  While walking the holy way of renunciation,

  Let me behold the beauty of thy Purity;

  Reveal to me the Purity which is divine;

  For I would know the Highest, even Truth:

  I would gaze upon thy face, O Master!

  I would behold thy glory;

  I would see thee as thou art.

  Master. He who rightly renounces,

  Who humbly purges his heart of self,

  Who diligently searches for Truth not for selfish pleasures,

  He, my lonely one, shall find my Purity;

  He, my faithful one, shall surely see my face,

  He, my chosen one, shall come to me at last.

    Disciple. Thou art my refuge and my dwelling-place;

  My eyes, I know, will rest on thee at last;

  My heart at last will stay itself on thee.

  Show me the highest and holiest way,

  Even the stainless way of Purity.

  Master. Thou art ready to be washed free from thy defilements;

  As a vessel thou art ready to be cleansed;

  And when thou art cleansed thou shalt be filled with the pure Water of

Truth.

  By these four things is the heart defiled–

  The craving for pleasures,

  The clinging to temporal things,

  The love of self,

  The lust for personal continuance:

  From these four defilements spring all sins and sorrows Wash thou thy

heart;  Put away sensual cravings;

  Detach the mind from the wish for possession;

  Abandon self-defence and self-importance;

  And do not long for personal immortality.

  Thus putting away all cravings, thou wilt attain to satisfaction;

  Detaching thy mind from the love of perishable things, thou wilt acquire

wisdom;

    Abandoning the thought of self, thou wilt come to peace;

  And not lusting for eternal life, thou wilt realise the incorruptible Truth.

  He is pure who is free from desire;

  Who does not crave for sensual excitements;

  Who sets no value on perishable things;

  Who is the same in riches and poverty,

  In success or failure,

  In victory or defeat,

  In life or death;

  Who does not set up his own opinions;

  Who is willing not to be;

  Lo! he it is who possesses my Pureness;

  His happiness remains;

  His rest is sure;

  His peace is not disturbed;

  He knows what constitutes holiness;

  He understands the stainlessness of Truth.

    Disciple. I will cleanse my heart with the cleansing of Truth;

  I will be pure as thou art pure;

  I will put away the thought of pleasure;

  I will not covet perishable things;

  My personality I will regard as of no importance,

  Ceasing to crave for its eternal continuance.

  Death comes to all men, and the tears of sorrow flow;

  But Truth is eternal, and its knowledge leads to peace.  I followed self, but it was filled with pain;

  I followed the world but it was fraught with heavy sorrow;

  But now, O Master of Truth I follow thee,

  And thou art leading me to bliss unspeakable;

  Thou directest my steps into the way of purity and peace.

  Master. Be strenuous in effort,

  Strong in resolution;

    Patient in endurance;

  So wilt thou overcome all sin;

  Thou wilt become divinely pure;

    Sorrow and pain thou wilt altogether subdue

  And thou wilt acquire joy and strength and equanimity.                          6. OF RIGHTEOUSNESS


  Master. Stand up, Son of Light I and put on the garment of righteousness;

  Rejoice! and enter the glad way of holiness;

  Open thine eyes, and behold the glory of Truth;

  For thou hast been faithful and obedient;

  Thou hast been patient and enduring;

  Thou hast conquered and overcome.

  The Great Enemy, even self, thou hast slain;

  The Great Darkness, even the darkness of ignorance, thou hast dispersed;

  The Great Veil, even the veil of illusion, thou hast torn asunder.

    Henceforth thou shalt walk in the way of knowledge,

  Thou shalt dwell with peace,

  Thou shalt bask in the light of immortality.

  Rise up, Son of Truth! in my divine dignity;

  Put on the shining life of righteousness;

  For thou art no longer self, thou art Truth,

  Thy deeds will be according to the Eternal,

  And thou wilt be a beacon to mankind.

    Disciple. Now, O Master! I see thee as thou art;

  I see thy ineffable beauty and glory.

  How can darkness dwell where thou art?

  How can sin and sorrow approach thee?

  I am dazzled by the power of thy majesty;

  Thou art Truth! Thou art the Eternal!

  And he who knoweth thee, liveth in thy light;

  He doeth the deeds of light and not of darkness.

  Point out to me now, O Master! the righteous way;

  Reveal unto me the jewels of the perfect life;

  Instruct me in the doing which is according to the Eternal,

  So that I may be watchful, and fail not.

  Master. Unrighteous is he whose acts are born of self;    Righteous is he whose acts are born of Truth:

  The unrighteous man is swayed by his feelings;

  Likes and dislikes are his masters;

  Prejudices and partialities blind him;

  Desiring and suffering,

  Craving and sorrowing,

  Self - control he knows not, and great is his unrest.

  The righteous man is master of his moods;

  Likes and dislikes he has abandoned as childish things;

    Prejudice and partiality he has put away.

  Desiring nothing, he does not suffer;

  Not craving enjoyment, sorrow does not overtake him;

  Perfect in self-control, great peace abides with him;

  Do not condemn, resent or retaliate;

  Do not argue, or become a partisan;

    Maintain thy calmness with all sides;

  Be just, and speak truth.

  Act in gentleness, compassion, and charity;

  Be infinitely patient:

  Hold fast to Love, and let it shape thy doing:

  Have goodwill to all, without distinction:

  Think equally of all, and be disturbed by none;

  Be thoughtful and wise, strong and kind-hearted.

  Be watchful, that no thought of self again creep in and stain thee.

  Think of thyself as abolished, dispersed:

  In all thy doing think of the good of others and of the world,

  And not of pleasure or reward to thyself.

  Thou art no longer separate and divided from men,

  Thou art one with all;

  No longer strive against others for thyself,

  But sympathise with all;

  Regard no man as thine enemy,  Thou art the friend of all men.

  Be at peace with all;

  Pour out compassion on all living things;

  Let boundless charity adorn thy words and deeds–

  Such is the glad way of Truth.

  Such is the doing which is according to the Eternal.

  Filled with joy is the right-doer,

  He acts from principles which do not change and pass away;

    Abandoning personality, he has become a power;

  He is one with the Eternal, and has passed beyond unrest.

  The peace of the righteous man is perfect;

  It is not disturbed by change and impermanence;

  Freed from passion, it is equal-minded, calm, and does not sorrow;

  He sees things as they are, and is no more confused.

    Disciple. Thou has clothed me, O Master! with righteousness;

  The perfect life thou hast revealed to me;

  Thou hast shown me the holy and the happy way.

  Self is abolished, and I am thine;

  My thoughts are thy thoughts,

  My words are thy words,

  My deeds are thy deeds;

  Thou art eternal, and all my doing shall be from thee.

  Allayed is the fever of life;

  Dispersed is all the darkness of the mind;

    Uncertainty and unrest have vanished away;

  Sin and suffering are ended, and peace abides for ever.

  Master. Thou hast opened thine eyes to the Eternal Light;

  Thou art no more self-deceived nor self-afflicted.

  Enter now, O disciple! the highway of divine knowledge,

  And receive the bliss of immortality.                7. OF KNOWLEDGE OF THE LAW


    Disciple. Show unto me now, O Master! the Perfect Knowledge;

  Reveal unto me the working of thy Law;

  Illuminate my mind with the wisdom of enlightenment,

  Master. The Law of Life is perfect;

  Nothing can be added to it or taken from it;

  It cannot be altered or improved;

  None can avoid or escape it;

  Its operations are just;

  It is eternal, and abides in the midst of change;

  By it all things are protected, and there is no confusion:

  The good is preserved in bliss and peace,

  The evil is purified with punishment and suffering;

    Knowledge it crowns with calmness,

  Ignorance it scourges with unrest;

  It works with twofold action:

  It is Eternal Causation;

  It takes note of every thought and deed.

  Thou hast attained, O disciple, to spiritual vision;

  Look now upon the world and tell me what thou seest.

    Disciple. I see, O Master! the Great Darkness called Ignorance;

  I see lurking therein the smouldering sparks of desire;

  I see how those sparks gather strength;

  They intensify into flaming passions;

  And over all mankind are heavy clouds of sorrow,

  And these are for the quenching of passions.

  Master. Thou hast well seen.

  Look again, and say what thou beholdest.

    Disciple. My sight hath pierced the cloudy veil of sorrow,

  And above all I see the Great Light called Truth,

  And there is no darkness therein,  No desires can enter there.

  And there are no consuming passions;

  There is no weeping and no unrest.

  Master. Thou hast seen, O disciple, the Law of Life;

  Thou hast perceived the twofold action of the Law.

  There is ignorance which fosters desire;

  Desire is the painful hunger to obtain;

  It is also the feverish clinging to that which is obtained;

    Thence arises separation from the thing desired,

  And this is suffering and sorrow.

  From desire also arises egotism or selfishness,

  Thus is created an illusory self,

  And in the delusion of the self is the nightmare of the world’s woe.

  Thus man suffers by the action of the Law;

  He can also escape suffering by the action of the Law.

  When desire is abandoned, the painful hunger of the mind is cured,

  The burning fever of clinging to things is assuaged,

  And there is no separation and sorrow:

    Thence arises union with all that is,

  And this is satisfaction, bliss, and peace.

  From non-desire also proceed Humility and Love;

  The delusion of a permanent and separate individuality is destroyed;

  The preservation of the self is abandoned.

  And thus is cut away the ground of hatred, and pride, and selfishness;

  Then arises holiness;

  The reality of things is revealed;

  Truth is perceived, comprehended and known,

  And this is the knowledge of the Law;

  This is the bliss of immortality.

    Disciple. Very simple is the Law, O Truth! yet who shall comprehend it?

    Beautiful to behold, yet who can gaze upon it?

  Faultless in equity, yet who will listen, and receive it?  Master. The pure-hearted one receives, beholds, and comprehends;

  He acts with the action that is not attained by sin;

  His charity is without limit, it embraces all living things;

  He perceives with the vision that does not err.

  He does not condemn, knowing the Perfect Law,

  And knowing the Perfect Law, he has entered into peace,

    Disciple. Where knowledge is perfected, peace abides.

  Great is the calmness of the wise.

  Deep is the peace of the pure,

  Perfect the bliss of them that know the Truth.

  Stilled are the tempests of the mind,

  There is no more perturbation.

  There is a haven for the storm-tossed.

  A home for them that are lost and forsaken.

  A refuge for all who wander in the Night.

  I have found thee, thou eternal One, at last!

  Master. Thou hast sought and found;

  Thou hast fought and conquered;

  Thou hast striven and attained;

  He who has afflicted has become the healer of men:

  The child has become the Instructor.

  The pupil has become the Teacher.

  The disciple and the Master are one;

  What I am, that thou art.

  Abide with Me in Peace.                                    BENEDICTION


  And now peace abides.

  Self is dispersed and there is no more anguish;

  Truth is attained, and affliction has ceased to be;

  The pilgrimage of pain is finished,

  There is no more toil and darkness,

  There is no more doubt and weeping,

  Unrest and sorrow have vanished away.

  Love folds the world; to all that suffer, Peace!                  PART III: THE DIVINE


                              MESSAGES

  I, a Sower,

  Cast forth this seed upon the broad plains of the world.

  And leave it to the watchful care of the Supreme.

  The Divine Messages            THE FIRST PROPHECY, CALLED THE


                                AWAKENING


  SONS of Light, I salute you.

  Children of the Morning, I greet you.

  Awake! arise! and rouse ye them that slumber!

  I proclaim to you the advent of the Morning;

  The dawn of the New Day is upon every living thing,

  And down the holy Mountain cometh the Light of Love, the Lowly One,

  Bringing good tidings and publishing peace.

  And this is the majesty of the Morning,–

  That evil shall flee from the valleys,

  And hardly shall darkness find a lodging-place:

  For where light is, there is no darkness;

  Where good is, evil is dispersed,

  Where peace is, strife is destroyed;

  Where love is, all hatred has ceased;

  Where purity is, all sin is overcome,

  And from the abode of Truth all error has fled away.

  And this is the joy of the Morning,–

  That evil is conquered, and Good is triumphant;

  That the glory of Truth is revealed;

  That the Path of Perfection is opened up,

  And the bliss of a holy life is partaken of.

  And this is the consummation of the

    Morning,–

  That darkness is dispelled by Light

  Ignorance by Knowledge,

  Illusion by Reality,

  And error by Truth.

  And the majesty of the Morning is revealed;  And the joy of the Morning is comprehended;

  And the consummation of the Morning is realised.

  Ye who have waited, come now, and gaze your fill:

  Upon the Heights the coming of the King is announced,

  Even the King of Peace;

  And they who are stricken and afflicted shall be made glad;

  The mourners and they that sorrow shall look up, and rejoice:

  The chains of them that are bound shall be broken, and they shall go free;

  The defiled shall be cleansed and purified,

  And the weary and travel-stained shall be at rest.

  Come, ye that are thirsty, and drink;

  Come, ye that hunger, and be filled;

  For the Water of Immortality is found,

  And the Bread of Life is made known.

  Awake, ye sleepers, and shake off the dreams of illusion!

  Rouse ye from the stupor of mortality!

  And slumber no more in the realm of self!

  For the Master of Compassion is revealed,

  The Law of Good is expounded,

  And the Great Reality of a stainless life is accomplished!

  The Truth of the ages is made plain;

  In the tabernacle of the holy heart it is revealed.

  The guileless perceive it;

  The righteous hear it;

  The holy realise it.

  It is manifested in all its glory in the conqueror of sin.

  Ye that search in the darkness,

  Come now unto the Light;

  Ye that see the evil and the woe without,

  Come with me, and I will show you its source:–

  Go ye into the secret chambers of your hearts,

  Seek there until ye find;  Meditate there until ye awake.

  He that dreams in self is asleep in Truth.

  The dreamer can neither know himself nor the awakened;

  The awakened knoweth both himself and the dreamer,

  He also knoweth the emptiness of the thing dreamed.

  The sleeper in self is involved in evil;

  He is encompassed with darkness;

  He is surrounded with woe;

  Such is the plight of the dreamer,

  And the source, continuance, and end of evil are hidden from him.

  Awake! therefore, ye that sleep!

  Awake from the sleep of lust!

  Awake from the slumber of hatred!

  Come out of the painful dreams of avarice, self-indulgence, vanity and

pride!

  Shake off the nightmare of doubt!

  Be drugged no more by groundless faith,

  By error, and the clinging unto death!

  End ye the sleep of self, and awake in the Reality of Truth!

  For the end of self is the beginning of Truth. Behold, the glorious Truth!

  Awake! awake! awake! ye are sleeping I ye

  are dreaming! Awake! Sons of the Morning, and fill the

  world with music.

  Come ye, and dwell in the Light;

  Come ye, and tread the Path of Perfection;

  Come ye, and be exalted with the exaltation of Holiness,

  So shall ye. know the supreme Love and Peace.        THE SECOND PROPHECY, CALLED THE


                                    MESSIAH


  CONSIDER the signs of the times:

  War is rampant, strife is raging,

  And the fires of passion are devastating the earth;

  Nation is opposed to nation, creed to creed and system to system:

  Science has discovered its own weakness,

  Philosophy has confounded philosophy,

  And a confusion of mental tongues has become universal.

  Yet in the height of all this confusion,

  In the midst of the fierce clash of prejudice and passion,

  One has descended whose name is Love,

  Whose mission is Peace,

  And whose end is Unity.

  Walking in the midst is He,

  But men know Him not because of their infirmities;

  Yet at His touch the blind receive their sight,

  The deaf hear, and the lame walk.

    Silently, holily is He working in isolated hearts:

  Here and there a disciple is called,

  And he hears and follows;

  And the disciple knows his Master, and the Master His disciple.

  The Chosen Few have not been deaf to the command, "Follow Me",

  And they have followed with sure and certain steps.

  They have gazed upon the face of the Serene One;

  They have sat at the feet of the Perfect One;

  They have accepted the instruction of the Holy One,

  And peace abides with them.

  They walk amongst men, and are not discerned;

  They have relinquished all strife in their inmost hearts,  Hating none, condemning none;

  They have entered the Gate of Forgiveness;

    Goodwill is the breath of their nostrils,

  And boundless charity is the master of their

  thoughts. They have ceased from vain longings;

  They have chased away all fluctuating desires;

  They have passed through the Gate of Sacrifice,

  They have clothed themselves with the Garment of Humility,

  They tread the Path of Good, and their gait is steadfast.

  Fear and doubt they have dispersed;

  They walk upon the turbulent waters of sorrow,

  And they sink not, and are comforted.

  They are no longer confounded by false philosophy;

  They have passed through the Sea and the Desert,

  And have entered the Promised Land.

  And these are they who have been born again for the salvation of the

world;

  In the time of darkness, they have accepted the Light;

  In the time of evil, they have chosen the Good;

  In the day of self-seeking, they have silenced the many voices of self,

  And have followed the One Voice whose music harmonises all.

    Therefore, they rejoice;

  Not blind to the evil,

  But because the Omniscient One has shown them the end of evil;

  Yea, in themselves they have already accomplished that end,

  For they have become One with Him whom they have followed.

  All that belongs to the world they have given to the world,

  And they have not murmured.

  The clouds of confusion do not darken them,

  And the fires of passion do not scorch them;

  Therefore let gladness reign!

  For with the great darkness of these times, there has also come greatLight;

  Though the rivers of sorrow are swollen high,

  The banks are perfumed with the flowers of blessedness;

  Though strife is raging, Peace has entered into the midst;

  Though confusion has covered the earth, unity has been revealed;

  And though many continue to dream the dreams of illusion,

  The vision of the Great Reality has gladdened the ken of the wakeful.

  Awake, ye sleepers! Arouse yourselves, ye dreamers!

  When will ye open your eyes, and see?

  The Perfect One has appeared!

  The stainless majesty of the Holy One is revealed;

  His sleepless watchers have hailed Him,

  And He has borne away their weariness.

  Come, then, ye sorrowing, and be glad!

  Come, ye weary, and find peace!

  Come, ye toilers, and be at rest!

  For the longing of the ages is fulfilled,

  And He whom we call Master has appeared:–

  He is the sacred inmost heart of Love.          THE THIRD PROPHECY, CALLED THE


                                  ALL - ONE


  TO do good and to remain unknown,

  Let this be called Humility;

  To bless one’s persecutors,

  Let this be called Love;

  To rejoice at the good fortune of one’s enemies,

  Let this be called Perfection:

  Thus is the All-One manifested,

  Thus is the Truth made known.

  The knowers of the All-One are perfect;

  They are without sin,

    Dwelling in Truth and robed with holiness.

  Behold! the All-One is revealed,

  He is made known to His worshippers;

  The garment of evil has fallen away from them,

  And they have put on the perfect garment of Good;

  The old bottles of error are broken,

  And the new bottles of Truth are filled with the Wine of Life.

  The believers in the-All-One drink and are satisfied.

  And the doers of His word enter into the joy of immortality.

  And who are they that believe in the All-One?

  Who are the doers of His Word?

  The believer and doer is known by these sure signs,–

  He is freed from ignorance and is not enslaved by likes and dislikes;

  He is freed from hatred, and does not condemn;

  He is freed from partiality, and does not engage in strife;

  He is freed from self-seeking, and does not defend himself.

  He never lets go of patience;

  He does not doff the robe of Purity;  He goes not out from the dwelling-place of Love.

  The knower of the All-One is perfect in knowledge.

  He is blameless in thought, word, and deed.

  The All-One is sought by practice,

  He is perceived by knowledge,

  And he is realised by the perfection of practice and the consummation of

knowledge.

  To rise above good and evil,

  Hatred and love,

    Prejudice and error,

  Desire and pain,

  Self - love and sorrow,

  Passion and remorse,

  Life and death,

  Is to enter the unending peace of the All-One,

  Is to realise the immortality of the All-One,

  Is to become the All-One.

  The All - One is that Perfect Good which is beyond both good and evil;

  He is that Perfect Love which neutralises love and hate;

  He is that Perfect Life which is not broken by life and death.

  He that would know Him, let him become His disciple.

  Let him remove the ever - changing opposites within until he comes to

that which changes not;

  So shall he find the Eternal Rock,

  Even the blessed All-One, the Master of peace.

  He that searches without, he shall not find;

  He that is proud of his knowledge, he shall not find;

  He that fortifies himself against others, he shall not find;

  Realise, O disciple! thine inward error,

  Thine inward ignorance,

  Thine inward delusion rooted in self;

  And, having realised, leave error and cling to Truth;  Fly from ignorance to the knowledge that is pure.

  And fortify thyself against the enemies within thyself.

  By this way is the All-One approached,

  By none other is He accessible;

  He that is willing to be naked to self, let him come and be clothed with

Truth;

  He that is willing to die to error, let him come and be reborn as a child of

Truth;

  He that is willing to become empty, let him come and be filled with the

knowledge of the All - One.

  The Good that is supreme,

  The Humility that is sublime,

  The love that transcends all sorrow,–

  To this attainment shall he surely come

  Who seeks the All-One by the Path of Peace.THE FOURTH PROPHECY, CALLED UNREST


  HE voice of the Spirit to the children of the flesh,–

  This is darkness,–to be enslaved by sin;

  This is light,–to be free from sin.

  There is a place of darkness,

  A dwelling - place of deep darkness,

  And they who abide there cry out of their unrest,

  They cry and are not heard, because their cry is of self;

  They call upon their God, but the silence is not broken;

  The echo of their own voice they hear, and it affrights them.

  And they remain in their sins.

  And remaining in their sins, they shall cry,–

  "We have sown wheat and have reaped straw,

  We have ploughed, but we have no produce of our labour,

  And lo! the Great Famine is upon us.

  We stored away much grain, but the rats have devoured it;

  We put away much fruit, but it has decayed, and the long winter is before

us;

  We bartered, and acquired much gold, yet we perish,

  For some the thief has stolen, and the rest is mouldy.

  What shall we purchase, having no Bread?

  There is no Bread, and no seller of Bread;

  We die, and there is none to save us!"

  And again, in their deep bitterness, they shall say,–

  "We have toiled mightily, but we have no reward;

  That which we built is destroyed,

  That which we made secure is undermined,

  And all our wonderful works are crumbling away.

  We ate and slept, but now we are afflicted,  We made sacrifices, yet now we are deserted,

  We built ourselves pleasant mansions, and there is no rest in them.

  Our sorrows are as the deep seas,

  Our miseries are as the great mountains,

  Our woes are many, and our pains are great.

  There is no cure for our diseases,

  There is no relief for our sorrows,

  We are weary, and there is no rest!"

  So shall they cry, and they shall not be heard;

  So shall they suffer, and shall not be relieved;

  And they shall seek for rest, and shall not find it;

  For in the place of darkness,

  In the dwelling-place of deep darkness,

  There is no remedy,

  There is no redress,

  There is no salvation.

  Where self is lord and king there is no peace.

  Ye who are in the way of impurity,

  Ye who are the subjects of self,

  Listen, though ye understand not.

    Hear,–for  the  day  cometh  when  the  precepts  of  the  prophet  are

remembered,

  And his words are burnt into the heart with brands of fire,–

  Where there shall come upon you the night which is more than darkness,

  The hunger which is more than famine,

  And the deprivation which is more than death,

  When Love shall be crucified, and hatred be set free,

  When peace shall be banished, and strife be glorified.

  When righteousness shall be mocked, and confusion shall flourish,

  And the voice of the prophet is no longer heard;–

  When that time comes, and ye cry, and are not heard,

  Suffer, and are not relieved,  Sorrow, and are not comforted,

    Remember this,–

  He that rouseth himself early seeth the sun rise,

  He that watcheth diligently and taketh a light, findeth his way out of the

darkness,

  And he that striveth with an uncomplaining heart, is crowned with the

Crown of Peace.                THE FIFTH PROPHECY, CALLED


                                TRANSITION


  THE Voice of the Spirit to the children of sorrow,–

  Arise ye! Awake!

  Open your eyes, and see!

  Why will ye sleep the sleep that is painful?

  Come out of the night of unrest,

  Out of the dark nightmare of sin and affliction!

  For there is a Way out of the place of darkness,

  And out of the dwelling-place of deep darkness a Pathway that is sure.

  There shall be light and safety,

  There shall be rest and healing,

  There shall be joy and satisfaction.

  There shall be no more dreaming for him who is awake,

  Who says, with deep resolve, "I will abandon self, and Truth shall be my

Lord".

  And thus resolving, there shall appear upon his right hand a Gateway that

is dark,

  And upon his left hand a portal pleasant to behold;

  And he shall stoop and enter the Gateway that is dark,

  And there shall come behind him mockeries and revilings, and laughter

that stingeth:

  And, entering, he shall take up two swords.

  The first is called the Sword of Searching,

  And the second is called the Sword of Dividing;

  And  with  the  Sword  of  Searching  he  shall  destroy  the  enemies  of

Wisdom,

  And with the Sword of Dividing he shall sever Good from evil.

  He shall encounter all the enemies of Light;

  Them that cast the Great Shadow he shall disperse,  And the strong keepers of the keys of hell he shall put to rout.

  He shall pass through the Fire called Suffering and it shall not devour

him;

  He shall cross the dark Ocean called Sorrow, and it shall not swallow him

up;

  And when he cometh to the Great Desert called Desertion, he shall not

turn back.

  And he shall come out of all his darkness,

  He shall find the Shadowless Light.

  Upon the outermost edge of the Great Darkness he shall hear a Voice,

  The Voice of the Holy One,

  Then shall he know that the King of Truth is near,

  And that there cometh the anointed Prince of Peace.

  And he shall follow the Voice because it is gentle and true,

  And it shall lead him to the eternal abode of Light,

  Where every veil shall be lifted, and every mystery solved.

  And he shall perceive the majesty of the Master of Truth;

  He shall behold the beauty of the Law of Righteousness;

  He shall gaze upon the glory of the Great Reality;

  He shall hear the song of the redeemed,

  Even this the sweet song of salvation:–

  Sin is destroyed,

  How perfect is the Law!

    Sorrow is slain,

  How mighty is Love!

  The clouds of affliction are dispersed,

  How glorious is the Light!

  Error is fallen,

  How immaculate is the Truth!

  Awake! ye sleepers,

  Rejoice in the Truth!

  Look up I ye fallen,  And rejoice in the Light!

  Let the thirsty come and drink,

  Let the hungry come and eat,

  Let the dying come and live,

    Salvation abounds, and redemption is sure.

  And entering the Gate of Peace, the empires of this world shall be to him

as dust,

  Its glories as clouds that are dispersed,

  Its pleasures as chaff that is carried away,

  And its pursuits as houses having no-foundation;

  And the Voice of the Holy One shall say unto him,–

    "Conqueror of self, Slayer of sin and sorrow,

  Disperser of shadows and illusions,

  Put away the Sword of Searching,

  And let the Sword of Dividing be sheathed;

  Here are no sorrows,

  Here is no darkness and affliction,

  And strife and division cannot enter here.

  Lowly doer of righteousness, thou hast found my Law,

  Silent seeker of Truth, thou hast found my Peace,

  Lover of meekness and Good, thou hast found Me;

  Take up thy abode in my eternal Habitation,

  Thy warfare is ended, and thy rest is achieved."        THE SIXTH PROPHECY, CALLED PEACE


  THE Voice of the Spirit to the children of Truth,–

  Rejoice, and be glad I Yea, be filled with gladness!

  For the Great Task is completed, and there is no more labour;

  The Long Journey is ended, and there is no more weariness;

  The days are numbered, and the Saviour has come.

  There is peace upon the hills, and in the valleys a tumult of great joy,

  For the Child who is Love and Wisdom is apprehended,

  And the Kingdom which is Goodwill and Peace is proclaimed.

  Sing, ye holy ones!

  Ye pure and peaceful, let your voices be heard!

  Truth is established, and righteousness reigneth.

  There is joy for every sorrow,

  This is oil for every wound,

  And there is healing for every broken heart.

  For the weary there is a rest that endureth,

  For the wandering an eternal refuge,

  And for the despairing and tempest-tossed a harbour of great gladness,

  Fur there is sinlessness of heart.

  Out of the dark places of self,

  Beyond the uncertain valley of Transition,

  Is found the peaceful Path of Holiness.

  Upon the high Peaks of Purity,

  Upon the Mountains of Righteousness,

  Even upon the lofty Hills of Love,

  There abideth eternal peace,

  There awaiteth everlasting rest.

    Whosoever will climb, let him come and see;

    Whosoever will strive, let him come and know;

    Whosoever will overcome, let him come and enter in.

  The darkness is dispersed,  The power of evil is destroyed,

  And the wheel of Fate is broken.

  The Light abideth in eternal glory,

  The power of Good is supreme,

  And Righteousness and Love have broken every bond.

  Death is slain, for Life is known;

  Doubt is no more, for immortality is tasted;

  Fear is cast out, for Perfect Love is revealed,

  The King of Truth is near,

  And He is Perfect Knowledge;

  The Lord of Life is at hand,

  And He is Perfect Purity;

  The Saviour is here, and He is Perfect Love;

    Therefore, peace abideth,

  Yea, abideth for ever.

  These things are made known to the righteous,

  To the wise their glory is revealed,

  And by the guileless alone are these three Perfections comprehended;

  For he that is unholy knoweth only that which is unholy;

  He that is holy knoweth holy things.

  Perfection cannot be distorted,–

  Behold its beauty!

    Righteousness cannot be broken,–

  How faultless are its proportions!

  Truth remains undisturbed,–

  How incomparable is its calm!

  And because of this, there is great rejoicing,

  Because of this, there is holy gladness,

  Because of this, there is unending peace.                      THE FIRST EXHORTATION,


                        CONCERNING PURITY


  THE Purity that is stainless,

  To this I exhort men;

  To the Purity of the Highest I point the Sons of Light.

  I exhort also the children of error to the excellent Way of Purity;

  For out of Purity groweth Truth,

  And they who seek it, seek the heavenly Light.

  Ye who are bound, come now and be free;

  Say not, "I am helpless", ye who are enslaved,

  For the way of emancipation is opened up,

  Yea, even salvation knocketh at your door.

  Will you choose liberty?

  Or will ye rather choose to be bound?

  In Purity there is freedom,

    Understanding dwelleth in her Temple,

  And joy, and Gladness, and Peace are her doorkeepers.

  Come, then, and listen to the exhortation of Truth,

  And, having listened, do that which is pure,

  And doing that which is pure ye shall know the supreme blessedness.

  Not in thy acts alone shalt thou find Purity,

  The Purity of the Highest is not confined to acts.

  Not by cutting off thy acts shalt thou become pure,

  But by cleansing the source of thy acts,

  Even thy mind and heart,

  For a pure mind cannot commit impure acts,

  Neither can a stainless heart bring forth any unlovely thing.

  What, then, defileth, and what maketh clean?

  The unchaste thought,

  The impure desire,  The selfish inclination,

  This defileth, and bringeth forth darkness and death.

  The pure thought,

  The holy aspiration,

  The unselfish love,

  This cleanseth, and bringeth forth Light and Life.

  Come, then, and see how straight is the narrow Path of Purity!

  Come and know how open and unsecret are the beautiful Courts of Truth!

  Come and understand how simple is the excellent Law of Righteousness!

  Easy to find and pleasant to walk: is the path, of Purity;

  Open wide, and inviting entrance, are the Gates of Truth;

  Near at hand and ready for investigation is the Law of Righteousness.

  To harbour hateful thoughts,

  To cherish lustful inclinations.

  To nurture the seeds of malice in the heart,–

  This defileth, and leadeth to suffering.

  To thirst for pleasures and rewards,

  To dwell upon the sins of others,

  And to think, " I am better than this man,"–

  This maketh impure and causeth thee to wander from Truth.

  To seek for thyself and not to consider others,

  To depreciate others, and to think highly of thine own Works,

  And to make proud and stubborn thy heart,–

  This staineth thy soul, and taketh thee away from thy peace.

  Behold how glorious is the Path of Purity!

  How lovely is the treasury of Truth!

  How comely and beautiful is the Garment of Holiness!

  To be free from hatred, lust and malice,–

  How sweet! How pleasant!

  Not to desire pleasures and rewards,–

  How good! How joyful!

  Not to magnify evil in others,–  How fair! How lovely!

  To put away all egotism,–

  How beautiful! How peaceful!

  The blessedness of a pure heart is beyond conception;

  The loveliness of a sinless mind is beyond comparison;

  And supremely blissful is the immortality of the righteous.

    Peace-producing is the Purity of the Highest;

  Joy - inspiring is the stainlest life,

  And rich in wisdom is the heat that is sinless.

  Ye who are tired of sin;

  Ye who know the bitterness of impurity;

  Ye who seek the everlasting peace,

  Come and enter the door of Purity

  And let Holiness be your companion.

  Purify your thoughts;

  Wash white the garment of your mind;

  Cleanse ye the secret places of your heart:–

  This done, Truth shall come and dwell with You;

    Knowledge shall be your lamp, and wisdom your guide;

    Righteousness shall be your everlasting protection,

  And Light, and Joy, and Peace shall abide with you for ever.                  THE SECOND EXHORTATION,


                    CONCERNING HUMILITY


  THE Humility that is blameless,

  To this I exhort men;

  I point them to the sublime pathway of Humility.

  Without Humility who shall see Truth?

  Without Meekness who shall comprehend the All - One?

  Without Lowliness who shall find the Great Reality?

  Love dwelleth with Humility,

  Wisdom also abideth there;

  And peace remaineth with the lowly heart.

  Put away thy Pride,

  Think no more of thy superiority,

  And purge thy mind of all its vanity;

  Then shall the Truth dignify thee.

  Truth fleeth from pride;

  Wisdom departeth from egotism;

  And holiness and vanity cannot dwell together.

  Out of Humility cometh Light,

  But darkness dwells with vanity and pride.

  Of what art thou proud? O man! of thy beauty?

    Corruption awaits it.

  Of thy garments?

  The moth and the dust shall destroy them.

  Of thy possessions?

  To - morrow another shall possess them.

  Of thy talents?

  Their lusture shall be dimmed.

  Of thy fame?

  It shall disappear as a mist Of thy learning?  Even now it is surpassed.

  Of thy! works?

  They shall vanish away for ever.

  What, then, remaineth, if these things are as naught?

  Wisdom remaineth, and Truth and Love;

  And Joy and Peace and Enlightenment are established.

  But these cannot be known to the proud.

  Neither can the vain man understand them,

  And their glory is not revealed, to him that is subject to self.

  What can darkness reveal?

  And he who walketh in darkness, what shall he see?

  The proud are blinded by darkness;

  The vain stumble and lose their way;

  And grief and desolation are the end of self.

  The enlightenment of Humility is more than learning;

  The power of Meekness is more than the strength of many conquerors,

  And he who makes lowly his mind establishes himself upon a rock.

  How shall the proud stand?

  They fall of their own weakness.

  How shall the vain endure?

  They are as reeds without support.

  How shall the self-seeking flourish?

  They are as barren seed blown about and finding no soil.

  Put on the Garment of Humility, and thou shalt not fall;

  Make gentle thy heart, and thou shalt endure as the mountain;

  Put away self, and thy works shall flourish is seed upon good soil.

  The arrogant regard themselves as kings,

  But they are less than serfs;

  The meek regard themselves as serfs,

  But they are more than kings,

  How easily are the proud injured,

  Every day they suffer pain;  How often are the vain wounded.

    Weeping and sorrow are their portion;

  How readily do the selfish suffer deprivation,

  Every day they grieve over that they have lost.

  There is no pain in Humility,

  Meekness destroyeth sorrow,

  And the pure in heart can suffer no loss.

  What can a man retain?

  What endureth?

  And where dwelleth immortality?

  The things of the world pass away, and none can hold them;

  The body perishes, and is no more seen;

  And the opinions of men are as smoke in a high wind.

    Holiness can be retained,

  Truth endureth,

  And immortality dwelleth in the sinless heart.

  I sought the world, but peace was not there;

  I courted learning, but Truth was not revealed

  I sojourned with philosophy, but my heart was sore with vanity

  And I cried, " where is peace to be found?

  And where is the hiding - place of Truth?"

  In Humility I found peace,

  In the practice of righteousness Truth was. revealed;

  And in self - obliteration I reached the end of pain and vanity.

  Bend low, Ye pilgrims;

  Prostrate Yourselves, Ye weary and disconsolate;

  Give up that ye love, ye stricken and afflicted;

  For he that bendeth himself shall be straightened,

  He that prostrateth himself shall be lifted up,

  And whosoever relinquishes self shall see the end of his afflictions.

  Narrow and Low is the Portal of Humility,

  But he that stoopeth, and entereth therein, shall stand for ever.                    THE THIRD EXHORTATION,


                        CONCERNING LOVE


  THE Love that is perfect,

  To this I exhort men;

  Even to the Love of the Highest.

  How beautiful to behold is Love!

  How glorious to contemplate!

  And in practice how sweet and full of gladness!

  To find Love is to find Perfection;

  To know Love is to know the Eternal;

  To practise Love is to manifest Truth.

  But how is Love found?

  How is it revealed in the heart?

  How is it practised and made manifest?

  Not to be a partisan,

  Not to practise hatred,

  Not to engage in strife,

  Not to practise deception,

  Not to covet,

  Not to retaliate,

  Not to condemn,–

  Not to do all these is to find Love.

  To put away prejudice,

  To rid the mind of pride and vanity,

  To disperse doubt and fear,

  To wash from the heart the stains of desire.

  To purify the mind of every defilement,–

  To do all these is to know Love.

  To be always patient,

  To be supremely calm,  To be ceaselessly holy,

  To be forgiving to the uttermost,

  And to be equal - minded towards enemies as towards friends,–

  To be all these is to manifest Love.

  Where Love is, Light is,

  Where Love is not, there is impenetrable darkness.

  Where Love is, Life is;

  Where Love is not, there is the deeper death.

  Where Love is, Truth is;

  Where Love is not, there is error and confusion

  Love changes not, for Love is Truth;

  Love sins not, for Love is perfect;

  Love grieves not, for Love is the Eternal;

  Love is not subject to birth and death, for Love is Immortality.

  How illusory is the world!

  How fleeting and empty are the pleasures of the world!

  How real is Love!

  How steadfast and full of peace is the life of Truth!

  How vain are the pursuits of men!

  How heavy is the weariness of self!

  But the practice of righteousness is fruitful.

  And sweet is the peace of Truth.

  He who hath Love hath all things,

  The Master dwelleth in Love,

  In Love the Great Reality abides,

  And the wonderful Peace is only found by Love.

  The Purity of the Highest is there,

  The majesty of humility also,

  And he who adjusts his heart to Love is perfect

  Seek self, and Love shall be withheld from you;

  Seek Love, and lo! it is already with you.

  Who seeketh enlightenment?  Who seeketh Truth?

  Who seeketh Love?

  Let him that seeketh, come, and say,–

  " Open! ye doors of Purity!

  Be closed no more, ye narrow portals of Humility!

  Swing open wide, ye everlasting gates of Love!

  And his voice shall be heard in the innermost places:

  He shall not cry in vain, nor shall he lose his way.

  But shall pass through to his everlasting rest.                INSTRUCTION, CONCERNING THE


                                    MASTER


  TO the obedient and the ready;

  To all who are willing to understand;

  To those wandering in the darkness, and: unable to perceive the Light: –

  Come now, and listen;

  Come now, and be made glad;

  Enter now into the revelation of Purity.–

  The Master is not perceived by the senses,

  Not comprehended by the reason,

  Not realised by argument.

  Not on the hills, nor in the valleys;

  Not in the earth, nor sky, not in any outward thing is the Master to be

found.

  Creeds and schools and books cannot contain Him,

  He dwelleth within.

  Cease from thine outward search, O weary one!

  Cease from thy wanderings, O child of night!

  In thine own heart dwelleth the Master;

  He is not hidden from thee but by thyself.

  The Master is the inward Voice,

  The inward Light,

  The inward Peace.

  Behold I show you the dwelling - place of the Master,–

  It is a purified heart,

  He who hath broken the bonds of self,

  Who hath slain desire,

  Whose mind is quiet, conquered, and subdued,

  Whose heart is calm and mild and full of peace,

  He hath entered the presence of the Master,  Unto him the glory of the Master is revealed.

  O thou who criest and receivest no answer!

  O thou who wanderest and findest no rest!

  O thou who searchest and findest no Light!

  Bring hither thy fainting heart,

  Bring hither thy blindness,

  Come and listen to the instruction that is holy,

  And, having listened, find satisfaction and rest.–

  There are truths many, and there is one Truth,

  Even the pure mind, the supremely Perfect Life:

  There are saviours many, and there is one Saviour,

  Even the supreme enlightenment of Wisdom:-

  There are teachers many and there is one Teacher,

  Even the glorious revelation of Righteousness:

  There are masters many, and there is one Master,

  Even the Spirit of Truth;

  And Truth, Saviour, Teacher and Master are one.

  Plain and unmistakable is the way which leadeth to the Master,–

  Overcome thyself, this is the Way.

  Purify thy heart, and thou shalt gaze upon the face of the Master.

  Cling to self, and thou shalt not find Him;

  Abandon self and lo! the Master abideth with thee.

  The impure have no eyes to see the pure,

  The darkness cannot penetrate the Light,

  And immortality is hidden from that which is perishable.

    Therefore, leave that to which thou clingest.

  Yield up thy desires,

  And the satisfaction of the Master shall fill thee.

  Yield up thy opinions,

  And the Light of the Master shall illumine thee;

  Go not after the evanescent and the perishable,

  And thou shalt enter into the possession of the Eternal and imperishable;  Thou shalt become one with the Master,

  And shalt dwell with Him in Immortality,

  The Master waiteth,

  Yea, eternally waiteth,

  Patience is His name;

  He departeth not from compassion,

  And where Righteousness abides, there dwelleth He.

    Hidden is He in Love;

  Come unto Love, and thou shalt find Him.

  The Light of Wisdom envelopeth Him;

  Purify thine understanding, and thou shalt know Him.

  The glory of Truth covereth Him up;

  Relinguish self, and thou shalt see His Form.

  Why perceivest thou not the Truth?

  Why hearest thou not the Voice of the Master?

  Thou perceivest not the Truth because of thine own errors;

  Thou hearest not the Master’s Voice because the voices of self clamour

loudly within thee.

  As clouds hide the face of the sun,

  So the clouds of error hide the face of the Master;

  Yea, the thick clouds of sin they shut Him but from men.

  Who, then, shall see the Master?

  Who shall comprehend Him?

  Who shall dwell with Him?

  Who shall hear His Voice?

  Even he who is of a pure heart;

  Who is gentle, compassionate, and infinitely patient;

  Who returneth meekness for anger,

  Love for hatred,

    Forgiveness for abuse,

  And silence for condemnation.

  Clothe thyself, therefore, in the Garment of Humility;    Acknowledge thine errors,

  Even thine inmost sins,

  Thus confessing thyself,

  thou shalt find the Way of Love,

  And finding Love thou shalt find the Master;

  And finding the Master thou shalt be at rest.

  Deny thyself;

  Subdue thyself;

  Conquer thyself.

  Let not goodwill depart from thee;

  Be at peace with all, yea, even with the beasts,

  So shall the highest Truth take up its abode within thee;

  Unto thee the heart of the Master shall be revealed;

    Sorrow and suffering and fear and doubt shall flee far from thee,

  And the knowledge of immortality shall fill thy heart with peace.

  Thus is the heart of the Master made known,

  Thus is He revealed unto them that are ready to receive Him.          INSTRUCTION, CONCERNING THE LAW


  TO the humble and the faithful;

  To them that are seeking humility and faith,–

  There is one Supreme Law,

  Even the Law of Good.

  Think not that which is evil;

  Say not that which is evil;

  Do not that which is evil,

  Think that which is good;

  Say that which is good;

  Do that which is good,

  So shalt thou come to know the Law;

  By no other way can it be comprehended.

  The knowledge of the Law maketh the heart glad,

  It filleth the mind with joy,

  It destroyeth all sorrow.

    Suffering ceases for him who knows the Law,

  Sin and grief and affliction leave him,

  And wheresoever he goes, peace follows him.

  Happy is he who has perceived the Law;

  Blessed is he who practises it;

  Divine is he who has become one with it.

  Come, thou that searchest, weary and almost hopeless,

  Prostrate thyself in the dust of obedience;

  Deny thyself to the uttermost;

  Leave all that thou art proud of;

  Yea, sacrifice all;

  So shalt thou put on the yoke of Lowliness,

  And shalt thou enter into a knowledge of the Law;

  Then shalt thou come to know the three Names of the Law of Good,–

  The first is Justice;  The second, Righteousness;

  The third, Love.

  Men, loving self, deny these lofty names,

  And have no knowledge of the Law of Good;

    Wandering in the dark, they fall into treacherous places,

  And fear and doubt and sorrow and suffering dwell with them.

  Practise the inward Righteousness,

  And thou shalt see the ineffable glory of the three Names;

  Thou shalt comprehend the Law of Good,

  And bliss and peace shall fill thee.

  To know the Law;

  To obey the Law;

  To practise the Law,–

  This only is salvation,

  This only is emancipation from error and unrest.

  Supremely glorious is the Law of Good,

  Supremely peace - giving is the knowledge of the Law,

  Supremely blessed is he whose pilgrim feet walk in obedience to the Law.

  He who says,–

  I will no more cling to self;

  I will no more engage in strife;

  I will no more retaliate;

  I will no more judge and condemn.

  Hitherto I have clung to self;

  I have sought to gratify self;

  I have defended and protected myself;

  But now I will abandon self;

  I will sacrifice and not defend myself;

  Yea, utmost crucifixion shall be mine.

  I will love all men, and only myself will I condemn;

  The Garment of Humility shall cover me;

    Righteousness and Love shall be my protection;  Even in the Highest will I take my refuge.

    Goodwill shall be my guide;

    Compassion shall not depart from me.

  And the divine gentleness of Truth shall guide my thoughts and actions.

  Thus will I cease from sin;

  Thus will I practise the Highest Good.

  He who thus resolves shall know the Law,

  The Law of Good shall he comprehend;

  The fulness of its majesty shall be revealed to him,

  And from all evil shall he be protected.

    Therefore, let a man believe in Good;

  Let him cling to Good;

  Let him practise Good;

  He will thus come to comprehend himself;

    Comprehending himself he will comprehend the universe;

  He will thus arrive at peace.

  When a man’s body is defiled, does he not wash it and make it clean?

  When a man’s heart is defiled, let him likewise wash it, and be clean.

  Five are the waters which wash away sin:–

  Purity, which washes away all indulgences and lusts;

  Pity, which washes away all self-seeking and indifference;

    Humility, which washes away all prejudice and pride;

  Joy, which washes away all covetousness and envy;

  Love, which washes away all hatred and condemnation.

    Whosoever will, let him come and be clean,

  The waters are ready and waiting.

  Blessed he is who is free from sin.

  He knows the supreme Law of Good, and dwells in peace.

  Thus is the Law of Good expounded;

  Thus is it spread abroad in the hearts of men.                INSTRUCTION, CONCERNING THE


                            GREAT REALITY


  TO the awakened and enlightened,

  To those who seek to be awakened and enlightened,–

  There is darkness and there is Light;

  There is dreaming and there is Waking;

  There is illusion and there is Reality.

  The darkness apprehendeth not the Light;

  The dreamer knoweth not his waking mind;

  And the wanderer in illusion is unacquainted with Reality;

  Of two ways, therefore, one must be abandoned.

  The dweller in darkness seeth nothing,

  Not even himself,

  His feet stumble, he knoweth not his way.

  Abandon darkness, and thou shalt come unto the Light;

  Coming to the Light, thou shalt see all things:

  Thou shalt know thy way, and thy feet shall cease from stumbling.

  The way of the dreamer is uncertain and painful;

  Pleasure and terror afflict him;

  He knoweth not where he standeth;

  He controlleth not himself, and is at the mercy of the unreal.

  Abandon the dreams of self, O thou that sleepest!

  Awake! open thine eyes to the Morning,

  And thou shalt comprehend thine own divinity.

  The walker in the way of illusion is surrounded with shadows;

  He perceiveth not the substance;

  Grasping at bubbles, he is scourged with grief and disappointment;

  Clinging to the perishable, he mourns,

  And following after that which vanishes, he is troubled with unrest.

  Abandon the pathway of illusion,  The pathway of thy perishable self,

  So shalt thou find the imperishable Truth;

  Gladness shall take the place of mourning,

  And thine eyes shall be opened to the glory of the Great Reality.

  What, then, is the Great Reality?

  The Great Reality is a stainless heart,

  An enlightened understanding,

  A soul whose perfect peace is not disturbed.

  By the practice of righteousness only can the Great Reality be known;

  He alone can perceive it who controls himself;

  He alone can enter it who purifies himself;

  He alone can abide therein who is free from all sin.

  In the Great Reality all religions and philosophies culminate,

  They meet here, and then vanish away,

  For there is no division in the Great Reality,

  Strife and unrest cannot enter there,

  And he who comes to it is filled with peace.

  Thou who wouldst understand the Great Reality;

  Thou who would’st enter it, and know its peace;

  Seek the One behind the many,

  Seek the Silence behind the noise,

  Seek Truth behind self;

  Seek for that which is holy and peace-giving,

  Which abides, and does not pass away like the morning dew.

  Wisdom abides;

  Love abides;

    Compassion abides;

  Truth abides;

  Therefore sacrifice self,

  For self and all the things of self are perishable,

  They belong to the unreal!

  Awake, then, out of thy dreaming!    Disperse all thy shadows,

  Destroy all thine illusions,

  And thou shalt enter the Great Reality;

  Filled with peace, thou shalt dwell with the Eternal Harmonies;

  Filled with bliss, thou shalt sing the everlasting Song,

  The Song which thrills the spaces and the worlds;

  Thy Song and mine thus shalt thou sing,–

  I have made the acquaintance of the Master of Compassion;

  I have put on the Garment of the Perfect Law;

  I have entered the realm of the Great Reality.

    Wandering is ended, for Rest is accomplished;

  Pain and sorrow have ceased, for Peace is entered into;

    Confusion is dissolved, for Unity is made manifest;

  Error is vanquished, for Truth is revealed.

  Blessed is he who has resolved to abandon self:

  Blessed is he who is pure;

  Blessed is he who has destroyed all his illusions;

  He has found the Great Reality at last.

  The universe is glad, for again the Master is revealed;

  The universe is glad, for again the Law of Good is expounded;

  The universe is glad, for again the Great Reality is comprehended.