        DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE WAY OF


                                      TRUTH


                            1. SELF - RESTRAINT


  WHAT is Truth?

  It resides in the silence of Perfect Deeds.

  That silence is sufficient for the wise.

  I, therefore, discourse not upon Truth,

  I discourse upon the Way which leads thither;

  For Truth is not of words, but of life,

  And though Truth govern the tongue, its seat is not there,

  Its seat is in the heart.

  What words shall add beauty to the ineffable?

  And what man shall glorify Truth?

  Let the ineffable give beauty to words,

  And let man be glorified by Truth,

  I, therefore, point the Way which leads to Truth.

  Not by speculation do I point the Way,

  But by practice and attainment:

  The Way is named Self - conquest.

  I write for believers,

  For them that believe that self can be overcome.

  I write not for them that deny that self can be overcome,

  And who thus exalt and give dominion to self.

  He who believes, will walk the holy Way,

  And, walking it, will reach the highest Truth.

  Let him who thus believes, equip himself:–

    Helmeted with Faith, Armoured with Patience,

  And armed with the sharp Sword of Resolution,

  He will be prepared to attack the enemies of Truth within-himself;  He will enter upon the Practices of Truth.

  By practice the artisan becomes accomplished in his craft,

  By practice the Truth - lover becomes accomplished in Truth.

  The Way of Truth is marked by three Great Practices,–

  The first is Self - Restraint,

  The second, Self - Examination,

  The third, Self- Surrender;

  These three include all others,

  He who refuses to practise Self - Restraint,

  Who says in his heart, –

  " I will eat and drink, and make me garlands of pleasure,"

  He cannot find the Way which leads to peace.

  But he who says within himself,–

  " I will dwell with Abstinence,

  I will make my abode with Chastity,

  Integrity shall be my companion,

  And faith shall light up my darkness,

  Yea, Virtue shall be my refuge and my stay,"

  He will find the Way which leads to Truth,

  Lo! he hath already found it,

  For the practice of virtue is the entrance to the Way.

  The vicious man destroys, but the virtuous man builds;

  He slays himself who thinks only of his own pleasure;

  He preserves himself who controls himself.

  He who renounces pleasure, and restrains his passions,

    Preferring steadfastness and integrity to gratification,

  Will partake of the joys of virtue:

  Pleasant will be his friendships,

  Pure his affections,

  And long and prosperous his days;

  Thus walking with virtue, happiness will wait upon him,

  Partial blessedness will be his portion,  And he will reach the first great Resting-Place;

  Yet, staying there, he will not reach the Highest.                          2. SELF-EXAMINATION


  He  who  seeks  the  Highest  will  enter  upon  the  practice  of  Self  -

Examination.

  Searching the inmost recesses of his heart,

  Following up the intricate threads of thought,

    Rigorously testing the quality of his motives,

  He will find out the hidden springs of desire,

  He will lay bare the roots of the tree of life,

  And finding the Eternal Cause, he will know both Good and evil,

  He will see the Highest, and will no more perish.

  As a beautiful flower is formed, its growth not being seen,

  So will he grow in wisdom, unseen of men.

  Yet when wisdom is fully formed,

  When the flower of Truth becomes manifest in all its beauty,

  Men unacquainted with its silent growth will say.

  "This man is wise, whence obtained he his wisdom?

  How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?"

  As a child in the womb.

  As a plant in the earth,

  As an object in the eye of the approaching traveller,

  So wisdom is formed in the heart,

  So knowledge grows in him who diligently examines himself;

  Who, having found the roots of evil,

  Tears them up with the hands of Renunciation,

  And burns them to ashes in the fire of Knowledge.

  He who thus examines himself,

  Who rectifies his inmost heart,

  And rejects all the errors of his mind,

  Who, seeking out and humbly acknowledging his own faults,

    Refusing to dwell upon the faults of others,

  Will make swift progress toward the goal of peace.  He will cleanse his heart;

  He will purify his understanding;

  Subduing self, he will no longer look through the eye of self;

    Apprehending Truth, he will perceive with the unveiled eye of Truth;

  He will know both self and Truth.

  All his works will prosper, for his acts will be righteous;

  His tongue will speak wisdom, for his heart will be pure;

  And where his feet have trodden, the flowers of Love and Peace will

grow.

  He will refuse to dwell with unrighteousness.

  Folly and impurity he will reject,

  And he will say unto strife and hatred, " Depart ye from me."

  Kindling the fire of inward knowledge,

  Keeping bright and constant its flame,

  And feeding it with patient and loving sacrifice,

  Let a man burn up all that is perishable within him,

  Only thus will he find the Imperishable;

  Let him eliminate the dross of error,

  Only thus will he discover the gold of Truth:

  Let him destroy all sin, Only thus will he find the Stainless One,

  Only thus will he approach the Highest.

  Thus seeking out the source within himself.

  Passion will not long torment him;

  Finding the cause of passion, he will destroy it,

  And self - restraint will give way to composure of mind and heart,

  Far will he travel on the Way of Peace,

  And, reaching the second Resting - Place,

  Will taste of fuller joy and blessedness.

  Yet, staying there, he will not reach the Highest.                          3. SELF - SURRENDER


    Having well restrained himself,

    Having deeply examined himself,

  Let the lover of Truth now enter upon the practice of Self - Surrender.

  He who practises self - restraint travels well;

  He who practises self - examination travels better;

  He who practises self - surrender travels best.

  He only can know the Highest who surrenders self,

  Who makes the inward sacrifice complete,

  Who holds nothing back,

  Who calls nothing his own,

  Who refuses to set his heart upon any earthly thing;

  Putting aside all his lusts,

  Emptying himself of all his vanities,

    Divesting himself of all his theories and opinions,

  He will become empty, naked, and without possessions;

  And having become empty, he will be filled with Truth;

    Having become naked, he will be clothed with Righteousness;

  Possessing nothing, he will be lord of all.

  When self surrender is practised in its completeness.

  Then is the Highest reached,

  Then is Truth comprehended,

  Then is Perfect Peace enjoyed.

  He who has conquered himself can never be brought low,

  He who has surrendered himself can never be confounded;

  He who has overcome the world can never be disturbed,

  The flames of lust will not burn him, for he has quenched them;

    Temptation will no more scourge him, for he has destroyed the cause of

temptation;

    Restraint will no more be needed, for he will be perfect in Truth,

  Freed from self, he will be freed from sorrow;  Freed from error, he will no more grieve;

  Freed from impurity, he will cease from suffering.

  He will enter into the highest joy,

  And, reaching the final Resting - Place,

  Will partake of perfect bliss and blessedness.

  Not valuing that which perishes he can never be robbed;

  Not loving himself he can never be wounded;

  And though men should slay him he can never be destroyed;

  For he is no longer self, but Truth,

  And who shall destroy Truth?

  All bodies die, but Truth does not die;

  Ail things pass away, but Truth remains for ever.

  He who has surrendered self has become, immortal,

  He is no longer separate but has become one with Truth,

  And he manifests the Highest, though men perceive it not.

  Of self - restraint is born Virtue,

  Of self - examination is born Knowledge,

  Of self - surrender is born Love.

  Happy shall he become who restrains himself,

  Blessed shall he become who purifies himself,

  Divine shall he become who surrenders himself.

  By Virtue one’s life is governed,

  By Knowledge one’s life is purified,

  By Love one’s life is perfected.

  Virtue is the seed, Knowledge the plant, and Love the flower.

  The seed knoweth not the plant,

  The plant knoweth not the flower,

  But the flower knoweth itself, plant, and seed.

  By self-restraint passion is slain;

  By self - examination false belief is slain;

  By self - surrender all illusion is laid low.

  Self - restraint leads to strength;  Self - examination leads to wisdom;

    Self-surrender leads to holiness.

  Perfect in self-restraint, self-examination and self - surrender.

  A man has reached the Highest;

  He has become one with Truth, and will no more wander.

    Unalterable in compassion,

  Firmly established in righteousness,

  And steadfast in holiness,

  His heart thrills in unison with the Heart of all;

  He knows the unending joy,

  He has found the heavenly peace.

    Having stooped to the lowest, he is exalted to the Highest;

    Having conquered sin, he is crowned with Holiness;

    Having crucified self, he is glorified by Truth.

  Willing to be nothing, he has become all;

  Yielding up all things, he has become possessed of all;

    Giving his life, he is clothed with Immortality.

    Altogether virtuous, he is altogether happy;

    Altogether righteousness, he is altogether blessed;

    Altogether pure, he is altogether peaceful.

    Beautiful in Meekness,

  Majestic in Love,

  And invincible in Innocence,

  He will manifest the Ineffable;

  He will teach without words.

  No more troubled;

  No more tormented;

  No more afflicted;

  Arisen, awakened, healed, and made perfect;

  He has unveiled the Face of the Highest;

  He knows the Great Rest,

  The Deep Silence,  The Profound Peace.

  In the Light which knows no darkness he walks,

  And it casts no shadow on his pathway.                        BOOK NINETEEN


              MORNING AND EVENING


                              THOUGHTS.                                FIRST MORNING


 

  In aiming at the life of blessedness, one of the simplest beginnings to be

considered, and rightly made, is that which we all make every day-namely,

the beginning of each day’s life. 

  There is a sense in which every day may be regarded as the beginning of

a new life, in which one can think, act, and live newly, and in a wiser and

better spirit. 

  The  right  beginning  of  the  day  will  be  followed  by  a  cheerfulness

permeating the household with a sunny influence, and the tasks and duties of

the day will be undertaken in a strong and confident spirit, and the whole day

will be well lived. 


                                  FIRST EVENING


 

  There can be no progress, no achievement, without sacrifice, and a man’s

worldly success will be in the measure that he sacrifices his confused animal

thoughts,  and  fixes  his  mind  on  the  development  of  his  plans,  and  the

strengthening of his resolution and self-reliance. 

  And  the  higher  he  lifts  his  thoughts,  the  more  manly,  upright,  and

righteous he becomes, the greater will be his success, the more blessed and

enduring will be his achievements.                              SECOND MORNING


 

  None but right acts can follow right thoughts; none but a right life can

follow right acts; and by living a right life all blessedness is achieved.

  Mind is the Master-power that moulds and makes.

  And Man is Mind, and evermore he takes.

  The Tool of thought, and, shaping what he wills,

  Brings forth a thousand joys, a thousand ills;-

  He thinks in secret, and it comes to pass:

    Environment is but his looking-glass.

                               SECOND EVENING


    Calmness  of  mind  is  one  of  the  beautiful  jewels  of  wisdom.  A  man

becomes  calm  in  the  measure  that  he  understands  himself  as  a  thought-

evolved being. . . .

  And he as he develops a right understanding, and sees more and more

clearly the internal relations of things by the action of cause and effect, he

ceases to fret and fume, and worry and grieve, and remains poised, steadfast,

serene.

                                 THIRD MORNING


  To follow, under all circumstances, the highest promptings within you; to

be always true to the divine self; to rely upon the inward Voice, the inward

Light, and to pursue your purpose with a fearless and restful heart, believing

that  the  future  will  yield  unto  you  the  need  of  every  thought  and  effort;

knowing that the laws of the universe can never fail, and that your own will

come back to you with mathematical exactitude-this is faith and the living of

faith.

                                 THIRD EVENING


  Have a thorough understanding of your work, and let it be your own; and

as you proceed, ever following the inward Guide, the infallible Voice, you

will pass on from victory to victory, and will rise step by step to higher

resting-places, and your ever- broadening outlook will gradually reveal to

you  the  essential  beauty  and  purpose  of  life.  Self-purified,  health  will  be

yours; self-governed, power will be yours, and all that you do will prosper.

 

  And I may stand where health, success, and power

  Await my coming, if, each fleeting hour,

  I cling to love and patience; and abide

  With stainlessness; and never step aside

  From high integrity; so shall I see

  At last the land of immortality.

                               FOURTH MORNING


  When the tongue is well controlled and wisely subdued; when selfish

impulses and unworthy thoughts no longer rush to the tongue demanding

utterance; when the speech has become harmless, pure, gracious, gentle, and

purposeful, and no word is uttered but in sincerity and truth-then are the five

steps  in  virtuous  speech  accomplished,  then  is  the  second  great  lesson  in

Truth learned and mastered.

 

  Make pure thy heart, and thou wilt make thy life

  Rich, sweet and beautiful.

                               FOURTH EVENING


    Having clothed himself with humility,

  the first questions a man asks himself are:

  “How am I acting towards others?”

  “What am I doing to others?”

  “How am I thinking of others?”

  “Are  my  thoughts  of,  and  acts  towards  others  prompted  by  unselfish

love?”

  As  a  man,  in  the  silence  of  his  soul,  asks  himself  these  searching

questions, he will unerringly see where he has hitherto failed.

                                 FIFTH MORNING


  To dwell in love always and towards all is to live the true life, is to have

Life itself.

    Knowing this, the good man gives up himself unreservedly to the Spirit of

Love, and dwells in Love towards all, contending with none, condemning

none, but loving all.

  The  Christ  Spirit  of  Love  puts  an  end,  not  only  to  all  sin,  but  to  all

division and contention.

                                   FIFTH EVENING


  When sin and self are abandoned, the heart is restored to its imperishable

Joy.

  Joy comes and fills the self-emptied heart; it abides with the peaceful; its

reign is with the pure.

  Joy flees from the selfish, it deserts the quarrelsome; it is hidden from the

impure.

  Joy cannot remain with the selfish; it is wedded to Love.

                                 SIXTH MORNING


  In the pure heart there is no room left where personal judgments and

hatreds can find lodgement, for it is filled to overflowing with tenderness and

love; it sees no evil, and only as men succeed in seeing no evil in others will

they become free from sin, and sorrow, and suffering.

  If men only understood

  That the heart that sins must sorrow,

  That the hateful mind tomorrow

  Reaps its barren harvest, weeping,

  Starving, resting not, nor sleeping;

    Tenderness would fill their being,

  They would see with Pity’s seeing

  If they only understood.

                                 SIXTH EVENING


  To stand face to face with truth; to arrive, after innumerable wanderings

and pains, at wisdom and bliss; not to be finally defeated and cast out, but to

ultimately triumph over every inward foe-such is man’s divine destiny, such

his glorious goal; and this, every saint, sage, and saviour has declared. 

  A man only begins to be a man when he ceases to whine and revile, and

commences to search for the hidden justice which regulates his life. And as

he adapts his mind to that regulating factor, he ceases to accuse others as the

cause of his condition, and builds himself up in strong and noble thoughts;

ceases to kick against circumstances, but begins to use them as aids to his

more rapid progress, and as a means of discovering the hidden power and

possibilities within himself.

                             SEVENTH MORNING


  The will to evil and the will to good

  Are both within thee, which wilt thou employ?

  Thou knowest what is right and what is wrong,

  Which wilt though love and foster? which destroy?

  Thou art the chooser of thy thoughts and deeds;

  Thou art the maker of thine inward state;

  The power is thine to be what thou wilt be;

  Thou buildest Truth and Love, or lies and hate.

                               SEVENTH EVENING


  The  teaching  of  Jesus  brings  men  back  to  the  simple  truth  that

righteousness, or right-doing, is entirely a matter of individual conduct, and

not a mystical something apart from a man’s thoughts and deeds. 

    Calmness and patience can become habitual by first grasping, through

effort, a calm  and patient thought, and then continuously thinking it, and

living in it, until “use becomes second nature,” and anger and impatience

pass away for ever.

                               EIGHTH MORNING


  Man is made or unmade by himself; in the armoury of thought he forges

the weapons by which he destroys himself; he also fashions the tools with

which he builds for himself heavenly mansions of joy and strength and peace.

By the right choice and true application of thought man ascends to the Divine

Perfection; by the abuse and wrong application of thought he descends below

the level of the beast. 

    Between these two extremes are all the grades of character, and man is

their maker and master. 

  As a being of Power, Intelligence, and Love, and the lord of his own

thoughts, man holds the key to every situation.

                               EIGHTH EVENING


    Whatsoever  you  harbour  in  the  inmost  chambers  of  your  heart  will,

sooner or later, by the inevitable law of reaction, shape itself in your outward

life.  Every soul attracts its own, and nothing can possibly come to it that

does not belong to it. To realize this is to recognize the universality of Divine

Law.

 

  If thou would’st right the world,

  And banish all its evils and its woes.

 

  Make its wild places bloom,

  And its drear deserts blossom as the rose-

  Then right thyself.

                                 NINTH MORNING


    Whatever conditions are rendering your life burdensome, you may pass

out  of  and  beyond  them  by  developing  and  utilizing  within  you  the

transforming power of self-purification and self-conquest. 

  Before the divine radiance of a pure heart all darkness vanishes and all

clouds  melt  away,  and  he  who  has  conquered  self  has  conquered  the

universe. 

  He who sets his foot firmly upon the path of self-conquest, who walks,

aided  by  the  staff  of  faith,  the  highway  of  self-sacrifice,  will  assuredly

achieve the highest prosperity, and will reap abounding and enduring joy and

bliss.

                                 NINTH EVENING


  It is the silent and conquering thought- forces which bring all things into

manifestation. The universe grew out of thought. 

  To  adjust  all  your  thoughts  to  a  perfect  and  unswerving  faith  in  the

omnipotence and supremacy of Good, is to co-operate with that Good, and to

realize within yourself the solution and destruction of all evil. 

  To mentally deny evil is not sufficient; it must, by daily practice, be risen

above and understood. To affirm the Good mentally is inadequate; it must, by

unswerving endeavour, be entered into and comprehended.

                                 TENTH MORNING


  Every thought you think is a force sent out.

    Whatever your position in life may be, before you can hope to enter into

any measure of success, usefulness, and power, you must learn how to focus

your thought- forces by cultivating calmness and repose. 

  There is no difficulty, however great, but will yield before a calm and

purposeful concentration of thought, and no legitimate object but may be

speedily actualized by the intelligent use and direction of one’s soul forces. 

  Think good thoughts, and they will quickly become actualized in your

outward life in the form of good conditions.

                                 TENTH EVENING


  That  which  you  would  be  and  hope  to  be,  you  may  be  now.  Non-

accomplishment  resides  in  your  perpetual  postponement,  and,  having  the

power to postpone, you also have the power to accomplish-to perpetually

accomplish: realize this truth, and you shall be to-day, and every day, the

ideal being of whom you dreamed. 

  Say to yourself, “I will live in my Ideal now; I will manifest my ideal

now; I will be my Ideal now; and all that tempts me away from my Ideal I

will not listen to; I will listen only to the voice of my Ideal.”                            ELEVENTH MORNING


  Be as a flower; content to be, to grow

  in sweetness day by day.

 

  If thou would’st perfect thyself in

    knowledge, perfect thyself in Love.

 

  If thou would’st reach the Highest,

    ceaselessly cultivate a loving and compassionate heart.

 

  To him who chooses Goodness,

    sacrificing all, is given that which

  is more than, and includes, all.

                             ELEVENTH EVENING


  The Great Law never cheats any man of his just due.

    Human life, when rightly lived,

  is simple with a beautiful simplicity.

 

  He who comprehends the utter simplicity of life, who obeys its laws, and

does not step aside into the dark paths and complex mazes of selfish desire,

stands where no harm can reach him.

  Then there is fullness of joy, abounding plenty, and rich and complete

blessedness.

                             TWELFTH MORNING


  Every man reaps the results of his own thoughts and deeds, and suffers

for his own wrong.

  He who begins right, and continues right, does not need to desire, and

search  for  felicitous  results;  they  are  already  at  hand;  they  follow  as

consequences; they are the certainties, the realities, of life.

  Sweet is the rest and deep is the bliss of him who has freed his heart from

its lusts and hatreds and dark desires.

                               TWELFTH EVENING


  You are the creator of your own shadows;

  you desire, and then you grieve; renounce,

  and then you shall rejoice.

 

  Of  all  the  beautiful  truths  pertaining  to  the  soul,  .  .  .  none  is  more

gladdening or fruitful of divine promise and confidence than this-that man is

the master of thought, the moulder of character, and the maker and shaper of

character, environment, and destiny.

                           THIRTEENTH MORNING


  As darkness is a passing shadow, and light is a substance that remains, so

sorrow is fleeting, but joy abides for ever. No true thing can pass away and

become lost; no false thing can remain and be preserved. 

    Sorrow is false, and it cannot live; joy is true, and it cannot die. Joy may

become hidden for a time, but it can always be recovered; sorrow may remain

for a period, but it can be transcended and dispersed. 

  Do not think your sorrow will remain; it will pass away like a cloud. Do

not believe that the torments of sin are ever your portion; they will vanish

like a hideous nightmare. Awake! Arise! Be holy and joyful.

                           THIRTEENTH EVENING


  Tribulation lasts only so long as there remains some chaff of self which

needs to be removed. The tribulum, or threshing machine, ceases to work

when all the grain is separated from the chaff; and when the last impurities

are blown away from the soul, tribulation has completed its work, and there is

no more need for it; then abiding joy is realized. 

  The sole and supreme use of suffering is to purify, to burn out all that is

useless and impure. Suffering ceases for him who is pure. There could be no

object in burning gold after the dross had been removed.

                           FOURTEENTH MORNING


  In speaking of self-control, one is easily misunderstood. It should not be

associated with a destructive repression, but with a constructive expression.

  A man is happy, wise and great in the measure that he controls himself;

he is wretched, foolish, and mean in the measure that he allows his animal

nature to dominate his thoughts and actions. 

  He who controls himself, controls his life, his circumstances, his destiny;

and  wherever  he  goes  he  carries  his  happiness  with  him  as  an  abiding

possession.  Renunciation precedes regeneration. 

  The permanent happiness which men seek in dissipation, excitement, and

abandonment to unworthy pleasures, is found only in the life which reverses

all this-the life of self-control.

                           FOURTEENTH EVENING


  Law, not confusion, is the dominating principle in the universe; justice,

not  injustice  is  the  soul  and  substance  of  life;  and  righteousness,  not

corruption, is the moulding and moving force in the spiritual government of

the  world.  This  being  so,  man  has  but  the  right  himself  to  find  that  the

universe is right.

 

  When I am pure,

  I shall have solved the mystery of life;

  I shall be sure,

  When I am free from hatred, lust and strife,

  I am in Truth, and Truth abides in me;

  I shall be safe, and sane, and wholly free,

  When I am pure.

                           FIFTEENTH MORNING


  If men only understood

  That their hatred and resentment

  Slays their peace and sweet contentment,

  Hurts themselves, helps not another,

  Does not cheer one lonely brother,

  They would seek the better doing

  Of good deeds which leaves no rueing-

  If they only understood.

 

  If men only understood

  How Love conquers; how prevailing

  Is its might, grim hate assailing;

  How compassion endeth sorrow,

  Maketh wise, and doth not borrow

  Pain of passion, they would ever

  Live in Love, in hatred never-

  If they only understood.

                             FIFTEENTH EVENING


  The grace and beauty that were in Jesus can be of no value to you-cannot

be understood by you-unless they are also in you, and they can never be in

you,  until  you  practise  them,  for,  apart  from  doing,  the  qualities  which

constitute Goodness do not, as far as you are concerned, exist.

  To adore Jesus for his good qualities is a long step towards Truth, but to

practise those qualities is Truth itself; and he who fully adores the perfection

of another will not rest content in his own imperfection, but will fashion his

soul after the likeness of that other.

  Therefore thou who adorest Jesus for his divine qualities, practise those

qualities Thyself, and thou too shalt be divine.

                             SIXTEENTH MORNING


  Let a man realize that life in its totality proceeds from the mind, and lo,

the way of blessedness is opened up to him! For he will then discover that he

possesses the power to rule his mind and to fashion it in accordance with his

Ideal. 

  So  will  he  elect  to  strongly  and  steadfastly  walk  those  pathways  of

thought and action which are altogether excellent; to him life will become

beautiful  and  sacred;  and,  sooner  or  later,  he  will  put  to  flight  all  evil,

confusion,  and  suffering;  for  it  is  impossible  for  a  man  to  fall  short  of

liberation, enlightenment, and peace, who guards with unwearying diligence

the gateway of his heart. 

                             SIXTEENTH EVENING


  By constantly overcoming self, a man gains a knowledge of the subtle

intricacies of his mind; and it is this divine knowledge which enables him to

become established in calmness. 

  Without self-knowledge there can be no abiding peace of mind, and those

who are carried away by tempestuous passions, cannot approach the holy

place where calmness reigns. 

  The weak man is like one who, having mounted a fiery steed, allows it to

run away with him, and carry him whithersoever it wills; the strong man is

like one who, having mounted the steed, governs it with a masterly hand and

makes it go in whatever direction and at whatever speed he commands. 

                         SEVENTEENTH MORNING


  There  is  no  strife,  no  selfishness,  in  the  Kingdom;  there  is  perfect

harmony, equipoise, and rest. 

  Those who live in the Kingdom of Love, have all their needs supplied by

the Law of Love. 

  As self is the root cause of all strife And suffering, so Love is the root

cause of all peace and bliss. 

  Those who are at rest in the Kingdom, do not look for happiness in any

outward possessions. They are freed from all anxiety and trouble and, resting

in Love, they are the embodiment of happiness. 

                           SEVENTEENTH EVENING


  Let it not be supposed that the children of The Kingdom live in ease and

indolence (these two sins are the first that have to be eradicated when the

search for the Kingdom is entered upon); they live in a peaceful activity; in

fact, they only truly live, for the life of self, with its train of worries, griefs,

and fears, is not real life. 

  The children of the Kingdom are Known by their life, they manifest the

fruits  of  the  Spirit-“Love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  kindness,  goodness,

faithfulness,  meekness,  temperance,  self-control”-  under  all  circumstances

and vicissitudes.

                           EIGHTEENTH MORNING


  The gospel of Jesus is a gospel of living and doing. If it were not this it

would  not  voice  the  Eternal  Truth.  Its  Temple  is  Purified  Conduct,  the

entrance-door to which is Self-surrender. It invites men to shake off sin, and

promises, as a result, joy and blessedness and perfect peace. 

  The  Kingdom  of  Heaven  is  perfect  trust,  perfect  knowledge,  perfect

peace. . . . 

  No sin can enter therein, no self-born Thought or deed can pass its golden

gates; no impure desire can defile its radiant robes. . . .

  All may enter it who will, but all must pay the price-the unconditional

abandonment of self.

                           EIGHTEENTH EVENING


  I say this-and know it to be truth-that circumstances can only affect you

in  so  far  as  you  allow  them  to  do  so.  You  are  swayed  by  circumstances

because you have not a right understanding of the nature, use, and power of

thought.

  You  believe  (and  upon  this  little  word  belief  hang  all  our  joys  and

sorrows) that outward things have the power to make or mar your life; by so

doing you submit to those outward things, confess that you are their slave,

and they your unconditional master.

  By  so  doing  you  invest  them  with  a  power  which  they  do  not  of

themselves possess, and you succumb, in reality not to the circumstances, but

to the gloom or gladness, the fear or hope, the strength of weakness, which

your thought-sphere has thrown around them. 

                           NINETEENTH MORNING


  If you are one of those who are praying for, and looking forward to a

happier world beyond the grave, here is a message of gladness for you-you

may enter into and realize that happy world now; it fills the whole universe,

and it is within you, waiting for you to find, acknowledge, and possess.  Said

one who understood the inner laws of Being-“When men shall say, lo here, or

lo there, go not after them. 

  The Kingdom of God is within you.”

                             NINETEENTH EVENING


  Heaven and hell are inward states. 

  Sink into self and all its gratifications, and you sink into hell; rise above

self into that state of consciousness which is the utter denial and forgetfulness

of self, and you enter heaven.

  So  long  as  you  persist  in  selfishly  seeking  for  your  own  personal

happiness, so long will happiness elude you, and you will be sowing the

seeds of wretchedness.

  In so far as you succeed in losing yourself in the service of others, in that

measure will happiness come to you, and you will reap a harvest of bliss.

                           TWENTIETH MORNING


    Sympathy given can never be waste.

 

  One aspect of sympathy is that of Pity-pity for the distressed or pain-

stricken, with a desire to alleviate or help them in their sufferings.

  The world needs more of this divine quality.

  “For pity makes the world

  Soft to the weak, and noble for the strong.

 

  Another form of sympathy is that of rejoicing with others who are more

successful than ourselves, and though their success were our own.

                           TWENTIETH EVENING


  Sweet  are  companionships,  pleasures,  and  material  comforts,  but  they

change and fade away. Sweeter still are Purity, Wisdom, and the knowledge

of Truth, and these never change nor fade away.

  He  who  attained  to  the  possession  of  spiritual  things  can  never  be

deprived of his source of happiness; he will never have to part company with

it, and wherever he goes in the whole universe, he will carry his possessions

with him. His spiritual end will be the fulness of joy. 

                         TWENTY-FIRST MORNING


  Let your heart grow and expand with ever- broadening love, until, freed

from  all  hatred,  and  passion,  and  condemnation,  it  embraces  the  whole

universe with thoughtful tenderness. 

  As the flower opens its petals to receive the morning light, so open your

soul more and more to the glorious light of Truth.  Soar upward on the wings

of aspiration; be fearless and believe in the loftiest possibilities. 

                         TWENTY-FIRST EVENING


  Mind clothes itself in garments of its own making. 

  Mind is the arbiter of life; it is the creator and shaper of conditions, and

the recipient of its own results. It contains within itself both the power to

create illusion and to perceive reality. 

  Mind is the infallible weaver of destiny; thought is the thread, good and

evil deeds are the warp and woof, and the web, woven upon the loom of life,

is character. 

  Make  pure  thy  heart,  and  thou  wilt  make  thy  life  Rich,  sweet,  and

beautiful, unmarred by strife. 

  Cherish your visions; cherish your ideals; cherish the music that stirs in

your heart, the beauty that forms in your mind, the Loveliness that drapes

your purest thoughts, for out of them will grow all delightful conditions, all

heavenly environment; of these, if you will remain true to them, your world

will at last be built. 

  Guard well thy mind, and, noble, strong, and free,

  Nothing shall harm, disturb or conquer thee;

  For all thy foes are in thy heart and mind,

  There also thy salvation thou shalt find. 

                       TWENTY-SECOND EVENING


  Dream lofty dreams, and as you dream so shall you become. Your vision

is the promise of what you shall one day be; your Ideal is the prophecy of

what you shall at last unveil.  The greatest achievement was at first and for a

time a dream. The oak sleeps in the acorn; the bird waits in the egg; and in

the highest vision of the soul a waking angel stirs. 

  Your circumstances may be uncongenial, but they shall not long remain

so when you perceive an Ideal and strive to reach it.

                         TWENTY-THIRD MORNING


  He who has conquered doubt and fear has conquered failure. His every

thought is allied with power, and all difficulties are bravely met and wisely

overcome. His purposes are seasonably planted, and they bloom and bring

forth fruit which does not fall prematurely to the ground. 

  Thought  allied  fearlessly  to  purpose  becomes  creative  force:  he  who

knows this is ready to become something higher and stronger than a mere

bundle of wavering thoughts and fluctuating sensations; he who does this has

become the conscious and intelligent wielder of his mental powers. 

                         TWENTY-THIRD EVENING


  Man’s  true  place  in  the  Cosmos  is  that  of  a  king,  not  a  slave,  a

commander under the Law of Good, and not a helpless tool in the region of

evil.  I write for men, not for babes; for those who are eager to learn, and

earnest to achieve; for those who will put away (for the world’s good) a petty

personal indulgence, a selfish desire, a mean thought, and live on as though it

were not, sans craving and regret.

 

  Man is a master. If he were not, he could not act contrary to law.

 

  Evil and weakness are self-destructive.

 

  The universe is girt with goodness and strength, and it protects the good

and the strong.

 

  The angry man is the weak man.

                       TWENTY-FOURTH MORNING


  Not by learning will a man triumph over evil; not by much study will he

overcome sin and sorrow. Only by conquering himself will he conquer evil;

only by practising righteousness will he put an end to sorrow.

 

  Not  for  the  clever,  nor  the  learned,  nor  the  self-confident  is  the  Life

Triumphant, but for the pure, the virtuous and wise.

 

  The former achieve their particular success in life, but the latter alone

achieve the great success so invincible and complete that even in apparent

defeat it shines with added victory.

                       TWENTY-FOURTH EVENING


  The true silence is not merely a silent tongue; it is a silent mind. To

merely hold one’s tongue, and yet to carry about a disturbed and rankling

mind, is no remedy for weakness, and no source of power. 

  Silentness, to be powerful, must envelop the whole mind, must permeate

every chamber of the heart; it must be the silence of peace. 

  To this broad, deep, abiding silentness a man attains only in the measure

that he conquers himself.

                         TWENTY-FIFTH MORNING


  By curbing his tongue, a man gains possession of his mind. 

  The fool babbles, gossips, argues, and bandies words. He glories in the

fact that he has had the last word, and has silenced his opponent. He exults in

his  own  folly,  is  ever  on  the  defensive,  and  wastes  his  energies  in

unprofitable channels.  He is like a gardener who continues to dig and plant

in unproductive soil. 

  The  wise  man  avoids  idle  words,  gossips,  vain  argument,  and  self-

defence.  He  is  content  to  appear  defeated;  rejoices  when  he  is  defeated;

knowing that, having found and removed another error in himself, he has

thereby become wiser.  Blessed is he who does not strive for the last word. 

                         TWENTY-FIFTH EVENING


  Desire is the craving for possession; aspiration is the hunger of the heart

for peace. 

  The craving for things leads ever farther and farther from peace, and not

only ends in deprivation, but is in itself a state of perpetual want. Until it

comes to an end, rest and satisfaction are impossible. 

  The hunger for things can never be satisfied, but the hunger for peace can,

and the satisfaction of peace is found- is fully possessed, when all selfish

desire is abandoned. Then there is fullness of joy, abounding plenty, and rich

and complete blessedness. 

                         TWENTY-SIXTH MORNING


  A man will reach the Kingdom by purifying himself, and he can only do

this by pursuing a process of self-examination and self-analysis. 

  The  selfishness  must  be  discovered  and  understood  before  it  can  be

removed. It is powerless to remove itself, neither will it pass away of itself.

Darkness ceases only when light is introduced; so ignorance can only be

dispersed by knowledge, selfishness by love. 

  A man must first of all be willing to lose himself (his self-seeking) before

he can find himself (his Divine Self). He must realize that selfishness is not

worth clinging to, that it is a master altogether unworthy of his service, and

that divine goodness alone is worthy to be enthroned in his heart, as the

supreme master of his life. 

                         TWENTY-SIXTH EVENING


  Be still, my soul, and know that peace is thine.  Be steadfast, heart, and

know that strength divine Belongs to thee; cease from thy turmoil, mind, And

thou the Everlasting Rest shalt find. 

  If a man would have peace, let him exercise the spirit of peace; if he

would find Love, let him dwell in the spirit of Love; if he would escape

suffering, let him cease to inflict it; if he would do noble things for humanity,

let him cease to do ignoble things for himself.

  If he will but quarry the mine of his own soul, he shall find there all the

materials for building whatsoever he will, and he shall find there also the

Central Rock on which to build in safety. 

                       TWENTY-SEVENTH MORNING


  Men go after much company, and seek out new excitements, but they are

not  acquainted  with  peace;  in  divers  paths  of  pleasure  they  search  for

happiness, but they do not come to rest; through divers ways of laughter and

feverish delirium they wander after gladness and life, but their tears are many

and grievous, and they do not escape death. 

  Drifting upon the ocean of life in search of selfish indulgences, men are

caught in its storms, and only after many tempests and much privation do

they fly to the Rock of Refuge which rests in the deep silence of their own

being.

                       TWENTY-SEVENTH EVENING


    Meditation centered upon divine realities is the very essence and soul of

prayer.

  It is the silent reaching upward of the soul toward the Eternal.

    Meditation is the intense dwelling, in thought, upon an idea or theme with

the object of thoroughly comprehending it; and whatsoever you constantly

meditate upon, you will not only come to understand, but will grow more and

more into its likeness, for it will become incorporated with your very being,

will become, in fact, your very self. 

  If,  therefore,  you  constantly  dwell  upon  that  which  is  selfish  and

debasing, you will ultimately become selfish and debased; if you ceaselessly

think upon that which is pure and unselfish, you will surely become pure and

unselfish.

                       TWENTY-EIGHTH MORNING


  There is no difficulty, however great, but will yield before a calm and

powerful  concentration  of  thought,  and  no  legitimate  object  but  may  be

speedily actualized by the intelligent use and direction of one’s soul forces.

    Whatever your task may be, concentrate your whole mind upon it; throw

into it all the energy of which you are capable. The faultless completion of

small tasks, leads inevitably to larger tasks.

  See to it that you rise by steady climbing, and you will never fall.

                       TWENTY-EIGHTH EVENING


  He who knows that Love is at the heart of all things, and has realized the

all-sufficing power of that Love, has no room in his heart for condemnation.

  If you love people and speak of them with praise, until they in some way

thwart you, or do something of which you disapprove, and then you dislike

them and speak of them with dispraise, you are not governed by the Love

which is of God. 

  If, in your heart, you are continually arraigning and condemning others,

selfless love is hidden from you. 

  Train your mind in strong, impartial, and gentle thought; train your heart

in  purity  and  compassion;  train  your  tongue  to  silence,  and  to  true  and

stainless speech; so shall you enter the way of holiness and peace, and shall

ultimately realize the immortal Love.

                         TWENTY-NINTH MORNING


  If you would realize true prosperity, do not settle down, as many have

done, into the belief that if you do right everything will go wrong. Do not

allow  the  word  “Competition”  to  shake  your  faith  in  the  supremacy  of

righteousness.

  I care not what men say about the “laws of competition,” for do not I

know the Unchangeable Law which shall one day put them all to rout, and

which puts them to rout even now in the heart and life of the righteous man?

And  knowing  this  law  I  can  contemplate  all  dishonesty  with  undisturbed

repose, for I know where certain destruction awaits it.

  Under all circumstances do that which you believe to be right, and trust

the Law; trust the Divine Power which is immanent in the universe, and it

will never desert you, and you will always be protected.

                         TWENTY-NINTH EVENING


  Forget yourself entirely in the sorrows of others, and in ministering to

others,  and  divine  happiness  will  emancipate  you  from  all  sorrow  and

suffering. “Taking the first step with a good thought, the second with a good

word, and the third with a good deed, I entered Paradise.” And you also enter

Paradise by pursuing the same course. 

  Lose yourself in the welfare of others; forget yourself in all that you do-

this is the secret of abounding happiness. 

  Ever be on the watch to guard against selfishness and learn faithfully the

divine lessons of inward sacrifice; so shall you climb the highest heights of

happiness, and shall remain in the never-clouded sunshine of universal joy,

clothed in the shining garment of immortality.

                             THIRTIETH MORNING


  When the farmer has tilled and dressed his land and put in the seed, he

knows that he has done all that he can possibly do, and that now he must trust

to the elements, and wait patiently for the course of time to bring about the

harvest, and that no amount of expectancy on his part will affect the result. 

  Even so, he who has realized Truth, goes forth as a sower of the seeds of

goodness, purity, love, and peace, without expectancy and never looking for

results, knowing that there is the Great Over- ruling Law which brings about

its own harvest in due time, and which is alike the source of preservation and

destruction.                            THIRTIETH EVENING


  The virtuous put a check upon themselves, and set a watch upon their

passions and emotions; in this way they gain possession of the mind, and

gradually acquire calmness; and as they acquire influence, power, greatness,

abiding joy, and fullness and completeness of life. 

  He only finds peace who conquers himself, who strives, day by day, after

greater self-possession, greater self-control, greater calmness of mind. 

  Where  the  calm  mind  is  there  is  strength  and  rest,  there  is  love  and

wisdom; there is one who has fought successfully innumerable battles against

self, who, after long toil in secret against his own failings, has triumphed at

last.

                         THIRTY-FIRST MORNING


    Sympathy bestowed increases its store in our own heart and enriches and

fructifies our own life. Sympathy given is blessedness received; sympathy

withheld is blessedness forfeited. 

  In the measure that a man increases and enlarges his sympathy so much

nearer does he approach the ideal life, the perfect blessedness; and when his

heart has become so mellowed that no hard, bitter, or cruel thought can enter,

and  detract  from  its  permanent  sweetness,  then  indeed  is  he  richly  and

divinely blessed.

                         THIRTY-FIRST EVENING


  Sweet is the rest and deep the bliss of him who has freed his heart from

its lusts and hatreds and dark desires; and he who, without any shadow of

bitterness resting upon him, and looking out upon the world with boundless

compassion and love, can breathe, in his inmost heart, the blessing:

  Peace unto all living things, making no exceptions or distinctions- such a

man has reached that happy ending which can never be taken away, for this is

the  perfection  of  life,  the  fulness  of  peace,  the  consummation  of  perfect

blessedness.

 

  The End.                        BOOK TWENTY            JAMES ALLEN’S BOOK OF


MEDITATIONS FOR EVERY DAY


                          IN THE YEAR.

  By Thought we rise; by Thought we fall, by Thought

  We stand or go; all destiny is wrought

  By its swift potency, and he who stands

  Master of Thought, and his desires commands,

  Willing and weaving thoughts of Love and Alight,

  Shapes his high end in ’Truth’s unerring Light.


  He who does not find The way of Meditation cannot reach

    Emancipation and enlightenment.

  But thou wilt find the way of Holy Thought;

  With mind made calm and steadfast, thou will see

  The Permanent amid the mutable,

  The Truth eternal in the things that change:

  Thou wilt behold the Perfect Law: Cosmos

  From Chaos rises when the conquered self

  Lies underneath man’s heel: Love be thy strength;

  Look on the passion-tortured multitudes,

  And have compassion on them; know their pain

  By thy long sorrow ended. Thou wilt come

  To perfect peace, and so wilt bless the world,

  Leading unto the High and Holy Way

  The feet of them that seek.—And now I go

  To my Abode; go thou unto thy work.                              EDITOR’S PREFACE


  James Allen may truly be called the Prophet of Meditation. In an age of

strife, hurry, religious controversy, heated arguments, ritual and ceremony, he

came with his message of Meditation, calling men away from the din and

strife of tongues into the peaceful paths of stillness within their own souls,

where the Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world ever burns

steadily and surely for all who will turn their weary eyes from the strife

without to the quiet within. Many of the Meditations were written as he came

down from the Cairn in the early morning, where he spent those precious

hours alone with God while the world slept. Others are gleaned from his

many  writings,  published  and unpublished,  and  are  arranged  for  daily

readings at his request, and, we believe, under his spiritual guidance. The

book must ever be a stronghold of Spiritual Truth and blessing to all who

read it, and especially to those who use it for daily meditation. Its great power

lies in that it is the very heart of a good man who lived every word he wrote.

The beautiful half-tone portrait is a speaking likeness of the Author. It was

taken  only  six  weeks  before  his  translation,  and  has  not  been  published

before.

  We are indebted to Messrs. Putnam’s Sons (London and New York), and

to  Messrs.  Wm.  Rider  and  Son,  Limited  (London),  for  their  cordial

expressions of pleasure that some of the Meditations should be culled from

the  books  published  by  them,  viz., The Mastery  of  Destiny, and Above

Life’s  Turmoil(Putnam),  and From  Passion  to  Peace, and Man:  King  of

Mind, Body, and Circumstance (Rider).

  LILY L. ALLEN.

    "BRYNGOLEU,"

    ILFRACOMBE, ENGLAND.                                        JANUARY  The way front passion to peace is by overcoming one’s self.

    JA N U A R Y FI R S T.

    FREQUENTLY the man of passion is most eager to put others right; but

the man of wisdom puts himself right. If one is anxious to reform the world,

let him begin by reforming himself. The reformation of self does not end with

the elimination of the sensual elements only; that is its beginning. It ends

only when every vain thought and selfish aim is overcome. Short of perfect

purity and wisdom, there is still some form of self-slavery or folly which

needs to be conquered.

  On  the  wings  of  aspiration  man  rises  from  earth  to  heaven,  from

ignorance to knowledge, from the under darkness to the upper light. Without

it  he  remains  a  grovelling  animal,  earthly,  sensual,  unenlightened,  and

uninspired.

    Aspiration is the longing for heavenly things.


  Where is peace to be found! Where is the hiding-place of truth!

    JA N U A R Y SE C O N D.

  LET first things be put first; work before play; duty before enjoyment;

and others before self: this is an excellent rule which cannot lead astray. To

make a right beginning is half-way to victory. The athlete who makes a bad

start may lose his prize; the merchant who makes a false start may lose his

reputation; and the Truth-seeker who makes a wrong start may forego the

crown  of  Righteousness.  To  begin  with  pure  thoughts,  sterling  rectitude,

unselfish purpose, noble aims, and an incorruptible conscience—this is to

start right; this it is to put first things first, so that all other things will follow

in harmonious order, making life simple, beautiful, successful, and peaceful.

  The soul will cry out for its lost heritage.


  If one would find peace, he must come out of passion.

    JA N U A R Y TH I R D.

  SO long as animal conditions taste sweet to a man, he cannot aspire: he is

so far satisfied; but  when  their  sweetness  turns  to  bitterness,  then  in  his

sorrow he thinks of nobler things. When he is deprived of earthly joy, heaspires to the joy which is heavenly. It is when impurity turns to suffering

that purity is sought. Truly aspiration rises, phoenix-like, from the dead ashes

of  repentance,  but  on  its  powerful  pinions  man  can  reach  the  heaven  of

heavens.

  The man of aspiration has entered the way which leads to peace; and

surely he will reach that end if he stays not nor turns back. If he constantly

renews  his  mind  with  glimpses  of  the  heavenly  vision,  he  will  reach  the

heavenly state.

  That which can be conceived can be achieved.


  Our life is what we make it by our own thoughts and deeds.

    JA N U A R Y FO U R T H.

  MAN attains in the measure that he aspires. His longing to be is the gauge

of what he can be. To fix the mind is to fore-ordain the achievement. As man

can experience and know all low things, so he can experience and know all

high things. As he has become human, so he can become divine. The turning

of the mind in high and divine directions is the sole and needful task.

  What is impurity but the impure thoughts of the thinker? What is purity

but the pure thoughts of the thinker? One man does not do the thinking of

another. Each man is pure or impure of himself alone. The man of aspiration

sees before him the pathway up the heavenly heights, and his heart already

experiences a foretaste of the final peace.

  There is a life of victory over sin, and triumph over evil.


  When a man wishes and wills he can find the good and the true.

    JA N U A R Y FI F T H.

  THE Gates of Heaven are for ever open, and no one is prevented from

entering by any will or power but his own; but no one can enter the Kingdom

of Heaven so long as he is enamoured of, and chooses, the seductions of hell,

so long as he resigns himself to sin and sorrow.

  There  is  a  larger,  higher,  nobler,  diviner  life  than  that  of  sinning  and

suffering, which is so common—in which, indeed, nearly all are immersed—

a life of victory over sin, and triumph over evil; a life wise and happy, benign

and tranquil, virtuous and peaceful. This life can be found and lived now, and

he who lives it is steadfast in the midst of change; restful among the restless;peaceful, though surrounded by strife.

  Every moment is the time of choice; every hour is destiny.


  The lover of the pure life renews his mind daily.

    JA N U A R Y SI X T H.

  As the energetic man of business is not daunted by difficulties, but studies

how to overcome them, so the man of ceaseless aspiration is not crushed into

submission by temptations, but meditates how he may fortify his mind; for

the tempter is like a coward, he only creeps in at weak and unguarded points.

The  tempted  one  should  study  thoughtfully  the  nature  and  meaning  of

temptation,  for  until  it  is  known  it  cannot  be  overcome.  He  who  is  to

overcome temptation must understand how it arises in his own darkness and

error, and must study, by introspection and meditation, how to disperse the

darkness and supplant error by truth.

  A man must know himself if he is to know truth. Self-knowledge is the

handmaid of self-conquest.

  Engage daily in holy meditation on Truth and its attainment.


  As errors and impunities are revealed, purge them way.

    JA N U A R Y SE V E N T H.

  EVERY step upward means the leaving of something behind and below.

The high is reached only at the sacrifice of the low. The good is secured only

by abandoning the evil. Knowledge is acquired only by the destruction of

ignorance.  livery  acquisition  has  its  price,  which  must  be  paid  "to  the

uttermost farthing." Every animal, every creeping thing, possesses some gift,

so power, which man, in his upward march, has laid down, which he has

exchanged for some higher gift, or power. What great good men forfeit by

clinging to old selfish habits! Behind every humble sacrifice a winged angel

waits to bear us up the heights of knowledge and wisdom.

  Let him who has attained guard against falling back. Let him be careful in

little things, and be well fortified against the entrance of sin.

  Aim, with ardour, for the attainment of a perfect life.


  The strife of the world in all its forms has its origin in one common cause,

namely, individual selfishness.    JA N U A R Y EI G H T H.

  ALL the varied activities of human life are rooted in, and draw their

vitality  from,  one  common  source—the  human  heart.  The  cause  of  all

suffering and all happiness resides, not in the outer activities of human life,

but in the inner activities of the heart and mind; and every external agency is

sustained by the life which it derives from human conduct.

  The man who cannot endure to have his errors and shortcomings brought

to the surface and made known, but tries to hide them, is unfit to walk the

highway of Truth. He is not properly equipped to battle with and overcome

temptation. He who cannot fearlessly face his lower nature cannot climb the

rugged heights of renunciation.

  Each man comes under the laws of his own being, never under the laws of

another.


  When the soul is most tried, its need is greatest.

    JA N U A R Y NI N T H.

  DO not despair because of failure. From your particular failure there is a

special greatness, a peculiar wisdom, to be gained; and no teacher can lead

you  to  that  greatness,  that  wisdom,  more  surely  and  swiftly  than  your

experience of failure. In every mistake you make, in every fall you encounter,

there is a lesson of vital import if you will but search it out; and he who will

stoop to discover the good in that which appears to be disastrous will rise

superior to every event, and will utilise his failures as winged steeds to bear

him to a final and supreme success.

  Foolish men blame others for their lapses and sins, but let the truth-lover

blame only himself. Let him acknowledge his complete responsibility for his

own conduct.

  Where temptation is powerful, the greater and more enduring will be the

victory.


  The great need of the soul is the need of that permanent

    JA N U A R Y TE N T H.

  THE old must pass away before the new can appear. The old cottage

must be demolished before the new mansion can appear upon its site. The old

error must be destroyed before the new truth can come. . . . The old self mustbe renounced before the new man can be born. When the old self of temper,

impatience,  envy,  pride,  and  impurity  has  perished,  then  in  its  place  will

appear the new man of gentleness, patience, goodwill, humility, and purity.

Let the old life of sin and sorrow pass; let the new life of Righteousness and

Joy  come  in.  ...  Then  all  that  was  old  and  ugly  will  be  made  new  and

beautiful.

  It is in the realisation of this Principle where the Kingdom of Heaven, the

abiding home of the soul, resides, and which is the source and storehouse of

every permanent blessing.

  A life of virtue is noble and excellent.


  It  matters  little  what  is  without,  for  it  is  all  a  reflection  of  your  own

consciousness.

    JA N U A R Y EL E V E N T H.

  THE deplorable failure of many outward and isolated reforms is traceable

to the fact that their devotees pursue them as an end in themselves, failing to

see that they are merely steps towards ultimate, individual perfection.

  All true reform must come from within, in a changed heart and mind. The

giving up of certain foods and drinks, and the breaking away from certain

outward  habits,  are  good  and  necessary  beginnings;  but  they  are  only

beginnings, and to end there is to fall far short of a true spiritual life. It is

good, therefore, to cleanse the heart, to correct the mind, and to develop the

understanding, for we know that the one thing needed is a regenerate heart.

  It matters everything what you are within, for everything without will be

mirrored and coloured accordingly.


  Renew your resolution daily, and in the hour of temptation do not depart

from the right path.

    JA N U A R Y TW E L F T H.

  THE days are lengthening. Each day now the sun rises a little higher, and

the light lingers a little longer. So each day we can strengthen our character;

each day we can open our heart a little more to the light of Truth, and allow

the Sun of Righteousness to shine more highly in our mind. The sun does not

increase in volume or intensity, but the earth turns towards it, and receives

more as it turns. All that there is of Truth and Good is now. It does notincrease or diminish, but as we turn towards it we receive of its radiance and

beneficence in ever-increasing abundance and power.

  As the artisan acquires skill in fashioning the articles of his craft by daily

and diligent practice with his tools, so do you acquire skill in fashioning good

deeds by daily and diligent practice of the Truth.

  You can acquire Truth only by practice.


  The wise purify their thoughts.

    JA N U A R Y TH I R T E E N T H.

    EVERYDAY is a new birth in time, holding out new beginnings, new

possibilities, new achievements. The ages have witnessed the stars in their

orbits, but this day hath no age witnessed. It is a new appearance, a new

reality. It heralds a new life—yea, a new order, a new society, a new age. It

holds out new hopes, new opportunities, to all men. In it you can become a

new man, a new woman. For you it can be the day of regeneration, renewal,

rebirth. From the old past with its mistakes, failures, and sorrows, you can

rise  a  new  being,  endued  with  power  and  purpose,  and  radiant  with  the

inspiration of a new ideal.

  Be chaste in mind and body. Abandon sensual pleasures. Purge the mind

of selfishness, and live a life of exalted purity.

  Be upright, gentle, and pure-hearted.


  Exert yourself ceaselessly in decreasing evil and accumulating good.

    JA N U A R Y FO U R T E E N T H.

    VICTORY of all kinds is preceded by a season of preparation. It can no

more appear spontaneously and erratically than can a flower or a mountain.

Like them, it is the culminating point in a process of growth, in a series of

causes and effects. No mere wishing, no magic word, will produce worldly

success; it  must  be  achieved  by  an  orderly  succession  of  well-directed

efforts. No spiritual victory will be achieved by him who imagines that it

does not begin until the hour of temptation arrives. All spiritual triumphs are

gained in the silent hour of meditation, and through a series of successes in

lesser trials. The time of great temptation is the climax of a conquest that long

preparation has made certain and complete.

  Fix  your  minds  on  the  practice  of  virtue,  and  the  comprehension  andapplication of fixed and noble principles.


  The Never-Ending Gladness awaits your Home- coming.

    JA N U A R Y FI F T E E N T H.

  AS the falling rain prepares the earth for the future crops of grain and

fruit, so the rains of many sorrows showering upon the heart prepare and

mellow it for the coming of that wisdom that perfects the mind and gladdens

the heart. As the clouds darken the earth but to cool and fructify it, so the

clouds of grief cast a shadow over the heart to prepare it for nobler things.

The hour of sorrow is the hour of reverence. It puts an end to the shallow

sneer, the ribald jest, the cruel calumny; it softens the heart with sympathy,

and enriches the mind with thoughtfulness. Wisdom is mainly recollection of

all that was learned by sorrow.

  Do not think that your sorrow will remain; it will pass away like a cloud.

  Where self ends, grief passes away.


  Live sweetly and happily, as becomes the dignity of a true manhood and

womanhood.

    JA N U A R Y SI X T E E N T H.

  THERE is no greater happiness than to be occupied with good, whether it

be good thoughts, good actions, or good employment; for every good thing is

fraught with bliss, and evil cannot enter the heart or house that is tenanted by

all  that  is  good.  The  mind  whose  doors  are  guarded  by  good  shuts  out

unhappiness as the well-sentried garrison shuts out the foe. Unhappiness can

only enter through unguarded doors, and even then its power over the tenant

is not complete unless it find him occupied with evil. Not to entertain evil

thoughts; not to do bad actions; not to engage in worthless or questionable

employment, but to resort to good in all things—this is the source of supreme

happiness.

  Pure happiness is the rightful and happy condition of the soul.


  All  things  are orderly  and sequential  being  governed  by  the  law  of

causation.

    JA N U A R Y SE V E N T E E N T H.

  DO  not  trouble  about  results,  or  be  anxious  as  to  the  future; but  betroubled about personal shortcomings, and be anxious to remove them; for

know this simple truth—wrong does not result from right, and a good present

cannot give birth to a bad future. You are the custodian of your deeds, but not

of the results which flow from them. The deeds of to-day bring the happiness

or sorrow of to-morrow. Be therefore concerned about what you think and

do, rather than about what may or may not come to you; for he whose deeds

are good does not concern himself about results, and is freed from fear of

future ill.

  Verily the Law reigneth, and reigneth for ever, and Justice and Love are

its eternal ministers.


  Speak only words which are truthful and sincere.

    JA N U A R Y EI G H T E E N T H.

  THE storm may rage without, but it cannot affect us if there is peace

within. As by the fireside there is security from the fiercest storm, so the heart

that is steadfast in the knowledge of Truth abides in peace, though all around

be strife and perturbation. The bitter opposition of men and the unrest of the

world cannot make us bitter and restless unless we enter into and co-operate

with it. Rather, if we have peace in our heart, will the outer turmoil cause our

peace to deepen, to take firmer root, and to show forth more abundantly in

works of peace for the softening of human hearts and the enlightening of

human minds.

  Blessed is he who has no wrongs to remember, no injuries to forget, in

whose pure heart no hateful thought about another can take root and flourish.

  He who speaks evil of another cannot find the way of peace.


    Purification is necessarily severe. All becoming is painful.

    JA N U A R Y NI N E T E E N T H.

  WHEN  a  storm  has  subsided,  and  all  is  calm  again,  observe  how  all

nature seems to pause in a restorative silence. A restful quiet pervades all

things, so that even inanimate objects seem to participate in the recuperative

repose. So when a too violent eagerness or a sudden burst of passion has

spent itself, there comes a period of reflective thought, a time of calm, in

which the mind is restored, and things are seen in their true outlines and right

proportions. It is wise to take advantage of this quiet time by gaining a truerknowledge of one’s self, and forming a more kindly judgment of others. The

hour of calm is the hour of restoration.

  Joy comes and fills the self-emptied heart; it abides with the peaceful; its

reign is with the pure.

  Make your every thought, word, and deed sweet and pure.


  In the dark times of sorrow, men approach very near to Truth.

    JA N U A R Y TW E N T I E T H.

  WHEN the tears flow, and the heart aches, remember then the sorrow of

the world. When sorrow has overtaken you, remember then that it overtakes

all; that none escape it; that it is the great fact in human life that makes

religion  a  necessity.  Think  not  that  your  pain  is  isolated  and  unjustly

inflicted. It is but a fragment of the great pain of the world. It is the common

experience of all. Perceiving this, let sorrow gently lead you into a deeper

religion, a wider compassion, a tenderer regard for all men and all creatures.

Let it bring you into greater love and deeper peace.

  Bear well in mind that nothing can overtake you that does not belong to

you, and that is not for your eternal good.

  The end of sorrow is joy and peace.


  The sorrowless state is reached through sorrow.

    JA N U A R Y TW E N T Y-F I R S T.

  AS  light  displaces  darkness,  and  quiet  follows  storm,  so  gladness

displaces  sorrow,  and  peace  comes  after  pain.  The  deeper  wisdom  which

flows from acquaintance with sorrow brings with it a holier and more abiding

joy than that shallow excitement that preceded sorrow. Between the lesser

joys of the senses and the greater joy of the spirit lies the dark vale of sorrow

through which all earthly pilgrims pass, and having passed through it, the

heavenly Joy, the Abiding Gladness, is henceforth our companion. They who

have passed from the earthly to the heavenly pilgrimage have lifted the dark

veil of sorrow from the radiant face of Truth.

  He  whose  treasure  is  Truth,  who  fashions  his  life  in  accordance  with

Wisdom, will  find  the  Joy  which  does  not  pass  away;  crossing the  wide

ocean of illusion, he will come to the sorrowless Shore.  All  outward  oppression  is  but  the  shadow  and  effect  of  the  real

oppression within.

    JA N U A R Y TW E N T Y-S E C O N D.

  IN happiness and unhappiness, in joy and sorrow, in success and failure,

in victory and defeat; in religion, business, circumstances; in all the issues of

life, the determining factor is character. In the mentality of individuals lie the

hidden causes of all that pertains to their outward life. Character is both cause

and effect. It is the doer of deeds and the recipient of results. Heaven, hell,

purgatory, are contained within it. The character that is impure and vicious

will experience a life from which the elements of happiness and beauty are

lacking, wheresoever they may be placed; but a pure and virtuous character

will  show  forth  a  life  that  is  happy  and  beautiful.  As  you  make  your

character, so will you shape your life.

  To put away self and passion, and establish one’s self in right doing, this

is the highest wisdom.


  Not departing from the path of holiness, but surmounting all difficulties

and continuing to the end whosoever does this will comprehend Truth.

    JA N U A R Y TW E N T Y-T H I R D.

  WHEN great difficulties arise, and troubles beset, regard your perplexity

as a call to deeper thought and more vigorous action. Nothing will attack you

that you are not capable of overcoming; no problem will vex you that you

cannot solve. The greater your trial, the greater your test of strength, and the

more  complete  and  triumphant  your  victory.  However  complicated  your

maze of confusion may be, there is a way out of it, and the finding of that

way will exercise your powers to the utmost, and will bring out all your latent

skill, energy, and resource. When you have mastered that which threatens to

master you, you will rejoice in a new-found strength.

    Knowing the Truth by practice, and being at one with Truth, you will be

invincible, for Truth cannot be confounded or overthrown.


  Look not outside thee nor behind thee for the light and blessedness of

Truth, but look within.

    JA N U A R Y TW E N T Y-F O U R T H.

  WE advance by a series of efforts. We gather strength, whether mental orphysical,  by  a  succession  of  strivings  in  given  directions.  Exertion,  oft

repeated,  leads  to  power.  It  is  by  obeying  this  law  that  the  athlete  trains

himself  to  accomplish  wonderful  feats  of  speed  or  endurance.  When  the

exertion is along intellectual lines, it leads to unusual talent, or genius; and

when in spiritual channels, it leads to wisdom, or transcendent greatness. We

should not mourn when circumstances are driving us to greater efforts and

more protracted exertion. Events are only evil to the mind that makes them

so. They are good to him that accepts their discipline as salutary.

  Thou wilt find Truth within the narrow sphere of thy duty, even in the

humble and hidden sacrifices of thine own heart.


  There is no blessedness anywhere until impatience is sacrificed.

    JA N U A R Y TW E N T Y-F I F T H.

    DESPONDENCY,  anxiety,  worry,  and  irritability  cannot  cure  the  ills

against which they are directed. They only add more misery to the troubles

that prompt them. The cultivation of a steadfast and serene spirit cannot be

overlooked if life is to yield any measure of usefulness and happiness. The

trifles,  and  even  greater  troubles,  which  annoy  would  soon  dissolve  and

disappear if confronted with a temper that refuses to be ruffled and disturbed.

Personal aims, wishes, schemes, and pleasures will meet with checks, rebuffs,

and obstacles; and it is in learning to meet these reverses in a wise and calm

spirit that we discover the true and abiding happiness within our heart.

  When  impatience  and  irritability  are  put  away,  then  is  realised  and

enjoyed the blessedness of a strong, quiet, and peaceful mind.


  The greatest blessedness comes to him who infuses into his mind the

purest and noblest thoughts.

    JA N U A R Y TW E N T Y-S I X T H.

  WE are becoming wise when we know and realise that happiness abides

in certain habits of mind, or mental characteristics, rather than in material

possessions,  or  in  certain  combinations  of  circumstances.  It  is  a  common

delusion to imagine that if one only possessed this or that— a little more

money, a little more leisure, this man’s talent, or that man’s opportunities; or

if one had better friends, or more favourable surroundings—one would be

happy with a perfect felicity. Alas! discontent and misery lie in such vainwishes.  If  happiness  is  not  already  found  within,  it  will  never  be  found

without. The happiness of a wise mind abides through all vicissitudes.

  Your whole life is a series of effects, having their cause in thought—in

your own thought.


  A sweet and happy soul is the ripened fruit of experience and wisdom.

    JA N U A R Y TW E N T Y-S E V E N T H.

  THERE  is  an  infinite  patience  in  nature  which  it  is  profitable  to

contemplate. A comet may take a thousand years to complete its orbit; the sea

may  occupy  ten  thousand  years  in  wearing  away  the  land;  the  complete

evolution of the human race may occupy millions of years. This should make

us  ashamed  of  our  hurry,  fussiness,  discontent,  disappointments,  and

ridiculous self-importance over trifling things of an hour or a day. Patience is

conducive to the highest greatness, the most far-reaching usefulness, and the

profoundest peace. Without it, life will lose much of its power and influence,

and its joy win be largely destroyed.

  "So with well-ordered strenuousness Raise thou thy structure of Success."

  He who fills with useful pursuits the minutes as they come and go grows

old in honour and wisdom, and prosperity abides with him.


  No pure thought, no unselfish deed, can fall short of its felicitous results,

and every such result is a happy consummation.

    JA N U A R Y TW E N T Y-E I G H T H.

  IF to-day is cold and gloomy, is that a cause for despair? Do we not know

that there are warm, bright days ahead? Already the birds are beginning to

sing,  and  the  tremulous  trill  in  their  little  throats  is  prophetic  of  the

approaching love of a new spring, and of the bounty of a summer that as yet

is but a sleeping germ in the womb of this gloomy day, but whose birth is

sure, and its full growth certain. No effort is vain. The spring of all your

aspirations is near—very near; and the summer of your unselfish deeds will

surely come to pass.

  Self shall depart, and Truth shall take its place;

  The Changeless One, the Indivisible, Shall take up His abode in me, and

cleanse  The White Robe of the Heart Invisible.

  Go to your task with love in your heart, and you will go to it light-hearted

and cheerful.


  All evil is corrective and remedial, and is therefore not permanent.

    JA N U A R Y TW E N T Y-N I N T H.

  BY earnest self-examination strive to realise, and not merely hold as a

theory, that evil is a passing phase, a self-created shadow; that all your pains,

sorrows, and misfortunes have come to you by a process of undeviating and

absolutely perfect law; have come to you because you deserve and require

them, and that by first enduring, and then understanding them, you may be

made  stronger,  wiser,  nobler.  When  you  have  fully  entered  into  this

realisation, you will be in a position to mould your own circumstances, to

transmute all evil into good, and to weave, with a master hand, the fabric of

your destiny.

  Cease to be a disobedient child in the school of experience, and begin to

learn, with humility and patience, the lessons that are set for your ultimate

perfection.


  Mediation centred upon divine realities is the very essence and soul of

prayer.

    JA N U A R Y TH I R T I E T H.

  TELL me what that is upon which you most frequently and intensely

think, that to which, in your silent hours, your soul most naturally turns, and I

will tell you to what place of pain or peace you are travelling, and whether

you are growing into the likeness of the divine or the bestial. There is an

unavoidable  tendency  to  become  literally  the  embodiment  of  that  quality

upon which one most constantly thinks. Let, therefore, the object of your

meditation be above and not below, so that every time that you revert to it in

thought you will be lifted up; let it be pure and unmixed with any selfish

element; so shall your heart become purified and drawn nearer to Truth, and

not defiled and dragged more hopelessly into error.

    Meditation is the secret of all growth in spiritual life and knowledge.


  If you ceaselessly think upon that which is pure and unselfish, you willsurely become pure and unselfish.

    JA N U A R Y TH I R T Y-F I R S T.

  IF you are daily praying for wisdom, for peace, for loftier purity, and a

fuller realisation of Truth, and that for which you pray is still far from you, it

means that you are praying for one thing, whilst living out in thought and act

another.  If  you  will  cease  from  such  waywardness,  taking  your  mind  off

those things, the selfish clinging to which debars you from the possession of

the stainless realities for which you pray; if you will no longer ask God to

grant you that which you do not deserve, or to bestow upon you that love and

compassion which you refuse to bestow upon others, but will commence to

think and act in the spirit of Truth, you will day by day be growing into those

realities, so that ultimately you will become one with them.

  Enter  the  path  of  Meditation,  and  let  the  supreme  object  of  your

meditation be Truth.                                  FEBRUARY


 

  Unrest and pain and sorrow are the shadows of life.

    FE B R U A R Y F I R S T.

  IS there no way of escape from pain and sorrow? Are there no means by

which the bonds of evil may be broken? Is permanent happiness and abiding

peace a foolish dream? No, there is a way—and I speak it with gladness—by

which evil may be slain for ever; there is a process by which every adverse

condition or circumstance can be put on one side for ever, never to return;

and there is a practice by which unbroken and unending peace and bliss can

be partaken of and realised. And the beginning of the way which leads to this

glorious realisation is the acquirement of a right understanding of the nature

of evil. It is not sufficient to deny or ignore evil; it must be understood.

  Men remain in evil because they are not willing or prepared to learn the

lesson which it came to teach them.


  You must get outside yourself, and must begin to examine and understand

yourself.

    FE B R U A R Y SE C O N D.

  EVIL, when rightly understood, is found to be, not an unlimited power or

principle in the universe, but a passing phase of human experience, and it

therefore becomes a teacher to those who are willing to learn. Evil is not an

abstract something outside yourself; it is an experience in your own heart,

and by patiently examining and rectifying your heart you will be gradually

led into the discovery of the origin and nature of evil, which will necessarily

be followed by its complete eradication. ... There is no evil in the universe

which is not the result of ignorance, and which would not, if we were ready

and willing to learn its lesson, lead us to higher wisdom, and then vanish

away.

  Every soul attracts its own, and nothing can possibly come to it that does

not belong to it.  What you are, so is your world.

    FE B R U A R Y TH I R D.

  ALL that you positively know is contained in your own experience; all

that you ever will know must pass through the gateway of experience, and so

become  part  of  yourself.  Your  own  thoughts,  desires,  and  aspirations

comprise your world, and, to you, all that there is in the universe of beauty,

and joy, and bliss, or of ugliness, and sorrow, and pain, is contained within

yourself. By your own thoughts you make or mar your life, your world, your

universe. As you build within by the power of thought, so will your outward

life  and  circumstances  shape  themselves  accordingly.  Whatsoever  you

harbour in the inmost chambers of your heart will, sooner or later, by the

inevitable law of reaction, shape itself in your outward life.

  Every  soul  is  a  complex  combination  of  gathered  experiences  and

thoughts, and the body is but an improvised vehicle for its manifestation.


  To them, that seek the highest Good All things subserve the wisest ends.

    FE B R U A R Y F O U R T H.

  HE who clings to self is his own enemy, and is surrounded by enemies.

He who relinquishes self is his own saviour, and is surrounded by friends like

a  protecting  belt.  Before  the  divine  radiance  of  a  pure  heart  all  darkness

vanishes  and  all  clouds  melt  away,  and  he  who  has  conquered  self  has

conquered the universe. Come, then, out of your poverty; come out of your

pain;  come  out  of  your  troubles,  and  sighings,  and  complainings,  and

heartaches, and loneliness by coming out of yourself. Let the old tattered

garment of your petty selfishness fall from you, and put on the new garment

of universal Love. You will then realise the inward heaven, and it will be

reflected in all your outward life.

  All glory and all good await

  The coming of Obedient feet.


  All men’s accomplishments were first wrought out in thought, and then

objectivised.

    FE B R U A R Y FI F T H.

  WHEN the thought-forces are directed in harmony with the over-ruling

Law, they are up-building and preservative, but when subverted they becomedisintegrating and self-destructive. To adjust all your thoughts to a perfect

and unswerving faith in the omnipotence and supremacy of Good is to co-

operate  with  that  Good,  and  to  realise  within  yourself  the  solution  and

destruction of all evil. Believe and ye shall live. And here we have the true

meaning of salvation; salvation from the darkness and negation of evil, by

entering into and realising the living light of the Eternal Good.

  It is the silent and conquering thought-forces which bring all things into

manifestation.


  There is nothing that a strong faith and an unflinching purpose may not

accomplish.

    FE B R U A R Y SI X T H.

  THERE is no difficulty, however great, but will yield before a calm and

powerful  concentration  of  thought,  and  no  legitimate  object  but  may  be

speedily actualised by the intelligent use and direction of one’s soul-forces.

  Not until you have gone deeply and searchingly into your inner nature,

and  have  overcome  many  enemies  that  lurk  there,  can  you  have  any

approximate conception of the subtle power of thought, of its inseparable

relation  to  outward  and  material  things,  or  of  its  magical  potency,  when

rightly  poised  and  directed,  in  re-adjusting  and  transforming  the  life-

conditions. Every thought you think is a force sent out, and in accordance

with its nature and intensity will it go out to seek a lodgement in minds

receptive to it, and will react upon yourself for good or evil.

  Think good thoughts, and they will quickly become actualised in your

outward life in the form of good conditions.


  He  only  is  fitted  to  command  and  control  who  has  succeeded  in

commanding and controlling himself.

    FE B R U A R Y SE V E N T H.

  IF you would acquire overcoming power, you must cultivate poise and

passivity.  You  must  be  able  to  stand  alone.  All  power  is  associated  with

immovability. The mountain, the massive rock, the storm-tried oak, all speak

to  us  of  power,  because  of  their  combined  solitary  grandeur  and  defiant

fixity; while the shifting sand, the yielding twig, and the waving reed speak to

us of weakness, because they are movable and non-resistant, and are utterlyuseless when detached from their fellows. He is the man of power who, when

all his fellows are swayed by some emotion or passion, remains calm and

unmoved. The hysterical, the fearful, the thoughtless and frivolous, let such

seek company, or they will fall for lack of support; but the calm, the fearless,

the thoughtful and grave, let such seek solitude, and to their power more

power will be added.

  Be  of  single  aim.  Have  a  legitimate  and  useful  purpose,  and  devote

yourself unreservedly to it.


  Self-seeking is self-destruction

    FE B R U A R Y EI G H T H.

  IF you would realise true prosperity, do not settle down, as many have

done, into the belief that if you do right everything will go wrong. Do not

allow  the  word competition to  shake  your  faith  in  the  supremacy  of

righteousness. I care not what man may say about the laws of competition,

for do I not know the Unchangeable Law, which shall one day put them all to

rout,  and  which  puts  them  to  rout  even  now  in  the  heart  and  life  of  the

righteous man? And knowing this Law I can contemplate all dishonesty with

undisturbed repose, for I know where certain destruction awaits it. Those who

have wandered from the highway of righteousness guard themselves against

competition; those who always pursue the right need not to trouble about

such defence.

  Under all circumstances do that which you believe to be right, and trust

the Law; trust the Divine Power, and you will always be protected.


  Perfect Love is Perfect Power.

    FE B R U A R Y N I N T H.

  THE wisely loving heart commands without exercising any authority. All

things and all men obey him who obeys the Highest. He thinks, and lo! he has

already accomplished! He speaks, and behold! a world hangs upon his simple

utterances!  He  has  harmonised  his  thoughts  with  the  Imperishable  and

Unconquerable Forces, and for him weakness and uncertainty are no more.

His every thought is a purpose; his every act an accomplishment; he moves

with the Great Law, not setting his puny personal will against it, and he thus

becomes a channel through which the Divine Power can flow in unimpededand beneficent expression. He has thus become Power itself.

  Perfect Love is Perfect Wisdom.


  If you really seek Truth, you will be willing to make the effort necessary

for its achievement.

    FE B R U A R Y TE N T H.

  AT the outset, meditation must be distinguished from idle reverie. There

is nothing dreamy and unpractical about it. It is a process of searching and

uncompromising thought which allows nothing to remain but the simple and

naked truth. Thus meditating you will no longer strive to build yourself up in

your prejudices, but, forgetting self, you will remember only that you are

seeking the Truth. And so you will remove, one by one, the errors which you

have  built  around  yourself  in  the  past,  and  will  patiently  wait  for  the

revelation of Truth which will come when your errors have been sufficiently

removed.

  Let the supreme object of your meditation be Truth.


  As the flower opens its petals to receive the morning light, so open your

soul more and more to the glorious light of Truth.

    FE B R U A R Y EL E V E N T H.

    SPIRITUAL  meditation  and  self-discipline  are  inseparable;  you  will,

therefore, commence to meditate upon yourself so as to try and understand

yourself, for, remember, the great object you will have in view will be the

complete removal of all your errors in order that you may realise Truth. You

will begin to question your motives, thoughts, and acts, comparing them with

your ideal, and endeavouring to look upon them with a calm and impartial

eye. In this manner you will be continually gaining more of that mental and

spiritual  equilibrium  without  which  men  are  but  helpless  straws  upon  the

ocean of life.

  Soar upward on the wings of aspiration; be fearless, and believe in the

loftiest possibilities.


  A beginning is a cause, and, as such it must be followed by an effect.

    FE B R U A R Y TW E L F T H.

  THE nature of an initial impulse will always determine the body of itsresults.  A  beginning  also  presupposes  an  ending,  a  consummation,

achievement, or goal. A gate leads to a path, and the path leads to some

particular destination; so a beginning leads to results, and results lead to a

completion.

  There are right beginnings and wrong beginnings, which are followed by

effects of a like nature. You can, by careful thought, avoid wrong beginnings

and make right beginnings, and so escape evil results and enjoy good results.

In aiming at the life of Blessedness, one of the simplest beginnings to be

considered and rightly made is that which we all make every day—namely,

the beginning of each day’s life.

  The effect will always be of the same nature as the cause.


  Wisdom inheres in the common details of everyday existence.

    FE B R U A R Y TH I R T E E N T H.

    EVERYTHING in the universe is made of little things, and the perfection

of the great is based upon the perfection up of the small. If any detail of the

universe were imperfect, the whole would be imperfect. If any particle were

omitted, the aggregate would cease to be. Without a grain of dust there would

be no world, and the whole is perfect because the grain of dust is perfect.

Neglect of the small is confusion of the great. The snowdrop is as perfect as

the star; the dewdrop is as symmetrical as the planet; the microbe is not less

mathematically  proportioned  than  the  man.  By  laying  stone  upon  stone,

plumbing and fitting each with perfect adjustment, the temple at last stands

forth in all its architectural beauty.

  When the parts are made perfect, the Whole will be without blemish.


  To neglect small tasks, or to execute them in a perfunctory manner, is a

mark of weakness and folly.

    FE B R U A R Y FO U R T E E N T H.

  THE great man knows the vast value that inheres in moments, words,

greetings,  meals,  apparel,  correspondence,  rest,  work,  detached  efforts,

fleeting obligations, in the thousand-and-one little things which press upon

him for attention— briefly, in the common details of life. He sees everything

as  divinely  apportioned,  needing  only  the  application  of  dispassionate

thought and action on his part to render life blessed and perfect. He neglectsnothing, does not hurry, seeks to escape nothing but error and folly; attends to

every duty as it is presented to him, and does not postpone and regret. By

giving himself unreservedly to his nearest duty, he attains to that combined

childlike simplicity and unconscious power which is greatness.

  There is no way to strength and wisdom but by acting strongly and wisely

in the present moment.


  He who masters the small becomes the rightful possessor of the great.

    FE B R U A R Y FI F T E E N T H.

  THE foolish man thinks that little faults, little indulgences, little sins, are

of no consequence; he persuades himself that so long as he does not commit

flagrant immoralities he is virtuous, and even holy; but he is thereby deprived

of virtue and holiness, and the world knows him accordingly; it does not

reverence,  adore,  and  love  him;  it  passes  him  by;  he  is  reckoned  of  no

account; his influence is destroyed. The efforts of such a man to make the

world virtuous, his exhortations to his fellow men to abandon great vices, are

empty  of  substance  and  barren  of  fruitage.  The  insignificance  which  he

attaches to his small vices permeates his whole character, and is the measure

of his manhood.

  He  who  regards  his  smallest  delinquencies  as  of  the  gravest  nature

becomes a saint.


  Truth is wrapped up in infinitesimal details.

    FE B R U A R Y SI X T E E N T H.

  AS  the  year  consists  of  a  given  number  of  sequential  moments,  so  a

man’s character and life consists of a given number of sequential thoughts

and deeds, and the finished whole will bear the impress of the parts. Little

kindnesses,  generosities,  and  sacrifices  make  up  a  kind  and  generous

character. The truly honest man is honest in the minutest details of his life.

The noble man is noble in every little thing he says and does. You do not live

your  life  in  the  mass;  you  live  it  in  fragments,  and  from  these  the  mass

emerges. You can will to live each fragment nobly if you choose, and, this

being done, there can be no particle of baseness in the finished whole.

    Thoroughness is genius.  Truth in its very nature is ineffable and can only be lived.

    FE B R U A R Y SE V E N T E E N T H.

  TRUTH  is  the  one  Reality  in  the  universe,  the  inward  Harmony,  the

perfect Justice, the eternal Love. Nothing can be added to it, nor taken from

it. It does not depend upon any man, but all men depend upon it. You cannot

perceive the beauty of Truth while you are looking out from the eyes of self.

If you are vain, you will colour everything with your own vanities. If lustful,

your heart and mind will be clouded with the smoke and flames of passion,

and everything will appear distorted through them. If proud and opinionative,

you  will  see  nothing  in  the  whole  universe  except  the  magnitude  and

importance of your own opinions. The humble Truth-lover has learned to

distinguish between opinion and Truth. He who has most of Charity has most

of Truth.


  There is but one religion, the religion of Truth.

    FE B R U A R Y EI G H T E E N T H.

  YOU may easily know whether you are a child of Truth or a worshipper

of self, if you will silently examine your mind, heart, and conduct. Do you

harbour  thoughts  of  suspicion,  enmity,  envy,  lust,  pride;  or  do  you

strenuously fight against these? If the former, you are chained to self, no

matter what religion you may profess; if the latter, you are a candidate for

Truth,  even  though  outwardly  you  may  profess  no  religion.  Are  you

passionate, self-willed, ever seeking to gain your own ends, self-indulgent,

and self-centred; or are you gentle, mild, unselfish, quit of every form of self-

indulgence, and are ever ready to give up your own? If the former, self is

your master; if the latter, Truth is the object of your affection.

  The signs by which the Truth-lover is known are unmistakable.


  That which temptation appeals to and arouses is unconquered desire.

    FE B R U A R Y NI N E T E E N T H.

    TEMPTATION waylays the man of aspiration until he touches the region

of the divine consciousness, and beyond that border temptation cannot follow

him.  It  is  when  a  man  begins  to  aspire  that  he  begins  to  be  tempted.

Aspiration rouses up all the latent good and evil, in order that the man may be

fully revealed to himself, for a man cannot overcome himself unless he fullyknows himself. It can scarcely be said of the merely animal man that he is

tempted, for the very presence of temptation means that there is a striving for

a purer state. Animal desire and gratification is the normal condition of the

man  who  has  not  yet  risen  into  aspiration;  he  wishes  for  nothing  more,

nothing better, than his sensual enjoyments, and is, for the present, satisfied.

Such a man cannot be tempted to fall, for he has not yet risen.

    Aspiration can carry a man to heaven.


  A man must know himself, if he is to know Truth.

    FE B R U A R Y TW E N T I E T H.

  LET  the  tempted  one  know  this:  that  he  himself  is  both  tempter  and

tempted; that all his enemies are within; that the flatterers which seduce, the

taunts  which  stab,  and  the  flames  which  burn,  all  spring  from  that  inner

region of ignorance and error in which he has hitherto lived; and knowing

this, let him be assured of complete victory over evil. When he is sorely

tempted, let him not mourn, therefore, but let him rejoice in that his strength

is  tried  and  his  weakness  exposed.  For  he  who  truly  knows  and  humbly

acknowledges his weakness will not be slow in setting about the acquisition

of strength.

  He who cannot fearlessly face his lower nature cannot climb the rugged

heights of renunciation.


  Seek diligently the path of holiness.

    FE B R U A R Y TW E N T Y-F I R S T.

  THE giving up of self is not merely the renunciation of outward things. It

consists of the renunciation of the inward sin, the inward error. Not by giving

up vain clothing; not by relinquishing riches; not by abstaining from certain

foods; not by speaking smooth words; not by merely doing these things is the

Truth found. But by giving up the spirit of vanity; by relinquishing the desire

for riches; by abstaining from the lust of self-indulgence; by giving up all

hatred, strife, condemnation, and self-seeking, and becoming gentle and pure

at heart, by doing these things is the Truth found.

  The renunciation of self is the way of Truth.


  He who ceases to be passion’s slave becomes a master-builder in theTemple of Destiny,

    FE B R U A R Y TW E N T Y-S E C O N D.

  A MAN commences to develop power when, checking his impulses and

selfish inclinations, he falls back upon the higher and calmer consciousness

within him, and begins to steady himself upon a principle.

  The realisation of unchanging principles in consciousness is at once the

source and secret of the highest power.

  When, after much searching, and suffering, and sacrificing, the light of an

eternal  principle  dawns  upon  the  soul,  a  divine  calm  ensues  and  joy

unspeakable gladdens the heart.

  He  who  has  realised  such  a  principle  ceases  to  wander,  and  remains

poised and self-possessed.

  Only that work endures that is built upon an indestructible principle.


  Men and women of real power and influence are few.

    FE B R U A R Y TW E N T Y-T H I R D.

  IT  is  easy  for  a  man,  so  long  as  he  is  left  in  the  enjoyments  of  his

possessions,  to  persuade  himself  that  he  believes  in  and  adheres  to  the

principles  of  Peace,  Brotherhood,  and  Universal  Love;  but  if,  when  his

enjoyments are threatened, or he imagines they are threatened, he begins to

clamour loudly for war, he shows that he believes in and stands upon, not

Peace, Brotherhood, and Love, but strife, selfishness, and hatred.

  He who does not desert his principles when threatened with the loss of

every earthly thing, even to the loss of reputation and life, is the man of

power, is the man whose every word endures, is the man whom the after-

world honours, reveres, and worships.

  There is no way to the acquirement of spiritual power except by that

inward illumination and enlightenment.


  All pain and sorrow is spiritual starvation, and aspiration is the cry for

food.

    FE B R U A R Y TW E N T Y-F O U R T H.

  MAN’S  essential  being  is  inward,  invisible,  spiritual,  and  as  such  it

derives its life, its strength, from within not from without. Outward things arechannels through which its energies are expended, but for renewal it must fall

back on the inward silence. In so far as man seeks to drown this silence in the

noisy  pleasures  of  the  senses,  and  endeavours  to  live  in  the  conflicts  of

outward  things,  just  so  much  does  he  reap  the  experiences  of  pain  and

sorrow, which, becoming at last intolerable, drive him back to the feet of the

inward Comforter, to the shrine of the peaceful solitude within.

  It is in solitude only that a man can be truly revealed to himself.


  Inward harmony is spiritual power,

    FE B R U A R Y TW E N T Y-F I F T H.

  TAKE the principle of Divine Love, and quietly and diligently meditate

upon it with the object of arriving at a thorough understanding of it. Bring its

searching light to bear upon all your habits, your actions, your speech and

intercourse  with  others,  your  every  secret  thought  and  desire.  As  you

persevere  in  this  course,  the  Divine  Love  will  become  more  and  more

perfectly revealed to you, and your own shortcomings will stand out in more

and more vivid contrast, spurring you on to renewed endeavour; and having

once  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  incomparable  majesty  of  that  imperishable

principle, you will never again rest in your weakness, your selfishness, your

imperfection, but will pursue that Love until you have relinquished every

discordant element, and have brought yourself into perfect harmony with it.

  Make no stay, no resting-place, until the inmost garment of your soul is

bereft of every stain.


  In solitude a man gathers strength to meet the difficulties and temptations

of life.

    FE B R U A R Y TW E N T Y-S I X T H.

  JUST as the body requires rest for the recuperation of its forces, so the

spirit  requires  solitude  for  the  renewal  of  its  energies.  Solitude  is  as

indispensable to man’s spiritual welfare as sleep is to his bodily well-being;

and pure thought, or meditation, which is evoked in solitude, is to the spirit

what activity is to the body. As the body breaks down when deprived of the

needful rest and sleep, so do the spirits of men break down when deprived of

the  necessary  silence  and  solitude.  Man,  as  a  spiritual  being,  cannot  be

maintained  in  strength,  uprightness,  and  peace  except  he  periodicallywithdraw  himself  from  the  outer  world  of  perishable  things,  and  reach

inwardly towards the abiding and imperishable realities.

  He who loves Truth, who desires and seeks wisdom, will be much alone.


    Human loves are reflections of the Divine Love.

    FE B R U A R Y TW E N T Y-S E V E N T H.

  MEN, clinging to self, and to the comfortless shadows of evil, are in the

habit of thinking of Divine Love as something belonging to a God who is out

of reach; as something outside themselves, and that must for ever remain

outside. Truly, the Love of God is ever beyond the reach of self, but when the

heart and mind are emptied of self then the selfless Love, the supreme Love,

the Love that is of God, or Good, becomes an inward and abiding reality.

  And this inward realisation of holy Love is none other than the Love of

Christ, that is so much talked about, and so little comprehended; the Love

that not only saves the soul from sin, but lifts it also above the power of

temptation.

  Divine Love knows neither sorrow nor change.


  Let a man learn to stand alone.

    FE B R U A R Y TW E N T Y-E I G H T H.

  IF a man can find no peace within himself, where shall he find it? If he

dreads to be alone with himself, what steadfastness shall he find in company?

If he can find no joy in communion with his own thoughts, how shall he

escape misery in his contact with others? The man who has yet found nothing

within himself upon which to stand will nowhere find a place of constant rest.

Without  is  change,  and  decay,  and  insecurity;  within  is  all  surety  and

blessedness. The soul is sufficient of itself. Where the need is, there is the

abundant supply. Your eternal dwelling-place is within.

  Be rich in yourself, be complete in yourself.


  Find your centre of balance and succeed in standing alone.

    FE B R U A R Y TW E N T Y-N I N T H.

  UNTIL you can stand alone, looking for guidance neither to spirits nor

mortals, gods nor men, but guiding yourself by the light of the truth within

you,  you  are  not  unfettered  and  free,  not  altogether  blessed.  But  do  notmistake  pride  for  self-reliance.  To  attempt  to  stand  upon  the  crumbling

foundation of pride is to be already fallen. No man depends upon others more

than the proud man. His happiness is entirely in the hands of others. But the

self-reliant  man  stands,  not  upon  personal  pride,  but  on  an  abiding  law,

principle, ideal, reality, within himself. Upon this he poises himself, refusing

to be swept from his strong foothold either by the waves of passion within or

the storms of opinion without.

  Find the joy that results from well-earned freedom, the peace that flows

from wise self-possession, the blessedness that inheres in native strength.                                      MARCH


  As the fountain from the hidden spring, so issues man’s life from the

secret recesses of his heart.

    MA R C H FI R S T.

  AS  the  heart,  so  is  the  life.  The  within  is  ceaselessly  becoming  the

without. Nothing remains unrevealed. That which is hidden is but for a time;

it ripens and comes forth at last. Seed, tree, blossom, and fruit is the fourfold

order of the universe. From the state of a man s heart proceed the conditions

of his life; his thoughts blossom into deeds, and his deeds bear the fruitage of

character and destiny.

  Life is ever unfolding from within, and revealing itself to the light, and

thoughts engendered in the heart at last reveal themselves in words, actions,

and things accomplished.

  Mind clothes itself in garments of its own making.


  There is no nobler work or higher science than that of self-perfection.

    MA R C H SE C O N D.

  LET man realise that life in its totality proceeds from the mind, and lo,

the way of blessedness is opened to him. For he will then discover that he

possesses the power to rule his mind, and to fashion it in accordance with his

ideal. So will he elect to strongly and steadfastly walk those pathways of

thought and action which are altogether excellent; to him life will become

beautiful  and  sacred; and,  sooner  or  later,  he  will  put  to  flight  all  evil,

confusion,  and  suffering;  for  it  is  impossible  for  a  man  to  fall  short  of

liberation, enlightenment, and peace who guards with unwearying diligence

the gateway of his heart.

  He who aims at the possession of a calm, wise, and seeing mind engages

in the most sublime task that man can undertake.


  A thought constantly repeated at last becomes a fixed habit.

    MA R C H TH I R D.  IT is in the nature of the mind to acquire knowledge by the repetition of

its experiences. A thought which it is very difficult, at first, to hold and to

dwell upon, at last becomes, by constantly being held in the mind, a natural

and habitual condition. Just as a boy, when commencing to learn a trade,

cannot even handle his tools aright, much less use them correctly, but after

long repetition and practice plies them with perfect ease and consummate

skill, so a state of mind at first apparently impossible of realisation is, by

perseverance and practice, at last acquired and built into the character as a

natural and spontaneous condition.

  In this power of the mind to form and reform its habits, its conditions, is

contained the basis of man’s salvation, and the open door to perfect liberty by

the mastery of sen.

  When the heart is pure all outward things are pure.


  Every sin may be overcome.

    MA R C H FO U R T H.

  A MAN’S life, in its totality, proceeds from his mind, and his mind is a

combination of habits, which he can, by patient effort, modify to any extent,

and over which he can gain complete ascendancy and control. Let a man

realise this, and he has at once obtained possession of the key which shall

open the door to his complete emancipation.

  But emancipation from the ills of life (which are the ills of one’s mind) is

a matter of steady growth from within, and not a sudden acquisition from

without.  Hourly  and  daily  must  the  mind  be  trained  to  think  stainless

thoughts, and to adopt right and dispassionate attitudes, until he has wrought

out of it the Ideal of his holiest dreams.

  The Higher Life is a higher living in thought, word, and deed.


  Without  the  right  performance  of  Duty,  the  higher  virtues  cannot  be

known.

    MA R C H FI F T H.

  ALL duty should be regarded as sacred, and its faithful and unselfish

performance one of the leading rules of conduct. All personal and selfish

considerations should be extracted and cast away from the doing of one’s

duty; and when this is done, Duty ceases to be irksome, and becomes joyful.Duty is only irksome to him who craves some selfish enjoyment or benefit

for himself. Let the man who is chafing under the irksome-ness of his duty

look to himself, and he will find that his wearisomeness proceeds, not from

the duty itself, but from his selfish desire to escape it. He who neglects duty,

be it great or small, or of a public or private nature, neglects Virtue; and he

who in his heart rebels against Duty rebels against Virtue.

  The virtuous man concentrates his mind on the perfect doing of his own

duty.


  Man is the doer of his own deeds; as such he is the maker of his own

character.

    MA R C H SI X T H.

  THOSE things which befall a man are the reflections of himself; that

destiny which pursued him, which he was powerless to escape by effort, or

avert by prayer, was the relentless ghoul of his own wrong deeds demanding

and  enforcing  restitution;  those  blessings  and  curses  which  come  to  him

unbidden are the reverberating echoes of the sounds which he himself sent

forth.

  Man finds himself involved in the train of causation. His life is made up

of causes and effects. It is both a sowing and a reaping. Each act of his is a

cause which must be balanced by its effects. He chooses the cause (this is

Free-will), he cannot choose, alter, or avert the effect (this is Fate); thus Free-

will stands for the power to initiate causes, and destiny is involvement in

effects.

    Character is destiny.


  Every form of unhappiness springs from a wrong condition of mind.

    MA R C H SE V E N T H.

  ALL sin is ignorance. It is a condition of darkness and undevelopment.

The wrong-thinker and the wrong-doer is in the same position in the school

of life as is the ignorant pupil in the school of learning. He has yet to learn

how to think and act correctly, that is, in accordance with Law. The pupil in

learning  is  not  happy  so  long  as  he  does  his  lessons  wrongly,  and

unhappiness cannot be escaped while sin remains unconquered.

  Life is a series of lessons. Some are diligent in learning them, and theybecome pure, wise, and altogether happy. Others are negligent, and do not

apply themselves, and they remain impure, foolish, and unhappy.

  Happiness is mental harmony.


  If one would find peace, he must come out of passion.

    MA R C H EI G H T H.

    SELFISHNESS, or passion, not only subsists in the gross forms of greed

and glaringly ungoverned conditions of mind; it informs also every hidden

thought which is subtly connected with the assumption and glorification of

one’s self; and it is most deceiving and subtle when it prompts one to dwell

upon the selfishness of others, to accuse them of it and to talk about it. The

man  who  continually  dwells  upon  the  selfishness  in  others  will  not  thus

overcome his own selfishness. Not by accusing others do we come out of

selfishness, but by purifying ourselves. The way from passion to peace is not

by hurling painful charges against others, but by overcoming one’s self. By

eagerly  striving  to  subdue  the  selfishness  of  others,  we  remain  passion-

bound; by patiently overcoming our own selfishness we ascend into freedom.

  The ascending pathway is always at hand. It is the way of self-conquest.


    Aspiration—the rapture of the saints.

    MA R C H NI N T H.

  ON  the  wings  of  aspiration  man  rises  from  earth  to  heaven,  from

ignorance to knowledge, from the under darkness to the upper light. Without

it  he  remains  a  grovelling  animal,  earthly,  sensual,  unenlightened,  and

uninspired.

    Aspiration  is  the  longing  for  heavenly  things  —for  righteousness,

compassion, purity, love— as distinguished from desire, which is the longing

for  earthly  things—for  selfish  possessions,  personal  dominance,  low

pleasures, and sensual gratifications. For one to begin to aspire means that he

is dissatisfied with his low estate, and is aiming at a higher condition. It is a

sure sign that he is roused out of his lethargic sleep of animality, and has

become conscious of nobler attainments and a fuller life.

    Aspiration makes all things possible.


  The man of aspiration sees before him the pathway up to the heavenlyheights.

    MA R C H TE N T H.

  WHEN the rapture of aspiration touches the mind it at once refines it, and

the dross of its impurities begins to fall away; yea, while aspiration holds the

mind, no impurities can enter it, for the impure and the pure cannot at the

same  moment  occupy  the  thought.  But  the  effort  of  aspiration  is  at  first

spasmodic and short-lived. The mind falls back into its habitual error and

must be constantly renewed.

  To thirst for righteousness; to hunger for the pure life; to rise in holy

rapture on the wings of angelic aspiration—this is the right road to wisdom;

this is the right striving for peace; this is the right beginning of the way

divine.

  The lover of the pure life renews his mind daily with the invigorating

glow of aspiration.


  Error is sifted away. The Gold of Truth remains.

    MA R C H EL E V E N T H.

    SPIRITUAL transmutation consists in an entire reversal of the ordinary

self-seeking attitude of mind towards men and things, and this reversal brings

about  an  entirely  new  set  of  experiences.  Thus  the  desire  for  a  certain

pleasure is abandoned, cut off at its source, and not allowed to have any place

in the consciousness; but the mental force which that desire represented is not

annihilated, it is transferred to a higher region of thought, transmuted into a

purer form of energy. The law of conservation of energy obtains universally

in mind as in matter, and the force shut off in lower directions is liberated in

higher realms of spiritual activity.

  The clear and cloudless heights of spiritual enlightenment.


  The early stage of transmutation is painful but brief, for the pain is soon

transformed into pure spiritual joy.

    MA R C H TW E L F T H.

    ALONG the Saintly Way towards the divine life, the midway region of

Transmutation is the Country of Sacrifice, it is the Plain of Renunciation. Old

passions,  old  desires,  old  ambitions  and  thoughts,  are  cast  away  and

abandoned, but only to reappear in some more beautiful, more permanent,more  eternally  satisfying  form.  As  valuable  jewels,  long  guarded  and

cherished, are thrown tearfully into the melting-pot, yet are remoulded into

new and perfect adornments, so the spiritual alchemist, at first loth to part

company with long-cherished thoughts and habits, at last gives them up, to

discover, a little later, to his joy, that they have come back to him in the form

of  new  faculties,  rarer  powers,  and  purer  joys,  spiritual  jewels  newly

burnished, beautiful, and resplendent.

  The wise man meets passion with peace, hatred with love, and returns

good for evil.


  The present is the synthesis of the entire past; the net result of all that a

man has ever thought and done is contained within him.

    MA R C H TH I R T E E N T H.

  IT is this knowledge of the Perfect Law working through and above all

things; of the Perfect Justice operating in and adjusting all human affairs, that

enables  the  good  man  to  love  his  enemies,  and  to  rise  above  all  hatred,

resentment, and complaining; for he knows that only his own can come to

him, and that, though he be surrounded by persecutors, his enemies are but

the blind instruments of a faultless retribution; and so he blames them not,

but calmly receives his accounts, and patiently pays his moral debts. But this

is not all; he does not merely pay his debts; he takes care not to contract any

further debts. He watches himself and makes his deeds faultless.

    Characteristics are fixed habits of mind, the results of deeds.


  Heaven and hell are in this world.

    MA R C H FO U R T E E N T H.

    NOTHING  comes  unbidden;  where  the  shadow  is,  there  also  is  the

substance.  That  which  comes  to  the  individual  is  the  product  of  his  own

deeds.  As  cheerful  industry  leads  to  greater  industry  and  increasing

prosperity, and labour shirked or undertaken discontentedly leads to a lesser

degree of labour and decreasing prosperity, so with all the varied conditions

of life as we see them—they are the effects of deeds, destinies wrought by

the thoughts and deeds of each particular individual. So also with the vast

variety of characters—they are the ripening and ripened growth of the sowing

of deeds, a sowing not confined solely to this visible life, but going backwardthrough that infinite life which traverses the portals of innumerable births and

deaths, and which also will extend into the illimitable future, reaping its own

harvests, eating the sweet and bitter fruits of its own deeds.

  Life is a great school for the development of character.


    Purification of the heart by repetitive thought on pure things.

    MA R C H FI F T E E N T H.

  MAN is a thought-being, and his life and character are determined by the

thoughts in which he habitually dwells. By practice, association, and habit,

thoughts  tend  to  repeat  themselves  with  greater  and  greater  ease  and

frequency, and so fix the character in a given direction by producing that

automatic  action  which  is  called  "habit."  By  daily  dwelling  upon  pure

thoughts,  the  man  of  meditation  forms  the  habit  of  pure  and  enlightened

thinking which leads to pure and enlightened actions, and well-performed

actions. By the ceaseless repetition of pure thoughts, he at last becomes one

with those thoughts, and is a purified being, manifesting his attainment in

pure actions.

  Attainment of divine knowledge by embodying such purity in practical

life.


  He who will control himself will put an end to all his sufferings.

    MA R C H SI X T E E N T H.

  BLESSED is that day, and not to be forgotten, when a man discovers that

he himself is his own undoer and his own saviour. That within himself is the

cause of all his suffering and lack of knowledge, and that also within is the

source of all peace, enlightenment, and Godliness. Selfish thoughts, impure

desires, and acts not shaped by Truth are the baneful seeds from which all

suffering springs; while selfless thoughts, pure aspirations, and the sweet acts

of Truth are the seeds from which all blessedness grows.

  He who will deny himself will find the holy place where calmness lives.


  He who will purify himself will destroy all his ignorance.

    MA R C H SE V E N T E E N T H.

  HE who governs his tongue is greater than a successful disputant in the

arena of intellectualism; he who controls well his mind is more powerful thanthe king of many nations; and he who holds himself in entire subjection is

more than gods and angels. When a man who is enslaved by self realises that

he must work out his own salvation, in that moment he will rise up in the

dignity of his divine manhood and say, "Henceforward I will be a master in

Israel, and not a slave in the House of Bondage."

  Not until a man realises this, and commences to patiently purify his inner

life, can he find the way which leads to lasting peace.

  A life of perfect peace and blessedness by means of self-government and

self-enlightenment.


    Impatience is a handmaid of impulse, and never helped any man.

    MA R C H EI G H T E E N T H.

  YOU will be greatly helped if you devote at least one hour every day to

quiet meditation on lofty moral subjects and their application to everyday life.

In this way you will cultivate a calm, quiet strength, and win develop right

perception and correct judgment. Do not be anxious to hurry matters. Do

your  duty  to  the  very  uttermost;  live  a  disciplined  and  self-denying  life;

conquer impulse, and guide your actions by moral and spiritual Principles, as

distinguished from your feelings, firmly believing that your object will be, in

its own time, completely accomplished.

  Still go on becoming, and as you grow more perfect you will make fewer

mistakes and will suffer less.


  The diadem of the King of Truth is a righteous life, his sceptre is the

sceptre of peace, and his throne is in the hearts of mankind.

    MA R C H NI N E T E E N T H.

  IN every heart there are two kings, but one is a usurper and tyrant; he is

named self, and his thoughts and deeds are those of lust, hatred, passion, and

strife; the other, the rightful monarch, is named Truth, and his thoughts and

deeds are those of purity and love, meekness and peace. Brother, sister, to

what monarch dost thou bow? What king hast thou crowned in thy heart?

Well is it with thy soul if Thou canst say: "I bow down to the Monarch of

Truth; in my inmost heart I have crowned the King of Peace." Blessed indeed

and immortal shall he be who shall find in the inward and heavenly places the

King of Righteousness, and shall bow his heart to Him.  Power resides in blamelessness of heart. All earthly things are symbols.


  It is by the eradication of the inward errors and impurities alone that a

knowledge of Truth can be gained. There is no other way to wisdom and

peace.

    MA R C H TW E N T I E T H.

  THE peace which passeth understanding is a peace which no event or

circumstance  can  shake  or  mar,  because  it  is  not  merely  a  passing  calm

between two storms, but is an abiding peace that is born of knowledge. Men

have not this peace, because they do not understand, because they do not

know, and they do not understand and know because they are blinded and

rendered ignorant by their own errors and impurities; and whilst they are

unwilling  to  give  these  up,  they  cannot  but  remain  entirely  ignorant  of

impersonal Principles.

  Whilst a man loves his lusts he cannot love wisdom.


  If we could suffer, even partly, through others, our sufferings would be

unjust.

    MA R C H TW E N T Y-F I R S T.

  ARE our sufferings and troubles entirely the result of our own ignorance

and wrong-doing, or are they partly or wholly brought about by others, and

by outward conditions?

  Our sufferings are just, and are entirely the result of our own ignorance,

error, and wrongdoing.

  "Ye suffer from yourselves, none else compels." If this were not so, if a

man could commit an evil deed and escape, the consequences of that deed

being visited upon an innocent person, then there would be no Law of Justice,

and without such a Law the universe could not, even for a single moment,

exist. All would be chaos. Upon the surface, men appear to suffer through

others, but it is only an appearance an appearance which a deeper knowledge

dispels.

  Man is not the result of outward conditions; outward conditions are the

result of man.


  In the knowledge of truth there is freedom.    MA R C H TW E N T Y-S E C O N D.

  MEN suffer because they love self, and do not love righteousness, and

loving self they love their delusions, and it is by these that they are bound.

There is one supreme liberty of which no man can be deprived by any but

himself—the liberty to love and to practise righteousness.

  This includes all other liberties. It belongs to the whipped and chained

slave equally as to the king, and he who will enter into this liberty will cast

from him every chain. By this the slave will walk out from the presence of

his oppressor, who will be powerless to stay him. By this the king will cease

to be defiled by his surrounding luxuries, and will be a king indeed.

  No outward oppressor can burden the righteous heart.


  Joy is to the sinless!

    MA R C H TW E N T Y-T H I R D.

  THE wise man knows. For him anxiety, fear, disappointment, and unrest

have ceased, and under whatever condition or circumstance he may be placed

his calmness will not be broken, and he will bend and adjust everything with

capacity and wisdom. Nothing will cause him grief. When friends yield up

the body of flesh, he knows that they still are, and does not sorrow over the

shell they have discarded. None can injure him, for he has identified himself

with that which is unaffected by change.

  The  knowledge  which  brings  peace,  then,  is  the  knowledge  of

unchangeable  Principles  arrived  at  by  the  practice  of  pure  goodness,

righteousness,  becoming  one  with  which  a  man  becomes  immortal,

unchangeable, indestructible.

  Peace is to the pure.


  Love,  meekness,  gentleness,  self-accusation,  forgiveness,  patience,

compassion, reproof—these are the works of the Spirit.

    MA R C H TW E N T Y-F O U R T H.

  THE flesh flatters; the Spirit reproves. The flesh blindly gratifies; the

  Spirit wisely disciplines.

  The flesh loves secrecy; the Spirit is open and clear.

  The flesh remembers the injury of a friend; the Spirit forgives the bitterestenemy.

  The flesh is noisy and rude; the Spirit is silent and gracious.

  The flesh is subject to moods; the Spirit is always calm.

  The  flesh  incites  to  impatience  and  anger;  the  Spirit  controls  with

patience and serenity.

  The flesh is thoughtless; the Spirit is thoughtful.

  Hatred,  pride,  harshness,  accusing  others,  revenge,  anger,  cruelty,  and

flattery—these are the works of the flesh.


  You can only help others in so far as you have up-

  lifted and purified yourself.

    MA R C H TW E N T Y-F I F T H.

  A TRUTH is first perceived, and afterwards realised. The perception may

be instantaneous, the realisation is almost invariably a process of gradual

unfoldment. You will have to learn to love, regarding yourself as a child; and

as you make progress in learning, the Divine will unfold within you. You can

only learn to love by constantly meditating upon Love as a divine principle,

and by adjusting, day by day, all your thought, and words, and acts to it.

Watch yourself closely, and when you think, or say, or do anything which is

not  born  of  pure  unselfish  love,  resolve  that  you  will  henceforth  guard

yourself  in  that  direction.  By  so  doing  you  will  every  day  grow  purer,

tenderer, holier, and soon you will find it easy to love, and will realise the

Divine within you.

  When love is perfected and revealed in the heart, Christ is known.


  Follow faithfully where the inward light leads you.

    MA R C H TW E N T Y-S I X T H.

  IT is well to become conscious of your shortcomings, for, having realised

them, and feeling the necessity of overcoming them, you will, sooner or later,

rise above them into the pure atmosphere of duty and unselfish love. You

should not picture dark things in the future, but if you think of the future at

all,  think  of  it  as  bright.  Above  all,  do  your  duty  each  day,  and  do  it

cheerfully and unselfishly, and then each day will bring its own measure of

joy and peace, and the future will hold much happiness for you. The best wayto  overcome  your  faults  is  to  perform  all  your  duties  faithfully,  without

thinking of any gain to yourself, and to do all you can to make others happy;

speaking kindly to all, doing kind things when you can, and not retaliating

when others do or say unkind things.

  Put your whole heart into the present, living it, minute by minute, hour by

hour, and day by day, self-governed and pure.


  The righteous man is invincible. No enemy can possibly overcome him.

    MA R C H TW E N T Y-S E V E N T H.

  THE righteous man, having nothing to hide, committing no acts which

require stealth, and harbouring no thoughts and desires which he would not

like others to know, is fearless and unashamed. His step is firm, his body

upright, and his speech direct, and without ambiguity. He looks everybody in

the face. How can he fear any, who wrongs none? How can he be ashamed

before any, who deceives none? And ceasing from all wrong, he can never be

wronged; ceasing from all deceit, he can never be deceived. It is impossible

for evil to overcome good, so the righteous man can never be brought low by

the unrighteous.

  He cannot be afflicted by weariness and unrest whose heart is at peace

with all.


  It is better to love than to accuse and denounce.

    MA R C H TW E N T Y-E I G H T H.

  THERE  is  that  outburst  of  passion  which  is  called  "righteous

indignation,"  and  it  appears  to  be  righteous,  but  looked  at  from  a  higher

conception of conduct it is seen to be not righteous. There is a certain stamp

of  nobility  about  indignation  at  wrong  or  injustice,  and  it  is  certainly  far

higher and nobler than indifference, but there is a loftier nobility still, by

which  it  is  seen  that  indignation  is  never  necessary,  and  where  love  and

gentleness take its place, they overcome the wrong much more effectually. A

person that is apparently wronged requires our pity, but the one who wrongs

requires still more our compassion, for he is ignorantly laying up for himself

a store of suffering: he  must  reap  the  wrong  he  is  sowing.  When  divine

compassion is perceived in its fullness and beauty, indignation and all forms

of passion cease to exercise any influence over us.  If a man would do a noble thing, and does not do it he is not exalted

thereby, but debased.

    MA R C H TW E N T Y-N I N T H.

  THE term Goodness does not mean sickly sentiment, but inward virtue,

the direct result of which is strength and power; therefore, the good man is

not weak, the weak man is not good.

  We should not judge the souls of others in the spirit of condemnation; but

we can judge of our own life and conduct by results. There is nothing more

certain than this, the evil doer speedily proves that his evil produces misery;

the good man demonstrates that his goodness results in happiness.

  It is a fact that one may " flourish like a green bay tree " and yet be

unrighteous, but we should also remember that the bay tree at last perishes, or

is cut down, and such is the fate of the unrighteous.

  An exalted being apart from an exalted life is inconceivable and cannot

be.


  We know nothing higher than Goodness.

    MA R C H TH I R T I E T H.

  THE  Teachers  of  mankind  are  few.  A  thousand  years  may  pass  by

without the advent of such a one; but when the true Teacher does appear, the

distinguishing  feature  by  which  he  is  known  is his  life.  His conduct is

different from other men, and his teaching is never derived from any man or

book, but from his own life. The Teacher first lives, and then teaches others

how  they  may  likewise  live.  The  proof  and  witness  of  his  teaching  is  in

himself, his life. Out of millions of preachers, one only is ultimately accepted

by mankind as the true Teacher, and the one who is thus accepted and exalted

is he who lives. The supreme aim of all religions is to teach men how to live.


  Love is far beyond the reach of all selfish argument and can only be lived.

    MA R C H TH I R T Y-F I R S T.

  JESUS gave to the world a code of rules, by the observance of which all

men could become sons of God, could live the Perfect Life. These rules or

precepts  are  so  simple,  direct,  and  unmistakable  that  it  is  impossible  to

misunderstand  them.  So  plain  and  unequivocal  are  they  that  even  anunlettered child could grasp their meaning without difficulty. All of them are

directly related to human conduct, and can be applied only by the individual

in his own life. To carry out the spirit of these rules in one’s daily conduct

constitutes  the  whole  duty  of  life,  and  lifts  the  individual  into  the  full

consciousness of his divine origin and nature, of his oneness with God, the

Supreme Good.

  Men everywhere, in their inmost hearts, know that Goodness is divine.                                      APRIL


  A man has no character, no soul, no life, apart from his thoughts and

deeds.

  AP R I L FI R S T.

  EACH man is responsible for the thoughts which he thinks and the acts

which he does, for his state of mind, and the life which he lives. No power,

no event, no circumstance, can compel a man to evil and unhappiness. He

himself is his own compeller. He thinks and acts by his own volition. No

being, however wise and great—not even the Supreme—can make him good

and happy. He himself must choose the good, and thereby find the happy.

  This life of triumph is not for those who are satisfied with any lower

conditions; it is for those who thirst for it and are willing to achieve it; who

are as eager for righteousness as the miser is for gold. It is always at hand,

and is offered to all, and blessed are they who accept and embrace it; they

will enter the world of Truth; they will find the Perfect Peace.

  There  is  a  larger,  higher,  nobler,  diviner  life  than  that  of  sinning  and

suffering.


  Man is; and as he thinks, so he is.

  AP R I L SE C O N D.

  MAN’S life is actual; his thoughts are actual; his deeds are actual. To

occupy  ourselves  with  the  investigation  of  things  that  are,  is  the  way  of

wisdom. Man, considered as above, beyond, and separate from, mind and

thought, is speculative and not actual, and to occupy ourselves with the study

of things that are not, is the way of folly.

  Man cannot be separated from his mind; his life cannot be separated from

his thoughts. Mind, thought, and life are as inseparable as light, radiance, and

colour. The facts are all-sufficient, and contain within themselves the ground-

work of all knowledge concerning them.

  To live is to think and act, and to think and act is to Change.  Man as mind is subject to change. He is not something " made " and

finally completed, but has within him the capacity for progress.

  AP R I L TH I R D.

  THE  purification  of  the  heart,  the  thinking  of  right  thoughts,  and  the

doing of good deeds—what are they but calls to a higher, nobler mode of

thought energising forces urging men to effort in the choosing of thoughts

which shall lift them into realms of greater power, greater good, greater bliss?

    Aspiration, meditation, devotion—these are the chief means which men

in all ages employ to reach up to higher modes of thought, wider airs of

peace, vaster realms of knowledge, for as he thinketh in his heart, so is he; he

is saved from himself—from his own folly and suffering by creating within,

new habits of thought; by becoming a new thinker, a new man.

  Man’s being is modified by every thought he thinks. Every experience

affects his character.


  Only the choosing of wise thoughts, and, necessarily the doing of wise

deeds, leads to wisdom.

  AP R I L FO U R T H.

  THE multitudes, unenlightened concerning their spiritual nature, are the

slaves of thought, but the sage is the master of thought. They follow blindly;

he chooses intelligently. They obey the impulse of the moment, thinking of

their immediate pleasure and happiness; he commands and subdues impulse,

resting upon that which is permanently right. They, obeying blind impulse,

violate the law of righteousness; he, conquering impulse, obeys the law of

righteousness. The sage stands face to face with the facts of life. He knows

the nature of thought. He understands and obeys the law of his being.

  Thought determines character, conditions, knowledge.


  Law  cannot  be  partial  It  is  an  unvarying  mode  of  action,  disobeying

which, we are hurt; obeying, we are made happy.

  AP R I L FI F T H.

  IT is not less kind that we should suffer the penalty of our wrong-doing

than that we should enjoy the blessedness of our right-doing. If we could

escape the effects of our ignorance and sin, all security would be gone, and

there would be no refuge, for we could then be equally deprived of the resultof our wisdom and goodness. Such a scheme would be one of caprice and

cruelty, whereas law is a method of justice and kindness.

  Indeed, the supreme law is the principle of eternal kindness, faultless in

working, and infinite in application. It is none other than that

  "Eternal Love, for ever full,

  For ever flowing free,"

  of  which  the  Christian  sings;  and  the  "  Boundless  Compassion  "  of

Buddhistic precept and poetry.

  Every pain we suffer brings us nearer to the knowledge of the Divine

Wisdom.


  Seers of the Cosmos do not mourn over the scheme of things.

  AP R I L SI X T H.

    BUDDHA always referred to the moral law of the universe as the Good

Law, and indeed it is not rightly perceived if it is thought of as anything but

good, for in it there can be no grain of evil, no element of unkindness. It is no

iron-hearted monster crushing the weak and destroying the ignorant, but a

soothing love and brooding compassion shielding the tenderest from harm,

and protecting the strongest from a too destructive use of their strength. It

destroys an evil, it preserves a good. It enfolds the tiniest seedling in its care,

and it destroys the most colossal wrong with a breath. To perceive it, is the

beatific vision; to know it, is the beatific bliss; and they who perceive and

know it are at peace; they are glad for ever more.

  The wise man bends his will and subjects his desire to the Divine Order.


  Rise above the allurements of sin, and enter the Divine Consciousness,

the Transcendent Life.

  AP R I L SE V E N T H.

  THERE comes a time in the process of transmutation when, with the

decrease of evil and the accumulation of good, there dawns in the mind a new

vision, a new consciousness, a new man. And when this is reached, the saint

has become a sage; he has passed from the human life to the divine life. He is

" born again " and there begins for him a new round of experiences; he wields

a new power; a new universe opens out before his spiritual gaze. This is thestage  of  Transcendence;  this  I  call  the  Transcendent  Life.  When

Transcendence is attained, then the limited personality is outgrown, and the

divine life is known; evil is transcended, and Good is all-in-all.

  As passion is the keynote of the self-life, so serenity is the keynote of the

transcendent life.


  When Perfect Good is realised and known, then calm vision is acquired.

  AP R I L EI G H T H.

  THE transcendent life is ruled, not by passions, but by principles. It is

founded,  not  upon  fleeting  impulses,  but  upon  abiding  laws.  In  its  clear

atmosphere, the orderly sequence of all things is revealed, so that there is

seen  to  be  no  more  room  for  sorrow,  anxiety,  or  regret.  While  men  are

involved in the passions of self, they load themselves with cares, and trouble

over many things; and more than all else do they trouble over their own little,

burdened, pain-stricken personality, being anxious for its fleeting pleasures,

for its protection and preservation, and for its eternal safety and continuance.

Now in the life that is wise and good all this is transcended. Personal interests

are  replaced  by  universal  purposes,  and  all  cares,  troubles,  and  anxieties

concerning  the  pleasure  and  fate  of  the  personality  are  dispelled  like  the

feverish dreams of a night.

    Universal Good is seen.


  Evil is an experience, and not a power

  AP R I L NI N T H.

  IF it (evil) were an independent power in the universe, it could not be

transcended by any being. But though not real as a power, it is real as a

condition, an experience, for all experience is of the nature of reality. It is a

state of ignorance, of undevelopment, and as such it recedes and disappears

before  the  light  of  knowledge,  as  the  intellectual  ignorance  of  the  child

vanishes before the gradually accumulating learning, or as darkness dissolves

before the rising light.

  The painful experiences of evil pass away as the new experiences of good

enter into and possess the field of consciousness.

  The transcendent man is he who is above and beyond the dominion of

self; he has transcended evil.    Whatsoever  happens  to  the  good  man  cannot  cause  him  perplexity  or

sorrow, for he knows its cause and issue.

  AP R I L TE N T H.

  IN looking back on the self-life which he has transcended, the divinely

enlightened  man  sees  that  all  the  afflictions  of  that  life  were  his

schoolmasters teaching him, and leading him upward, and that in the measure

that  he  penetrated  their  meaning,  and  lifted  himself  above  them,  they

departed from him. Their mission to teach him having ended, they left him

triumphant  master  of  the  field;  for  the  lower  cannot  teach  the  higher;

ignorance cannot instruct wisdom; evil cannot enlighten good; nor can the

pupil set lessons for the master. That which is transcended cannot reach up to

that which transcends. Evil can only teach in its own sphere, where it is

regarded as a master; in the sphere of good it has no place, no authority.

  The  strong  traveller  on  the  highroad  of  truth  knows  no  such  thing  as

resignation to evil; he knows only obedience to good.


  He  is  bravo  who  conquers  another:  but  he  who  conquers  himself  is

supremely noble.

  AP R I L EL E V E N T H.

  BY the way of self-conquest is the Perfect Peace achieved. Man cannot

understand  it,  cannot  approach  it,  until  he  sees  the  supreme  necessity  of

turning away from the fierce fighting of things without, and entering upon the

noble warfare against evils within. He is already on the Saintly Way who has

realised that the enemy of the world is within, and not without; that his own

ungoverned thoughts are the source of confusion and strife; that his own

unchastened desires are the violators of his peace, and of the peace of the

world.

  If a man has conquered lust and anger, hatred and pride, selfishness and

greed, he has conquered the world.

  He who is victorious over another may in turn be defeated; but he who

overcomes himself will never be subdued.


  Force and strife work upon the passions and fears, but love and peace

reach and reform the heart.  AP R I L T W E L F T H.

  HE who is overcome by force is not thereby overcome in his heart: he

may be a greater enemy than before; but he who is overcome by the spirit of

peace is thereby changed at heart. He that was an enemy has become a friend.

  The pure-hearted and wise have peace in their hearts; it enters into their

actions; they apply it in their lives. It is more powerful than strife; it conquers

where force would fail. Its wings shield the righteous. Under its protection,

the  harmless  are  not  harmed.  It  affords  a  secure  shelter  from  the  heat  of

selfish struggle. It is a refuge for the defeated, a tent for the lost, and a temple

for the pure.

  When, divine good is practised, life is bliss. Bliss is the normal condition

of the good man.


  He who has realised the Love that is divine has become a new man.

  AP R I L TH I R T E E N T H.

  AND this Love, this Wisdom, this Peace, this tranquil state of mind and

heart, may be attained to, may be realised, by all who are willing and ready to

and who are prepared to humbly enter into a comprehension of all that the

giving up of self involves. There is no arbitrary power in the universe, and

the strongest chains of fate by which men are bound are self-forged. Men are

chained to that which causes suffering because they desire to be so, because

they love their chains, because they think their little dark prison of self is

sweet and beautiful, and they are afraid that if they desert that prison they

will lose all that is real and worth having.

  " Ye suffer from yourselves, none else compels, None other holds ye that

ye live and die."

  To the divinely wise, knowledge and Love are one and inseparable.


  The  world  does  not  understand  the  Love  that  is  selfless  because  it  is

engrossed in the pursuit of its own pleasures.

  AP R I L F O U R T E E N T H.

  AS the shadow follows the form, and as smoke comes after fire, so effect

follows cause, and suffering and bliss follow the thoughts and deeds of men.

There is no effect in the world around us but has its hidden or revealed cause,

and that cause is in accordance with absolute justice. Men reap a harvest ofsuffering because in the near or distant past they have sown the seeds of evil;

they reap a harvest of bliss also as a result of their own sowing of the seeds of

good. Let a man meditate upon this, let him strive to understand it, and he

will then begin to sow only seeds of good, and will burn up the tares and

weeds which he has formerly grown in the garden of his heart.

  It is toward the complete realisation of this divine Love that the whole

world is moving.


  He who purifies his own heart is the world’s greatest benefactor.

  AP R I L FI F T E E N T H.

  THE world is, and will be for many years to come, shut out from that

Golden Age which is the realisation of selfless Love. You, if you are willing,

may enter it now, by rising above your selfish self; if you will pass from

prejudice, hatred, and condemnation to gentle and forgiving love.

  Where  hatred,  dislike,  and  condemnation  are,  selfless  Love  does  not

abide. It resides only in the heart that has ceased from all condemnation. He

who knows that Love is at the heart of all things, and has realised the all-

sufficing power of that Love, has no room in his heart for condemnation.

  Let men and women take this course, and lo! the Golden Age is at hand.


  Only the pure in heart see God.

  AP R I L SI X T E E N T H.

  HE  whose  heart  is  centred  in  the  supreme  Love  does  not  brand  and

classify men; does not seek to convert men to his own views, nor to convince

them of the superiority of his methods. Knowing the Law of Love, he lives it,

and maintains the same calm attitude of mind and sweetness of heart towards

all. The debased and the virtuous, the foolish and the wise, the learned and

the unlearned, the selfish and the unselfish, receive alike the benediction of

his tranquil thought.

  You  can  only  attain  to  this  supreme  knowledge,  this  divine  Love,  by

unremitting endeavour in self-discipline, and by gaining victory after victory

over yourself.

  Enter into the New Birth, and the Love that does not die will be awakened

within you, and you will be at peace.  Where  there  is  pure  spiritual  knowledge,  Love  is  perfected  and  fully

realised.

  AP R I L SE V E N T E E N T H.

  TRAIN your mind in strong, impartial, and gentle thought; train your

heart in purity and compassion; train your tongue to silence and to true and

stainless speech; so shall you enter the way of holiness and peace, and shall

ultimately realise the immortal Love. So living, without seeking to convert,

you will convince; without arguing, you will teach; not cherishing ambition,

the wise will find you out; and without striving to gain men’s opinions, you

will subdue their hearts. For Love is all-conquering, all-powerful; and the

thoughts, and deeds, and words of Love can never perish.

  This is the realisation of selfless Love.


  Rejoice! for the morning has dawned: The Truth has awakened us.

  AP R I L EI G H T E E N T H.

  WE have opened our eyes, and the dark night of terror is no more. Long

have we slept in matter and sensation; long did we struggle in the painful

nightmare of evil; but now we are awake in Spirit and Truth: We have found

the Good, and the struggle with evil is ended.

  We slept, yet knew not that we slept. We suffered, yet knew not that we

suffered. We were troubled in our dreaming, yet none could awake us, for all

were dreaming like ourselves. Yet there came a pause in our dreaming; our

sleep was stayed. Truth spoke to us, and we heard; and lo! we opened our

eyes, and saw. We slumbered, and saw not; we slept, and knew not; but now

we are awake and see. Yea, we know we are awake because we have seen

Holiness, and we love sin no more.

  How  beautiful  is  Truth!  How  glorious  is  the  realm  of  reality!  How

ineffable is the bliss of Holiness!


  Abandon error for Truth, and illusion for Reality.

  AP R I L NI N E T E E N T H.

  TO sin is to dream, and. to love sin is to love darkness. They who love

darkness are involved in the darkness; they have not yet seen the light. He

who has seen the light does not choose to walk in darkness. To see the Truth

is to love it, and, in comparison, error has no beauty. The dreamer is now inpleasure, now in pain; this hour in confidence, the next in fear. He is without

stability,  and  has  no  abiding  refuge.  When  the  monsters  of  remorse  and

retribution pursue him, whither can he fly? There is no place of safety unless

he awake. Let the dreamer struggle with his dream; let him strive to realise

the illusory nature of all self-seeking desire, and lo! he will open his spiritual

eyes  upon  the  world  of  Light  and  Truth.  He  will  be  happy,  sane,  and

peaceful, seeing things as they are.

  Truth is the Light of the universe, the day of the mind.


  The Knowledge of Truth is an abiding consolation.

  AP R I L TW E N T I E T H.

  WHEN all else fails, Truth does not fail. When the heart is desolate and

the world affords no shelter, Truth provides a peaceful refuge and a quiet rest.

The cares of life are many, and its path is beset with difficulties; but Truth is

greater  than  care,  and  is  superior  to  all  difficulties.  Truth  lightens  our

burdens; it lights up our pathway with the radiance of joy. Loved ones pass

away,  friends  fail,  and  possessions  disappear.  Where  then  is  the  voice  of

comfort? Where is the whisper of consolation? Truth is the comforter of the

comfortless, and the consoler of them that are deserted. Truth does not pass

away, nor fail, nor disappear. Truth bestows the consolation of abiding peace.

Be alert, and listen, that ye may hear the call of Truth, even the voice of the

Great Awakener.

  Truth  removes  the  sting  from  affliction,  and  disperses  the  clouds  of

trouble.


  He who dings to his delusions, loving self and sin cannot find the Truth.

  AP R I L TW E N T Y-F I R S T.

  TRUTH brings joy out of sorrow, and peace out of perturbation; it points

the selfish to the Way of Good, and sinners to the Path of Holiness. Its spirit

is  the  doing  of  Righteousness.  To  the  earnest  and  faithful  it  brings

consolation; upon the obedient it bestows the crown of peace. I take refuge in

Truth: Yea, in the Spirit of Good, in the knowledge of Good, and in the doing

of Good I abide. And I am reassured and comforted. It is to me as though

malice  were  not,  and  hatred  had  vanished  away.  Lust  is  confined  to  the

nethermost darkness, it hath no way in Truth s transcendent Light. Pride isbroken up and dissolved, and vanity is melted away as a mist. I have set my

face  towards  the  Perfect  Good,  and  my  feet  in  the  Blameless  Way;  and

because of this I am consoled.

  I am strengthened and comforted, having found refuge in Truth.


  A pure  heart  and  a  blameless  life  avail.  They  are  filled  with  joy  and

peace.

  AP R I L TW E N T Y-S E C O N D.

  OUR good deeds remain with us, they save and protect us. Evil deeds are

error. Our evil deeds follow us, they overthrow us in the hour of temptation.

The evil doer is not protected from sorrow; but the good doer is shielded

from all harm. The fool says unto his evil deed, " Remain thou hidden, be

thou unexposed "—but his evil is already published, and his sorrow is sure. If

we  are  in  evil,  what  shall  protect  us?  What  keep  us  from  misery  and

confusion? Nor man nor woman, nor wealth nor power, nor heaven nor earth,

shall keep us from confusion. From the results of evil there is no escape; no

refuge and no protection. If we are in Good, what shall overtake us? What

bring us to misery and confusion? Nor man nor woman, nor poverty nor

sickness, nor heaven nor earth, shall bring us to confusion.

  There is a straight way and a quiet rest.


  Be glad and not sorrowful, all ye who love Truth! For your sorrows shall

pass away, like the mists of the morning.

  AP R I L TW E N T Y-T H I R D.

    DISCIPLE: Teacher of teachers, instruct Thou me.

  Master: Ask,  and  I  will  answer. Disciple: I  have  read  much,  but  am

ignorant  still; I  have  studied  the  doctrines  of  the  schools,  but  have  not

become wise thereby; I know the scriptures by heart, but peace is hidden

from me. Point out to me, O Master! the way of knowledge. Reveal to me the

highway of divine wisdom; lead Thou Thy child into the path of peace.

  Master: The way of knowledge, O Disciple! is by searching the heart; the

highway of wisdom is by the practice of righteousness; and by a sinless life is

found the way of peace.

  Behold where Love Eternal rests concealed!  (The deathless Love that seemed so far away!)

  E’en in the lowly heart; it stands revealed

  To him who lives the sinless life to-day.


  Great  is  the  conquest  which  thou  hast  entered  upon,  even  the  mighty

conquest of thyself; be faithful and thou shalt overcome.

  AP R I L TW E N T Y-F O U R T H.

    DISCIPLE: Lead me, O Master! for my darkness is very great! Will the

darkness lift, O Master? Will trial end in victory, and will there be an end to

my many sorrows?

  Master: When thy heart is pure the darkness will disappear. When thy

mind is freed from passion, thou wilt reach the end of trial, and when the

thought of self-preservation is yielded up, there will be no more cause for

sorrow. Thou art now upon the way of discipline and purification; all my

disciples  must  walk  that  way.  Before  thou  canst  enter  the  white  light  of

knowledge, before thou canst behold the full glory of Truth, all thy impurities

must be purged away, thy delusions all dispelled, and thy mind fortified with

endurance. Relax not thy faith in Truth; forget not that Truth is eternally

supreme; remember that I, the Lord of Truth, am watching over thee.

  Be faithful, and endure, and I will teach thee all things.


  Blessed is he who obeys the Truth, he shall not remain comfortless.

  AP R I L TW E N T Y-F I F T H.

    DISCIPLE: What are the greater and the lesser powers?

  Master: Hear  me  again,  O  Disciple!  Walking  faithfully  the  path  of

discipline and purification, not abandoning it, but submitting to its austerities,

thou  wilt  acquire  the  three  lesser  powers  of  discipleship;  thou  wilt  also

receive the three greater powers. And the greater and the lesser powers will

render thee invincible. Self-control, Self-reliance, and Watchfulness—these

are the three lesser powers. Steadfastness, Patience, Gentleness—these are

the  three  greater  powers.  When  thy  mind  is  well-controlled,  and  in  thy

keeping; when thou reliest upon no external aid, but upon Truth alone; and

when thou art ceaselessly watchful over thy thoughts and actions—then thou

wilt approach the Supreme Light.  Thy darkness will pass away for ever, and joy and light will wait upon thy

footsteps.


  Be strenuous in effort, patient in endurance, strong in resolution.

  AP R I L TW E N T Y-S I X T H.

  BY these four things is the heart defiled— the craving for pleasure, the

clinging to temporal things, the love of self, the lust for personal continuance;

from these four defilements spring all sins and sorrows. Wash thou thy heart;

put away sensual cravings; detach thy mind from the wish for possessions;

abandon self-defence and sell-importance. Thus putting away all cravings,

thou  wilt  attain  to  satisfaction;  detaching  thy  mind  from  the  love  of

perishable things, thou wilt acquire wisdom; abandoning the thought of self,

thou wilt come to peace. He who is pure is free from desire; he does not

crave for sensual excitements; he sets no value on perishable things; he is the

same in riches and poverty, in success or failure, in victory or defeat, in life

or death. His happiness remains, his rest is sure.

  Hold fast to love, and let it shape thy doing.


  Instruct me in the doing which is according to the Eternal, so that I may

be watchful, and fail not.

  AP R I L TW E N T Y-S E V E N T H.

  THE unrighteous man is swayed by his feelings; likes and dislikes are his

masters; prejudices and partialities blind him; desiring and suffering, craving

and  sorrowing,  self-control  he  knows  not,  and  great  is  his  unrest.  The

righteous man is master of his moods; likes and dislikes he has abandoned as

childish things; prejudice and partiality he has put away. Desiring nothing, he

does  not  suffer;  not  craving  enjoyment,  sorrow  does  not  overtake  him;

perfect in self-control, great peace abides with him.

  Do not condemn, resent, or retaliate; do not argue, or become a partisan.

Maintain thy calmness with all sides; be just, and speak the truth. Act in

gentleness, compassion, and charity. Be infinitely patient. Hold fast to love,

and let it shape thy doing. Have goodwill to all without distinction. Think

equally of all, and be disturbed by none.

  Be thoughtful and wise, strong and kind-hearted.  Be watchful, that no thought of self creep in again and stain thee.

  AP R I L TW E N T Y-E I G H T H.

  THINK of thyself as abolished. In all thy doing think of the good of

others and of the world, and not of pleasure or reward to thyself. Thou art no

longer separate and divided from men, thou art one with all. No longer strive

against others for thyself, but sympathise with all. Regard no man as thine

enemy, for thou art the friend of all men. Be at peace with all. Pour out

compassion on all living things, and let boundless charity adorn thy words

and  deeds.  Such  is  the  glad  way  of  Truth; such  is  the  doing  which  is

according  to  the  Eternal.  ruled  with  joy  is  the  right-doer;  he  acts  from

principles which do not change and pass away. He is one with the Eternal,

and has passed beyond unrest. The peace of the righteous man is perfect; it is

not disturbed by change and impermanence. Freed from passion, he is equal-

minded, calm, and does not sorrow; he sees things as they are, and is no more

confused.

  Open thine eyes to the Eternal Light.


    Knowledge is for him who seeks;

  Wisdom crowneth him who strives; Peace in sinless silence speaks: All

things perish, Truth survives.

  AP R I L TW E N T Y-N I N T H.

    INCREASE thy strength and self-reliance; make

  The spectres of thy mind obey thy will;

  See thou command thyself, nor let no mood,

  No subtle passion nor no swift desire

  Hurl thee to baseness; but, shouldst thou be hurled,

  Rise, and regain thy manhood, taking gain

  Of lowliness and wisdom from thy fall.

  Strive ever for the mastery of thy mind,

  And glean some good from every circumstance

  That shall confront thee; make thy store of strength

  Richer for ills encountered and o’ercome.

  Submit to naught but nobleness; rejoice  Like a strong athlete straining for the prize,

  When thy full strength is tried.

  Follow where Virtue leads

  High and still higher;

  Listen where Pureness pleads,

  Quench not her fire.

  Lo! he shall see Reality,

  Who cometh upward, cleansed from all desire.


    Deliverance shall him entrance who strives with sifts and sorrows, tears

and pains, Till he attains.

  AP R I L TH I R T I E T H.

  BE not the slave

  Of lusts and cravings and indulgences,

  Of disappointments, miseries, and griefs,

  Fears, doubts, and lamentations, but control

  Thyself with calmness: master that in thee

  Which masters others, and which heretofore

  Has mastered thee: let not thy passions rule,

  But rule thy passions; subjugate thyself

  Till passion is transmuted into peace,

  And wisdom crown thee; so shalt thou attain

  And, by attaining, know.

  Look thou within. Lo! In the midst of change

  Abides the Changeless; at the heart of strife

  The Perfect Peace reposes. At the root

  Of all the restless striving of the world

  Is passion. Whoso follows passion findeth pain,

  But whoso conquers passion findeth peace.

  I am ignorant, yet strive to know; nor will I cease to strive till I attain.                                        MAY


  Comfort ye! The heights of Blessed Vision ye shall reach.

  MA Y FI R S T.

    EOLAUS: I know that sorrow follows passion; know

  That grief and emptiness, and heartaches wait

  Upon all earthly joys; so am I sad;

  Yet Truth must be, and being, can be found;

  And though I am in sorrow, this I know—

  I shall be glad when I have found the Truth.

  Prophet: There is no gladness like the joy of Truth.

  The pure in heart swim in a sea of bliss

  That evermore nor sorrow knows, nor pain;

  For who can see the Cosmos and be sad?

  To know is to be happy; they rejoice

  Who have attained Perfection; these are they

  Who live, and know, and realise the Truth.

  He findeth Truth who findeth self-control.


  Not in any of the three worlds can the soul find lasting satisfaction, apart

from the realisation of righteousness.

  MA Y SE C O N D.

  EVERY soul, consciously or unconsciously, hungers for righteousness,

and every soul seeks to gratify that hunger in its own particular way, and in

accordance with its own particular state of knowledge. The hunger is one,

and the righteousness is one, but the pathways by which righteousness is

sought are many. They who seek consciously are blessed, and shall shortly

find that final and permanent satisfaction of soul which righteousness alone

can give, for they have come into a knowledge of the true path. They who

seek unconsciously, although for a time they may bathe in a sea of pleasure,

are not blessed, for they are carving out for themselves pathways of suffering,over which they must walk with torn and wounded feet, and the soul will cry

out for its lost heritage— the eternal heritage of the righteous.

  Blessed are they who earnestly and intelligently seek.


    Glorious, radiant, free, detached from the tyranny of self!

  MA Y TH I R D.

  THE journey to the Kingdom may be a long and tedious one, or it may be

short and rapid. It may occupy a minute, or it may take a thousand ages.

Everything  depends  on  the  faith  and  belief  of  the  searcher.  The  majority

cannot  "  enter  in  because  of  their  unbelief  "; for  how  can  men  realise

righteousness when they do not believe in it, nor in the possibility of its

accomplishment? Neither is it necessary to leave the outer world, and one’s

duties therein. Nay, it can only be found through the unselfish performance of

one’s duty. But all who believe, and aspire to achieve, will sooner or later

arrive at victory, if, amid all their worldly duties, they faint not, nor lose sight

of the Ideal Goodness, and continue, with unshaken resolve, to press on to

Perfection."

  The outward life harmonises itself with the inward music.


  The regulation and purification of conduct.

  MA Y FO U R T H.

  THE whole journey from the Kingdom of Strife to the Kingdom of Love

resolves  itself  into  a  process  which  may  be  summed  up  in  the  following

words:—The regulation and purification of conduct. Such a process must, if

assiduously pursued, necessarily lead to perfection. It will also be seen that as

the man obtains the mastery over certain forces within himself, he arrives at a

knowledge of all the laws which operate in the realm of all these forces, and

by watching the ceaseless working of cause and effect within himself, until

he understands it, he then understands it in its universal adjustments in the

body of humanity.

  The process is also one of simplification of the mind, a sifting away of all

but the essential gold in character.

  He  lives  no  longer  for  himself,  he  lives  for  others:  and  so  living,  he

enjoys the highest bliss, the deepest peace.  Apart from the earnest striving to live out the teachings of Jesus there can

be no true life.

  MA Y FI F T H.

  A GOOD man is the flower of humanity, and to daily grow purer, nobler,

more Godlike, by overcoming some selfish tendency, is to be continually

drawing nearer to the Divine Heart. " He that would be My disciple, let him

deny  himself  daily,"  is  a  statement  which  none  can  misunderstand  or

misapply, howsoever he may ignore it. Nowhere in the universe is there any

substitute for Goodness; and until a man has this, he has nothing worthy or

enduring. To the possession of Goodness there is only one way, and that is, to

give up all and everything that is opposed to Goodness. Every selfish desire

must be eradicated; every impure thought must be yielded up; every clinging

to opinion must be sacrificed; and it is in the doing of this that constitutes the

following of Christ.

  That which is above all creeds, beliefs, and opinions is a loving and self-

sacrificing heart.


  To dwell in love always and towards all is to live the true life, is to have

Life itself.

  MA Y SI X T H.

  JESUS  so  lived,  and  all  men  may  so  live,  if  they  will  humbly  and

faithfully carry out His precepts. So long as they refuse to do this, clinging to

their desires, passions, and opinions, they cannot be ranked as His disciples;

they are the disciples of self. " Verily, verily, I say unto you: whosoever

committeth sin is the servant of sin," is the searching declaration of Jesus. Let

men cease to delude themselves with the belief that they can retain their bad

tempers, their lusts, their harsh words and judgments, their personal hatreds,

their petty contentions and darling opinions, and yet have Christ. All that

divides man from man, and man from Goodness, is not of Christ, for Christ is

Love.

  Sin and Christ cannot dwell together, and he who accepts the Christ-life

of pure Goodness ceases from sin.


  When Christ is disputed about, Christ is lost.

  MA Y SE V E N T H.  IT is no less selfish and sinful to cling to opinion than to cling to impure

desire.  knowing  this,  the  good  man  gives  up  himself  unreservedly  to  the

Spirit  of  Love,  and  dwells  in  Love  towards  all,  contending  with  none,

condemning none, hating none, but loving all, seeing behind their opinions,

their creeds, and their sins, into their striving, suffering, and sorrowing hearts.

" He that loveth his life shall lose it." Eternal life belongs to him who win

obediently  relinquish  his  petty,  narrowing,  sin-loving,  strife-producing

personal self, for only by so doing can he enter into the large, beautiful, free,

and  glorious  life  of  abounding  Love.  Herein  is  the  Path  of  Life;  for  the

Straight Gate is the Gate of Goodness.

  The narrow way is the Way of Renunciation, or self- sacrifice.


  A man can learn nothing unless he regards himself as a learner.

  MA Y EI G H T H.

  HOW am I acting towards others?

  " What am I doing for others? "

  " How am I thinking of others? "

  " Are my thoughts of, and acts towards others, prompted by unselfish

love, as I would theirs should be to me; or are they the outcome of personal

dislike, of petty revenge, or of narrow bigotry and condemnation? " as a man,

in  the  sacred  silence  of  his  soul,  asks  himself  these  searching  questions,

applying all his thoughts and acts to the spirit of the primary precept of the

Christ, his understanding will become illuminated, so that he will unerringly

see where he has hitherto failed; and he will see what he has got to do in

rectifying his heart and conduct, and the way in which it is to be done.

  Evil  is  not  worth  resisting.  The  practice  of  the  good  is  supremely

excellent.


  Personal antipathies, however natural they may be to the animal man, can

have no place in the divine life.

  MA Y NI N T H.

    WHILST a man is engaged in resisting evil, he is not only not practising

the good, he is actually involved in the like passion and prejudice which he

condemns in another; and as a direct result of his attitude of mind, he himself

is resisted by others as evil. Resist a man, a party, a religion, a government,as evil, and you yourself will be resisted as evil. He who considers it as a

great  evil  that  he  should  be  persecuted  and  condemned,  let  him  cease  to

persecute  and  condemn.  Let  him  turn  away  from  all  that  he  has  hitherto

regarded as evil, and begin to look for the good. So deep and far-reaching is

this  precept  that  the  practice  of  it  will  take  a  man  far  up  the  heights  of

spiritual knowledge and attainment.

  He who will keep the precepts of Jesus will conquer himself, and will

become divinely illuminated.


    Humanity is essentially divine.

  MA Y TE N T H.

  SO long has man dwelt in the habitations of sin that he has at last come to

regard himself as native to it, and as being cut off from the Divine Source,

which  he  believes  to  be  outside  and  away  from  him.  Man  is  primarily  a

spiritual being, and as such, is of the nature and substance of the Eternal

Spirit, the Unchangeable Reality, which men call God. Goodness, not sin, is

his rightful condition; perfection, not imperfection, is his heritage, and this a

man may enter into and realise now if he will grant the condition, which is

the denial or abandonment of self, that is, of his feverish desires, his proud

will, his egotism and self-seeking—all that which St. Paul calls the " natural

man."

  Jesus, in His divine goodness, knew the human heart, and He knew that it

was good.


  He who would find how good at heart men are, let him throw away all his

ideas and suspicions about the " evil " in others, and find and practise the

good within himself.

  MA Y EL E V E N T H.

  MAN has within him the divine power by which he can rise to the highest

heights of spiritual achievement; by which he can shake off sin and shame

and sorrow, and do the will of the Father, the Supreme Good; by which he

can conquer all the powers of darkness within, and stand radiant and free; by

which he can subdue the world, and scale the lofty pinnacles of God. This

can man, by choice, by resolve, and by his divine strength, accomplish; but

he can only accomplish it in and by obedience; he must choose meekness andlowliness  of  heart;  he  must  abandon  strife  for  peace;  passion  for  purity;

hatred for love; self-seeking for self-sacrifice, and must overcome evil with

good.

  This is the holy way of Truth; this is the safe and abiding salvation; this

is the yoke and burden of the Christ.


  The Gospel of Jesus is a Gospel of living and doing.

  MA Y TW E L F T H.

  THAT Jesus was meek, and lowly, and loving, and compassionate, and

pure is very beautiful, but it is not sufficient; it is necessary that you also

should be meek, and lowly, and loving, and compassionate, and pure. That

Jesus subordinated His own will to the will of the Father, it is inspiring to

know, but it is not sufficient; it is necessary that you, too, should likewise

subordinate your will to that of the overruling Good. The grace and beauty

and  goodness  that  were  in  Jesus  can  be  of  no  value  to  you,  cannot  be

understood by you, unless they are also in you, and they can never be in you

until you practice them, for, apart from doing, the qualities which constitute

Goodness do not, as far as you are concerned, exist.

  Pure Goodness is religion, and outside it there is no religion.


  They are the doers of the Father’s will who shape their conduct to the

Divine precepts.

  MA Y TH I R T E E N T H.

  TO us and to all there is no sufficiency, no blessedness, no peace to be

derived from the goodness of another, not even the goodness of God; not

until  the  goodness  is done by  us,  not  until  it  is,  by  constant  effort,

incorporated into our being, can we know and possess its blessedness and

peace. Therefore, thou who adorest Jesus for His divine qualities, practise

those qualities thyself, and thou too shalt be divine.

  The  teaching  of  Jesus  brings  men  back  to  the  simple  truth  that

righteousness, or right-doing, is entirely a matter of individual conduct, and

not a mystical something apart from a man’s thoughts and actions, and that

each must be righteous for himself; each must be a doer of the word, and it is

a man’s own doing that brings him peace and gladness of heart, not the doing

of another.  It is only the doer of forgiveness who tastes the sweets of forgiveness.


  The Christ is the Spirit of Love.

  MA Y FO U R T E E N T H.

  WHEN Jesus said, " Without Me ye can I do nothing," He spoke not of

His  perishable  form,  but  of  the  Universal  Spirit  of  Love,  of  which  His

conduct was a perfect manifestation; and this utterance of His is the statement

of a simple truth; for the works of men are vain and worthless when they are

done for personal ends, and he himself remains a perishable being, immersed

in  darkness  and  fearing  death,  so  long  as  he  lives  in  his  personal

gratifications. The animal in man can never respond to and know the divine;

only the divine can respond to the divine. The spirit of hatred in man can

never vibrate in unison with the Spirit of Love; Love only can apprehend

Love, and become linked with it. Man is divine; man is of the substance of

Love; this he may realise if he will relinquish the impure, personal elements

which he has hitherto been blindly following, and will fly to the impersonal

Realities of the Christ

  Spirit.

  In this Principle of Love, all knowledge, Intelligence, and Wisdom are

contained.


  Love is not complete until it is lived by man.

  MA Y FI F T E E N T H.

  EVERY precept of Jesus demands the unconditional sacrifice of some

selfish, personal element, before it can be carried out. Man cannot know the

Real whilst he clings to the unreal; he cannot do the work of Truth whilst he

clings  to  error.  Whilst  a  man  cherishes  lust,  hatred,  pride,  vanity,  sell-

indulgence, covetousness, he can do nothing, for the works of all these sinful

elements are unreal and perishable. Only when he takes refuge in the Spirit of

Love within, and becomes patient, gentle, pure, pitiful, and forgiving, does he

the works of Righteousness, and bears the fruits of Life. The vine is not a

vine  without  its  branches,  and  even  then  it  is  not  complete  until  those

branches bear fruit.

  Daily practising love towards all in heart and mind and deed, harbouring

no injurious or impure thoughts, he discovers the imperishable Principles ofhis being.

  Man’s only refuge from sin is sinless Love.


  Before a man can know Love as the abiding Reality within him, he must

utterly  abandon  all  those  human  tendencies  which  frustrate  us  perfect

manifestation.

  MA Y SI X T E E N T H.

  A  MAN  can  only  consciously  ally  himself  to  the  Vine  of  Love  by

deserting all strife, and hatred, and condemnation, and impurity, and pride,

and self-seeking, and by thinking and doing loving deeds. By so doing he

awakens  within  him  the  divine  nature  which  he  has  heretofore  been

crucifying and denying. Every time a man gives way to anger, impatience,

greed, pride, vanity, or any form of personal selfishness, he denies the Christ,

he shuts himself out from Love. And thus only is Christ denied, and not by

refusing to adopt a formulated creed. Christ is only known to him who by

constant striving has converted himself from a sinful to a pure being, who by

noble, moral effort has succeeded in relinquishing that perishable self, which

is the source of all suffering and sorrow and unrest, and has become rational,

gentle, peaceful, loving, and pure.

  Such glorious realisation is the crown of evolution, the supreme aim of

existence.


  As self is the root cause of all strife and suffering, so Love is the root

cause of all peace and bliss.

  MA Y SE V E N T E E N T H.

  THOSE who are at rest in the Kingdom do not look for happiness in any

outward possession. They see that all such possessions are mere transient

effects that come when they are required, and, after their purpose is served,

pass away. They never think of these things (money, clothing, food, etc.)

except as mere accessories and effects of the true Life. They are, therefore,

freed  from  all  anxiety  and  trouble,  and,  resting  in  Love,  they  are  the

embodiment  of  Happiness.  Standing  upon  the  imperishable  Principles  of

Purity, Compassion, Wisdom, and Love, they are immortal, and know they

are immortal; they are one with God, the Supreme Good, and know they are

one with God. Seeing the realities of things, they can find no room anywherefor condemnation.

  All men are essentially divine, though unaware of their divine nature.


  All so-called evil is seen to be rooted in ignorance.

  MA Y EI G H T E E N T H.

  LET it not be supposed that the children of the Kingdom live in ease and

indolence (these two sins are the first that have to be eradicated when the

search for the Kingdom is entered upon); they live in a peaceful activity; in

fact, they only truly live, for the life of self, with its train of worries, griefs,

and  fears,  is  not real life.  They  perform  all  their  duties  with  the  most

scrupulous diligence, apart from thoughts of self, and employ all their means,

as well as powers and faculties, which are greatly intensified, in building up

the  Kingdom  of  Righteousness  in  the  hearts  of  others,  and  in  the  world

around them. This is their work, first by example, then by precept. They

sorrow  no  more,  but  live  in  perpetual  gladness,  for,  though  they  see  the

suffering in the world, they also see the final Bliss and the Eternal Refuge.

    Whosoever is ready may come now.


  Heaven is not a speculative thing beyond the tomb but a real, ever-present

Heaven in the heart.

  MA Y NI N E T E E N T H.

  THE only salvation recognised and taught by Jesus is salvation from sin,

and the effects of sin, here and now; and this must be effected by utterly

abandoning sin, which, having done, the Kingdom of God is realised in the

heart as a state of perfect knowledge, perfect blessedness, perfect peace.

  " Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God." A

man must become a new creature, and how can he become new except by

utterly abandoning the old? That man’s last state is worse than his first who

imagines  that,  though  still  continuing  to  cling  to  his  old  temper,  his  old

opinionativeness, his old vanity, his old selfishness, he is constituted a new

creature in some mysterious and unexplainable way by the adoption of some

particular theology or religious formula.

  Heaven is where Love rules, and where peace is never absent.


  To the faithful, humble, and true will be revealed the sublime Vision ofthe Perfect One.

  MA Y TW E N T I E T H.

  GOOD news indeed is that message of Jesus which reveals to man His

divine possibilities; which says in substance to sin-stricken humanity, "Take

up thy bed and walk; which tells man that he need no longer remain the

creature  of  darkness  and  ignorance  and  sin,  if  he  will  but  believe  in

Goodness, and will watch and strive and conquer until he has actualised in

his life the Goodness that is sinless. And in thus believing and overcoming,

man has not only the guide of that Perfect Rule which Jesus has embodied in

His precepts, he has also the inward Guide, the Spirit of Truth in his own

heart, " The Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world," which,

as he follows it, will infallibly witness to the divine origin of those precepts.

    Realise the perfect Goodness of the Eternal Christ.


  The  Kingdom  of  Heaven  is  perfect  trust,  perfect  knowledge,  perfect

peace.

  MA Y TW E N T Y-F I R S T.

  THE children of the Kingdom are known by their life. They manliest the

fruits of the Spirit—" love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness,

faithfulness, meekness, temperance, self-control "—under all circumstances

and vicissitudes. They are entirely free from anger, fear, suspicion, jealousy,

caprice, anxiety, and grief. Living in the Righteousness of God, they manifest

qualities which are the very reverse of those which obtain in the world, and

which are regarded by the world as foolish. They demand no rights; they do

not defend themselves; do not retaliate; do good to those who attempt to

injure them; manifest the same gentle spirit towards those who oppose and

attack them, as towards those who agree with them; do not pass judgment on

others; condemn no man and no system, and live at peace with all.

  That Kingdom is in the heart of every man and woman.


  Find the Kingdom by daily effort and patient work.

  MA Y TW E N T Y-S E C O N D.

  THE Temple of Righteousness is built, and its four walls are the four

Principles—Purity, Wisdom, Compassion, Love. Peace is its roof, its floor is

Steadfastness, its entrance door is Selfless Duty, its atmosphere is Inspiration,and its music is the Joy of the perfect. It cannot be shaken, and, being eternal

and indestructible, there is no more need to seek protection in taking thought

for the things of the morrow. And the Kingdom of Heaven being established

in  the  heart,  the  obtaining  of  the  material  necessities  of  life  is  no  more

considered, for, having found the Highest, all these things are added as effect

to cause, the struggle for existence has ceased, and the spiritual, mental, and

material needs are daily supplied from the Universal Abundance.

  Pay the price . . . the unconditional abandonment of self.


  All things are possible now, and only now.

  MA Y TW E N T Y-T H I R D.

  NOW is the reality in which time is contained. It is more and greater than

time; it is an ever-present reality. It knows neither past nor future, and is

eternally  potent  and  substantial  every  minute,  every  day,  every  year  is  a

dream  as  soon  as  it  has  passed,  and  exists  only  as  an  imperfect  and

unsubstantial picture in the memory, if it be not entirely obliterated.

  Past  and  future  are  dreams; now is a  reality.  All  things  are  now;  all

power, all possibility, all action is now. Not to act and accomplish now is not

to act and accomplish at all. To live in thoughts of what you might have done,

or in dreams of what you mean to do, this is folly; but to put away regret, to

anchor anticipation, and to do and to work now, this is wisdom.

  Man has all power now.


  Cease to tread every byway that tempts thy soul into the shadow-land.

  MA Y TW E N T Y-F O U R T H.

  MAN has all power now; but not knowing this, he says, " I will be perfect

next year, or, in so many years, or in so many lives." The dwellers in the

Kingdom of God, who live only in the now, say, I am perfect now, and

refraining from all sin now, and ceaselessly guarding all the portals of the

mind, not looking to the past nor to the future, nor turning to the left or right,

they remain eternally holy and blessed. " Now is the accepted time, now is

the day of salvation." Say to yourself, " I will live in my Ideal now; I will be

my Ideal now; and all that tempts me away from my Ideal I will not listen to;

I will listen only to the voice of my Ideal." Thus resolving, and thus doing,

you shall not depart from the Highest, and shall eternally manifest the Truth.  Manifest thy native and divine strength now.


  Be resolute. Be of single purpose. Renew your resolution daily.

  MA Y TW E N T Y-F I F T H.

  IN  the  hour  of  temptation  do  not  depart  from  the  right  path.  Avoid

excitement. When passions are aroused, restrain and subdue them. When the

mind would wander, bring it back to rest on higher things. Do not think—" I

can get Truth from the Teacher, or from the books." You can acquire Truth

only  by  practice.  The  teacher  and  the  books  can  do  no  more  than  give

instructions; and you must apply them. Those only who practise faithfully the

rules and lessons given, and rely entirely upon their own efforts, will become

enlightened. The Truth must be earned. Do not be led away by phenomenal

appearances, or seek communications with spirits, or the dead; but attain to

virtue, wisdom, and knowledge of the Supreme Law by the practice of Truth.

Trust the Teacher; trust the Law; trust the path of Righteousness.

  Put away all wavering and doubt, and practise the lessons of wisdom with

unlimited faith.


  Avoid exaggerations. The Truth is sufficient.

  MA Y TW E N T Y-S I X T H.

  SPEAK only words which are truthful and sincere. Do not deceive either

by word, look, or gesture. Avoid slander as you would a deadly snake, lest

you be caught in its toils. He who speaks evil of another cannot find the way

of  peace.  Put  away  all  dissipations  of  idle  gossip.  Do  not  talk  about  the

private  affairs  of  others,  or  discuss  the  ways  of  Society,  or  criticise  the

eminent.  Do  not  recriminate,  or  accuse  others  of  offences,  but  meet  all

offences with blameless conduct. Do not condemn those who are not walking

in the righteous path, but protect them with compassion, walking the path

yourself. Quench the flame of anger with the pure water of Truth. Be modest

in  your  words,  and  do  not  utter,  or  participate  in,  coarse,  frivolous,  or

unseemly jests. Gravity and reverence are marks of purity and wisdom.

  Do not dispute about Truth, but live it.


  Abstinence, sobriety, and self-control are good.

  MA Y TW E N T Y-S E V E N T H.  DO your duty with the utmost faithfulness, putting away all thought of

reward. Let no thought of pleasure or self entice you from your duty. Do not

interfere with the duties of others. Be upright in all things. Under the most

severe trial, though your happiness and life should seem to be at stake, do not

swerve from the right. The man of unconquerable integrity is invincible; he

cannot be confounded, and he escapes from the painful mazes of doubt and

bewilderment. If one should abuse or accuse, or speak ill of you, remain

silent and self-controlled, striving to understand that the wrong-doer cannot

injure you unless you retaliate, and allow yourself to be carried away by the

same  wrong  condition  of  mind.  Strive,  also,  to  meet  the  evil-doer  with

compassion, seeing how he is injuring himself.

  The pure-minded cannot think, " I have been injured by another." They

know no enemy but self.


  Let your charity increase and extend till self is swallowed up in kindness.

  MA Y TW E N T Y-E I G H T H.

  BEAR no ill-will. Subdue anger and overcome hatred. Think of all, and

act towards all, with the same unalterable kindness and compassion. Do not,

under the severest trial, give way to bitterness, or words of resentment; but

meet anger with calmness, mockery with patience, and hatred with love. Do

not be a partisan, but be a peacemaker. Do not increase division between man

and man, or promote strife by taking sides with one party against another, but

give equal justice, equal love, equal goodwill to all. Do not disparage other

teachers, other religions, or other schools of thought. Do not set up barriers

between  rich  and  poor,  employer  and  employed,  governor  and  governed,

master and servant, but be equal-minded towards all, perceiving their several

duties.  By  constantly  controlling  the  mind,  subduing  bitterness  and

resentment, and striving to acquire a steadfast kindness, the spirit of goodwill

will at last be born.

  Be strong, energetic, steadfast.


  Be right-minded, intelligent, and clear-seeing.

  MA Y TW E N T Y-N I N T H.

  BRING reason to bear on all things. Test all things. Be eager to know and

understand. Be logical in thought. Be consistent in word and action. Bring thesearchlight  of  knowledge  to  bear  on  your  condition  of  mind,  in  order  to

simplify it and remove its errors. Question yourself with searching scrutiny.

Let go of belief, hearsay, and speculation, and lay hold on knowledge. He

who stands upon knowledge acquired by practice is filled with a sublime yet

lowly confidence, and is able to speak the word of Truth with power. Master

the task of discrimination. Learn to distinguish between good and evil; to

perceive the facts of life, and understand them in their relation one to another.

Awake the mind to see the orderly sequence of cause and effect in all things,

both  mental  and  material.  Thus  will  be  revealed  the  worthlessness  of

pleasure-seeking and sin, and the glory and gladness of a life of sublime

virtue and spotless purity.

  Truth is. There is no chaos.


  Train your mind to grasp the Great Law of Causation which is unfailing

justice.

  MA Y TH I R T I E T H.

  THEN you will see, not with fleshly eyes, but with the pure and single

eye of Truth. You will then understand your nature perceiving how, as a

mental being, you have evolved through countless ages of experience, how

you have risen, through an unbroken line of lives, from low to high, and from

high to higher still—how the ever-changing tendencies of the mind have been

built up by thought and action—how your deeds have made you what you

are. Thus, understanding your own nature, you will understand the nature of

all beings, and will dwell always in compassion. You will understand the

Great Law, not only universally and in the abstract, but also in its particular

application to individuals. Then self will be ended. It will be dispersed like a

cloud, and Truth will be all in all.

  Find no room for hatred, no room for self, no room for sorrow.


  Be self-reliant, but let thy self-reliance be saintly and not selfish.

  MA Y TH I R T Y-F I R S T.

  FOLLY and wisdom, weakness and strength, are within a man, and not in

any external thing, neither do they spring from any external cause. A man

cannot be strong for another, he can only be strong for himself; he cannot

overcome for another, he can only overcome for himself. You may learn ofanother, but you must accomplish for yourself. Put away all external props,

and rely upon the Truth within you. A creed will not bear a man up in the

hour  of  temptation;  he  must  possess  the  inward  Knowledge  which  slays

temptation. A speculative philosophy will prove a shadowy thing in the time

of calamity; a man must have the inward Wisdom which puts an end to grief.

The Unfailing Wisdom is found only by constant practice in pure thinking

and well-doing; by harmonising one’s mind and heart to those things which

are beautiful, lovable, and true.

  Goodness is the aim of all religions.                                        JUNE


  The  incentive  to  self-sacrificing  labour  does  not  reside  in  any  theory

about the universe, but in the spirit of love and compassion.

  JU N E FI R S T.

  THE spirit of love does not decrease when a man realises that perfect

justice obtains in the spiritual government of the world; on the other hand, it

is increased and intensified, for he knows that men suiter because they do not

understand, because they err in ignorance. " The comfortably conditioned "

are frequently involved in greater suffering than the poor, and, like others, are

garnering their own mixed harvest of happiness and suffering. This teaching

of Absolute Justice is not more encouraging for the rich than for the poor, for

while it tells the rich, who are selfish and oppressive, or who misuse their

wealth, that they must reap the results of all their actions, it also tells the

suffering  and  oppressed  that,  as  they  are  now  reaping  what  they  have

formerly  sown,  they  may,  and  surely  will,  by  sowing  the  good  seeds  of

purity, love, and peace, shortly also reap a harvest of good, and so rise above

their present woes.

  The  painful  consequences  of  all  self-seeking  must be  met  and  passed

through.


  Man is the maker of happiness and misery.

  JU N E SE C O N D.

    FIXED attitudes of mind determine courses of conduct, and from courses

of conduct come those reactions caned happinesses and unhappinesses. This

being so, it follows that, to alter the reactive condition, one must alter the

active thought. To exchange misery for happiness it is necessary to reverse

the fixed attitude of mind and habitual course of conduct which is the cause

of misery, and the reverse effect will appear in the mind and life. A man has

no  power  to  be  happy  while  thinking  and  acting  selfishly;  he  cannot  be

unhappy while thinking and acting unselfishly. Wheresoever the cause is,

there the effect will appear. Man cannot abrogate effects, but he can alter

causes. He can purify his nature; he can remould his character. There is greatpower in self-conquest; there is great joy in transforming oneself.

  Each man is circumscribed by his own thoughts.


  Men live in spheres low or high according to the nature of their thoughts.

  JU N E TH I R D.

  CONSIDER the man whose mind is suspicious, covetous, envious. How

small and mean and drear everything appears to him. Having no grandeur in

himself,  he  sees  no  grandeur  anywhere,  being  ignoble  himself,  he  is

incapable of seeing nobility in any being; selfish as he himself is, he sees in

the most exalted acts of unselfishness only motives that are mean and base.

    Consider  again  the  man  whose  mind  is  unsuspecting,  generous,

magnanimous. How wondrous and beautiful is his world. He sees men as

true, and to him they are true. In his presence the meanest forget their nature,

and for the moment become like himself, getting a glimpse, albeit confused,

in that temporary upliftment of a higher order of things, of an immeasurably

nobler and happier life.

  Refrain from harbouring thoughts that are dark and hateful, and cherish

thoughts that are bright and beautiful.


  The small-minded man and the large-hearted man live in two different

worlds though they be neighbours.

  JU N E FO U R T H.

  THE kingdom of heaven is not taken by I violence, but he who conforms

to its principles receives the password. The ruffian moves in a society of

ruffians; the saint is one of an elect brotherhood whose communion is divine

music. All men are mirrors reflecting according to their own surface. All

men, looking at the world of men and things, are looking into a mirror which

gives back their own reflection.

  Each man moves in the limited or expansive circle of his own thoughts,

and all outside that circle is non-existent to him. He only knows that which he

has become. The narrower the boundary, the more convinced is the man that

there is no further limit, no other circle. The lesser cannot contain the greater,

and  he  has  no  means  of  apprehending  the  larger  minds;  such  knowledge

comes only by growth.

  Men, like schoolboys, find themselves in standards or classes to whichtheir ignorance or knowledge entitles them.


  The world of things is the other half of the world of thoughts.

  JU N E FI F T H.

  THE inner informs the outer. The greater embraces the lesser. Matter is

the counterpart of mind. Events are streams of thoughts. Circumstances are

combinations of thought, and the outer conditions and actions of others in

which each man is involved, are intimately related to his own mental needs

and development. Man is a part of his surroundings. He is not separate from

his  fellows,  but  is  bound  closely  to  them  by  the  peculiar  intimacy  and

interaction of deeds, and by those fundamental laws of thought which are the

roots of human society.

  One cannot alter external things to suit his passing whims and wishes, but

he can set aside his whims and wishes; he can so alter his attitude of mind

towards externals, that they will assume a different aspect. He cannot mould

the  actions  of  others  towards  him,  but  he  can  rightly  fashion  his  actions

towards them.

    Things follow thoughts. Alter your thoughts, and things will receive a

new adjustment.


  The  perfecting  of  one’s  own  deeds  is  man’s  highest  duty  and  most

sublime accomplishment.

  JU N E SI X T H.

  THE cause of your bondage as of your deliverance is within. The injury

that comes to you through others is the rebound of your own deed, the reflex

of your own mental attitude. They are the instruments, you are the cause.

Destiny is ripened fruits. The fruit of life, both bitter and sweet, is received

by each man in just measure. The righteous man is free. None can injure him;

none can destroy him; none can rob him of his peace. His attitude towards

men, born of understanding, disarms their power to wound him. Any injury

which they may try to inflict rebounds upon themselves to their own hurt,

leaving him unharmed and untouched. The good that goes from him is his

perennial  fount  of  happiness,  his  eternal  source  of  strength.  Its  root  is

serenity, its flower is joy.

  External things and deeds are powerless to injure you.  The man is the all-important factor.

  JU N E SE V E N T H.

  A MAN imagines he could do great things if he were not hampered by

circumstances—by want of money, want of time, want of influence, and want

of freedom from family ties. In reality the man is not hindered by these things

at all. He, in his mind, ascribes to them a power which they do not possess,

and he submits, not to them, but to his opinions about them, that is, to a weak

element in his nature. The real "want" that hampers him is the want of the

right attitude of mind. When he regards his circumstances as spurs to his

resources, when he sees that his so-called drawbacks are the very steps up

which he is to mount successfully to his achievement, then his necessity gives

birth to invention, and the " hindrances " are transformed into aids.

  He who complains of his circumstances has not yet become a man.


  Nothing can prevent us from accomplishing the aims of our life.

  JU N E EI G H T H.

  MAN’S power subsists in discrimination and choice Man does not create

one jot of the universal conditions or laws; they are the essential principles of

things, and are neither made nor unmade. He discovers, not makes, them.

Ignorance of them is at the root of the world’s pain. To defy them is folly and

bondage. Who is the freer man, the thief who denes the laws of his country,

or the honest citizen who obeys them? Who, again, is the freer man, the fool

who thinks he can live as he likes, or the wise man who chooses to do only

that which is right?

  Man is, in the nature of things, a being of habit, and this he cannot alter;

but he can alter his habits. He cannot alter the law of his nature, but he can

adapt his nature to the law.

  He is the good man whose habits of thought and action are good.


  He becomes the master of the lower by enlisting in the service of the

higher.

  JU N E NI N T H.

  MAN repeats the same thoughts, the same actions, the same experiences

over and over again, until they are incorporated with his being, until they arebuilt into his character as part of himself. Evolution is mental accumulation.

Man to-day is the result of millions of repetitious thoughts and acts. He is not

ready-made,  he  becomes,  and  is  still  becoming.  His  character  is  pre-

determined by his own choice. The thought, the act, which he chooses, that,

by habit, he becomes.

  Thus  each  man  is  an  accumulation  of  thoughts  and  deeds.  The

characteristics which he manifests instinctively and without effort are lines of

thought and action become, by long repetition, automatic; for it is the nature

of habit to become, at last, unconscious, to repeat, as it were, itself without

any apparent choice or effort on the part of its possessor; and in due time it

takes such complete possession of the individual as to appear to render his

will powerless to counteract it.

  Habit is repetition. Faculty is fixed habit.


  By thoughts man binds himself.

  JU N E TE N T H.

  IT is true that man is the instrument of mental forces—or to be more

accurate, he is those forces—but they are not blind, and he can direct them

into new channels. In a word, he can take himself in hand and reconstruct his

habits; for though it is also true that he is born with a given character, that

character is the product of numberless lives during which it has been slowly

built up by choice and effort, and in this life it will be considerably modified

by new experiences.

  No matter how apparently helpless a man has become under the tyranny

of a bad habit, or a bad characteristic—and they are essentially the same—he

can, so long as sanity remains, break away from it and become free.

  A changed attitude of mind changes the character, the habits, the life.


  The body is the image of the mind.

  JU N E EL E V E N T H.

  ONE who suffers in body will not necessarily at once be cured when he

begins to fashion his mind on moral and harmonious principles; indeed, for a

time, while the body is bringing to a crisis, and throwing off the effects of

former inharmonies, the morbid condition may appear to be intensified. As a

man  does  not  gain  perfect  peace  immediately  he  enters  upon  the  path  of