righteousness,  but  must,  except  in  rare  instances,  pass  through  a  painful

period of adjustment, neither does he, with the same rare exception, at once

acquire  perfect  health.  Time  is  required  for  bodily  as  well  as  mental

readjustment, and even if health is not reached, it will be approached. If the

mind  be  made  robust,  the  bodily  condition  will  take  a  secondary  and

subordinate place, and will cease to have that primary importance which so

many give to it.

  Mental harmony, or moral wholeness, makes for bodily health.


  Reach out into a comprehension of the Infinite.

  JU N E TW E L F T H.

    WHILST  vainly  imagining  that  the  pleasures  of  earth  are  real  and

satisfying  pain  and  sorrow  continually  remind  man  of  their  unreal  and

unsatisfying nature. Ever striving to believe that complete satisfaction is to be

found in material things, he is conscious of an inward and persistent revolt

against  this  belief,  which  revolt  is  at  once  a  refutation  of  his  essential

mortality, and an inherent and imperishable proof that only in the immortal,

the eternal, the infinite, can he find abiding satisfaction and unbroken peace.

  Man is essentially and spiritually divine and eternal, and, immersed in

mortality and troubled unrest, he is striving to enter into a consciousness of

his real nature.

  The common ground of faith—the root and spring of all religion—the

heart of Love!


  The restful Reality of the Eternal Heart.

  JU N E TH I R T E E N T H.

  THE spirit of man is inseparable from I the Infinite, and can be satisfied

with nothing short of the Infinite, and the burden of pain will continue to

weigh upon man’s heart, and the shadows of sorrow to darken his pathway,

until, ceasing from wanderings in the dream-world of matter, he comes back

to his home in the reality of the Eternal.

  As the smallest drop of water detached from the ocean contains all the

qualities of the ocean, so man, detached in consciousness from the Infinite,

contains within himself its likeness; and as the drop of water must, by the law

of nature, ultimately find its way back to the ocean and lose itself in its silentdepths, so must man, by the unfailing law of his nature, at last return to his

source, and lose himself in the heart of the Infinite.

  To become one with the Infinite is the goal of man.


  Enter  into  perfect  harmony  with  the  Eternal  Law,  which  is  Wisdom,

Love, and Peace.

  JU N E FO U R T E E N T H.

  THIS divine state is, and must ever be, incomprehensible to the merely

personal. Personality, separateness, selfishness, are one and the same, and are

the antithesis of wisdom and divinity. By the unqualified surrender of the

personality,  separateness  and  selfishness  cease,  and  man  enters  into  the

possession of his divine heritage of immortality and infinity.

  Such surrender of the personality is regarded by the worldly and selfish

mind as the most grievous of all calamities, the most irreparable loss, yet it is

the one supreme and incomparable blessing, the only real and lasting gain.

The mind unenlightened upon the inner laws of being and upon the nature

and destiny of its own life clings to transient appearances, things which have

in them no enduring substantiality, and so clinging, perishes, for the time

being, amid the shattered wreckage of its own illusions.

  Love is universal, supreme, all-sufficing. This is the realisation of selfless

love.


  When a man s soul is clouded with selfishness in any or every form, he

loses the power of spiritual discrimination, and confuses the temporal with

the eternal.

  JU N E FI F T E E N T H.

  MEN cling to and gratify the flesh as though it were going to last for

ever,  and  though  they  try  to  forget  the  nearness  and  inevitably  of  its

dissolution, the dread of death and of the loss of all that they cling to clouds

their happiest hours, and the chilling shadow of their own selfishness follows

them like a remorseless

  And  with  the  accumulation  of  temporal  comforts  and  luxuries,  the

divinity  within  men  is  drugged,  and  they  sink  deeper  and  deeper  into

materiality, into the perishable life of the senses; and where there is sufficient

intellect, theories concerning the immortality of the flesh come to be regardedas infallible truths.

  The  perishable  in  the  universe  can  never  become  permanent;  the

permanent can never pass away.


  Man cannot immortalise the flesh.

  JU N E SI X T E E N T H.

  ALL  nature  in  its  myriad  forms  of  life  is  changeable,  impermanent,

unenduring. Only the informing Principle of nature endures. Nature is many,

and is marked by separation. The informing Principle is one, and is marked

by unity. By overcoming the senses and the selfishness within, which is the

overcoming of nature, man emerges from the chrysalis of the personal and

illusory,  and  wings  himself  into  the  glorious  light  of  the  impersonal,  the

region of Truth, out of which all perishable forms come.

  Let  men,  therefore,  practise  self-denial;  let  them  conquer  their  animal

inclinations; let them refuse to be enslaved by luxury and pleasure; let them

practise virtue, and grow daily into higher and ever higher virtue, until at last

they grow into the Divine.

  Only by realising the God state of consciousness does man enter into

immortality.


  This only is true service to forget oneself in love towards all.

  JU N E SE V E N T E E N T H.

  WHOEVER fights ceaselessly against his own selfishness, and strives to

supplant it with all-embracing love, is a saint, whether he live in a cottage or

in  the  midst  of  riches  and  influence;  or  whether  he  preaches  or  remains

obscure.

  To the worldling, who is beginning to aspire towards higher things, the

saint, such as a sweet St. Francis of Assisi, or a conquering St. Anthony, is a

glorious and inspiring spectacle; to the saint, an equally enrapturing sight is

that of the sage, sitting serene and holy, the conqueror of sin and sorrow, no

more tormented by regret and remorse, and whom even temptation can never

reach; and yet even the sage is drawn on by a still more glorious vision, that

of the Saviour actively manifesting His knowledge in selfless works, and

rendering  His  divinity  more  potent  for  good  by  sinking  Himself  in  the

throbbing, sorrowing heart of mankind.  Only the work that is impersonal can live.


  Where duties, howsoever humble, are done without self-interest, and with

joyful sacrifice, there is true service and enduring work.

  JU N E EI G H T E E N T H.

  IT is given to the world to learn one great and divine lesson—-the lesson

of absolute unselfishness. The saints, sages, and saviours of all time are they

who have submitted themselves to this task, and have learned and lived it. All

the scriptures of the world are framed to teach this one lesson, all the great

teachers reiterate it. It is too simple for the world which, scorning it, stumbles

along in the complex ways of selfishness.

  To search for this righteousness is to walk the Way of Truth and Peace,

and he who enters this Way will soon perceive that Immortality which is

independent of birth and death, and will realise that in the divine economy of

the universe the humblest effort is not lost. The world will not have finished

its long journey until every soul has entered into the blissful realisation of its

own divinity.

  A pure heart is the end of all religion and the beginning of divinity.


  In the external universe there is ceaseless turmoil, change, and unrest; at

the  heart  of  all  things  there  is  undisturbed  repose;  in  this  deep  silence

dwelleth the Eternal.

  JU N E NI N E T E E N T H.

  AS there are depths in the ocean which the fiercest storm cannot reach, so

there are silent, holy depths in the heart of man which the storms of sin and

sorrow can never disturb. To reach this silence and to live consciously in it is

peace.

  Discord is rife in the outward world, but unbroken harmony holds sway at

the  heart  of  the  universe.  The  human  soul  reaches  blindly  toward  the

harmony of the sinless state, and to reach this state and to live consciously in

it is peace. Come away, for a while, from external things, from the pleasure

of the senses, from the arguments of the intellect, from the noise and the

excitements of the world, and withdraw yourself into the inmost chamber of

your  heart,  and  there,  free  from  the  sacrilegious  intrusion  of  all  selfish

desires, you will find a holy calm, a blissful repose; the faultless eye of Truthwill open within you, and you will see things as they really are.

  Become as little children.


  Hatred  severs  human  lives,  fosters  persecution,  and  hurls  nations  into

ruthless war.

  JU N E TW E N T I E T H.

  MEN cry peace! peace! where there is no peace, but, on the contrary,

discord, disquietude, and strife. Apart from that wisdom which is inseparable

from self-renunciation, there can be no real and abiding peace.

  The  peace  which  results  from  social  comfort,  passing  gratification,  or

worldly victory is transitory in its nature, and is burnt up in the heat of fiery

trial. Only the Peace of Heaven endures through all trial, and only the selfless

heart can know the Peace of Heaven.

    Holiness alone is undying peace. Self-control leads to it, and the ever-

increasing Light of Wisdom guides the pilgrim on his way. It is partaken of in

a measure as soon as the path of virtue is entered upon, but it is only realised

in its fullness when self disappears in the consummation of a stainless life.

  This inward peace, this silence, this harmony, this love is the Kingdom of

Heaven.


    Realise the Light that never fades,

  JU N E TW E N T Y-F I R S T.

  IF,  O  reader!  you  would  realise  the  Joy  that  never  ends,  and  the

tranquillity that cannot be disturbed; if you would leave behind for ever your

sins,  your  sorrow,  your  anxieties,  and  perplexities;  if,  I  say,  you  would

partake of this salvation, this supremely glorious Life, then conquer yourself.

Bring every thought, every impulse, every desire into perfect obedience to the

divine power resident within you. There is no other way to peace but this; and

if you refuse to walk it, your much praying and your strict adherence to ritual

will be fruitless and unavailing, and neither gods nor angels can help you.

Only to him that overcometh is given the white stone of the regenerate life,

on which is written the New and Ineffable Name.

  The holy place within you is your real and eternal self: it is the divine

within you.  Spiritual  Principles  can  only  be  acquired  after  long  discipline  in  the

pursuit and practice of Virtue.

  JU N E TW E N T Y-SE C O N D.

  HE schoolmaster never attempts to teach his pupils the abstract principles

of  mathematics  at  the  commencement;  he  knows  that  by  such  a  method

teaching would be vain, and learning impossible. He first places before them

a very simple sum, and, having explained it, leaves them to do it. When, after

repeated failures and ever-renewed effort, they have succeeded in doing it

correctly, a more difficult task is set them, and then another and another; and

not  until  the  pupils  have,  through  many  years  of  diligent  application,

mastered all the lessons in arithmetic does he attempt to unfold to them the

underlying mathematical principles.

  Thus practice ever precedes knowledge even in the ordinary things of the

world, and in spiritual things, in the living of the higher life, this law is rigid

in its exactions.


  Truth can only be arrived at by daily and hourly doing the lessons of

Virtue.

  JU N E TW E N T Y-T H I R D.

  IN a properly governed household the child is first taught to be obedient,

and to conduct itself properly under all circumstances. The child is not even

told why it must do this, but is commanded to do it, and only after it has so

far succeeded in doing what is right and proper is it told why it should do it.

No father would attempt to teach his child the principles of ethics before

exacting from it the practice of filial duty and social virtue.

  Virtue can only be known by doing, and the knowledge of Truth can only

be  arrived  at  by  perfecting  oneself  in  the  practice  of  Virtue;  and  to  be

complete in the practice and acquisition of Virtue is to be complete in the

knowledge of Truth.

    Undaunted by failure, and made stronger by difficulties.


  Learn  the  lessons  of  Virtue,  and  thus  build  up  in  the  strength  of

knowledge, destroying ignorance and the ills of life.

  JU N E TW E N T Y-F O U R T H.

  WHERE Love is, God is, and where Goodness lives  There Christ abides; and he who daily strives

    ’Gainst self and selfishness, shaping his mind

  For Truth and Purity, shall surely find

  The Master’s presence in his inmost heart.

  God shall be one with him (and not apart)

  Who overcomes himself, and makes his life

  Godlike and holy; banishing all strife

  Far from him; letting hate and anger die,

  And greed and pride and fleshly lusts that lie

  To God and Goodness: great shall be his peace,

  Happy and everlasting his release

  From pain and sorrow who doth conquer sin.

  To the pure heart comes God and dwells therein:

  He only who the Path of Good hath trod

  Hath found the Life that’s " hid with Christ in God."

  "  Make  pure  thy  heart,  and  thou  wilt  make  thy  life  Rich,  sweet,  and

beautiful, unmarred by strife."


  Stimulate the mind to watchfulness and reflection.

  JU N E TW E N T Y-F I F T H.

  IT will be seen that the first step in the discipline of the mind is the over-

coming  of  indolence.  This  is  the  easiest  step,  and  until  it  is  perfectly

accomplished  the  other  steps  cannot  be  taken.  The  clinging  to  indolence

constitutes  a  complete  barrier  to  the  Path  of  Truth.  Indolence  consists  in

giving the body more ease and sleep than it requires, in procrastinating, and

in  shirking  and  neglecting  those  things  which  should  receive  immediate

attention. This condition of laziness must be overcome by rousing up the

body  at  an  early  hour,  giving  it  just  the  amount  of  sleep  it  requires  for

complete recuperation, and by doing, promptly and vigorously, every task

and duty, no matter how small, as it comes along.

  The heart must be purified of sensual and gustatory lust.


  A listless mind could not achieve any kind of success.  JU N E TW E N T Y-S I X T H.

  SUCCESS is rooted in a subtle mental brooding along a given line. It

subsists in an individual characteristic, or combination of characteristics, and

not in a particular circumstance, or set of circumstances. The circumstances

appear, it is true, and form part of the success, but these would be useless

without the mind that can penetrate and utilise them.

  At the root of every success there is some form of well-husbanded and

well-directed energy. There has been some persistent brooding of the mind

upon a project. Success is like a flower: it may appear more or less suddenly,

but it is the finished product of a long series of efforts, of preparatory stages.

Men  see  the  success,  but  the  preparation  for  it,  the  innumerable  mental

processes that led up to it, are hidden from them.

  Without exertion nothing can be accomplished.


  In  order  to  achieve  the  higher  forms  of  success,  a  man  must  give  up

anxiety, hurry, and fussiness.

  JU N E TW E N T Y-S E V E N T H.

    PRESSING forward persistently along a given way is sure to lead to a

destination that is definitely associated with that way. Frequent going aside,

or turning back, will render effort fruitless; no destination will he reached;

success will remain afar off.

  Effort,  and  the  more  effort,  and  then  effort  again,  is  the  keynote  of

success. As the simple old saying has it:

  " If at first you don’t succeed, Try again." All the precepts of successful

business men are precepts of doing; all the precepts of the wise teachers are

precepts of doing. To cease to do is to cease to be of any use in the economy

of life. Doing means effort, exertion.

    Transmute the energy that wears and breaks down into that deeper and

less obtrusive kind that preserves and builds up.


  The silent, calm people will manifest a more enduring form of success

than those who are noisy and restless.

  JU N E TW E N T Y-E I G H T H.

  WHEN a man exchanges coppers for silver, and silver for gold, he doesnot thereby give up the use of money; he exchanges a heavy mass for one that

is lighter and smaller but more valuable. So when a man exchanges hurry for

deliberation, and deliberation for calmness, he does not give up effort, he

merely exchanges a diffusive and more or less ineffective energy for a more

highly concentrated, effective, and valuable form.

  Yet even the crudest forms of effort are necessary at first, for without

them to begin with the higher forms could not be acquired. The child must

crawl before it can walk; it must babble before it can talk; it must talk before

it  can  compose.  Man  begins  in  weakness  and  ends  in  strength,  but  from

beginning to end he advances by the efforts he makes, by the exertion he puts

forth.

  The root of success is in character.


  The law which punishes us is the law which preserves us.

  JU N E TW E N T Y-N I N T H.

  WHEN in their ignorance men would destroy themselves, its everlasting

arms are thrown about them in loving, albeit sometimes painful, protection.

Every  pain  we  suffer  brings  us  nearer  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Divine

Wisdom. Every blessedness we enjoy speaks to us of the perfection of the

Great Law, and of the fullness of bliss that shall be man’s when he has come

to his heritage of divine knowledge. We progress by learning, and we learn,

up to a certain point, by suffering. When the heart is mellowed by love, the

law  of  love  is  perceived  in  all  its  wonderful  kindness;  when  wisdom  is

acquired, peace is assured.

  We cannot alter the law of things, which is of sublime perfection, but we

can alter ourselves so as to comprehend more and more of that perfection,

and make its grandeur ours.

  To wish to bring down the perfect to the imperfect is the crown of folly,

but to strive to bring the imperfect up to the perfect is the height of wisdom.


  Seers of the Cosmos do not mourn over the scheme of things.

  JU N E TH I R T I E T H.

  SEERS of the Cosmos see the universe as a perfect whole, and not as an

imperfect jumble of parts. The Great Teachers are men of abiding joy and

heavenly peace.  The blind captive of unholy desire may cry:

  "  Ah!  Love,  could  you  and  I  with  Him  conspire  To  grasp  this  sorry

scheme of things entire, Would we not shatter it to bits, and then Remould it

nearer to the heart’s desire? "

  This is the wish of the voluptuary, the wish to enjoy unlawful pleasures to

any extent, and not reap any painful consequences. It is such men who regard

the universe as a " sorry scheme of things." They want the universe to bend to

their will and desire; want lawlessness, not law; but the wise man bends his

will and subjects his desires to the Divine Order, and he sees the universe as

the glorious perfection of an infinitude of parts.

  To perceive it, is the beatific vision; to know it, is the beatific bliss.                                        JULY


  Wisdom is the aim of every philosophy.

  JU L Y FI R S T.

  IN whatever condition a man finds himself, he can always find the True;

and he can find it only by so utilising his present condition as to become

strong and wise. The effeminate hankering after rewards, and the craven fear

of punishment, let them be put away for ever, and let a man joyfully bend

himself to the faithful performance of all his duties, forgetting himself and his

worthless pleasures, and living strong and pure and self-contained; so shall he

surely find the Unfailing Wisdom, the God-like Patience and Strength. " The

situation that has not its Duty, its Ideal, was never yet occupied by man." All

that is beautiful and blessed is in thyself, not in thy neighbour’s wealth. Thou

art poor? Thou art poor indeed if thou art not stronger than thy poverty! Thou

hast suffered calamities? Tell me, wilt thou cure calamity by adding anxiety

to it? There is no evil but will vanish if thou wilt wisely meet it.

  Canst thou mend a broken vase by weeping over it?


  The might of meekness!

  JU L Y SE C O N D.

  THE  man  who  conquers  another  by  force  is  strong;  the  man  who

conquers himself by Meekness is mighty. He who conquers another by force

will himself likewise be conquered; he who conquers himself by Meekness

will never be overthrown, for the human cannot overcome the divine. The

meek man is triumphant in defeat. Socrates lives the more by being put to

death;  in  the  crucified  Jesus  the  risen  Christ  is  revealed;  and  Stephen,  in

receiving his stoning, defies the hurting power of stones. That which is real

cannot be destroyed, but only that which is unreal. When a man finds that

within him which is real, which is constant, abiding, changeless, and eternal,

he enters into that Reality, and becomes meek. All the powers of darkness

will come against him, but they will do him no hurt, and will at last depart

from him.

  Meekness is a divine quality, and as such is all powerful.  Nothing is hidden from him who overcomes himself.

  JU L Y TH I R D.

  INTO  the  cause  of  causes  shalt  thou  penetrate,  and  lifting,  one  after

another, every veil of illusion, shalt reach at last the inmost Heart of Being.

Thus  becoming  one  with  Life,  thou  shalt  know  all  life,  and,  seeing  into

causes, and knowing realities, thou shalt be no more anxious about thyself,

and others, and the world, but shalt see that all things that are, are engines of

the Great Law. Canopied with gentleness, thou shalt bless where others curse;

love where others hate; forgive where others condemn; yield where others

strive;  give  up  where  others  grasp;  lose  where  others  gain.  And  in  their

strength they shall be weak; and in thy weakness thou shalt be strong; yea,

thou shalt mightily prevail. " Therefore, when Heaven would save a man, it

enfolds him with gentleness."

  He that hath not unbroken gentleness hath not Truth.


  How can he fear any who wrongs none?

  JU L Y FO U R T H.

  THE righteous man is invincible. No enemy can possibly overcome or

con-found  him;  and  he  needs  no  other  protection  than  that  of  his  own

integrity and holiness. As it is impossible for evil to overcome Good, so the

righteous man can never be brought low by the unrighteous. Slander, envy,

hatred, malice can never reach him, nor cause him any suffering, and those

who try to injure him only succeed ultimately in bringing ignominy upon

themselves.

  The  righteous  man  having  nothing  to  hide,  committing  no  acts  which

require stealth, and harbouring no thoughts and desires which he would not

like others to know, is fearless and unashamed. His step is firm, his body

upright, and his speech direct and without ambiguity. He looks everybody in

the face. How can he be ashamed before any who deceives none?

  Ceasing  from  all  wrong  you  can  never  be  wronged;  ceasing  from  all

deceit you can never be deceived.


  The universe is preserved because Love is at the Heart of it

  JU L Y FI F T H.  THE Children of Light who abide in the Kingdom of Heaven see the

universe, and all that it contains, as the manifestation of one Law—the Law

of  Love.  They  see  Love  as  the  moulding,  sustaining,  protecting,  and

perfecting Power immanent in all things animate and inanimate. To them

Love is not merely and only a rule of life, it is the Law of life, it is Life itself.

Knowing  this,  they  order  their  whole  life  in  accordance  with  Love,  not

regarding their own personality. By thus practising obedience to the Highest,

to divine Love, they become conscious partakers of the power of Love, and

so arrive at perfect Freedom as Masters of Destiny. Love is Perfect Harmony,

pure bliss, and contains, therefore, no element of suffering. Let a man think

no  thought  and  do  no  act  that  is  not  in  accordance  with  pure  Love,  and

suffering shall no more trouble him.

  Love is the only preserving power.


  To know Love is to know that there is no harmful power in the whole

universe.

  JU L Y SI X T H.

  IF a man would know Love, and partake of its undying bliss, he must

practise it in his heart; he must become Love. He who always acts from the

spirit of Love is never deserted, is never left in a dilemma or difficulty, for

Love (impersonal Love) is both Knowledge and Power. He who has learned

how to Love has learned how to master every difficulty, how to transmute

every  failure  into  success,  how  to  clothe  every  event  and  condition  in

garments of blessedness and beauty.

  The  way  to  Love  is  by  self-mastery,  and,  travelling  that  way,  a  man

builds himself up in Knowledge as he proceeds. Arriving at Love, he enters

into full possession of body and mind, by right of the divine Power which he

has earned. " Perfect Love casteth out fear."

  Perfect  Love  is  perfect  Harmlessness.  And  he  who  has  destroyed  in

himself all thoughts of harm, and all desire to harm, receives the universal

protection.


  By self-enlightenment is Perfect Freedom found,

  JU L Y SE V E N T H.

  THERE is no bondage in the Heavenly Life. There is Perfect Freedom.This is its great glory. This Supreme Freedom is gained only by obedience.

He who obeys the Highest co-operates with the Highest, and so masters every

force within himself and every condition without. A man may choose the

lower and neglect the Higher, but the Higher is never overcome by the lower:

herein  lies  the  revelation  of  Freedom.  Let  a  man  choose  the  Higher  and

abandon the lower; he shall then establish himself as an overcomer, and shall

realise Perfect Freedom.

  To give the reins to inclination is the only slavery; to conquer oneself is

the only freedom. The slave to self loves his chains, and will not have one of

them  broken  for  fear  he  would  be  depriving  himself  of  some  cherished

delight. He thus defeats and enslaves himself.

  The Land of Perfect Freedom lies through the Gate of Knowledge.


  Man will be free when he is freed from self.

  JU L Y EI G H T H.

  ALL  outward  oppression  is  but  the  shadow  and  effect  of  the  real

oppression  within.  For  ages  the  oppressed  have  cried  for  liberty,  and  a

thousand man-made statutes have failed to give it to them. They can give it

only to themselves; they shall find it only in obedience to the Divine Statutes

which are inscribed upon their hearts. Let them resort to the inward Freedom,

and the shadow of oppression shall no more darken the earth. Let men cease

to oppress themselves, and no man shall oppress his brother. Men legislate

for an outward freedom, yet continue to render such freedom impossible of

achievement  by  fostering  an  inward  condition  of  enslavement.  They  thus

pursue a shadow without, and ignore the substance within. All outward forms

of bondage and oppression will cease to be when man ceases to be the willing

bond-slave of passion, error, and ignorance.

  Freedom is to the free!


  The True, the Beautiful, the Great is always childlike, and is perennially

fresh and young.

  JU L Y NI N T H.

  THE great man is always the good man; he is always simple. He draws

from, nay, lives in, the inexhaustible fountain of divine Goodness within; he

inhabits the Heavenly Places; communes with the vanished great ones; liveswith the Invisible: he is inspired, and breathes the airs of Heaven. He who

would be great, let him learn to be good. He will therefore become great by

not seeking greatness. Aiming at greatness, a man arrives at nothingness;

aiming at nothingness he arrives at greatness. The desire to be great is an

indication of littleness, of personal vanity and obtrusiveness. The willingness

to  disappear  from  gaze,  the  utter  absence  of  self-aggrandisement,  is  the

witness of greatness. Littleness seeks and loves authority. Greatness is never

authoritative, and it thereby becomes the authority to which the after ages

appeal.

  Be thy simple self, thy better self, the impersonal self, and lo! thou art

great!


  The  greatness  that  is  flawless,  rounded,  and  complete  is  above  and

beyond all art.

  JU L Y TE N T H.

    WOULDST thou preach the living Word? Thou shalt forgo thyself, and

become  that  Word.  Thou  shalt  know  one  thing—that  the  human  heart  is

good, is divine; thou shalt live one thing—Love. Thou shalt love all, seeing

no evil, believing no evil; then, though thou speak but little, thy every act

shall be a power, thy every word a precept. By thy pure thought, thy selfless

deed, though it appear hidden, thou shalt preach, down the ages, to untold

multitudes of aspiring souls.

  To  him  who  chooses  Goodness,  sacrificing  all,  is  given  that  which

includes  all.  He  becomes  the  possessor  of  the  Best,  communes  with  the

Highest, and enters the company of the Great.

  The  greatness  that  is  flawless,  rounded,  and  complete  is  above  and

beyond all art. It is Perfect Goodness in manifestation: therefore the greatest

souls are always Teachers.


  Every natural law has its spiritual counterpart.

  JU L Y EL E V E N T H.

    THOUGHTS are seeds, which, falling in the soil of the mind, germinate

and  develop  until  they  reach  the  completed  stage,  blossoming  into  deeds

good or bad, brilliant or stupid, according to their nature, and ending as seeds

of thought to be again sown in other minds. A teacher is a sower of seed, aspiritual agriculturist, while he who teaches himself is the wise farmer of his

own mental plot. The growth of a thought is as the growth of a plant. The

seed must be sown seasonably, and time is required for its full development

into the plant of knowledge and the flower of wisdom.

  The seen is the mirror of the unseen.


  Energy to be productive must not only be directed towards good ends, it

must be carefully controlled and conserved.

  JU L Y TW E L F T H.

  THE advice of one of the Great Teachers to his disciples, " Keep wide

awake," tersely expresses the necessity for tireless energy if one’s purpose is

to be accomplished, and is equally good advice to the salesman as to the

saint. "Eternal vigilance is the price of liberty," and liberty is the reaching of

one’s fixed ends. It was the same Teacher who said: "If anything is to be

done, let a man do it at once; let him attack it vigorously!" The wisdom of

this advice is seen when it is remembered that action is creative, that increase

and development follow upon legitimate use. To get more energy we must

use to the full that which we already possess. Only to him that puts his hand

vigorously to some task do power and freedom come.

  Noise and hurry are so much energy running to waste.


  It is a great delusion that noise means power.

  JU L Y TH I R T E E N T H.

  WHERE calmness is, there is the greatest power. Calmness is the sure

indication of a strong, well-trained, patiently disciplined mind. The calm man

knows  his  business,  be  sure  of  it.  His  words  are  few,  but  they  tell.  His

schemes are well planned, and they work true, like a well-balanced machine.

He sees a long way ahead, and makes straight for his object. The enemy,

Difficulty, he converts into a friend, and makes profitable use of him, for he

has studied well how to " agree with his adversary while he is in the way with

him." Like a wise general, he has anticipated all emergencies. Indeed, he is

the man who is prepared beforehand. In his meditations, in the counsels of

his judgment, he has conferred with causes, and has caught the bent of all

contingencies. He is never taken by surprise; is never in a hurry; is safe in the

keeping of his own steadfastness; and is sure of his ground.  Working steam is not heard. It is the escaping steam which makes a great

noise.


  Energy is the first pillar in the temple of prosperity.

  JU L Y F O U R T E E N T H.

    CALMNESS, as distinguished from the dead placidity of languor, is the

acme  of  concentrated  energy.  There  is  a  focused  mentality  behind  it.  In

agitation and excitement the mentality is dispersed. It is irresponsible, and is

without force or weight. The fussy, peevish, irritable man has no influence.

He  repels,  not  attracts.  He  wonders  why  his  "  easy-going  "  neighbour

succeeds, and is sought after, while he, who is always hurrying, worrying,

and troubling (he miscalls it striving), fails, and is avoided. His neighbour,

being a calmer man, not more easy-going but more deliberate, gets through

more work, does it more skilfully, and is more self-possessed and manly.

This is the reason of his success and influence. His energy is controlled and

used, while the other man’s energy is dispersed and abused.

  No energy means no capacity.


  The spendthrift can never become rich, but, if he begin with riches, must

soon become poor.

  JU L Y FI F T E E N T H.

  THE poor man who is to become rich must begin at the bottom, and must

not wish, or try, to appear affluent by attempting something far beyond his

means. There is always plenty of room and scope at the bottom, and it is a

safe place from which to begin, as there is nothing below, and everything

above. Many a young business man comes at once to grief by swagger and

display, which he foolishly imagines are necessary to success, but which,

deceiving  no  one  but  himself,  lead  quickly  to  ruin.  A  modest  and  true

beginning,  in  any  sphere,  will  better  ensure  success  than  an  exaggerated

advertisement of one’s standing and importance.

  The thrifty and prudent are on the way to riches.


  Vanity leading to excessive luxury in clothing is a vice which should be

studiously avoided by virtuous people.

  JU L Y SI X T E E N T H.  AN obtrusive display in clothing and jewellery bespeaks a vulgar and

empty mind. Modest and cultured people are modest and becoming in their

dress, and their spare money is wisely used in further enhancing their culture

and  virtue.  Education  and  progress  are  of  more  importance  to  them  than

needless, vain apparel; and literature, art, and science are encouraged thereby.

A true refinement is in the mind and behaviour, and a mind adorned with

virtue and intelligence cannot add to its attractiveness (though it may detract

from it) by an ostentatious display of the body.

    Simplicity in dress, as in other things, is the best.


  Money wasted can be restored; health wasted can be restored; but time

wasted can never be restored.

  JU L Y SE V E N T E E N T H.

  THE man who gets up early in order to think and plan, that he may weigh

and consider and forecast, will always manifest greater skill and success in

his particular pursuit than the man who lies in bed till the last moment, and

only gets up in time to begin breakfast. An hour spent in this way before

breakfast will prove of the greatest value in making one’s efforts fruitful. It is

a means of calming and clarifying the mind, and of focusing one’s energies

so as to render them more powerful and effective. The best and most abiding

success is that which is made before eight o’clock in the morning. He who is

at his business at six o’clock will always—all other conditions being equal—

be a long way ahead of the man who is in bed at eight.

  The day is not lengthened for any man.


  Wisdom is the highest form of skill.

  JU L Y EI G H T E E N T H.

  THERE is one right way of doing everything, even the smallest, and a

thousand  wrong  ways.  Skill  consists  in  finding  the  one  right  way,  and

adhering to it. The inefficient bungle confusedly about among the thousand

wrong ways, and do not adopt the right one when it is pointed out to them.

They do this in some cases because they think, in their ignorance, that they

know  best,  thereby  placing  themselves  in  a  position  where it becomes

impossible to learn, even though it be only to learn how to clean a window or

sweep a floor. Thoughtlessness and inefficiency are all too common. There isplenty of room in the world for thoughtful and efficient people. Employers of

labour  know  how  difficult  it  is  to  get  the  best  workmanship.  The  good

workman, whether with tools or brains, whether with speech or thought, will

always find a place for the exercise of his skill.

  Skill is gained by thoughtfulness and attention.


  There is no striking a cheap bargain with prosperity.

  JU L Y NI N E T E E N T H.

  AS the bubble cannot endure, so the fraud cannot prosper. He makes a

feverish spurt in the acquirement of money, and then collapses. Nothing is

ever gained, ever can be gained, by fraud. It is but wrested for a time, to be

again  returned  with  heavy  interest.  But  fraud  is  not  confined  to  the

unscrupulous swindler. All who are getting, or trying to get, money without

giving an equivalent are practising fraud, whether they know it or not. Men

who are anxiously scheming how to get money without working for it are

frauds, and mentally they are closely allied to the thief and swindler under

whose influence they come, sooner or later, and who deprives them of their

capital.

  Prosperity must be purchased, not only with intelligent labour, but with

moral force.


  Sterling  integrity  tells  wherever  it  is,  and  stamps  its  hall-mark  on  all

transactions.

  JU L Y TW E N T I E T H.

  TO be complete and strong, integrity must embrace the whole man, and

extend to all the details of his life; and it must be so thorough and permanent

as to withstand all temptations to swerve into compromise. To fail in one

point is to fail in all, and to admit, under stress, a compromise with falsehood,

howsoever necessary and insignificant it may appear, is to throw down the

shield of integrity, and to stand exposed to the onslaughts of evil.

  The man who works as carefully and conscientiously when his employer

is  away  as  when  his  eye  is  on  him,  will  not  long  remain  in  an  inferior

position. Such integrity in duty, in performing the details of his work, will

quickly lead him into the fertile regions of prosperity.

  The man of integrity is in line with the fixed law of things. He is like astrong tree whose roots are fed by perennial springs, and which no tempest

can lay low.


  Ignorant men imagine that dishonesty is a short cut to prosperity.

  JU L Y TW E N T Y-F I R S T.

    HONESTY is the surest way to success. The clay at last comes when the

dishonest man repents in sorrow and suffering; but no man ever needs to

repent of having been honest. Even when the honest man fails—as he does

sometimes through lacking other of those pillars, such as energy, economy,

or system—his failure is not the grievous thing that it is to the dishonest men,

for he can always rejoice in the fact that he has never defrauded a fellow-

being. Even in his darkest hour he finds repose in a clear conscience.

  The dishonest man is morally short-sighted.


  Strong  men  have  strong  purposes,  and  strong  purposes  lead  to  strong

achievements.

  JU L Y TW E N T Y-S E C O N D.

    INVINCIBILITY is a glorious protector, but it only envelops the man

whose integrity is perfectly pure and unassailable. Never to violate, even in

the most insignificant particular, is to be invincible against all the assaults of

innuendo, slander, and misrepresentation. The man who has failed in one

point  is  vulnerable,  and  the  shaft  of  evil,  like  the  arrow  in  the  heel  of

Achilles, will lay him low. Pure and perfect integrity is proof against all

attack  and  injury,  enabling  its  possessor  to  meet  all  opposition  and

persecution with dauntless courage and sublime equanimity. No amount of

talent, intellect, or business acumen can give a man that power of mind and

peace of heart which come from an enlightened acceptance and observance of

lofty moral principles.

  Moral force is the greatest power.


  The test of a man is in his immediate acts, and not in his ultra sentiments.

  JU L Y TW E N T Y-T H I R D.

    SYMPATHY should not be confounded with that maudlin and superficial

sentiment which, like a pretty flower without root, presently perishes and

leaves behind neither seed nor fruit. To fall into hysterical weeping whenparting  with  a  friend,  or  on  hearing  of  some  suffering  abroad,  is  not

sympathy. Neither are bursts of violent indignation against the cruelties and

injustices of others any indication of a sympathetic mind. If one is cruel at

home—if he badgers his wife, or beats his children, or abuses his servants, or

stabs  his  neighbours  with  shafts  of  sarcasm—  what  hypocrisy  is  in  his

profession of love for suffering people who are outside the immediate range

of his influence! What shallow sentiment informs his bursts of indignation

against the injustices and hard-heartedness in the world around him!

    Sympathy  is  a  deep,  inexpressible  tenderness  which  is  shown  in  a

consistently self-forgetful, gentle character.


  Lack of sympathy arises in egotism; sympathy arises in love.

  JU L Y TW E N T Y-F O U R T H.

    SYMPATHY  leads  us  to  the  hearts  of  all  men,  so  that  we  become

spiritually united to them, and when they suffer we feel the pain; when they

are glad, we rejoice with them; when they are despised and persecuted, we

spiritually descend with them into the depths, and take into our hearts their

humiliation  and  distress;  and  he  who  has  this  binding,  uniting  spirit  of

sympathy can never be cynical and condemnatory, can never pass thoughtless

and cruel judgments upon his fellows, because in his tenderness of heart he is

ever with them in their pain.

  But to have reached this ripened sympathy, it must needs be that he has

loved much, suffered much, and sounded the dark depths of sorrow. It springs

from acquaintance with the profoundest experiences, so that a man has had

conceit, thoughtlessness, and selfishness burnt out of his heart.

  Sympathy, in its real and profound sense, is oneness with others in their

strivings and sufferings.


    Gentleness is the hall-mark of spiritual culture.

  JU L Y TW E N T Y-F I F T H.

  LET  a  man  beware  of  greed,  of  meanness,  of  envy,  of  jealousy,  of

suspicion, for these things, if harboured, will rob him of all that is best in life,

aye, even all that is best in material things, as well as all that is best in

character and happiness. Let him be liberal of heart and generous of hand,

magnanimous  and  trusting,  not  only  giving  cheerfully  and  often  of  hissubstance, but allowing his friends and fellow-men freedom of thought and

action—let  him  be  thus,  and  honour,  plenty,  and  prosperity  will  come

knocking at his door for admittance as his friends and guests.

    Gentleness is akin to divinity.


  A gentle man—one whose good behaviour is prompted by thoughtfulness

and kindliness—is always loved, whatever may be his origin.

  JU L Y TW E N T Y-S I X T H.

  THE man who has perfected himself in gentleness never quarrels. He

never returns the hard word; he leaves it alone, or meets it with a gentle word,

which is far more powerful than wrath. Gentleness is wedded to wisdom, and

the wise man has overcome all anger in himself, and so understands how to

overcome it in others. The gentle man is saved from most of the disturbances

and turmoils with which uncontrolled men afflict themselves. While they are

wearing themselves out with wasteful and needless strain, he is quiet and

composed, and such quietness and composure are strong to win in the battle

of life.

    Argument analyses the outer skin, but sympathy reaches to the heart.


  Spurious things have no value, whether they be bric-a-brac or men.

  JU L Y TW E N T Y-S E V E N T H.

  IT is all-important that we be real; that we harbour no wish to appear

other than what we are; that we simulate no virtue, assume no excellency,

adopt no disguise. The hypocrite thinks he can hoodwink the world and the

eternal law of the world. There is but one person that he hoodwinks, and that

is himself, and for that the law of the world inflicts its righteous penalty.

There is an old theory that the excessively wicked are annihilated. I think to

be a pretender is to come as near to annihilation as a man can get, for there is

a sense in which a man is gone, and in his place there is but a mirage of

shams.

  The sound-hearted man becomes an exemplar: he is, more than a man; he

is a reality, a force, a moulding principle.


  Evil is an experience, and not a power.

  JU L Y TW E N T Y-E I G H T H.  THE painful experiences of evil pass away as the new experiences of

good enter into and possess the field of consciousness. And what are the new

experiences  of  good?  They  are  many  and  beautiful—such  as  the  joyful

knowledge of freedom from sin; the absence of remorse; deliverance from all

the  torments  of  temptation;  ineffable  joy  in  conditions  and  circumstances

which formerly caused deep affliction; imperviousness to hurt by the actions

of others; great patience and sweetness of character; serenity of mind under

all circumstances; emancipation from doubt, fear, and anxiety; freedom from

all dislike, envy, and enmity.

  Evil is a state of ignorance, of undevelopment, and as such it recedes and

disappears before the light of knowledge.


  When divine good is practised, life is bliss.

  JU L Y TW E N T Y-N I N T H.

  TO have transcendent virtue is to enjoy transcendent felicity. The beatific

blessedness which Jesus holds out is promised to those having the beatific

virtues—to the merciful, the pure in heart, the peacemakers, and so on. The

higher virtue does not merely and only lead to happiness, it is happiness. It is

impossible for a man of transcendent virtue to be unhappy. The cause of

unhappiness must be sought and found in the self-loving elements, and not in

the self-sacrificing qualities. A man may have virtue and be unhappy, but not

so if he have divine virtue. Human virtue is mingled with self, and therefore

with sorrow; but from divine virtue every taint of self has been purged away,

and with it every vestige of misery.

  Truth lies upward and beyond.


  Where passion is, peace is not; where peace is, passion is not.

  JU L Y TH I R T I E T H.

  EN pray for peace, yet cling to passion; they foster strife, yet pray for

heavenly rest. This is ignorance, profound spiritual ignorance; it is not to

know the first letter in the alphabet of things divine. Hatred and love, strife

and peace, cannot dwell together in the same heart. Where one is admitted as

a welcome guest, the other will be turned away as an unwelcome stranger. He

who despises another will be despised by others; he who opposes his fellow-

men will himself be resisted. He should not be surprised, and mourn, thatmen are divided. He should know that he is propagating strife. He should

understand his lack of peace.

  By the way of self-conquest is the Perfect Peace achieved.


  If men only understood

  That the wrong act of a brother

    Should not call from them another.

  JU L Y TH I R T Y-F I R S T.

  IF men only understood

  That their wrong can never smother

  The wrong doing of another;

  That by hatred hate increases, And by Good all evil ceases, They would

cleanse their hearts and actions, Banish thence all vile detractions— If they

only understood.

  If men only understood That the heart that sins must sorrow, That the

hateful mind to-morrow Reaps its barren harvest, weeping, Starving, resting

not, nor sleeping, Tenderness would fill their being, They would see with

Pity’s seeing—

  If they only understood.

  If men only understood How Love conquers . . .

  .  .  . They  would  ever  Live  in  Love,  in  hatred  never— If  they  only

understood.                                    AUGUST


  Let a man abandon self, let him overcome the world, let him deny the

personal; by this pathway only can he enter into the heart of the Infinite.

    AU G U S T FI R S T.

    "GOODWILL  gives  insight,"  and  only  he  who  has  so  conquered  his

personality that he has but one attitude of mind, that of goodwill, is possessed

of divine insight, and is capable of distinguishing the true from the false. The

supremely  good  man  is,  therefore,  the  wise  man,  the  divine  man,  the

enlightened  seer,  the  knower  of  the  Eternal.  Where  you  find  unbroken

gentleness,  enduring  patience,  sublime  lowliness,  graciousness  of  speech,

self-control, self-forgetfulness, and deep and abounding sympathy, look there

for the highest wisdom, seek the company of such a one, for he has realised

the Divine, he lives with the Eternal, he has become one with the Infinite.

Those who are spiritually awakened have alone comprehended the Universal

Reality where all appearances are dispersed and dreaming and delusion are

destroyed.

  To  centre  one’s  life  in  the  Great  Law  of  Love  is  to  enter  into  rest,

harmony, peace.


  To enter into a realisation of the Infinite and Eternal is to rise superior to

time.

    AU G U S T SE C O N D.

  TO refrain from all participation in evil

  and discord, to cease from all resistance to evil, and from the omission of

that which is good, and to fall back upon unswerving obedience to the holy

calm within, is to enter into the inmost heart of things, is to attain to a living,

conscious experience of that eternal and infinite principle which must ever

remain  a  hidden  mystery  to  the  merely  perceptive  intellect.  Until  this

principle  is  realised,  the  soul  is  not  established  in  peace,  and  he  who  so

realises is truly wise, not wise with the wisdom of the learned, but with the

simplicity of a blameless heart and of a divine manhood.

  There  is  one  Great  Law  which  exacts  unconditional  obedience,  oneunifying  principle  which  is  the  basis  of  all  diversity,  one  eternal  Truth

wherein all the problems of earth pass away like shadows.

  To realise this Law, this Unity, this Truth, is to enter into the Infinite, is to

become one with the Eternal.


  Become established in Immortality, Heaven, and the Spirit, which make

up the Empire of Light.

    AU G U S T TH I R D.

  ENTERING into the Infinite is not a mere theory or sentiment. It is a vital

experience which is the result of assiduous practice in inward purification.

When the body is no longer to be, even remotely, the real man; when all

appetites and desires are thoroughly subdued and purified; when the emotions

are  rested  and  calm;  and  when  the  oscillation  of  the  intellect  ceases  and

perfect poise is secured, then, and not till then, does consciousness become

one with the Infinite; not till then is childlike wisdom and profound peace

secured.

  Men grow weary and grey over the dark problems of life, and finally pass

away and leave them unsolved because they cannot see their way out of the

darkness of the personality, being too much engrossed in its limitations.

  Seeking to save his personal life, man forfeits the greater impersonal Life

of Truth; clinging to the perishable, he is shut out from a knowledge of the

Eternal.


  Self and error are synonymous.

    AU G U S T FO U R T H.

    ERROR  is  involved  in  the  darkness  of  unfathomable  complexity,  but

eternal simplicity is the glory of Truth.

  Love of self shuts men out from Truth, and seeking their own personal

happiness they lose the deeper, purer, and more abiding bliss. Says Carlyle, "

There is in man a higher than happiness. He can do without happiness, and

instead thereof find blessedness. . . . Love not pleasure, love God. This is the

Everlasting Yea, wherein all contradiction is solved; wherein whoso walks

and works, it is well with him."

  He who has yielded up that self, that personality that most men love, and

to  which  they  cling  with  such  fierce  tenacity  has  left  behind  him  allperplexity, and has entered into a simplicity so profoundly simple as to be

looked  upon  by  the  world,  involved  as  it  is  in  a  network  of  error,  as

foolishness.

  At rest in the Infinite.


  The region of Reality. Unchanging principle.

    AU G U S T FI F T H.

  WHEN  a  man  has  yielded  up  his  lusts,  his  errors,  his  opinions  and

prejudices, he has entered into possession of the knowledge of God, having

slain the selfish desire for heaven, and along with it the ignorant fear of hell;

having relinquished even the love of life itself, he has gained supreme bliss

and Life Eternal, the Life which bridges life and death, and knows its own

immortality. Having yielded up all without reservation, he has gained all, and

rests in peace on the bosom of the Infinite.

  Only he who has become so free from self as to be equally content to be

annihilated as to live, or to live as to be annihilated, is fit to enter into the

Infinite. Only he who, ceasing to trust his perishable self, has learned to trust

in  boundless  measure  the  Great  Law,  the  Supreme  Good,  is  prepared  to

partake of undying bliss.

  By the surrender of self all difficulties are overcome.


  There  is  no  more  regret,  nor  disappointment,  nor  remorse,  where  all

selfishness has ceased.

    AU G U S T SI X T H.

  THE spirit of Love which is manifested as a perfect and rounded life is

the crown of being and the supreme end of knowledge upon this earth. How

does  a  man  act  under  trial  and  temptation?  Many  men  boast  of  being  in

possession of Truth who are continually swayed by grief, disappointment,

and passion, and who sink under the first little trial that comes along. Truth is

nothing if not unchangeable, and in so far as a man takes his stand upon

Truth does he become steadfast in virtue, does he rise superior to his passions

and emotions and changeable personality.

  Men formulate perishable dogmas, and call them Truth. Truth cannot be

formulated; it is ineffable, and ever beyond the reach of intellect. It can only

be experienced by practice; it can only be manifested in a stainless heart anda perfect life.

  He who is patient, calm, and forgiving under all circumstances manifests

the Truth.


  Practise heart-virtue, and search humbly and diligently for the Truth.

    AU G U S T SE V E N T H.

  TRUTH will never be proved by wordy arguments and learned treatises,

for if men do not perceive the Truth in infinite patience, undying forgiveness,

and all-embracing compassion, no words can ever prove it to them.

  It is an easy matter for the passionate to be calm and patient when they

are in the midst of calmness, or when they are alone. It is equally easy for the

uncharitable to be gentle and kind when they are dealt kindly with, but he

who retains his patience and calmness under all trial, who remains sublimely

meek and gentle under the most trying circumstances, he, and he alone, is

possessed of the spotless Truth. And this is so because such lofty virtues

belong to the Divine, and can only be manifested by one who has attained to

the highest wisdom, who has relinquished his passionate and self-seeking

nature, who has realised the supreme and unchangeable Law, and has brought

himself into harmony with it.

  There  is  one  great  all-embracing  Law  which  is  the  foundation  of  the

universe, the Law of Love.


  To become possessed of a knowledge of the Law of Love, to enter into

conscious harmony with it, is to become immortal, invincible, indestructible.

    AU G U S T EI G H T H.

  IT is because of the effort of the soul to realise this Law that men come

again and again to live, to suffer, and to die; and when realised, suffering

ceases, personality is dispersed, and the fleshly life and death are destroyed,

for consciousness becomes one with the Eternal.

  The Law is absolutely impersonal, and its highest manifested expression

is that of Service. When the purified heart has realised Truth, it is then called

upon to make the last, the greatest, and holiest sacrifice, the sacrifice of the

well-earned  enjoyment  of  Truth.  It  is  by  virtue  of  this  sacrifice  that  the

divinely-emancipated soul comes to dwell amongst the lowliest and least, and

to be esteemed the servant of all mankind.  The Spirit of Love is alone singled out as worthy to receive the unstinted

worship of posterity.


  Truth cannot be limited.

    AU G U S T NI N T H.

  THE glory alike of the saint, the sage, and the saviour is this—that he has

realised the most profound lowliness, the most sublime unselfishness; having

given up all, even his own personality, all his works are holy and enduring,

for they are freed from every taint of self. He gives, yet never thinks of

receiving; he works, yet without regretting the past or anticipating the future,

and never looks for reward

  When the farmer has tilled and dressed his land and put in the seed, he

knows that he has done all that he can possibly do, and that now he must trust

to the elements, and wait patiently for the course of time to bring about the

harvest, and that no amount of expectancy on his part will affect the result,

liven so, he who has realised the Truth goes forth as a sower of the seeds of

goodness, purity, love, and peace, without expectancy, and never looking for

results, knowing that there is the Great Over-ruling Law which brings about

its own harvest in due time, and which is alike the source of preservation and

destruction.

  Every  holy  man  became  such  by  unremitting  perseverance  in  self-

sacrifice.


  He who enters upon the holy way begins by restraining his passions.

    AU G U S T TE N T H.

  WHAT the saints, sages, and saviours have accomplished, you likewise

may accomplish if you will only tread the way which they trod and pointed

out, the way of self-sacrifice, of self-denying service. Truth is very simple. It

says, " Give up self," " Come unto Me " (away from all that defiles) " and I

will give you rest." All the mountains of commentary that have been piled

upon  it  cannot  hide  it  from  the  heart  that  is  earnestly  seeking  for

righteousness.  It  does  not  require  learning;  it  can  be  known  in  spite  of

learning.  Disguised  under  many  forms  by  erring,  self-seeking  men,  the

beautiful simplicity and clear transparency of Truth remains unaltered and

undimmed, and the unselfish heart enters into and partakes of its shiningradiance. Not by weaving complex theories, not by building up speculative

philosophies, is Truth realised; but by weaving the web of inward purity, by

building up the Temple of a stainless life, is Truth realised.

  Saint ship is the beginning of holiness.


  Only when you identify yourself with the Divine can you be said to be "

clothed and in your right mind."

    AU G U S T EL E V E N T H.

  THE  divine  within  is  the  abode  of  peace,  the  temple  of  wisdom,  the

dwelling-place  of  immortality.  Apart  from  this  inward  resting-place,  this

Mount of Vision, there can be no true peace, no knowledge of the Divine, and

if you can remain there for one minute, one hour, or one day, it is possible for

you to remain there always.

  All your sins and sorrows, your fears and anxieties, are your own, and

you can cling to them or you can give them up. Of your own accord you cling

to your unrest; of your own accord you can come to abiding peace. No one

else  can  give  up  sin  for  you;  you  must  give  it  up  yourself.  The  greatest

Teacher can do no more than walk the way of Truth for himself, and point it

out to you; you yourself must walk it for yourself. You can obtain freedom

and peace alone by your own efforts, by yielding up that which binds the

soul, and which is destructive of peace.

  Give up all self-seeking; give up self, and lo! the Peace of God is yours.


  Come out of the storms of sin and anguish.

    AU G U S T TW E L F T H.

  O THOU who wouldst teach men of Truth! Hast thou passed through the

desert of doubt? Art thou purged by the fires of sorrow?

  Hath truth The fiends of opinion cast out. Of thy human heart? Is thy soul

so fair That no false thought can ever harbour there?

  O thou who Wouldst teach men of Love!

  Hast thou passed through the place of despair? Hast thou wept through

the dark night of grief? does it move

  (Now  freed  from  its  sorrow  and  care)  Thy  human  heart  to  pitying

gentleness, Looking on wrong, and hate, and ceaseless stress?  O thou who Wouldst teach men of Peace!

  Hast thou crossed the wide ocean of strife? Hast thou found on the Shores

of the Silence release

  From all the wild unrest of life? From thy human heart hath all striving

gone, Leaving but Truth, and Love, and Peace alone?

  Enter the inward resting-place.


  Make yourself pure and lovable, and you will be loved by all.

    AU G U S T TH I R T E E N T H.

  THINK  of  your  servants  with  kindness,  consider  their  happiness  and

comfort,  and  never  demand  of  them  that  extremity  of  service  which  you

yourself  would  not  care  to  perform  were  you  in  their  place.  Rare  and

beautiful is that humility of soul by which a servant entirely forgets himself

in his master’s good; but far rarer, and more beautiful with a divine beauty, is

that nobility of soul by which a man, forgetting his own happiness, seeks the

happiness of those who are under his authority, and who depend upon him for

their bodily sustenance. And such a man’s happiness is increased tenfold, nor

does he need to complain of those whom he employs. Said a well-known and

extensive employer of labour, who never needs to dismiss an employee: "I

have always had the happiest relations with my workpeople. If you ask me

how it is to be accounted for, I can only say that it has been my aim from the

first to do to them as I would wish to be done by."

  Be friendly towards others, and friends will soon flock round you.


  To  dwell  continually  in  good  thoughts  is  to  throw  around  oneself  a

psychic atmosphere of sweetness and power which leaves its impress upon all

who come in contact with it.

    AU G U S T FO U R T E E N T H.

  AS  the  rising  sun  puts  to  rout  the  helpless  shadows,  so  are  all  the

impotent forces of evil put to flight by the searching rays of positive thought

which shine forth from a heart made strong in purity and faith.

  Where there is sterling faith and uncompromising purity there is health,

there is success, there is power. In such a one, disease, failure, and disaster

can find no lodgement, for there is nothing on which they can feed.  Even physical conditions are largely determined by mental states, and to

this truth the scientific world is rapidly being drawn. The old, materialistic

belief that a man is what his body makes him is rapidly passing away, and is

being replaced by the inspiring belief that man is superior to his body, and

that his body is what he makes it by the power of thought.

  There is no evil in the universe but has its root and origin in the mind.


    Renounce.

    AU G U S T FI F T E E N T H.

  IF  you  are  given  to  anger,  worry,  jealousy,  greed,  or  any  other

inharmonious  state  of  mind,  and  expect  perfect  physical  health,  you  are

expecting the impossible, for you are continually sowing the seeds of disease

in your mind. Such conditions of mind are carefully shunned by the wise

man, for he knows them to be far more dangerous than a bad drain or an

infected house. If you would be free from all physical aches and pains, and

would  enjoy  perfect  physical  harmony,  then  put  your  mind  in  order,  and

harmonise your thoughts. Think joyful thoughts; think loving thoughts; let

the elixir of goodwill course through your veins, and you will need no other

medicine.  Put  away  your  jealousies,  your  suspicions,  your  worries,  your

hatreds, your selfish indulgences, and you will put away your dyspepsia, your

biliousness, your nervousness and aching joints.

  If you would secure health, you must learn to work without friction.


  Order your thoughts and you will order your life.

    AU G U S T SI X T E E N T H.

  POUR the oil of tranquillity upon the turbulent waters of the passions and

prejudices, and the tempests of misfortune, however they may threaten, will

be powerless to wreck the barque of your soul, as it threads its way across the

ocean of life. And if that barque be piloted by a cheerful and never-failing

faith, its course will be doubly sure, and many perils will pass it by which

would  otherwise  attack  it.  By  the  power  of  faith  every  enduring  work  is

accomplished. Faith in the Supreme; faith in the over-ruling Law; faith in

your work, and in your power to accomplish that work—here is the rock

upon which you must build if you would achieve, if you would stand and not

fall.  Follow, under all circumstances, the highest promptings within you.


  Let your heart grow large and loving and unselfish, and great and lasting

will be your influence and success.

    AU G U S T SE V E N T E E N T H.

    CULTIVATE a pure and unselfish spirit, and combine with purity and

faith singleness of purpose, and you are evolving from the elements enduring

success of greatness and power.

  If your present position is distasteful to you, and your heart is not in your

work, nevertheless perform your duties with scrupulous diligence; and whilst

resting your mind in the idea that the better position and greater opportunities

are  waiting  for  you,  ever  keep  an  active  mental  outlook  for  budding

possibilities, so that when the critical moment arrives, and the new channel

presents itself, you will step into it with your mind fully prepared for the

undertaking, and with that intelligence and foresight which is born of mental

discipline.

    Whatever your task may be, concentrate your whole mind upon it, throw

into it all the energy of which you are capable. The faultless completion of

small tasks leads inevitably to larger tasks.

  Learn  by  constant  practice  how  to  husband  your  resources,  and  to

concentrate them, at any moment, upon a given point.


  Passion is not power; it is the abuse of power, the dispersion of power.

    AU G U S T EI G H T E E N T H.

  WHEN  that  young  man,  whom  I  knew,  passing  through  continual

reverses and misfortunes, was mocked by his friends and told to desist from

further effort, and he replied, " The time is not far distant when you will

marvel at my good fortune and success," he showed that he was possessed of

that  silent  and  irresistible  power  which  has  taken  him  over  innumerable

difficulties, and crowned his life with success.

  If  you  have  not  this  power,  you  may  acquire  it  by  practice,  and  the

beginning  of  power  is  likewise  the  beginning  of  wisdom.  You  must

commence by overcoming those purposeless trivialities to which you have

hitherto been a willing victim. Boisterous and uncontrolled laughter, slander

and idle talk, and joking merely to raise a laugh—all these things must be puton one side as so much waste of valuable energy.

  Be  of  single  aim;  have  a  legitimate  and  useful  purpose,  and  devote

yourself unreservedly to it.


  Happiness is that inward state of perfect satisfaction which is joy and

peace.

    AU G U S T NI N E T E E N T H.

  THE  satisfaction  which  results  from  gratified  desire  is  brief  and

illusionary, and is always followed by an increased demand for gratification.

Desire  is  insatiable  as  the  ocean,  and  clamours  louder  and  louder  as  its

demands are attended to. It claims ever-increasing service from its deluded

devotees, until at last they are struck down with physical or mental anguish,

and are hurled into the purifying fires of suffering. Desire is the region of

hell,  and  all  torments  are  centred  there.  The  giving  up  of  desire  is  the

realisation of heaven, and all delights await the pilgrim there.

  " I sent my soul through the invisible, Some letter of that after life to

spell, And by and by my soul returned to me, And whispered, ’ I myself am

heaven and hell.’ "

  Heaven and hell are inward states.


  To seek selfishly is only to lose happiness

    AU G U S T TW E N T I E T H.

  SINK into self and all its gratifications, and you sink into hell; rise above

self into that state of consciousness which is the utter denial and forgetfulness

of self, and you enter heaven. Self is blind, without judgment, not possessed

of  true  knowledge,  and  always  leads  to  suffering.  Correct  perception,

unbiased judgment, and true knowledge belong only to the divine state, and

only in so far as you realise this divine consciousness can you know what real

happiness  is.  So  long  as  you  persist  in  selfishly  seeking  for  your  own

happiness, so long will happiness elude you, and you will be sowing the

seeds of wretchedness. In so far as you succeed in losing yourself in the

service of others, in that measure will happiness come to you, and you will

reap a harvest of bliss.

  Abiding happiness will come to you when, ceasing to selfishly cling, you

are willing to give up.    Whatsoever  you  constantly  meditate  upon  you  will  not  only  come  to

understand, but will grow more and more into its likeness.

    AU G U S T TW E N T Y-F I R S T.

    SPIRITUAL meditation is the pathway to Divinity. It is the mystic ladder

which reaches from earth to heaven, from error to Truth, from pain to peace.

Every saint has climbed it; every sinner must sooner or later come to it, and

every weary pilgrim that turns his back upon self and the world, and sets his

face  resolutely  towards  the  Father’s  Home,  must  plant  his  feet  upon  its

golden rounds. Without its aid you cannot grow into the divine state, the

divine likeness, the divine peace, and the fadeless glories and unpolluting

joys of Truth will remain hidden from you.

  If you constantly dwell upon that which is selfish and debasing, you will

ultimately become selfish and debased.


  If you would enter into possession of profound and abiding peace, come

now and enter the path of meditation.

    AU G U S T TW E N T Y-S E C O N D.

  SELECT some portion of the day in which to meditate, and keep that

period sacred to your purpose. The best time is the very early morning when

the spirit of repose is upon everything. All natural conditions will then be in

your  favour;  the  passions,  after  the  long  bodily  fast  of  the  night,  will  be

subdued,  the  excitements  and  worries  of  the  previous  day  will  have  died

away,  and  the  mind,  strong  and  yet  restful,  will  be  receptive  to  spiritual

instruction. Indeed, one of the first efforts you will be called upon to make

will be to shake off lethargy and indulgence, and if you refuse you will be

unable to advance, for the demands of the spirit are imperative.

  The sluggard and the self-indulgent can have no knowledge of Truth.


  The direct outcome of your meditations will be a calm, spiritual strength.

    AU G U S T TW E N T Y-T H I R D.

  IF you are given to hatred or anger, you will meditate upon gentleness

and forgiveness, so as to become acutely alive to a sense of your harsh and

foolish  conduct.  You  will  then  begin  to  dwell  in  thoughts  of  love,  of

gentleness, of abounding forgiveness; and as you overcome the lower by thehigher, there will gradually, silently steal into your heart a knowledge of the

divine  Law  of  Love  with  an  understanding  of  its  bearing  upon  all  the

intricacies of life and conduct. And in applying this knowledge to your every

thought, word, and act, you will grow more and more gentle, more and more

loving, more and more divine. And thus with every error, every selfish desire,

every human weakness; by the power of meditation is it overcome; and as

each sin, each error, is thrust out, a fuller and clearer measure of the Light of

Truth illumines the pilgrim soul.

  Great is the overcoming power of holy thought.


    Meditation will enrich the soul with saving remembrance in the hour of

strife, of sorrow, or of temptation.

    AU G U S T TW E N T Y-F O U R T H.

  AS, by the power of meditation, you grow in wisdom, you will relinquish,

more  and  more,  your  selfish  desires  which  are  fickle,  impermanent,  and

productive  of  sorrow  and  pain;  and  will  take  your  stand,  with  increasing

steadfastness  and  trust,  upon  unchangeable  principles,  and  will  realise

heavenly rest.

  The  use  of  meditation  is  the  requirement  of  a  knowledge  of  eternal

principles, and the power which results from meditation is the ability to rest

upon and trust those principles, and so become one with the Eternal. The end

of  meditation  is,  therefore,  direct  knowledge  of  Truth,  God,  and  the

realisation of divine and profound peace.

  Strive to rise, by the power of meditation, above all selfish clinging to

partial gods or party creeds; above dead formalities and lifeless ignorance.

    Remember that you are to grow into Truth by steady perseverance.


  Believe that a life of perfect holiness is possible.

    AU G U S T TW E N T Y-F I F T H.

  SO believing, so aspiring, so meditating, divinely sweet and beautiful will

be your spiritual experiences, and glorious the revelations that will enrapture

your inward vision. As you realise the divine Love, the divine Justice, the

Perfect Law of Good, or God, great will be your bliss and deep your peace.

Old things will pass away, and all things will become new. The veil of the

material universe, so dense and impenetrable to the eye of error, so thin andgauzy to the eye of Truth, will be lifted and the spiritual universe will be

revealed. Time will cease, and you will live only in Eternity. Change and

mortality will no more cause you anxiety and sorrow, for you will become

established  in  the  unchangeable,  and  will  dwell  in  the  very  heart  of

immortality.

  He who believes climbs rapidly the heavenly hills.


  Where self is, Truth is not; where Truth is, self is not.

    AU G U S T TW E N T Y-S I X T H.

  UPON the battlefield of the human soul two masters are ever contending

for the crown of supremacy, for the kingship and dominion of the heart; the

master of self, called also the " Prince of this world," and the master of Truth,

called  also  the  Father  God.  The  master  self  is  that  rebellious  one  whose

weapons  are  passion,  pride,  avarice,  vanity,  self-will,  implements  of

darkness; the master Truth is that meek and lowly one whose weapons are

gentleness, patience, purity, sacrifice, humility, love, instruments of Light.

  In every soul the battle is waged, and as a soldier cannot engage at once

in two opposing armies, so every heart is enlisted either in the ranks of self or

of  Truth.  There  is  no  half-and-half  course.  Jesus,  the  manifested  Christ,

declared that "No man can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one

and love the other; or else he will hold to the one and despise the other. Ye

cannot serve God and Mammon."

  You  cannot  perceive  the  beauty  of  Truth  while  you  are  looking  out

through the eyes of self.


  The lovers of Truth worship Truth with the sacrifice of self.

    AU G U S T TW E N T Y-S E V E N T H.

  DO you seek to know and to realise Truth? Then you must be prepared to

sacrifice, to renounce to the uttermost, for Truth in all its glory can only be

perceived and known when the last vestige of self has disappeared.

  The eternal Christ declared that he who would be His disciple must "

deny himself daily." Are you willing to deny yourself, to give up your lusts,

your  prejudices,  your  opinions?  If  so,  you  may  enter  the  narrow  way  of

Truth, and find that peace from which the world is shut out. The absolute

denial,  the  utter  extinction  of  self  is  the  perfect  state  of  Truth,  and  allreligions and philosophies are but so many aids to this supreme attainment.

  As you let self die, you will be reborn in Truth.


  Every holy man is a saviour of mankind.

    AU G U S T TW E N T Y-E I G H T H.

  WHEN men, lost in the devious ways of error and self, have forgotten the

"  heavenly  birth<"  the  state  of  holiness  and  Truth,  they  set  up  artificial

standards  by  which  to  judge  one  another,  and  make  acceptance  of,  and

adherence to, their own particular theology the test of Truth; and so men are

divided one against another, and there is ceaseless enmity and strife, and

unending sorrow and suffering.

  Reader, do you seek to realise the birth into Truth? There is only one

way: Let  self  die. All  those  lusts,  appetites,  desires,  opinions,  limited

conceptions, and prejudices to which you have hitherto so tenaciously clung,

let them fall from you. Let them no longer hold you in bondage, and Truth

will be yours. Cease to look upon your own religion as superior to all others,

and strive humbly to learn the supreme lesson of charity.

  To be in the world and yet not of the world is the highest perfection.


  The cause of all power, as of all weakness, is within.

    AU G U S T TW E N T Y-N I N T H.

  A THOROUGH understanding of this Great Law which permeates the

universe leads to the acquirement of that state of mind known as obedience.

To  know  that  justice,  harmony,  and  love  are  supreme  in  the  universe  is

likewise to know that all adverse and painful conditions are the result of our

own disobedience to that Law. Such knowledge leads to strength and power,

and it is upon such knowledge alone that a true life and an enduring success

and happiness can be built. To be patient under all circumstances, and to

accept  all  circumstances  as  necessary  factors  in  your  training,  is  to  rise

superior to all painful conditions, and to overcome them with an overcoming

which is sure, and which leaves no fear of their return, for by the power of

obedience to law they are utterly slain.

  There is no progress apart from unfoldment within.


  There  is  no  sure  foothold  in  prosperity  or  peace  except  by  orderlyadvancement in knowledge.

    AU G U S T TH I R T I E T H.

    PERHAPS the chains of poverty hang heavily upon you, and you are

friendless and alone, and you long with an intense longing that your load may

be lightened; but the load continues, and you seem to be enveloped in an

ever-increasing darkness. Perhaps you complain, you bewail your lot, you

blame your birth, your parents, your employer, or the unjust Powers who

have bestowed upon you so undeservedly poverty and hardship, and upon

another affluence and ease. Cease your complaining and fretting; none of

these things which you blame are the cause of your poverty; the cause is

within yourself, and where the cause is, there is the remedy.

  There is no room for a complainer in a universe of law, and worry is soul-

suicide.


  What your thoughts are, that is your real self.

    AU G U S T TH I R T Y-F I R S T.

  THE world around, both animate and inanimate, wears the aspect with

which your thoughts clothe it. " All that we are is the result of what we have

thought; it is founded on our thoughts; it is made up of our thoughts." Thus

said Buddha, and it therefore follows that if a man is happy, it is because he

dwells in happy thoughts; if miserable, because he dwells in despondent and

debilitating  thoughts.  Whether  one  be  fearful  or  fearless,  foolish  or  wise,

troubled or serene, within that soul lies the cause of its own state or states,

and never without. And now I seem to hear a chorus of voices exclaim, " But

do  you  really  mean  to  say  that  outward  circumstances  do  not  affect  our

minds? " I do not say that, but I say this, and know it to be an infallible truth,

that circumstances can only affect you in so far as you allow them to do so.

You are swayed by circumstances because you have not a right understanding

of the nature, use, and power of thought.                                  SEPTEMBER


  To make a useful and happy life dependent upon health is to put matter

before mind, is to subordinate spirit to body.

    SE P T E M B E R FI R S T.

  MEN of robust minds do not dwell upon their bodily condition if it be in

any way disordered—they ignore it, and work on, live on, as though it were

not. This ignoring of the body not only keeps the mind sane and strong, but it

is the best resource for curing the body. If we cannot have a perfectly sound

body, we can have a healthy mind, and a healthy mind is the best route to a

sound body.

  A sickly mind is more deplorable than a disordered body, and it leads to

sickness of body. The mental invalid is in a far more pitiable condition than

the bodily invalid. There are invalids (every physician knows them) who only

need  to  lift  themselves  into  a  strong,  unselfish,  happy  frame  of  mind  to

discover that their body is whole and capable.

  Moral principles are the soundest foundations for health, as well as for

happiness.


  Men are not made unhappy by poverty, but by the thirst for riches.

    SE P T E M B E R SE C O N D.

  WHERE there is a cause its effect will appear; and were affluence the

cause of immorality, and poverty the cause of degradation, then every rich

man  would  become  immoral,  and  every  poor  man  would  come  to

degradation.

  An evil-doer will commit evil under any circumstances, whether he be

rich or poor, or midway between the two conditions. A right-doer will do

right howsoever he be placed. Extreme circumstances may help to bring out

the evil which is already there awaiting its opportunity, but they cannot cause

the evil, cannot create it.

  Poverty is more often in the mind than in the purse. So long as a man

thirsts for more money he will regard himself as poor, and in that sense he ispoor, for covetousness is poverty of mind.

  A miser may be a millionaire, but he is as poor as when he was penniless.


  A man is great in knowledge, great in himself, and great in his influence

in the world, in the measure that he is great in self-control.

    SE P T E M B E R TH I R D.

    WONDERFUL as are the forces in nature, they are vastly inferior to that

combination of intelligent forces which comprise the mind of man, and which

dominate  and  direct  the  blind  mechanical  forces  of  nature.  Therefore,  it

follows that to understand, control, and direct the inner forces of passion,

desire, will, and intellect, is to be in possession of the destinies of men and

nations.

  He who understands and dominates the forces of external nature is the

natural scientist; but he who understands and dominates the internal forces of

the mind is the divine scientist; and the laws  which operate in gaining a

knowledge of external appearances operate also in gaining a knowledge of

internal verities.

  The end of knowledge is use, service, and the increase of the comfort and

happiness of the world.


  All things, whether visible or invisible, are subservient to, and fall within

the scope of, the infinite and eternal law and causation.

    SE P T E M B E R FO U R T H.

    PERFECT justice upholds the universe; perfect justice regulates human

life and conduct. All the varying conditions of life, as they obtain in the

world to-day, are the results of this law reacting on human conduct. Man can

(and does) choose what causes he shall set in operation, but he cannot change

the nature of effects; he can decide what thoughts he shall think, and what

deeds he shall do, but he has no power over the results of those thoughts and

deeds; these are regulated by the over-ruling law.

  Man has all power to act, but his power ends with the act committed. The

result of the act cannot be altered, annulled, or escaped; it is irrevocable.

  Evil thoughts and deeds produce conditions of suffering; good thoughts

and deeds determine conditions of blessedness.  Man’s power is limited to, and his blessedness or misery is determined

by, his own conduct.

    SE P T E M B E R FI F T H.

  LIFE may be likened to a sum in arithmetic. It is bewilderingly difficult

and  complex  to  the  pupil  who  has  not  yet  grasped  the  key  to  its  correct

solution,  but  once  this  is  perceived  and  laid  hold  of  it  becomes  as

astonishingly simple as it was formerly profoundly perplexing. Some idea of

this  relative  simplicity  and  complexity  of  life  may  be  grasped  by  fully

recognising and realising the fact that, while there are scores, and perhaps

hundreds, of ways in which a sum may be done wrong, there is only one way

by which it can be done right, and that when the right way is found the pupil

knows  it  to  be  right;  his  perplexity  vanishes,  and  he  knows  that  he  has

mastered the problem.

  In life there can be no falsifying of results; the eye of the Great Law

reveals and exposes.


    Selfish thoughts and bad deeds will not produce a useful and beautiful

life.

    SE P T E M B E R SI X T H.

  LIFE is like a piece of cloth, and the threads of which it is composed are

individual lives. The threads, while being independent, are not confounded

one with the other. Each follows its own course. Each individual suffers and

enjoys the consequences of his own deeds, and not the deeds of another. The

course of each is simple and definite; the whole forming a complicated, yet

harmonious, combination of sequences. There are action and reaction, deed

and  consequence,  cause  and  effect,  and  the  counterbalancing  reaction,

consequence, and effect is always in exact ratio with the initiatory impulse.

  Each man makes or mars his own life.


  Man is responsible only for his own deeds; he is the custodian of his own

actions.

    SE P T E M B E R SE V E N T H.

  THE " problem of evil " subsists in a man’s own evil deeds, and it is

solved when those deeds are purified. Says Rousseau:

  "Man, seek no longer the origin of evil; thou thyself art its origin."  Effect can never be divorced from cause; it can never be of a different

nature from cause. Emerson says:

  " Justice is not postponed; a perfect equity adjusts the balance in all parts

of life."

  And there is a profound sense in which cause and effect are simultaneous,

and form one perfect whole. Thus, upon the instant that a man thinks, say, a

cruel deed, that same instant he has injured his own mind; he is not the same

man he was the previous instant; he is a little viler and a little more unhappy;

and a number of successive thoughts and deeds would produce a cruel and

wretched man.

  An  immediate  nobility  and  happiness  attend  the  thinking  of  a  kind

thought, or doing a kind deed.


  Without  strength  of  mind,  nothing  worthy  of  accomplishment  can  be

done.

    SE P T E M B E R EI G H T H.

  THE cultivation of that steadfastness and stability of character which is

commonly called " will-power " is one of the foremost duties of man, for its

possession is essentially necessary both to his temporal and external well-

being. Fixedness of purpose is at the root of all successful efforts, whether in

things  worldly  or  spiritual,  and  without  it  man  cannot  be  otherwise  than

wretched, and dependent upon others for that support which should be found

within himself.

  The  true  path  of  will-cultivation  is  only  to  be  found  in  the  common

everyday  life  of  the  individual,  and  so  obvious  and  simple  is  it  that  the

majority,  looking  for  something  complicated  and  mysterious,  pass  it  by

unnoticed.

  The  direct  and  only  way  to  greater  strength  is  to  assail  and  conquer

weaknesses.


  In the training of the will the first step is the breaking away from bad

habits.

    SE P T E M B E R NI N T H.

  HE who has succeeded in grasping this simple, preliminary truth will

perceive  that  the  whole  science  of  will-cultivation  is  embodied  in  thefollowing seven rules:

  1. Break off bad habits.

  2.   Form good habits.

  3.   Give scrupulous attention to the duty of the present moment.

  4.   Do vigorously, and at once, whatever has to be done.

  5.   Live by rule.

  6.   Control the tongue.

  7.   Control the mind.

  Anyone who earnestly meditates upon, and diligently practises, the above

rules will not fail to develop that purity of purpose and power of will which

will  enable  him  to  successfully  cope  with  every  difficulty,  and  pass

triumphantly through every emergency.


  By submitting to a bad habit one forfeits the right to rule over himself.

    SE P T E M B E R TE N T H.

  HE who thus avoids self-discipline, and looks about for some " occult

secrets " for gaining will-power at the expenditure of little or no effort on his

part, is deluding himself, and is weakening the willpower which he already

possesses.

  The strength of will which is gained by success in overcoming bad habits

enables one to initiate good habits; for, while the conquering of a bad habit

requires merely strength of purpose, the forming of a new one necessitates

the intelligent direction of purpose. To do this, a man must be mentally active

and energetic, and must keep a constant watch upon himself.

    Thoroughness is a step in the development of the will which cannot be

passed over. Slipshod work is an indication of weakness.


  Perfection should be aimed at, even in the smallest task.

    SE P T E M B E R EL E V E N T H.

  BY not dividing the mind, but giving the whole attention to each separate

task as it presents itself, singleness of purpose and intense concentration of

mind are gradually gained—two mental powers which give weight and worth

of character, and bring repose and joy to their possessor.

  Doing  vigorously,  and  at  once,  whatever  has  to  be  done  is  equallyimportant. Idleness and a strong will cannot go together, and procrastination

is a total barrier to the acquisition of purposeful action. Nothing should be "

put off " until another time, not even for a few minutes. That which ought to

be done now should be done now. This seems a little thing, but it is of far-

reaching importance. It leads to strength, success, and peace.

  Live according to principle, and not according to passion.


    Thoroughness  consists  in  doing  little  things  as  though  they  were  the

greatest things in the world.

    SE P T E M B E R TW E L F T H.

  THAT the little things of life are of primary importance is a truth not

generally  understood,  and  the  thought  that  little  things  can  be  neglected,

thrown aside, or slurred over is at the root of that lack of thoroughness which

is so common, and which results in imperfect work and unhappy lives.

  When  one  understands  that  the  great  things  of  the  world  and  of  life

consist of a combination of small things, and that without this aggregation of

small things the great things would be non-existent, then he begins to pay

careful attention to those things which he formerly regarded as insignificant.

  He  who  acquires  the  quality  of  thoroughness  becomes  a  man  of

usefulness and influence.


  The  cause  of  the  common  lack  of  thoroughness  lies  in  the  thirst  for

pleasure.

    SE P T E M B E R TH I R T E E N T H.

  EVERY employer of labour knows how difficult it is to find men and

women who will put thought and energy into their work, and do it completely

and  satisfactorily.  Bad  workmanship  abounds.  Skill  and  excellence  are

acquired  by  few.  Thoughtlessness,  carelessness,  and  laziness  are  such

common vices that it should cease to appear strange that, in spite of " social

reform," the ranks of the unemployed should continue to swell, for those who

scamp their work to-day will, another day, in the hour of deep necessity, look

and ask for work in vain.

  The law of " the survival of the fittest " is not based on cruelty, it is based

on justice; it is one aspect of that divine equity which everywhere prevails.

Vice is " beaten with many stripes "; if it were not so, how could virtue bedeveloped?  The  thoughtless  and  lazy  cannot  take  precedence  of,  or  stand

equally with, the thoughtful and industrious.

  The mind that is occupied with pleasure cannot also be concentrated upon

the perfect performance of duty.


  He who lacks thoroughness in his worldly duties will also lack the same

in spiritual things.

    SE P T E M B E R FO U R T E E N T H.

    THOROUGHNESS is completeness, perfection; it means doing a thing

so well that there is nothing left to be desired; it means doing one’s work, if

not better than anyone else can do it, at least not worse than the best that

others do. It means the exercise of much thought, the putting forth of great

energy, the persistent application of the mind to its task, the cultivation of

patience, perseverance, and a high sense of duty. An ancient teacher said, "If

anything has to be done, let a man do it, let him attack it vigorously "; and

another teacher said, " Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy

might."

  It is better to be a whole-souled worldling than a half-hearted religionist.


  He who has not learned how to be gentle, loving, and happy has learned

very little.

    SE P T E M B E R FI F T E E N T H.

    DESPONDENCY,  irritability,  anxiety,  complaining,  condemning,  and

grumbling—all  these  are  thought-cankers,  mind-diseases;  they  are  the

indications  of  a  wrong  mental  condition,  and  those  who  suffer  therefrom

would do well to remedy their thinking and conduct. It is true there is much

sin and misery in the world, so that all our love and compassion are needed,

but our misery is not needed—there is already too much of that. No, it is our

cheerfulness and our happiness that are needed, for there is too little of that.

We can give nothing better to the world than beauty of life and character;

without this, all other things are vain; this is pre-eminently excellent; it is

enduring,  real,  and  not  to  be  overthrown,  and  it  includes  all  joy  and

blessedness.

  A man’s surroundings are never against him; they are there to aid him.  You can transform everything around you if you will transform yourself

    SE P T E M B E R SI X T E E N T H.

    UNBROKEN sweetness of conduct in the face of all outward antagonism

is the infallible indication of a self-conquered soul, the witness of wisdom,

and the proof of the possession of Truth.

  A  sweet  and  happy  soul  is  the  ripened  fruit  of  wisdom,  and  it  sheds

abroad the invisible aroma of its influence, gladdening the hearts of others,

and purifying the world.

  If  you  would  have  others  true,  be  true;  if  you  would  have  the  world

emancipated from misery and sin, emancipate yourself; if you would have

your home and your surroundings happy, be happy.

  And this you will naturally and spontaneously do as you realise the good

in yourself.

    Commence to live free from all wrong and evil. Peace of mind and true

reform lie this way.


    Immortality is here and now, and is not a speculative something beyond

the grave.

    SE P T E M B E R SE V E N T E E N T H.

    IMMORTALITY does not belong to time, and will never be found in

time: it belongs to Eternity; and just as time is here and now, so is Eternity

here and now, and a man may find that Eternity and establish himself in it, if

he  will  overcome  the  self  that  derives  its  life  from  the  unsatisfying  and

perishable things of time.

  Whilst  a  man  remains  immersed  in  sensation,  desire,  and  the  passing

events of his day-by-day existence, and regards those sensations, desires, and

passing events as of the essence of himself, he can have no knowledge of

immortality. The thing which such a man desires, and which he mistakes for

immortality, is persistence; that is, a continuous succession of sensations and

events of time.

    Persistence is the antithesis of immortality.


  The death of the body can never bestow upon a man immortality.

    SE P T E M B E R EI G H T E E N T H.    SPIRITS are not different from men, and live their little feverish life of

broken consciousness, and are still immersed in change and mortality. The

mortal  man,  he  who  thirsts  for  the  persistence  of  his  pleasure-loving

personality,  is  still  mortal  after  death,  and  only  lives  another  life  with  a

beginning  and  an  end,  without  memory  of  the  past  or  knowledge  of  the

future.

  The immortal man is he who has detached himself from the things of time

by  having  ascended  into  that  state  of  consciousness  which  is  fixed  and

unvariable, and is not affected by passing events and sensations. He is as one

who has awakened out of his dream, and he knows that his dream was not an

enduring reality, but a passing illusion. He is a man with knowledge, the

knowledge of both states—that of persistence, and that of immortality.

  The immortal man is in full possession of himself.


  The mortal man lives in the time or world state of consciousness which

begins and ends.

    SE P T E M B E R NI N E T E E N T H.

  THE immortal man remains poised and steadfast under all changes, and

the death of his body will not in any way interrupt the eternal consciousness

in which he abides. Of such a one it is said, " He shall not taste of death,"

because he has stepped out of the stream of mortality, and established himself

in the abode of Truth. Bodies, personalities, nations, and worlds pass away,

but Truth remains, and its glory is undimmed by time. The immortal man,

then, is he who has conquered himself; who no longer identifies himself with

the  self-seeking  forces  of  the  personality,  but  who  has  trained  himself  to

direct those forces with the hand of a master, and so has brought them into

harmony with the causal energy and source of all things.

  The immortal man lives in the cosmic or heaven state of consciousness, in

which there is neither beginning nor end, but an eternal now.


  The overcoming of self is the annihilation of all the sorrow-producing

elements.

    SE P T E M B E R TW E N T I E T H.

  THE doctrine of the overcoming or annihilation of self is simplicity itself;

indeed, so simple, practical, and close at hand is it that a child of five, whosemind has not yet become clouded with theories, theological schemes, and

speculative philosophies, would be far more likely to comprehend it than

many older people who have lost their hold upon simple and beautiful truths

by the adoption of complicated theories.

  The annihilation of self consists in weeding out and destroying all those

elements in the soul which lead to division, strife, suffering, disease, and

sorrow. It does not mean the destruction of any good and beautiful and peace-

producing quality.

  The overcoming of self is the cultivation of all the divine qualities.


  He  who  would  overcome  his  enemy  the  tempter  must  discover  his

stronghold and place of concealment, and must also find out the unguarded

gates in his own fortress where the enemy effects so easy an entrance.

    SE P T E M B E R TW E N T Y-F I R S T.

    TEMPTATION, with all its attendant torments, can be overcome here

and now, but it can only be overcome with knowledge. It is a condition of

darkness, or of semi-darkness. The fully enlightened soul is proof against all

temptation. When a man fully understands the source, nature, and meaning of

temptation, in that hour he will conquer it, and will rest from his long travail;

but whilst he remains in ignorance, attention to religious observances and

much praying and reading of Scripture will fail to bring him peace.

  This is the holy warfare of the saints.


  All temptation comes from within.

    SE P T E M B E R TW E N T Y-S E C O N D.

  MEN fail to conquer, and the fight is indefinitely prolonged, because they

labour,  almost  universally,  under  two  delusions;  first,  that  all  temptations

come  from  without;  and  second,  that  they  are  tempted  because  of  their

goodness. Whilst a man is held in bondage by these delusions, he will make

no  progress;  when  he  has  shaken  them  off,  he  will  pass  on  rapidly  from

victory to victory, and will taste of spiritual joy and rest.

  The source and cause of all temptation is in the inward desire; that being

purified and eliminated, outward objects and extraneous powers are utterly

powerless to move the soul to sin or to temptation. The outward object is

merely the occasion of the temptation, never the cause; this is in the desire ofthe one tempted.

  A  man  is  tempted  because  there  are  certain  desires  or  states  of  mind

which he has come to regard as unholy.


  The good in a man is never tempted. Goodness destroys temptation.

    SE P T E M B E R TW E N T Y-T H I R D.

  IT is the evil in a man that is aroused and tempted. The measure of a

man’s  temptations  is  the  exact  register  of  his  own  unholiness.  As  a  man

purifies his heart, temptation ceases, for when a certain unlawful desire has

been taken out of the heart the object which formerly appealed to it can no

longer do so, but becomes dead and powerless, for there is nothing left in the

heart that can respond to it. The honest man cannot be tempted to steal, let the

occasion  be  ever  so  opportune;  the  man  of  purified  appetites  cannot  be

tempted to gluttony and drunkenness; he whose mind is calm in the strength

of inward virtue can never be tempted to anger, and the wiles and charms of

the wanton fall upon the purified heart as empty, meaningless shadows.

    Temptation shows a man just where he is.


  The Great Law is good—the man of integrity is superior to fear, and

failure, and poverty, and shame, and disgrace.

    SE P T E M B E R TW E N T Y-F O U R T H.

  THE man who, fearing the loss of present pleasures or material comforts,

denies the truth within him can be injured, and robbed, and degraded, and

trampled  upon,  because  he  has  first  injured,  robbed,  and  degraded,  and

trampled  upon  his  own  nobler  self;  but  the  man  of  steadfast  virtue,  of

unblemished integrity, cannot be subject to such conditions, because he has

denied the craven self within him and has taken refuge in Truth. It is not the

scourge and the chains which make a man a slave, but the fact that he is a

slave.

  Slander, accusation, and malice cannot affect the righteous man, nor call

from him any bitter response, nor does he need to go about to defend himself

and  prove  his  innocence.  Innocence  and  integrity  alone  are  a  sufficient

answer to all that hatred may attempt.


  The man of integrity turns all evil things to good account.    SE P T E M B E R TW E N T Y-F I F T H.

  LET the man of integrity rejoice and be glad when he is severely tried; let

him be thankful that he has been given an opportunity of proving his loyalty

to the noble principles which he has espoused; and let him think, " Now is

the hour of holy opportunity! Now is the day of triumph for Truth! Though I

lose the whole world, I will not desert the right! " So thinking, he will return

good for evil, and will think compassionately of the wrong-doer.

  The slanderer, the backbiter, and the wrongdoer may seem to succeed for

a time, but the Law of Justice prevails; the man of integrity may seem to fail

for a time, but he is invincible, and in none of the worlds, visible or invisible,

can there be a forged weapon that shall prevail against him.

  The man of integrity can never be subdued by the forces of darkness,

having subdued all those forces within himself.


  Without discrimination a man is mentally blind.

    SE P T E M B E R TW E N T Y-S I X T H.

  A MAN’S mind and life should be free from confusion. He should be

prepared to meet every mental, material, and spiritual difficulty, and should

not be intricately caught (as many are) in the meshes of doubt, indecision,

and  uncertainty  when  troubles  and  so-called  misfortunes  come  along.  He

should be fortified against every emergency that can come against him; but

such  mental  preparedness  and  strength  cannot  be  attained  in  any  degree

without discrimination, and discrimination can only be developed by bringing

into play and constantly exercising the analytical faculty.

  Mind, like muscle, is developed by use.


    Confusion, suffering, and spiritual darkness follow the thoughtless.

    SE P T E M B E R TW E N T Y-S E V E N T H.

  THE man who is afraid to think searchingly upon his opinions, and to

reason critically upon his position, will have to develop moral courage before

he can acquire discrimination.

  A  man  must  be  true  to  himself,  fearless  with  himself,  before  he  can

perceive the pure principles of Truth, before he can receive the all-revealing

Light of Truth.  The  more  Truth  is  inquired  of,  the  brighter  it  shines;  it  cannot  suffer

under examination and analysis.

  The more error is questioned, the darker it grows; it cannot survive the

entrance of pure and searching thought.

  To " prove all things " is to find the good and to throw away the evil.

  He  who  reasons  and  meditates  learns  to  discriminate;  he  who

discriminates discovers the eternally True.

    Harmony, blessedness, and the Light of Truth attend upon the thoughtful.


  Belief is an attitude of mind determining the whole course of one’s life.

    SE P T E M B E R TW E N T Y-E I G H T H.

  BELIEF is the basis of all action, and, this being so, the belief which

dominates the heart or mind is shown in the life. Every man acts, thinks, lives

in exact accordance with the belief which is rooted in his innermost being,

and such is the mathematical nature of the laws which govern mind that it is

absolutely impossible for anyone to believe in two opposing conditions at the

same time. For instance, it is impossible to believe in justice and injustice,

hatred and love, peace and strife, self and truth. Every man believes in one or

the other of these opposites, never in both, and the daily conduct of every

man indicates the nature of his belief.

  Belief and conduct are inseparable, for the one determines the other.


  Justice reigns, and all that is called injustice is fleeting and illusory.

    SE P T E M B E R TW E N T Y-N I N T H.

  THE man who is continually getting enraged over the injustice of his

fellow men, who talks about himself being badly treated, or who mourns over

the lack of justice in the world around him, shows by his conduct, his attitude

of mind, that he believes in injustice. However he may protest to the contrary,

in his inmost heart he believes that confusion and chaos are dominant in the

universe, the result being that he dwells in misery and unrest, and his conduct

is faulty.

  Again, he who believes in love, in its stability and power, practises it

under all circumstances, never deviates from it, and bestows it alike upon

enemies as upon friends.  The  man  who  believes  in  justice  remains  calm  through  all  trials  and

difficulties.


  Every thought, every act, every habit, is the direct outcome of belief.

    SE P T E M B E R TH I R T I E T H.

  MEN are saved from error by belief in the supremacy of Truth. They are

saved from sin by belief in Holiness or Perfection. They are saved from evil

by belief in Good, for every belief is manifested in the life. It is not necessary

to inquire as to a man’s theological belief, for that is of little or no account,

for what can it avail a man to believe that Jesus died for him, or that Jesus is

God, or that he is " justified by faith," if he continues to live in his lower,

sinful nature? All that is necessary to ask is this: " How does a man live? " "

How does he conduct himself under trying circumstances? " The answer to

these questions will show whether a man believes in the power of evil or in

the power of Good.

  When our belief in a thing ceases, we can no longer cling to or practise it.                                    OCTOBER


  A man cannot cling to anything unless he believes in it; belief always

precedes action, therefore a man’s deeds and life are the fruits of his belief.

    OC T O B E R FI R S T.

  HE who believes in all those things that are good will love them, and live

in them, he who believes in those things that are impure and selfish will love

them, and cling to them. The tree is known by its fruits.

  A man’s beliefs about God, Jesus, and the Bible are one thing, his life, as

bound up in his actions, is another, therefore a man’s theological belief is of

no consequence, but the thoughts which he harbours, his attitude of mind

towards  others,  and  his  actions—these,  and  these  only,  determine  and

demonstrate whether the belief of a man’s heart is fixed in the false or the

true.

  There  are  only  two  beliefs  which  vitally  affect  the  life,  and  they  are:

belief in good and belief in evil.


  As the fruit to the tree and the water to the spring, so is action to thought.

    OC T O B E R SE C O N D.

  THE sudden falling, when greatly tempted, into some grievous sin by one

who was believed, and who believed himself, to stand firm, is seen neither to

be a sudden nor  a  causeless  thing  when  the  hidden  processes  of  thought

which  led  up  to  it  are  revealed.  The falling was  merely  the  end,  the

outworking, the finished result of what commenced in the mind probably

years before. The man had allowed a wrong thought to enter his mind; and a

second and a third time he had welcomed it, and allowed it to nestle in his

heart. Gradually he became accustomed to it, and cherished and fondled, and

tended it; and so it grew until at last it attained such strength and force that it

attracted to itself the opportunity which enabled it to burst forth and ripen

into act.

  All sin and temptation are the natural outcome of the thoughts of the

individual.  Guard well your thoughts, reader, for what you really are in your secret

thoughts to-day you will become in actual deed.

    OC T O B E R TH I R D.

  THERE is nothing hidden that shall not be revealed," and every thought

that is harboured in the mind must, by virtue of the impelling force which is

inherent in the universe, at last blossom into act good or bad, according to its

nature. The divine Teacher and the sensualist are both the product of their

own thoughts, and have become what they are as the result of the seeds of

thought which they have implanted, or allowed to fall, into the garden of the

heart, and have afterwards watered, tended, and cultivated.

  Let no man think he can overcome sin and temptation by wrestling with

opportunity; he can only overcome them by purifying his thoughts.

  A man can only attract that to him which is in harmony with his nature.


  As a being of thought, your dominant mental attitude will determine your

condition in life.

    OC T O B E R FO U R T H.

  YOU are the thinker of your thoughts, and as such you are the maker of

your self and condition. Thought is causal and creative, and appears in your

character and life in the form of results. There are no accidents in your life.

Both  its  harmonies  and  antagonisms  are  the  responsive  echoes  of  your

thoughts. A man thinks, and his life appears.

  If  your  dominant  mental  attitude  is  peaceable  and  lovable,  bliss  and

blessedness will follow you; if it be resistant and hateful, trouble and distress

will cloud your pathway. Out of ill-will will come grief and disaster; out of

good-will, healing and reparation.

  The boundary lines of your thoughts are self-erected fences.


  Pain,  grief,  sorrow,  and  misery  are  the  fruits  of  which  passion  is  the

flower.

    OC T O B E R FI F T H.

  WHERE the passion-bound soul sees only injustice, the good man, he

who has conquered passion, sees cause and effect, sees the Supreme Justice.

It is impossible for such a man to regard himself as treated unjustly, becausehe has ceased to see injustice. He knows that no one can injure or cheat him,

having ceased to injure or cheat himself. However passionately or ignorantly

men may act towards him, it cannot possibly cause him any pain, for he

knows that whatever comes to him (it may be abuse and persecution) can

only  come  as  the  effect  of  what  he  himself  has  formerly  sent  out.  He

therefore regards all things as good, rejoices in all things, loves his enemies,

blesses  them  that  curse  him,  regarding  them  as  the  blind  but  beneficent

instruments by which he is enabled to pay his moral debts to the Great Law.

  The Supreme Justice and the Supreme Love are one.


  The history of a nation is the building of its deeds.

    OC T O B E R SI X T H.

  AS a body is built of cells, and a house of bricks, so a man’s mind is built

of thoughts. The various characters of men are none other than compounds of

thoughts of varying combinations. Herein we see the deep truth of the saying,

"As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he." Individual characteristics are fixed

processes  of  thought;  that  is,  they  are  fixed  in  the  sense  that  they  have

become an integral part of the character, that they can be only altered or

removed  by  a  protracted  effort  of  the  will,  and  by  much  self-discipline.

Character is built in the same way as a tree or a house is built—namely, by

the ceaseless addition of new material, and that material is thought. By the

aid of millions of bricks a city is built; by the aid of millions of thoughts a

character, a mind, is built.


  Every man is a mind-builder.

    OC T O B E R SE V E N T H.

  PURE  thoughts,  wisely  chosen  and  well  placed,  are  so  many  durable

bricks  which  will  never  crumble  away,  and  from  which  a  finished  and

beautiful  building,  and  one  which  affords  comfort  and  shelter  for  its

possessor,  can  be  rapidly  erected.  Bracing  thoughts  of  strength,  of

confidence,  of  duty;  inspiring  thoughts  of  a  large,  free,  unfettered,  and

unselfish life, are useful bricks with which a substantial mind-temple can be

raised; and the building of such a temple necessitates that old and useless

habits of thought be broken down and destroyed.

  " Build thee more stately mansions, 0 my soul, As the swift seasons roll."  Each man is the builder of himself.


  Working in harmony with the fundamental laws of the universe.

    OC T O B E R EI G H T H.

  IF a man is to build up a successful strong, and exemplary life—a life that

will stoutly resist the fiercest storms of adversity and temptation—it must be

framed on a few, simple, undeviating moral principles.

  Four of these principles are: Justice, Rectitude, Sincerity, and Kindness.

These four ethical truths are to the making of a life what the four lines of a

square are to the building of a house. If a man ignores them and thinks to

obtain success and happiness by injustice, trickery, and selfishness, he is in

the position of a builder who imagines he can build a strong and durable

habitation while ignoring the relative arrangement of mathematical lines, and

he will, in the end, obtain only disappointment and failure.

  Build like a true workman.


  It is a common error to suppose that little things can be passed by, and

that the greater things are more important.

    OC T O B E R NI N T H.

  HE who adopts the four ethical principles as the law and base of his life,

who raises the edifice of character upon them, who in his thoughts and words

and actions does not wander from them, whose every duty and every passing

transaction is performed in strict accordance with their exactions, such a man,

laying  down  the  hidden  foundations  of  integrity  of  heart  securely  and

strongly, cannot fail to raise up a structure which shall bring him honour; and

he is building a temple in which he can repose in peace and blessedness —

even the strong and beautiful Temple of his life.

  He who would have a life secure and blessed must carry the practice of

the moral principles into every detail of it.


  When aspiration is united to concentration, the result is meditation.

    OC T O B E R TE N T H.

  WHEN a man intensely desires to reach and realise a higher, purer, and

more radiant life than the merely worldly and pleasure-loving life, he engages

in aspiration;  and  when  he  earnestly  concentrates  his  thoughts  upon  thefinding of that life, he practises meditation.

  Without  intense  aspiration  there  can  be  no  meditation.  Lethargy  and

indifference are fatal to its practice. The more intense the nature of the man,

the more readily will he find meditation and the more successfully will he

practise  it.  A  fiery  nature  will  most  rapidly  scale  the  heights  of  Truth  in

meditation, when its aspirations have become sufficiently awakened.

    Meditation is necessary to spiritual success.


  When a man aspires to know and realise the Truth, he gives attention to

conduct, to self-purification.

    OC T O B E R EL E V E N T H.

  BY concentration a man can scale the highest heights of genius, but he

cannot  scale  the  heavenly  heights  of  Truth;  to  accomplish  this  he  must

meditate. By concentration a man may acquire the wonderful comprehension

and vast power of a Caesar; by meditation he may reach the divine wisdom

and perfect peace of a Buddha. The perfection of concentration is power; the

perfection of meditation is wisdom. By concentration men acquire skill in the

doing of the things of life—in science, art, trade, etc.—but by meditation they

acquire skill in life itself; in right living, enlightenment, wisdom, etc. Saints,

sages, saviours—wise men and divine teachers— are the finished products of

holy meditation.

  Love Truth so fully and intensely as to become wholly absorbed in it.


  The object of meditation is divine enlightenment, Man is a thought-being,

and  his  life  and  character  are  determined  by  the  thoughts  in  which  he

habitually dwells.

    OC T O B E R TW E L F T H.

    WHILE, at first, the time spent in actual meditation is short—perhaps

only half an hour in the early morning—the knowledge gained in that half-

hour of vivid aspiration and concentrated thought is embodied in practice

during the whole day. In meditation, therefore, the entire life of a man is

involved; and as he advances in its practice he becomes more and more fitted

to perform the duties of life in the circumstances in which he may be placed,

for he becomes stronger, holier, calmer, and wiser.

  The principle of meditation is twofold, namely:  1. Purification of the heart by repetitive thought on pure things.

  2. Attainment of divine knowledge by embodying such purity in practical

life.


  By practice, association, and habit, thoughts tend to repeat themselves.

    OC T O B E R TH I R T E E N T H.

  BY daily dwelling upon pure thoughts, the man of meditation forms the

habit of pure and enlightened thinking which leads to pure and enlightened

actions  and  well-performed  duties.  By  the  ceaseless  repetition  of  pure

thoughts, he at last becomes one with those thoughts, and is a purified being,

manifesting his attainment in pure actions, in a serene and wise life.

  The  majority  of  men  live  in  a  series  of  conflicting  desires,  passions,

emotions,  and  speculations,  and  there  are  restlessness,  uncertainty,  and

sorrow; but when a man begins to train his mind in meditation, he gradually

gains control over this inward conflict by bringing his thoughts to a focus

upon a central principle.

  It is easy to mistake reverie for meditation.


  Selfishness, the root of the tree of evil and of all suffering, derives its

nourishment from the dark soil of ignorance.

    OC T O B E R FO U R T E E N T H.

  THE rich and the poor alike suffer for their own selfishness; and none

escape.  The  rich  have  their  particular  sufferings  as  well  as  the  poor.

Moreover, the rich are continually losing their riches; the poor are continually

acquiring them. The poor man of to-day is the rich man of to-morrow, and

vice versa. Fear, also, follows men like a great shadow, for the man who

obtains and holds by selfish force will always be haunted by a feeling of

insecurity, and will continually fear its loss; whilst the poor man, who is

selfishly seeking or coveting material riches, will be harassed by the fear of

destitution.  And  one  and  all  who  live  in  this  under-world  of  strife  are

overshadowed by one great fear—the fear of death.

  Each individual suffers by virtue of his own selfishness.


  The  spirit  is  strengthened  and  renewed  by  meditation  upon  spiritual

things.    OC T O B E R FI F T E E N T H.

  A MAN must pass through three Gateways of Surrender. The first is the

Surrender of Desire; the second is the Surrender of Opinion; the third is the

Surrender of Self. Entering into meditation, he will commence to examine his

desires, tracing them out in his mind, and following up their effects in his life

and  upon  his  character;  and  he  will  quickly  perceive  that,  without  the

renunciation  of  desire,  a  man  remains  a  slave  both  to  himself  and  to  his

surroundings and circumstances. Having discovered this, the first Gate, that

of the Surrender of Desire, is entered. Passing through this Gate, he adopts a

process of self-discipline which is the first step in the purification of the soul.

  The lamp of faith must be continually fed and assiduously trimmed.


  The loss of to-day will add to the gain of to-morrow for him whose mind

is set on the conquest of self.

    OC T O B E R SI X T E E N T H.

  LET  a  man,  therefore,  press  on  courageously,  heeding  neither  the

revilings of his friends without, nor the clamourings of his enemies within;

aspiring, searching, striving; looking ever towards his Ideal with eyes of holy

love;  day  by  day  ridding  his  mind  of  selfish  motive,  his  heart  of  impure

desire; stumbling sometimes, sometimes falling, but ever travelling onward

and rising higher; and recording each night in the silence of his own heart the

journey of the day, let him not despair if but each day, in spite of all its

failures and falls, records some holy battle fought, though lost, some silent

victory attempted, though unachieved.

  Learn to distinguish between the real and the unreal, the shadow and the

substance.


  Acquire the priceless possession of spiritual discernment.

    OC T O B E R SE V E N T E E N T H.

    CLOTHING his soul with the colourless Garment of Humility, a man

bends all his energies to the uprooting of those opinions which he has hitherto

loved and cherished. He now learns to distinguish between Truth, which is

one and unchangeable, and his own and others’ opinions about Truth, which

are many and changeable. He sees that his opinions about Goodness, Purity,

Compassion, and Love, are very distinct from those qualities themselves, andthat he must stand upon those divine Principles, and not on his own opinions.

Hitherto he has regarded his own opinions as of great value, but now he

ceases so to elevate his own opinions, and to defend them against those of

others, and comes to regard them as utterly worthless.

  Stand upon the divine Principles of Purity, Wisdom, Compassion, and

Love.


  Find the Divine Centre within.

    OC T O B E R EI G H T E E N T H.

  HE  who  resolves  that  he  will  not  rest  satisfied  with  appearances,

shadows, illusions shall, by the piercing light of that resolve, disperse every

fleeting phantasy, and shall enter into the substance and reality of life. He

shall learn how to live, and he shall live. He shall be the slave of no passion,

the servant of no opinion, the votary of no fond error. Finding the Divine

Centre within his own heart, he shall be pure and calm and strong and wise,

and will ceaselessly radiate the Heavenly Life in which he lives—which is

himself.

  Not to know that within you that is changeless, and defiant of time and

death,  is  not  to  know  anything,  but  is  to  play  vainly  with  unsubstantial

reflections in the Mirror of Time.


    Having  betaken  himself  to  the  Divine  Refuge  within,  and  remaining

there, a man is free from sin. No doubt shall shake his trust, no uncertainty

shall rob him of repose.

    OC T O B E R NI N E T E E N T H.

  MEN love their desires, for gratification seems sweet to them, but its end

is pain and vacuity; they love the argumentations of the intellect, for egotism

seems  most  desirable  to  them,  but  the  fruits  thereof  are  humiliation  and

sorrow. When the soul has reached the end of gratification and reaped the

bitter fruits of egotism, it is ready to receive the Divine Wisdom and to enter

into the Divine Life. Only the crucified can be transfigured; only by the death

of self can the Lord of the heart rise again into the Immortal Life, and stand

radiant upon the Olivet of Wisdom.

  Where self is not, there is the Garden of the Heavenly Life.  Life is more than motion, it is Music; more than rest, it is Peace; more

than work, it is Duty; more than labour, it is Love.

    OC T O B E R TW E N T I E T H.

  LET the impure turn to Purity, and they shall be pure; let the weak resort

to Strength, and they shall be strong; let the ignorant fly to Knowledge, and

they shall be wise. All things are man’s, and he chooses that which he will

have. To-day he chooses in ignorance, to-morrow he shall choose in wisdom.

He shall "work out his own salvation," whether he believe it or not, for he

cannot escape himself, nor transfer to another the eternal responsibility of his

own soul. By no theological subterfuge shall he trick the Law of his being,

which shall shatter all his selfish makeshifts and excuses for right thinking

and right doing. Nor shall God do for him that which it is destined his soul

shall accomplish for itself.

  Life is more than enjoyment, it is Blessedness.


  He who would find Blessedness, let him find himself.

    OC T O B E R TW E N T Y-F I R S T.

  MEN fly from creed to creed, and find unrest; they travel in many lands,

and  discover—disappointment;  they  build  themselves  beautiful  mansions,

and plant pleasant gardens, and reap—ennui and discomfort. Not until a man

falls back upon the Truth within himself does he find rest and satisfaction;

not until he builds the inward Mansion of Faultless Conduct does he find the

endless and incorruptible Joy, and, having obtained that, he will infuse it into

all his doings and possessions.

  When a man can no longer carry the weight of his many sins, let him fly

to  the  Christ,  whose  throne  is  the  centre  of  his  own  heart,  and  he  shall

become light-hearted, entering the glad company of the Immortals.

  The spiritual Heart of man is the Heart of the universe.


  All power, all possibility, all action is now.

    OC T O B E R TW E N T Y-S E C O N D.

    WHILST a man is dwelling upon the past or future he is missing the

present; he is forgetting to live now. All things are possible now, and only

now. Without wisdom to guide him, and mistaking the unreal for the real, a

man says, " If I had done so-and-so last week, last month, or last year, itwould have been better with me to-day"; or, " I know what is best to be done,

and  I  will  do  it  to-morrow."  The  selfish  cannot  comprehend  the  vast

importance and value of the present, and fail to see it as the substantial reality

of which past and future are the empty reflections. It may truly be said that

past and future do not exist except as negative shadows, and to live in them—

that is, in the regretful and selfish contemplation of them —is to miss the

reality in life.

  To put away regret, to anchor anticipation, to do and work now, this is

wisdom.


  Virtue consists in fighting sin day after day,

    OC T O B E R TW E N T Y-T H I R D.

  CEASE to tread every byway of dependence, every winding side way that

tempts thy soul into the shadow land of the past and the future, and manifest

thy native and divine strength now. Come out into " the open road."

  That  which  you  would  be,  and  hope  to  be,  you  may  be  now.  Non-

accomplishment  resides  in  your  perpetual  postponement,  and,  having  the

power to postpone, you also have the power to accomplish—to perpetually

accomplish; realise this truth, and you shall be to-day, and every day, the

ideal man of whom you dreamed.

  Act now, and lo! all things are done; live now, and behold! thou art in the

midst of Plenty; be now, and know that thou art perfect.

    Holiness consists in leaving sin, unnoticed and ignored, to die by the

wayside.


  Say not unto thy soul, " Thou shalt be purer tomorrow "; but rather say, "

Thou shalt be pure now."

    OC T O B E R TW E N T Y-F O U R T H.

    TO-MORROW  is  too  late  for  anything,  and  he  who  sees  help  and

salvation in to-morrow shall continually fail and fall to-day. Thou didst fall

yesterday! Didst sin grievously! Having realised this, leave it instantly and

forever, and watch that thou sinnest not now. The while thou art bewailing

the past every gate of thy soul remains unguarded against the entrance of sin

now.

  The foolish man, loving the boggy side of procrastination rather than thefirm highway of Present Effort, says, " I will rise early tomorrow; I will get

out of debt to-morrow; I will carry out my intentions to-morrow," But the

wise man, realising the momentous import of the Eternal Now, rises early to-

day; keeps out of debt to-day; carries out his intentions to-day; and so never

departs from strength and peace and ripe accomplishment.

  Thou  shalt  not  rise  by  grieving  over  the  irremediable  past,  but  by

remedying the present.


  Looking back to happy beginnings, and forward to mournful endings, a

man’s eyes are blinded so that he beholds not his own immortality.

    OC T O B E R TW E N T Y-F I F T H.

  IT is wisdom to leave that which has not arrived, and to attend to that

which  is;  and  to  attend  to  it  with  such  a  consecration  of  soul  and

concentration of effort as shall leave no loophole for regret to creep in.

  A man’s spiritual comprehension being clouded by the illusions of self,

he says, " I was born on such a day, so many years ago, and shall die at my

allotted time." But he was not born, neither will he die, for how can that

which is immortal, which eternally is, be subject to birth and death? Let a

man throw off his illusions, and then he will see that the birth and death of

the body are the mere incidents of a journey, and not its beginning and end.

  The universe, with all that it contains, is now.


  Let a man put away egotism, and he will see the universe in all the beauty

of its pristine simplicity.

    OC T O B E R TW E N T Y-S I X T H.

  LET life cease to be lived as a fragmentary thing, and let it be lived as a

perfect Whole; the simplicity of the Perfect will then be revealed. How shall

the fragment comprehend the Whole? Yet how simple that the Whole should

comprehend the fragment. How shall sin perceive Holiness? Yet how plain

that Holiness should understand sin. He who would become the Greater let

him abandon the lesser. In no form is the circle contained, but in the circle all

forms are contained. In no colour is the radiant light imprisoned, but in the

radiant light all colours are embodied. Let a man destroy all the forms of self,

and he shall apprehend the Circle of Perfection.

  When a man succeeds in entirely forgetting (annihilating) his personalself,  he  becomes  a  mirror  in  which  the  universal  Reality  is  faultlessly

reflected.


  In  the  perfect  chord  of  music  the  single  note,  though  forgotten,  is

indispensably  contained,  and  the  drop  of  water  becomes  of  supreme

usefulness by losing itself in the ocean.

    OC T O B E R TW E N T Y-S E V E N T H.

  SINK thyself compassionately in the heart of humanity, and thou shalt

reproduce the harmonies of Heaven; lose thyself in unlimited love toward all,

and thou shalt work enduring works and shalt become one with the eternal

Ocean of Bliss.

  Man evolves outward to the periphery of complexity, and then involves

backward  to  the  Central  Simplicity.  When  a  man  discovers  that  it  is

mathematically  impossible  for  him  to  know  the  universe  before  knowing

himself, he then starts upon the Way which leads to Original Simplicity. He

begins  to  unfold  from  within,  and  as  he  unfolds  himself,  he  enfolds  the

universe.

  Cease to speculate about God, and find the all-embracing Good within

thee.


  The pure man knows himself as pure being.

    OC T O B E R TW E N T Y-E I G H T H.

  HE who will not give up his secret lust, his covetousness, his anger, his

opinion about this or that, can see nor know nothing; he will remain a dullard

in the school of Wisdom, though he be accounted learned in the colleges.

  If a man would find the key of Knowledge, let him find himself. Thy sins

are not thyself; they are not any part of thyself; they are diseases which thou

hast come to love. Cease to cling to them, and they will no longer cling to

thee. Let them fall away, and thyself shall stand revealed. Thou shalt know

thyself as Comprehensive Vision, Invincible Principle, Immortal Life, and

Eternal Good.

  Purity is extremely simple, and needs no argument to support it.


  Truth lives itself.

    OC T O B E R TW E N T Y-N I N T H.    MEEKNESS, Patience, Love, Compassion, and Wisdom—these are the

dominant  qualities  of  Original  Simplicity;  therefore  the  imperfect  cannot

understand it. Wisdom only can apprehend Wisdom, therefore the fool says, "

No man is wise." The imperfect man says, " No man can be perfect," and he

therefore remains where he is. Though he live with a perfect man all his life,

he shall not behold his perfection. Meekness he will call cowardice; Patience,

Love, Compassion he will see as weakness; and Wisdom will appear to him

as folly. Faultless discrimination belongs to the Perfect Whole, and resides

not in any part, therefore men are exhorted to refrain from judgment until

they have themselves manifested the Perfect Life.

  A blameless life is the only witness of Truth.


  He who has found the indwelling Reality of his own being has found the

original and universal Reality.

    OC T O B E R TH I R T I E T H.

    KNOWING  the  Divine  Heart  within,  all  hearts  are  known,  and  the

thoughts of all men become his who has become master of his own thoughts;

therefore the good man does not defend himself, but moulds the minds of

others to his own likeness.

  As the problematical transcends crudity, so Pure Goodness transcends the

problematical.  All  problems  vanish  when  Pure  Goodness  is  reached;

therefore the Good man is called " The Slayer of illusions." What problem

can vex where sin is not? O thou who strivest loudly and resteth not! retire

into the holy silence of thine own being, and live therefrom. So shalt thou,

finding Pure Goodness, rend in twain the Veil of the Temple of Illusion, and

shalt enter into the Patience, Peace, and transcendent Glory of the Perfect, for

Pure Goodness and Original Simplicity are one.

  So extremely simple is Original Simplicity that a man must let go his

hold of everything before he can perceive it.


  Great will be his pain and unrest who seeks to stand upon the approbation

of others.

    OC T O B E R TH I R T Y-F I R S T.

  TO detach oneself from every outward thing, and to rest securely upon

the inward virtue, this is the Unfailing Wisdom. Having this Wisdom, a manwill be the same whether in riches or poverty. The one cannot add to his

strength, nor the other rob him of his serenity. Neither can riches defile him

who has washed away all the inward defilement, nor the lack of them degrade

him who has ceased to degrade the temple of his soul.

  To refuse to be enslaved by any outward thing or happening, regarding all

such  things  and  happenings  as  for  your  use,  for  your  education,  this  is

Wisdom. To the wise all occurrences are good, and, having no eye for evil,

they grow wiser every day. They utilise all things, and thus put all things

under their feet. They see all their mistakes as soon as made, and accept them

as lessons of intrinsic value, knowing that there are no mistakes in the Divine

Order.

  To love where one is not loved; herein lies the strength which shall never

fail a man.                                  NOVEMBER


  The wise man is always anxious to learn, but never anxious to teach.

    NO V E M B E R FI R S T.

  ALL strength and wisdom and power and knowledge a man will find

within himself, but he will not find it in egotism; he will only find it in

obedience, submission, and willingness to learn. He must obey the higher and

not  glorify  himself  in  the  lower.  He  who  stands  upon  egotism,  rejecting

reproof, instruction, and the lessons of experience, will surely fall; yea, he is

already fallen. Said a great teacher to his disciples, " Those who shall be a

lamp unto themselves, relying upon themselves only, and not relying upon

any external help, but holding fast to the Truth as their lamp, and, seeking

their salvation in the Truth alone, shall not look for assistance to any beside

themselves, it is they among my disciples who shall reach the very topmost

height! But they must be willing to learn." The true Teacher is in the heart of

every man.


  Dispersion is weakness; concentration is power.

    NO V E M B E R SE C O N D.

  THINGS are useful and thoughts are powerful in the measure that their

parts  are  strongly  and  intelligently  concentrated.  Purpose  is  highly

concentrated thought. All the mental energies are directed to the attainment of

an object, and obstacles which intervene between the thinker and the object

are, one after another, broken down and overcome. Purpose is the keystone in

the temple of achievement. It binds and holds together in a complete whole

that  which  would  otherwise  lie  scattered  and  useless.  Empty  whims,

ephemeral fancies, vague desires, and half-hearted resolutions have no place

in  purpose.  In  the  sustained  determination  to  accomplish  there  is  an

invincible power which swallows up all inferior considerations and marches

direct to victory.

  All successful men are men of purpose.


  Know this—thou makest and unmakest thyself.    NO V E M B E R TH I R D.

  DOUBT, anxiety, and worry are unsubstantial shades in the underworld

of self, and shall no more trouble him who will climb the serene altitudes of

his soul. Grief, also, will be for ever dispelled by him who will comprehend

the Law of his being. He who so comprehends shall find the Supreme Law of

Life, and he shall find that it is Love, that it is imperishable Love. He shall

become one with Love, and loving all, with mind freed from all hatred and

folly, he shall receive the invincible protection which Love affords. Claiming

nothing, he shall suffer no loss; seeking no pleasure, he shall find no grief;

and employing all his powers as instruments of service, he shall evermore

live in the highest state of blessedness and bliss.

  Thou art a slave if thou preferrest to be; thou art a master if thou wilt

make thyself one.


  He who has found Meekness has found divinity.

    NO V E M B E R FO U R T H.

  THE mountain bends not to the fiercest storm, but it shields the fledgling

and the lamb; and though all men tread upon it, yet it protects them, and bears

them up upon its deathless bosom. Even so is it with the meek man who,

though shaken and disturbed by none, yet compassionately bends to shield

the lowliest creature, and, though he may be despised, lifts up all men, and

lovingly protects them.

  As glorious as the mountain in its silent might is the divine man in his

silent  Meekness;  like  its  form,  his  loving  compassion  is  expansive  and

sublime. Truly his body, like the mountain’s base, is fixed in the valleys and

the mists; but the summit of his being is eternally bathed in cloudless glory,

and lives with the Silence.

  The meek man has realised the divine consciousness and knows himself

as divine.


  He  who  lives  in  Meekness  is  without  fear,  knowing  the  Highest, and

having the lowest under his feet.

    NO V E M B E R FI F T H.

  THE meek man shines in darkness, and flourishes in obscurity. Meekness

cannot boast, nor advertise itself, nor thrive on popularity. It is practised, andis seen and not seen; being a spiritual quality it is perceived only by the eye

of the spirit. Those who are not spiritually awakened see it not, nor do they

love it, being enamoured of, and blinded by, worldly shows and appearances.

Nor does history take note of the meek man. Its glory is that of strife and self-

aggrandisement; his is the glory of peace and gentleness. History chronicles

the earthly, not the heavenly acts. Yet though he lives in obscurity, he cannot

be  hidden  (how  can  light  be  hid?);  he  continues  to  shine  after  he  has

withdrawn himself from the world, and is worshipped by the world which

knew him not.

  The meek man is found in the time of trial; when other men fall he stands.


  The meek man resists none, and thereby conquers all.

    NO V E M B E R SI X T H.

  HE who imagines he can be injured by others, and who seeks to justify

and defend himself against them, does not understand Meekness, does not

comprehend the essence and meaning of life. " He abused me, he beat me, he

defeated me, he robbed me. In those who harbour such thoughts hatred will

never cease ... for hatred ceases not by hatred at any time; hatred ceases by

love." What sayest thou? Thy neighbour has spoken thee falsely? Well, what

of that? Can a falsity hurt thee? That which is false is false, and there is an

end of it. It is without life, and without power to hurt any but him who seeks

to be hurt by it. It is nothing to thee that thy neighbour should speak falsely of

thee, but it is much to thee that thou shouldst resist him, and seek to justify

thyself,  for,  by  so  doing,  thou  givest  life  and  vitality  to  thy  neighbour’s

falseness, so that thou art injured and distressed.

  Take  all  evil  out  of  thine  own  heart,  then  shalt  thou  see  the  folly  of

resisting it in another.


  Great is the power of purpose.

    NO V E M B E R SE V E N T H.

    PURPOSE goes with intelligence.

  There  are  lesser  and  greater  purposes,  according  with  degrees  of

intelligence.

  A great mind will always be great of purpose. A weak intelligence will be

without purpose. A drifting mind argues a measure of undevelopment.  The men who have moulded the destinies of humanity have been men

mighty of purpose. Like the Roman laying his road, they have followed along

a well-defined path, and have refused to swerve aside even when torture and

death confronted them. The Great Leaders of the race are the mental road-

makers, and mankind follows in the intellectual and spiritual paths which

they have carved out and beaten.

  Inert matter yields to a living force, and circumstance succumbs to the

power of purpose.


  All things at last yield to the silent, irresistible all-conquering energy of

purpose.

    NO V E M B E R EI G H T H.

  THE  weak  man,  who  grieves  because  he  is  misunderstood,  will  not

greatly achieve; the vain man, who steps aside from his resolve in order to

please others and gain their approbation, will not highly achieve; the double-

minded man, who thinks to compromise his purpose, will fail. The man of

fixed  purpose  who,  whether  misunderstandings  and  foul  accusations,  or

flatteries and fair promises, rain upon him, does not yield a fraction of his

resolve is the man of excellence and achievement; of success, greatness, and

power.

    Hindrances stimulate a man of purpose; difficulties nerve him to renewed

exertion; mistakes, losses, pains, do not subdue him; and failures are steps in

the  ladder  of  success,  for  he  is  ever  conscious  of  the  certainty  of  final

achievement.

  The intensity of the purpose increases with the growing magnitude of the

obstacles encountered.


  Joy is always the accompaniment of a task successfully accomplished.

    NO V E M B E R NI N T H.

  OF all miserable men, the shirker is the most miserable. Thinking to find

ease and happiness in avoiding difficult tasks, which require the expenditure

of labour and exertion, his mind is always uneasy and disturbed, he becomes

burdened with an inward sense of shame, and forfeits manliness and self-

respect. " He  who  will  not  work  according  to  his  faculty,  let  him  perish

according to his necessity," says Carlyle; and it is a moral law that the manwho avoids duty, and does not work to the full extent of his capacity, does

actually perish, first in his character, and last in his body and circumstances.

Life  and  action  are  synonymous,  and  immediately  a  man  tries  to  escape

exertion, either physical or mental, he has commenced to decay.

  An undertaking completed, or a piece of work done, always brings rest

and satisfaction.


  The price of life is effort.

    NO V E M B E R TE N T H.

  EVERY  successful  accomplishment,  even  in  worldly  things,  is  repaid

with its own measure of joy; and in spiritual things the joy which supervenes

upon  the  perfection  of  purpose  is  sure,  deep,  and  abiding.  Great  is  the

heartfelt  joy  (albeit  ineffable)  when,  after  innumerable  and  apparently

unsuccessful attempts, some ingrained fault of character is at last cast out, to

trouble its erstwhile victim and the world no more. The striver after virtue—

he who is engaged in the holy task of building up a noble character—tastes,

at every step of conquest over self, a joy which does not leave him again, but

which becomes an integral part of his spiritual nature.

  The reward of accomplishment is joy.


    Everything that happens is just.

    NO V E M B E R EL E V E N T H.

  AS you think, you travel; as you love, you attract. You are to-day where

your thoughts have brought you; you will be to-morrow where your thoughts

take you. You cannot escape the results of your thoughts, but you can endure

and learn, can accept and be glad.

  You will always come to the place where your love (your most abiding

and intense thought) can receive its measure of gratification. If your love be

base, you will come to a base place; if it be beautiful, you will come to a

beautiful place.

  You  can  alter  your  thoughts,  and  so  alter  your  condition.  You  are

powerful, not powerless.

  Nothing is fated, everything is formed.


  The man whose thoughts, words, and acts are sincere is surrounded bysincere friends; the insincere man is surrounded by insincere friends.

    NO V E M B E R TW E L F T H.

  EVERY fact and process in Nature contains a moral lesson for the wise

man. There is no law in the world which is not to be found operating with the

same mathematical certainty in the mind of man and in human life. All the

parables of Jesus are illustrative of this truth, and are drawn from the simple

facts of Nature. There is a process of seed-sowing in the mind and life, a

spiritual sowing which leads to a harvest according to the kind of seed sown.

Thoughts,  words,  and  acts  are  seeds  sown,  and,  by  the  inviolable  law  of

things, they produce after their kind.

  The man who thinks hateful thoughts brings hatred upon himself. The

man who thinks loving thoughts is loved.

  When you know yourself you will perceive that every event in your life is

weighed in the faultless balance of equity.


  He who would be blessed, let him scatter blessings.

    NO V E M B E R TH I R T E E N T H.

  THE farmer must scatter all his seed upon the land, and then leave it to

the elements. Were he to covetously hoard his seed, he would lose both it and

his produce, for his seed would perish. It perishes when he sows it, but in

perishing it brings forth a greater abundance. So in life, we get by giving; we

grow rich by scattering. The man who says he is in possession of knowledge

which he cannot give out because the world is incapable of receiving it either

does not possess such knowledge, or, if he does, will soon be deprived of it—

if he is not already deprived of it. To hoard is to lose; to exclusively retain is

to be dispossessed.

  He who would be happy, let him consider the happiness of others.


  Men reap that which they sow.

    NO V E M B E R FO U R T E E N T H.

  IF a man is troubled, perplexed, sorrowful, or unhappy, let him ask:

  " What mental seeds have I been sowing? "

  " What seeds am I sowing? "

  " What is my attitude towards others? "  " What seeds of trouble and sorrow and unhappiness have I sown that I

should thus reap these bitter weeds? "

  Let him seek within and find, and having found, let him abandon all the

seeds of self, and sow, henceforth, only the seeds of Truth.

  Let  him  learn  of  the  farmer  the  simple  truths  of  wisdom,  and  sow

broadcast the seeds of kindness, gentleness, and love.

  The  way  to  obtain  peace  and  blessedness  is  to  scatter  peaceful  and

blessed thoughts, words, and deeds.


    Destroying the idols of self, we draw nearer to the great, silent Heart of

Love.

    NO V E M B E R FI F T E E N T H.

  WE  have  reached  one  of  those  epochs  in  the  world’s  progress  which

witnesses the passing of the false gods; the gods of human selfishness and

human illusion. The new-old revelation of one universal impersonal Truth

has  again  dawned  upon  the  world,  and  its  searching  light  has  carried

consternation to the perishable gods who take shelter under the shadow of

self.

  Men have lost faith in a god who can be cajoled, who rules arbitrarily and

capriciously, subverting the whole order of things to gratify the wishes of his

worshippers, and are turning, with a new light in their hearts, to the God of

Law. And to Him they turn, not for personal happiness and gratification, but

for  knowledge,  for  understanding,  for  wisdom,  for  liberation  from  the

bondage of self.

  Enter the Path of obedience to the Law.


    Perfection, which is knowledge of the Perfect Law, is ready for all who

earnestly seek it.

    NO V E M B E R SI X T E E N T H.

  ENTERING that Path—the Path of the Supreme Law—men no longer

accuse, no longer doubt, no longer fret and despond, for they know now that

God is right, the universal laws are right, the cosmos is right, and that they

themselves are wrong, if wrong there is, and that their salvation depends

upon themselves, upon their own efforts, upon their personal acceptance of

that which is good, and deliberate rejection of that which is evil. No longermerely hearers, they become doers of the Word, and they acquire knowledge,

they receive understanding, they grow in wisdom, and they enter into the

glorious life of liberation from the bondage of self.

  Adopt the life of self-obliteration.


  God does not alter for man, for this would mean that the perfect must

become imperfect; man must alter for God.

    NO V E M B E R SE V E N T E E N T H.

  THE Children of Truth are in the world to-day; they are thinking, writing,

speaking, acting; yea, even prophets are amongst us, and their influence is

pervading the whole earth. An undercurrent of holy joy is gathering force in

the  world,  so  that  men  and  women  are  moved  with  new  aspirations  and

hopes, and even those who neither see nor hear, feel within them strange

yearnings after a better and fuller life.

  The Law reigns, and it reigns in men’s hearts and lives; they have come

to understand the reign of Law who have sought out the Tabernacle of the

true God by the fair pathway of unselfishness.

  The Law cannot be broken for man, otherwise confusion would ensue;

this is in accordance with harmony, order, justice.


  There  is  no  more  painful  bondage  than  to  be  at  the  mercy  of  one’s

inclinations.

    NO V E M B E R EI G H T E E N T H.

  THE Law is that the heart shall be purified, the mind regenerated, and the

whole being brought in subjection to Love, till self be dead and Love is all in

all, for the reign of Law is the reign of Love. And Love waits for all, rejecting

none. Love may be claimed and entered into now, for it is the heritage of all.

  Ah,  beautiful  Truth!  To  know  that now man  may  accept  his  divine

heritage, and enter the Kingdom of Heaven!

  Oh, pitiful error! To know that man rejects it because of love of self!

    Obedience to one’s selfish inclinations means the drawing about one’s

soul clouds of pain and sorrow which darken the light of Truth; the shutting

out of oneself from all real blessedness; for " whatsoever a man sows that

shall he also reap."  There is no greater liberty than utmost obedience to the Law of Being.


  The moral universe is sustained and protected by the perfect balance of its

equivalents.

    NO V E M B E R NI N E T E E N T H.

  IS there, then, no injustice in the universe? There is injustice, and there is

not. It depends upon the kind of life and the state of consciousness from

which a man looks out upon the world and judges. The man who lives in his

passions sees injustice everywhere; the man who has overcome his passions,

sees the operations of Justice in every department of human life.

  Injustice is the confused feverish dream of passion, real enough to those

who are dreaming it; Justice is the permanent reality in life, gloriously visible

to those who have wakened out of the painful nightmare of self.

  As  in  the  physical  world  Nature  abhors  a  vacuum,  so  in  the  spiritual

world disharmony is annulled.


  The  Divine  Order  cannot  be  perceived  until  passion  and  self  are

transcended.

    NO V E M B E R TW E N T I E T H.

  THE man who thinks, " I have been slighted, I have been injured, I have

been insulted, I have been treated unjustly," cannot know what justice is;

blinded  by  self,  he  cannot  perceive  the  pure  Principles  of  Truth,  and,

brooding upon his wrongs, he lives in continual misery.

  In the region of passion there is a ceaseless conflict of forces causing

suffering to all who are involved in them. There is action and reaction, deed

and consequence, cause and effect; and within and above all is the divine

Justice regulating the play of forces with the utmost mathematical accuracy,

balancing cause and effect with the finest precision.

  Justice is not perceived—cannot be perceived—by those who are engaged

in conflict.


    Having no knowledge of cause and effect in the moral sphere, men do not

see the exacting process which is momentarily proceeding.

    NO V E M B E R TW E N T Y-F I R S T.

  MEN  blindly  inflict  suffering  upon  themselves,  living  in  passion  andresentment, and not finding the true way of life. Hatred is met with hatred,

passion with passion, strife with strife. The man who kills is himself killed;

the thief who lives by depriving others, is himself deprived; the beast that

preys on others is hunted and killed; the accuser is accused, the condemner is

condemned, the denouncer is persecuted. " By this the slayer’s knife doth

stab himself, The unjust judge has lost his own defender, The false tongue

dooms its lie, the creeping thief And spoiler rob to render.

  " Such is the Law."

  Ignorance keeps alive hatred and strife.


  Cause and effect cannot be avoided; consequence cannot be escaped.

    NO V E M B E R TW E N T Y-S E C O N D.

  THE good man, having put away all resentment, retaliation, self-seeking,

and egotism, has arrived at a state of equilibrium, and has thereby become

identified with the Eternal and Universal Equilibrium. Having lifted himself

above the blind forces of passion, he understands those forces, contemplates

them with a calm penetrating insight, like the solitary dweller on a mountain

who looks down upon the conflict of the storms beneath his feet. For him,

injustice has ceased, and he sees ignorance and suffering on the one hand,

and enlightenment and bliss on the other. He sees that not only do the fool

and the slave need his sympathy, but that the fraud and the oppressor are

equally in need of it, and so his compassion is extended towards all.

    Unerring Justice presides over all.


  They who refuse to trim their lamps of reason will never perceive the

Light of Truth.

    NO V E M B E R TW E N T Y-T H I R D.

  HE who will use the light of reason as a torch to search for Truth, will not

be left at last in comfortless darkness.

  " Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord; though your sins

be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow."

  Many men and women pass through untold sufferings, and at last die in

their sins, because they refuse to reason; because they cling to those dark

delusions which even a faint glimmer of the light of reason would dispel; and

all must use their reason freely, fully, and faithfully, who would exchange thescarlet robe of sin and suffering for the white garment of blessedness and

peace.

  They who despise the light of reason, despise the Light of Truth.


  A  man  does  not  live  until  he  begins  to  discipline  himself;  he  merely

exists.

    NO V E M B E R TW E N T Y-F O U R T H.

  BEFORE a man can accomplish anything of an enduring nature in the

world  he  must  first  of  all  acquire  some  measure  of  success  in  the

management of his own mind. This is as mathematical a truism as that two

and two are four, for " out of the heart are the issues of life." If a man cannot

govern the forces within himself, he cannot long hold a firm hand upon the

outer  activities  which  form  the  visible  life.  On  the  other  hand,  as  a  man

succeeds in governing himself he rises to higher and higher levels of power

and usefulness and success in the world. Hitherto his life has been without

purpose  or  meaning,  but  now  he  begins  to  consciously  mould  his  own

destiny; he is " clothed and in his right mind."

  With the practice of self-discipline a man begins to live.


  In  the  process  of  self-discipline  there  are  three  stages— control,

purification, and relinquishment.

    NO V E M B E R TW E N T Y-FI F T H.

  A MAN begins to discipline himself by controlling those passions which

have  hitherto  controlled  him;  he  resists  temptation,  and  guards  himself

against all those tendencies to selfish gratifications which are so easy and

natural, and which have formerly dominated him. He brings his appetite into

subjection, and begins to eat as a reasonable and responsible being, practising

moderation and thoughtfulness in the selection of his food, with the object of

making his body a pure instrument through which he may live and act as

becomes a man, and no longer degrading that body by pandering to gustatory

pleasure. He puts a check upon his tongue, his temper, and, in fact, his every

animal desire and tendency.

  There is in the heart of every man and woman a selfless centre.


  The Rock of Ages, the Christ within, the divine and immortal in all men!    NO V E M B E R TW E N T Y-S I X T H.

  AS a man practises self-control he approximates more and more to the

inward reality, and is less and less swayed by passion and grief, pleasure and

pain, and lives a steadfast and virtuous life, manifesting manly strength and

fortitude. The restraining of the passions, however, is merely the initial stage

in self-discipline, and is immediately followed by the process of Purification.

By this a man so purifies himself as to take passion out of the heart and mind

altogether; not merely restraining it when it rises within him, but preventing it

from rising altogether. By merely restraining his passions a man can never

arrive at peace, can never actualise his ideal; he must purify these passions.

  It is in the purification of his lower nature that a man becomes strong and

godlike.


    Purification is effected by thoughtful care, earnest meditation, and holy

aspiration.

    NO V E M B E R TW E N T Y-S E V E N T H.

  TRUE strength and power and usefulness are born of self-purification, for

the lower animal forces are not lost, but are transmuted into intellectual and

spiritual  energy.  The  pure  life  (pure  in  thought  and  deed)  is  a  life  of

conservation of energy; the impure life (even should the impurity not extend

beyond thought) is a life of dissipation of energy. The pure man is more

capable, and therefore more fit to succeed in his plans and to accomplish his

purposes than the impure. Where the impure man fails, the pure man will step

in and be victorious, because he directs his energies with a calmer mind and a

greater definiteness and strength of purpose.

  With the growth in purity, all the elements which constitute a strong and

virtuous manhood are developed.


  By self-discipline a man rises higher and higher, approximating more and

more nearly to the divine.

    NO V E M B E R TW E N T Y-E I G H T H.

  AS a man grows purer, he perceives that all evil is powerless, unless it

receives his encouragement, and so he ignores it, and lets it pass out of his

life. It is by pursuing this aspect of self-discipline that a man enters into and

realises  the  divine  life,  and  manifests  those  qualities  which  are  distinctlydivine, such as wisdom, patience, non-resistance, compassion, and love. It is

here, also, where a man becomes consciously immortal, rising above all the

fluctuations  and  uncertainties  of  life,  and  living  in  an  intelligent  and

unchangeable peace.

  By self-discipline a man attains to every degree of virtue and holiness,

and finally becomes a purified son of God, realising his oneness with the

central heart of all things.


  A life without resolution is a life without aims, and a life without aims is

a drifting and unstable thing.

    NO V E M B E R TW E N T Y-N I N T H.

  WHEN a man makes a resolution, it means that he is dissatisfied with his

condition,  and  is  commencing  to  take  himself  in  hand,  with  a  view  to

producing a better piece of workmanship out of the mental materials of which

his  character  and  life  are  composed,  and  in  so  far  as  he  is  true  to  his

resolution he will succeed in accomplishing his purpose.

  The vows of the saintly ones are holy resolutions directed toward some

victory  over  self,  and  the  beautiful  achievements  of  holy  men  and  the

glorious conquests of the Divine Teachers were rendered possible and actual

by unswerving resolution.

    Resolution—the companion of noble aims and lofty ideals.


  True resolution is the crisis of long thought,

    NO V E M B E R TH I R T I E T H.

    HALF-HEARTED and premature resolution is no resolution at all, and is

shattered at the first difficulty.

  A  man  should  be  slow  to  form  a  resolution.  He  should  searchingly

examine  his  position  and  take  into  consideration  every  circumstance  and

difficulty with his decision, and should be fully prepared to meet them. He

should be sure that he completely understands the nature of his resolution,

that his mind is finally made up, and that he is without doubt in the matter.

With  the  mind  thus  prepared,  the  resolution  that  is  formed  will  not  be

departed from, and by the aid of it a man will, in due time, accomplish his

strong purpose.

  Hasty resolutions are futile.                                  DECEMBER


  Indolence is the twin sister of indifference, hat ready action is the friend

of contentment.

    DE C E M B E R FI R S T.

    CONTENTMENT is a virtue which becomes lofty and spiritual, as the

mind is trained to perceive and the heart to receive the guidance, in all things,

of a merciful law.

  To be contented does not mean to forgo effort; it means to free effort

from anxiety; it does not mean to be satisfied with sin and ignorance and

folly, but to rest happily in duty done, and work accomplished.

  A man may be said to be content to lead a grovelling life, to remain in sin

and in debt, but such a man’s true state is one of indifference to his duty, his

obligations, and the just claims of his fellow-men. He cannot truly be said to

possess  the  virtue  of  contentment;  he  does  not  experience  the  pure  and

abiding joy which is the accompaniment of active achievement.

  True contentment is the outcome of honest effort and true living.


  The truly contented man works energetically and faithfully, and accepts

all results with an untroubled spirit.

    DE C E M B E R SE C O N D.

  THERE  are  three  things  with  which  a  man  should  be  content:  With

whatever happens; with his friendships and possessions; and with his pure

thoughts. Contented with whatever happens, he will escape grief; with his

friendships  and  possessions,  he  will  avoid  anxiety  and  wretchedness;  and

with  his  pure  thoughts,  he  will  never  go  back  to  suffer  and  grovel  in

impurities.

  There  are  three  with  which  a  man  should  not  be  content:  With  his

opinions; with his character; and with his spiritual condition. Not content

with his opinions, he will continually increase in intelligence; not content

with his character, he will ceaselessly grow in strength and virtue; and not

content with his spiritual condition, he will, every day, enter into a largerwisdom and a fuller blessedness.

    Results exactly correspond with efforts.


    Universal Brotherhood is the supreme Ideal of Humanity, and towards

that Ideal the world is slowly but surely moving.

    DE C E M B E R TH I R D.

    BROTHERHOOD as a human organisation cannot exist so long as any

degree of self-seeking reigns in the hearts of men and women who band

themselves together for any purpose, as such self-seeking must eventually

rend the Seamless Coat of loving unity. But although organised Brotherhood

has so largely failed, any man may realise Brotherhood in its perfection, and

know it in all its beauty and completion, if he will make himself a wise, pure,

loving spirit, removing from his mind every element of strife, and learning to

practise  those  divine  qualities  without  which  Brotherhood  is  but  a  mere

theory, opinion, or illusive dream.

  In whatsoever heart discord rules, Brotherhood is not realised.


    Brotherhood is at first spiritual, and its outer manifestation in the world

must follow as a natural result.

    DE C E M B E R FO U R T H.

  FROM the spirit of Humility proceed meekness and peacefulness; from

Self-surrender come patience, wisdom, and true judgment; from Love spring

kindness,  joy,  harmony;  and  from  Compassion  proceed  gentleness  and

forgiveness.

  He who has brought himself into harmony with these four qualities is

divinely enlightened; he sees whence the actions of men proceed and whither

they  tend,  and  therefore  can  no  longer  live  in  the  exercise  of  the  dark

tendencies. He has realised Brotherhood in its completion, as freedom from

malice, from envy, from bitterness, from contention, from condemnation. All

men are his brothers, those who live in the dark tendencies as well as those

who  live  in  the  enlightening  qualities.  He  has  but  one  attitude  of  mind

towards all, that of goodwill.

  Where pride, self-love, hatred, and condemnation are, there can be no

Brotherhood.    Brotherhood  consists,  first  of  all,  in  the  abandonment  of  self  by  the

individual.

    DE C E M B E R FI F T H.

    THEORIES  and  schemes  for  propagating  Brotherhood  are  many,  but

Brotherhood  itself  is  one  and  unchangeable,  and  consists  in  the  complete

cessation from egotism and strife, and in practising goodwill and peace; for

Brotherhood is a practice and not a theory. Self-surrender and Goodwill are

its guardian angels, and peace is its habitation.

  Where two are determined to maintain an opposing opinion, the clinging

of self and ill-will are there, and Brotherhood is absent.

  Where two are prepared to sympathise with each other, to see no evil in

each other, to serve and not to attack each other, the love of Truth and Good-

will are there and Brotherhood is present.

    Brotherhood is only practised and known by him whose heart is at peace

with all the world.


    Prejudice and cruelty are inseparable.

    DE C E M B E R SI X T H.

    SYMPATHY  is  not  required  towards  those  who  are  purer  and  more

enlightened than one’s self, as the purer one lives above the necessity for it.

In such a case reverence should be exercised, with a striving to lift one’s self

up to the purer level, and so enter possession of the larger life. Nor can a man

fully understand one who is wiser than himself, and before condemning, he

should  earnestly  ask  himself  whether  he  is,  after  all,  better  than  the  man

whom he has singled out as the object of his bitterness. If he is, let him

bestow sympathy. If he is not, let him exercise reverence.

  When a man is prone to harshly judge and condemn others, he should

inquire how far he falls short himself.


    Dislike, resentment, and condemnation are all forms of hatred, and evil

cannot cease until these are taken out of the heart.

    DE C E M B E R SE V E N T H.

  THE  obliterating  of  injuries  from  the  mind  is  merely  one  of  the

beginnings in wisdom. There is a still higher and better way. And that way isto purify the heart and enlighten the mind that, far from having to forget

injuries, there will be none to remember. For it is only pride and self that can

be injured and wounded by the actions and attitudes of others; and he who

takes pride and self out of his heart can never think the thought, " I have been

injured by another," or, " I have been wronged by another."

  From a purified heart proceeds the right comprehension of things; and

from the right comprehension of things proceeds the life that is peaceful,

freed from bitterness and suffering, calm and wise.

  He who is troubled and disturbed about the sins of others is far from the

Truth.


  He who is troubled and disturbed about his own sins is very near to the

Gate of Wisdom.

    DE C E M B E R EI G H T H.

  HE in whose heart the flames of resentment burn, cannot know peace nor

understand Truth; he who will banish resentment from his heart, will know

and understand.

  He who has taken evil out of his own heart, cannot resent or resist it in

others, for he is enlightened as to its origin and nature, and knows it as a

manifestation  of  the  mistakes  of  ignorance.  With  the  increase  of

enlightenment, sin becomes impossible. He who sins, does not understand; he

who understands, does not sin. The pure man maintains his tenderness of

heart toward those who ignorantly imagine that they can do him harm. The

wrong attitude of others toward him does not trouble him; his heart is at rest

in Compassion and Love.

  Let those who aim at the right life, calmly and wisely understand.


  A pure heart and a righteous life are the great and all-important things.

    DE C E M B E R NI N T H.

  THE deeds and thoughts that lead to suffering are those that spring from

self-interest  and  self-seeking;  the  thoughts  and  deeds  that  produce

blessedness are those that spring from Truth. The process by which the mind

is thus changed and transmuted is two-fold; it consists of meditation and

practice. By  silent  meditation,  the  ground  and  reason  of  right  conduct  is

sought, and by practice, right-doing is accomplished in daily life.  For  Truth  is  not  a  matter  of  book  learning,  or  subtle  reasoning,  or

disputation, or controversial skill; it consists in right-doing.

  Truth is not something that can be gleaned from a book; it can be learned

and known by practice only.


  He only has Truth who has found it by practice.

    DE C E M B E R TE N T H.

  HE who wishes to acquire Truth must practise it. He must begin at the

very first lesson in self-control, thoroughly master it, and then pass on to the

next and the next, until he attains to the moral perfection at which he aims. It

is common with men to imagine that Truth consists in holding certain ideas

or opinions. They read a number of treatises, and then form an opinion which

they call " Truth," and then they go about disputing with their fellow-men in

order to try to prove that their opinion is the Truth. In worldly matters men

are wise, for they do things in order to achieve their ends, but in spiritual

things they are foolish, for they merely read, and do not do things, and then

imagine they have acquired Truth.

  He  only  has  Truth  whose  life  shows  it  forth  in  pure  and  blameless

conduct.


  Love, all inclusive.

    DE C E M B E R EL E V E N T H.

  BY its very nature, Love can never be the exclusive possession of any

religion, sect, school, or brotherhood. The common claim, therefore, of such

sections  of  the  community  to  the  exclusive  possession  of  Truth  in  their

particular religious doctrine is a denial of Love. Truth is a spirit and a life,

and  though  it  may  manifest  through  manifold  doctrines,  it  can  never  be

confined to any one particular form of doctrine. Love is a winged angel that

refuses to be chained to any letter doctrine whatsoever. Love is above and

beyond, outside and greater than all the opinions, doctrines, and philosophies

of men; yet Love includes all—the righteous and the unrighteous, the fair and

foul, the clean and the unclean. He whose Love is so deep and wide as to

envelop all men of all creeds is he who has most of religion, and most of

wisdom, and also most of insight, for he knows and sees men as they are.

  Hatred is absence of Love, and therefore absence of all that is included inLove.


  Love broadens and expands the mind of a man until it embraces in its

kindly folds all mankind without distinction.

    DE C E M B E R TW E L F T H.

  THE way of Love is the way of Life— Immortal Life—and the beginning

of that way consists in getting rid of our carpings, quarrellings, fault-findings,

and suspicions. If these petty vices possess us, let us not deceive ourselves,

but let us confess that we have not Love. To be thus honest with ourselves is

to be prepared to find Love; but to be self-deceived is to be shut out from

Love. If we are to grow in Love, we must begin at the beginning, and remove

from our minds all mean and suspicious thoughts about our fellow-workers

and fellow-men. We must learn to treat them with large-hearted freedom, and

to perceive the right reason for their actions, to excuse them on grounds of

personal right and personal freedom when their opinions, methods, or actions

are contrary to us; thus shall we come at last to love them with that Love of

which St. Paul speaks, a Love that is a permanent principle.

  He who has Love—of whatsoever creed or none— is enlightened with

the Light of Truth.


  The Life of Truth is that in which wrong-thinking and wrong-doing are

abandoned, and right-thinking and right-doing are embraced.

    DE C E M B E R TH I R T E E N T H.

  IT is the wrong deeds of men which bring all the unhappiness into the

world.  It  will  be  right  deeds  which  will  transform  all  its  misery  into

happiness. By wrong deeds we come to sorrow; by right deeds we come to

bliss.

  But a man must not think the thought: " It is the wrong deeds of others

which  have  made  me  unhappy,"  for  such  a  thought  produces  bitterness

towards others and increases hatred. He must understand that his unhappiness

is from something wrong within himself; he must regard it as a sign that he is

yet  imperfect,  that  there  is  some  weak  spot  within  which  must  be

strengthened. He must never accuse others for his lapses of conduct, or for

his troubles, but must gain more steadfastness of heart, must establish himself

more firmly in the Truth.  Walk with lowly footsteps the holy way of Truth.


  The principles of Truth are fixed and eternal, and cannot be made or

unmade by anyone.

    DE C E M B E R FO U R T E E N T H.

  THE principles of Truth were discovered by searching and practice, and

are so stated and arranged as to make the path plainer for other feet to tread;

and it is the path along which every being has travelled who has passed from

sin to sinlessness, from error to Truth. It is the ancient Way along which

every saint, every Buddha, every Christ has walked to divine perfection, and

along  which  every  imperfect  being  in  the  future  will  pass  to  reach  this

glorious goal. It matters not what religion a man professes, if he is daily

striving with his own sins, and purifying his heart, he is walking this path; for

while  opinions,  theologies,  and  religions  differ,  sin  does  not  differ,  the

overcoming of sin does not differ, and Truth does not differ.

  Religions change from age to age, but the principles of divine virtue are

eternally the same.


  Truth is one, though it has a variety of aspects, and is adaptable to men in

various stages of growth.

    DE C E M B E R FI F T E E N T H.

  WE have sat at the feet of all the Great Teachers, and have learned of

them. Unspeakable has been our rejoicing to have found, in the lives and

precepts of gentle Indian and Chinese Teachers, the same divine qualities and

the same preceptive truths which adorn the character of Jesus Christ. To us

they are all wonderful and adorable, and so great and good and wise that we

can but reverence and learn of them. They have also had the same marvellous

influence for good over the various races among which they have appeared,

and have all equally called forth the undying worship of millions of human

beings.

  Great Teachers are perfected flowers of humanity, types of what all men

will one day be.


  Perfect purity of heart is a condition of emancipation from all the cravings

and indulgences of self.    DE C E M B E R SI X T E E N T H.

  THERE is a distinction between a worldly life and a religious life. He

who is daily following his impure inclinations, with no wish to give them up,

is irreligious; while he who is daily controlling and purging away his impure

inclinations is religious.

  The religious man should curb his passions and the indulgence of his

desires, for that is what constitutes religion. He must learn to see men and

things as they are, and must perceive that they are living in accordance with

their  nature,  and  their  right  of  choosing  their  path  as  intelligent  human

beings. He must never intrude his rules of life upon them; and never presume

to be, or even think of himself as being, on a " higher plane " than they are.

He must learn to put himself in their place, and to see from their standpoint.

  A lover of Truth must be a lover of all men. He must let his love go out

without restraint or stint.


  The  ground  of  certainty  on  which  we  can  securely  rest  amid  all  the

incidents of life, is the mathematical exactitude of the moral law.

    DE C E M B E R SE V E N T E E N T H.

  THE unceasing change, the insecurity and the mystery of life make it

necessary to find some basis of certainty on which to rest if happiness and

peace of mind are to be maintained. This basic principle, a knowledge of

which the whole race will ultimately acquire, is best represented by the term

Divine Justice. Human justice differs with every man according to his own

light  or  darkness,  but  there  can  be  no  variation  in  that  Divine  Justice  by

which  the  universe  is  eternally  sustained.  Divine  Justice  is  spiritual

mathematics. As with figures and objects, so with the thoughts and deeds of

men, two and two equally make four.

  Given the same cause, there will always be the same effect.


  All  the  spiritual  laws  with  which  men  are  acquainted  have,  and  must

have, the same infallibility in their operations.

    DE C E M B E R EI G H T E E N T H.

  GIVEN the same thought or deed in a like circumstance, the result will

always be the same. Without this fundamental ethical justice there could be

no human society, for it is the just reactions of the deeds of individuals whichprevents society from tottering to its fall.

  It thus follows that the inequalities of life, as regards the distribution of

happiness and suffering, are the outworking of moral forces operating along

lines of flawless accuracy. This flawless accuracy, this perfect law, is the one

great  fundamental  certainty  in  life,  the  finding  of  which  insures  a  man’s

perfection, makes him wise and enlightened, and fills him with rejoicing and

peace.

  The moral order of the universe is not, cannot be disproportionate, for if it

were, the universe would fall.


  Nothing can transcend right.

    DE C E M B E R NI N E T E E N T H.

  TAKE away a belief in this certainty from a man’s consciousness, and he

is adrift on a self-created ocean of chance, without rudder, chart, or compass.

He has no ground on which to build a character or life, no incentive for noble

deeds, no centre for moral action; he has no island of peace and no harbour of

refuge. Even the crudest idea of God as of a great man whose mind is perfect,

who cannot err, and who has " no variableness nor shadow of turning," is a

popular expression of a belief in this basic principle of Divine Justice.

    According  to  this  principle  there  is  neither  favour  nor  chance,  but

unerring and unchangeable right. Thus all the sufferings of men are right as

effects, their causes being the mistakes of ignorance; but as effects they will

pass away.

  Man cannot suffer for something which he has never done, or never left

undone, for this would be an effect without a cause.


  Talent,  genius,  goodness,  greatness,  are  not  launched  upon  the  world

ready-made. They are the result of a long train of causes and effects.

    DE C E M B E R TW E N T I E T H.

  THE process of growth is seen in the flower, but though not seen in the

mental growth, it is nevertheless there.

  I said the process of mental growth was not seen; but this is only true in a

general sense. The true thinker and sage does see, with his spiritual eye, the

process of spiritual growth. Just as the natural scientist has made himself

acquainted with natural causes and effects— as, indeed, the ordinary observeris so acquainted—so he has made himself familiar with spiritual causes and

effects. He sees the process by which characters, like plants, come into being;

and when he sees the flowers of genius and virtue appear, he knows from

what mental seeds they sprang, and how they gradually came to perfection

through long periods of silent growth.

  Nothing appears ready-made. There is always a changing, a growing, a

becoming.


  An awakened vision calls us to a nobler life.

    DE C E M B E R TW E N T Y-F I R S T.

  AS a man cannot live in two countries at the same time, but must leave

the one before he can settle in the other, so a man cannot inhabit two spiritual

countries at the same time, but must leave behind the land of sin before he

can live at peace in the land of truth. When one leaves his native land, that he

may  begin  anew  in  an  adopted  country,  he  leaves  behind  all  beloved

associations, sweet companionships, dear friends and relatives, yea, all upon

which his heart has been ever set must be parted with and left behind. So

when one resolves to live in the new world of Truth, the old world of error,

with  its  loved  pleasures,  cherished  sins,  and  vain  associations,  must  be

renounced. By such renunciation the individual gains, humanity gains, and

the universe becomes a brighter and more beautiful habitation.

  We must shake the mud of the valley from our feet if we are to commune

with the mountain silence.


  Right  thoughts  spring  from  a  right  mental  attitude,  and  lead  to  right

actions.

    DE C E M B E R TW E N T Y-S E C O N D.

  THAT  is  the  right  mental  attitude  which  seeks  the  good  in  all  the

occurrences of life, and extracts strength, knowledge, and wisdom from them.

Right  thoughts  are  thoughts  of  cheer,  of  joy,  of  hope,  of  confidence,  of

courage, of constant love, of large generosity, of abounding faith and trust.

These are the affirmations that make strong characters and useful and noble

lives, and that build up those personal successes which make the progress of

the  world.  Such  thoughts  are  inevitably  followed  by  right  action,  by  the

putting forth of energy and effort in work, in the accomplishment of somelegitimate  object;  and  as  the  climber  at  last  reaches  the  hill-top,  so  the

earnest, cheerful, and untiring worker at last accomplishes his end.

  All the successful people, through all time, have reached their particular

success by labouring for it.


    Suffering is a purifying and perfecting process. " We become obedient by

the things which we suffer."

    DE C E M B E R TW E N T Y-T H I R D.

  TO inflict suffering upon others is to become more deeply involved in

ignorance; but to suffer ourselves is to come nearer to enlightenment. Pain

teaches men how to be kind and compassionate. It at last makes them tender-

hearted and thoughtful for the sufferings of others. When a man does a cruel

deed, he thinks, in his ignorance, that that is the end of it, but it is only the

beginning. Attached to the deed is a train of consequences which will plunge

him  in  a  tormenting  hell  of  pain.  For  every  wrong  thought  we  think,  or

unkind deed we do, we must suffer some form of mental or bodily pain; and

the kind of pain will be in accordance with the initiative thought or act.

  By  acquainting  man  with  suffering,  it  enables  him  to  feel  for  the

sufferings of others.


  Every resource is already with you and within you.

    DE C E M B E R TW E N T Y-F O U R T H.

  JUST as the strong doing of small tasks leads to greater strength, so the

doing of those tasks weakly leads to greater weakness. What a man is in his

fractional duties that he is in the aggregate of his character. Weakness is as

great a source of suffering as sin, and there can be no true blessedness until

some measure of strength of character is evolved. The weak man becomes

strong by attaching value to little things and doing them accordingly. The

strong man becomes weak by falling into looseness and neglect concerning

small  things,  thereby  forfeiting  his  simple  wisdom  and  squandering  his

energy.

  There is no way to strength and wisdom but by acting strongly and wisely

in the present moment.


  The year is passing, and blessed are they who can let its mistakes, itsinjuries, and wrongs pass away for ever, and be remembered no more.

    DE C E M B E R TW E N T Y-F I F T H.

  THE past is dead and unalterable; let it sink into oblivion, but extract and

retain its divine lessons; let those lessons be strength to you now, and make

them the starting-points of a nobler, purer, more perfect life in the coming

years. Let all thoughts of hatred, resentment, strife, and ill-will die with the

dying years; erase from the tablet of your heart all malicious memories, all

unholy grudges. Let the cry, " Peace on earth and good-will to men! " which

at this season re-echoes through the world from myriads of lips, be to you

something more than an oft-reiterated platitude. Let its truth be practised by

you; let it dwell in your heart; and do not mar its harmony and peace by

thoughts of ill-will.

  Blessed is he who has no wrongs to remember, no injuries to forget; in

whose pure heart no hateful thought about another can take root and flourish.


  No man can be confronted with a difficulty which he has not the strength

to meet and subdue.

    DE C E M B E R TW E N T Y-S I X T H.

  DO not regard your difficulties and perplexities as portentous of ill; by so

doing you will make them ill; but regard them as prophetic of good, which,

indeed, they are. Do not persuade yourself that you can evade them: you

cannot. Do not try to run away from them; this is impossible, for wherever

you go they will still be there with you—but meet them calmly and bravely;

confront them with all the dispassion and dignity which you can command;

weigh up their proportions; measure their strength; understand them; attack

them,  and  finally  vanquish  them.  Thus  will  you  develop  strength  and

intelligence; thus will you enter one of those byways of blessedness which

are hidden from the superficial gaze.

  There is no peace in sin, no rest in error, no final refuge but in Wisdom.


  Go to your task with love in your heart and you will go to it light-hearted

and cheerful.

    DE C E M B E R TW E N T Y-S E V E N T H.

  WHAT heavy burden is a man weighted with which is not made heavier

and  more  unendurable  by  weak  thoughts  or  selfish  desires?  If  yourcircumstances are " trying " it is because you need them, and can evolve the

strength to meet them. They are trying because there is some weak spot in

you, and they will continue to be trying until that spot is eradicated. Be glad

that  you  have  the  opportunity  of  becoming  stronger  and  wiser.  No

circumstances  can  be  trying  to  wisdom;  nothing  can  weary  love.  Stop

brooding over your own trying circumstances and contemplate the lives of

some of those about you.

  The duty which you shirk is your reproving angel; the pleasure which you

race after is your flattering enemy.


  Animal indulgence is alien to the perception of Truth.

    DE C E M B E R TW E N T Y-E I G H T H.

  THERE are little selfish indulgences, some of which appear harmless,

and are commonly fostered; but no selfish indulgence can be harmless, and

men and women do not know what they lose by repeatedly and habitually

succumbing to effeminate and selfish gratifications. If the God in man is to

rise strong and triumphant, the beast in man must perish. The pandering to

the animal nature, even when it appears innocent and seems sweet, leads

away  from  truth  and  blessedness.  Each  time  you  give  way  to  the  animal

within you, and feed and gratify him, he waxes stronger and more rebellious,

and takes firmer possession of your mind, which should be in the keeping of

Truth.

  Live  superior  to  the  craving  for  sense-excitement,  and  you  will  live

neither vainly nor uncertainly.


  Sacrifice  all  hatred,  slay  it  upon  the  altar  of  devotion— devotion  to

others.

    DE C E M B E R TW E N T Y-N I N T H.

    WHATEVER others may say of you, whatever they may do to you, never

take offence. Do not return hatred with hatred. If another hates you perhaps

you have, consciously or unconsciously, failed somewhere in your conduct,

or  there  may  be  some  misunderstanding  which  the  exercise  of  a  little

gentleness and reason may remove; but under all circumstances " Father,

forgive them " is infinitely better than " I will have nothing more to do with

them." Hatred is so small and poor, so blind and wretched. Love is so greatand rich, so far-seeing and blissful.

  Open the floodgates of your heart for the inpouring of that sweet, great,

beautiful love which embraces all.


  Inside the gateway of unselfishness lies the elysium of Abiding Joy.

    DE C E M B E R TH I R T I E T H.

    KNOWING this—that selfishness leads to misery, and unselfishness to

joy, not merely for one’s self alone—for if this were all how unworthy would

be our endeavours!—but for the whole world, and because all with whom we

live and come in contact will be the happier and the truer for unselfishness;

because Humanity is one, and the joy of one is the joy of all—knowing this,

let us scatter flowers and not thorns in the common ways of life—yea, even

in the highway of our enemies let us scatter the blossoms of unselfish love—

so  shall  the  pressure  of  their  footprints  fill  the  air  with  the  perfume  of

holiness and gladden the world with the aroma of joy.

  Seek the highest Good, and you will taste the deepest, sweetest joy.


  The universe has no favourites; it is supremely just, and gives to every

man his rightful earnings.

    DE C E M B E R TH I R T Y-F I R S T.

  HAPPY in the Eternal Happiness is he who has come to that Life from

which the thought of self is abolished. Already, even now and in this life, he

has  entered  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.  He  is  at  rest  on  the  bosom  of  the

Infinite.

  Sweet is the rest and deep the bliss of him who has freed his heart from

its lusts and hatreds and dark desires; and he who, without any shadow of

bitterness or selfishness, can breathe, in his heart, the blessing:

  Peace unto all living things,

  making no exceptions or distinctions—such a man has reached that happy

ending  which  can  never  be  taken  away,  the  fulness  of  peace,  the

consummation of Perfect Blessedness.

  Man can find the right way in life, and, having found it, can rejoice and

be glad.                BOOK TWENTY ONE


                        POEMS OF PEACE                                          EOLAUS


                  A LYRICAL DRAMATIC POEM


  Dramatis Personae

  Eolaus.

  The Prophet.

  Earth.

  Heaven.

    Cosmos.

  Voices of Nature.

  Voices of Truth.

    Echoes.

  Scene: — A beautiful Island, wooded. Eolaus sitting on a fallen tree near

the sea-shore.

  Eolaus. Unto this lonely Island I repair

  To search for peace. After long, days and nights

  Upon the waters, storm-tossed and fatigued,

  My skiff Touched thy fair harbour, blessed Isle.

  Now on thy fragrant bosom I will rest,

  And in thy spiritual ecstasy

  Sweetly participate: thy loveliness

  Entrances me; thy restfulness enweaves

  My thoughts with peace imperishable; thou

  Art silent, solitary, beautiful,

  And I am lonely; yet thy solitude

  Perchance will comfort me, and take away

  My loneliness and pain. O Solitude!

  Thou habitation of aspiring hearts;

  Thou light and beacon of the pure; thou guide

  Of them that cry in darkness; thou sweet friend

  Of sorrow stricken wanderers; thou staff  And stay of the strong climber up the hills,

  Trackless and strange, of Truth; instructor thou,

  And teacher of the teachable and true,

  Beloved of the lowly, wise and good,

  Be my companion now, and take away

  The world’s ache from my bosom! I am tired

  Of the vain Highways, where the noise and din

  Drowns all but sad remembrance; tired of all

  The tumult and the terror and the tears

  That rule discordant in the House of Life,

  Shaking but not destroying, as the storms,

    Confederate with the oceans, shake the shores

  And rock-bo’und margins of the continents.

  I seek the peace that does not change; the calm

  That knows no storm; the Silence that remains.

  Pleasure disturbs, and does not satisfy:

  When the excitements of the senses fade,

    Sorrow and pain return, and leave the heart

    Remorseful, desolate. As o’er the waste

  And barren moor the lonely curlew cries.

  So wails the bird of anguish o’er the mind

  Sated with pleasure; Woe and Want repair

  To the abode of Selfishness, and take

  Legions of miseries with them. I would find

  Where Wisdom is, where Peace abides, where Truth,

  Majestic, Changeless, and eternal, stands

    Untouched by the illusions of the world:

  For surely there is Knowledge, Truth, and Peace

  For him who seeks, seeing that ignorance

  And error and affliction are; these prove

  The unseen truths obversely: darkness makes

  Light sure and certain, though we see it not.  We sleep and wake, and, waking, know the dream

  That troubled us in sleep; how it arose,

    Phantasmal and chaotic, in the mind

  Left all ungoverned; even so perchance

  This life of passion and of wild desire

    (Troubled, chaotic, and not understood),

  May be, as ’twere, a dream; and if a dream

  Of the unmastered mind, we shall awake

  Out of the nightmare of our miseries,

  And know the gladness of Reality.

  But how shall one awake? How, if not by

    Bridling his passions, curbing his desires

  By masterful dominion of the will?

  If passions be the troubled dreams of life,

  And not its substance and reality,

  Then he who shakes off passion shall awake

  And know the Truth; surely this must be so!

  Therefore unto this unfrequented place

  Have I addressed myself, that I may gain,

  By purity and strong self-mastery,

  Th’ awakened vision that doth set men free

  From painful slumber and the night of grief.

  Here unobserved and solitary, I

  Will purify my heart and train my mind

  In the true ways of sweet unselfishness,

  Subduing self and passion; so perchance

  The changeless Truth will be revealed to me,

  And I shall move, wherever Duty calls,

  Serene and sorrowless.

    Moreover, here

  An aged Prophet dwells, so I am told,

  Who will instruct me in the Silent Way  Which winds through the morasses of the mind

  Unto the firm heights of accomplished Truth.

  Him will I seek when I have slept awhile,

  For weariness now urges me to rest.

  Lies down.

  Thou Zephyrus! thou sweet and cooling breath

  That temperest the broiling mid-day rays

  Of June’s extremest heat, blow o’er me now,

  And fan me into sweet forgetfulness!

  I am a-wearied, battling with the waves.

  Now will I sleep: after my long, long search

  Upon the waters, I am spent with toil.

  Watch o’er me. Nature, I am safe with thee.

    Sleeps.

    VOICES OF NATURE.

  First Voice.

  Listen, O Eolaus!

  Woven of passion is the Universe;

  Vain is thy puny strength to break its web.

  Submit thyself to that which in thee cries;

  Gratify nature; do not fly delight.

  Eolaus, come!

  Let me lead thee, Eolaus!

  Let me guide thee, Eolaus!

  Come, Eolaus! Eolaus, come!

  Echo.

  Eolaus, come!

    Second Voice.

  There is sweet intoxication

   In the Pleasure - house of Earth;

  Aye - renewed exhilaration,

   Love and happiness and mirth.  First Voice.

  Come, Eolaus! Eolaus, come!

  Echo.

  Eolaus, come!

  Third Voice.

  What is seen is sure;

  What is felt is known

  Pleasure is secure;

  Joy is life alone.

  First Voice.

  Come, Eolaus! Eolaus, come!

  Echo.

  Eolaus, come!

    Second Voice.

  Come and drink the wine of life;

   Pleasure’s vintage come and taste;

  Leave thy fruitless search and strife;

   Holy vigils wear and waste

  Youth, for love and revels framed:

   Nature thus is blindly blamed.

  First Voice.

  Come, Eolaus! Eolaus, come!

  Echo.

  Eolaus, come!

  Third Voice.

  Think no more of low and high;

   Leave thy climbings, and forget

  Aim and struggle, doubt and sigh;

   Level is the pathway set

  Of enjoyment: seek no more;

  Rest thou here, thy woe is o’er

  First Voice.  Eolaus come!

  Let me lead thee, Eolaus!

  Let me guide thee, Eolaus!

  Come, Eolaus! Eolaus, come!

  Echo.

  Eolaus, come!

    EARTH.

    Unnumbered ages have I rolled

   Through the abysmal spaces;

  And eons new from eons old

  Th’ Eternal Finger traces;

  And I must follow where it moves;

      No rest! no rest!

  With hopes and fears and hates and loves

      Unblest! unblest!

  Fourth Voice.

  Listen, O Eolaus!

    Sorrow doth darken all the universe;

  Its creatures are involved in pain and woe;

  Helpless they cry, and no one hears or aids;

  Dark, dark is life, and none its meaning know.

  Eolaus, hear!

  None can lead thee, Eolaus!

  None can guide thee, Eolaus!

 

  Hear, Eolaus! Eolaus, hear!

  Echo.

  Eolaus, hear!

  Fifth Voice.

  There is pain and woe and sorrow

  In the hospital of Earth;

  Every night and morn and morrow  Bringeth drought and death and dearth.

  Fourth Voice.

  Hear, Eolaus! Eolaus, hear!

  Echo.

  Eolaus, hear!

  Sixth Voice.

  What is Sean’s unsure;

  What is felt is blown;

  Self is insecure;

  Life is pain alone.

  Fourth Voice.

  Hear, Eolaus! Eolaus, hear!

  Echo.

  Eolaus, hear!

  Several Voices.

  We moan and sigh;

  We sob and cry;

  We wander, like the wind upon the stream,

  Vainly for peace,

  Seeking release

  From the keen pain of our unending dream.

  Fourth Voice.

  Eolaus, hear!

  None can lead thee, Eolaus!

  one can guide thee, Eolaus!

  Hear, Eolaus! Eolaus, hear!

  Echo.

  Eolaus, hear!

  Voices of Truth.

  First Voice.

  Awake, O Eolaus!

  Arise! Shake off the dreams of Night,  Open thine eyes, and see the Light;

    Passionless Wisdom waits for thee

  In sorrowless serenity.

  Leave thou the fleeting shapes of Time,

  The rugged Way of Truth sublime

  Walk thou; nor fear, nor grieve, nor lust,

    Scorning the self whose end is dust.

  Wake, Eolaus! Eolaus, wake!

  Chorus of Voices.

  Eolaus, wake!

    Second Voice.

    Knowledge is for him who seeks;

  Wisdom crowneth him who strives;

  Peace in sinless silence speaks;

  All things perish, Truth survives

  First Voice.

  Wake, Eolaus! Eolaus, wake!

  Voices.

  Eolaus, wake!

  Third Voice.

  Follow where Virtue leads,

  High and still higher;

  Listen when Pureness pleads,

  Quench not her fire.

  Lo! he shall see

    Reality,

  Who cometh upward, cleansed from all desire.

  First Voice.

  Wake, Eolaus! Eolaus, wake!

  Voices.

  Eolaus, wake!

  Fourth Voice.  He who attaineth unto Purity

  The faultless Parthenon of Truth doth see.

  Awake! disperse the dreams of self and sin!

  Behold the Shining Gateway! enter in!

  First Voice.

  Wake, Eolaus! Eolaus, wake!

  Voices.

  Eolaus, wake!

  Fifth Voice.

  Conquer thyself,

  Then thou shalt know;

  Climb to the high,

  Leave thou the low.

    Deliverance

  Shall him entrance

  Who strives with sins and sorrows, tears and pains

  Till he attains.

  First Voice.

  Wake, Eolaus! Eolaus, wake!

  Voices.

  Eolaus, wake!

    HEAVEN.

  In the visions of the ages

  I am evermore reflected;

  In the precepts of the Sages

  I am spoken and rejected.

  I can suffer no distortion,

  Sin and sorrow cannot stain me;

  Fixed and faultless in proportion,

  He must bend who would attain me.

  Eolaus, waking.

   Who will lead me, who will guide me

  In my deep perplexity?

    HEAVEN.

  In the middle of the Island

  Waits the sage whom you are seeking;

  On the Rock which cannot crumble

  Sits the Prophet who will guide you.

  Eolaus wakes.

  Eolaus. ’Mid the conflicting visions of the mind

  I darkly grope, and nevermore can find

  The steadfastness and surety that I seek;

  Where clamour reigns the Silence cannot speak;

  So many voices and so many ways!

  So many wand’rings the nights and days!

  One way I seek, one voice I long to hear,

  But Truth eludes me and does not appear,

  Now to this Island’s centre I repair

  To seek the Prophet who abideth there.

  The scene changes to the centre of the Island. An aged and venerable man

appears, sitting upon a rock.

  Eolaus. Art thou the Prophet whom I seek?

    Prophet. I am.

  Eolaus. Be thou my guide, for thou art wise, and I

  Am ignorant; speak thou, and I will hear;

  Teach me, and I will be instructed; make

  Me to behold the Path which leads to Truth,

  And I will walk if though it be o’erstrewn

  With flints and burrs; and if it needs must come

    Within the round of holy discipline

  That one shall walk that way with naked feet,

  Or else forego the end and view of Truth,

  Then barefoot I will walk it, and account    Bleedings and wounds and lacerations

  As aids unto my will and fortitude,

  As tasks wisely ordained, and so to be

  Gladly encountered in my pilgrimage.

  Mine ears are open, open thou mine eyes,

  For I am blind, and cannot find my way.

    Prophet. He who would see with the all-seeing eye

  Single of Truth, must first his blindness know.

  He cannot see who does not wish to see,

  Thinking he sees already, while his acts

    Proclaim his spiritual blindness. Truth

  Waits on the Lowly - hearted. He who knows

  That being passion - bound, he yet is blind,

  Has groped his way to Wisdom. Thou dost see.

  Eolaus. I see naught but the darkness of my mind,

  And in that darkness ever - changing shapes

  Of things phantasmal that perplex and haunt,

  Eluding knowledge; I am ignorant,

  Yet strive to know; nor will I cease to strive

  Till I attain.

    Prophet. Seeing thy darkness, thou

  So far dost see; knowing thine ignorance,

  So far hast thou attained to knowledge, seek,

  And thou shalt surely find.

  Eolaus. How shall I seek?

    Prophet. Increase thy strength and self-reliance; make

  The spectres of thy mind obey thy will:

  See thou command thyself; nor let no mood,

  No subtle passion nor so swift desire

  Hurl thee to baseness; but, should’st thou be hurled,

  Rise and regain thy manhood, taking gain

  Of lowliness and wisdom from thy fall.  Strive ever for the mastery of thy mind,

  And glean some good from every circumstance

  That shall confront thee; make thy store of strength

  Richer for ills encountered and o’ercome.

  Submit to naught but nobleness; rejoice

  Like a strong athlete straining for the prize,

  When thy full strength is tried; be not the slave

  Of lusts and cravings and indulgences,

  Of disappointments, miseries and griefs,

  Fears, doubts, and lamentations, but control

  Thyself with calmness; master that in thee:

  Which masters others, and which heretofore

  Has mastered thee: let not thy passions rule,

  But rule thy passions; subjugate thyself

  Till passion is transmuted into peace,

  And wisdom crown thee; so shalt thou attain

  And, by attaining, know.

  Eolaus. Hard is the path.

  Which thou hast set before me; steep and strange

  Its ascent; unfamiliar and unknown

  The Place whereto it leads: I see it rise

  Precipitous but yet accessible,

  Beyond the reach of vision: what awaits

  The climber, none but he who climbs may know;

  For if one ask, and, with believing ears

  Attend the spiritual Mountaineer

  In his depicture of the unknown heights,

  What knows he more, though more believing? What

  Gains he but words, and wonderings, and dreams,

  Unless he also climb? I would o’ermount

  Faith, and ascend to knowledge; I would not

  Rest idly in the valleys of belief,  Content with speculation; I would be

  The Mountaineer, and know.

    Prophet. The Mountaineer

  Is he who, dauntless, climbs.

  Eolaus. But yet the way,—

  Where leads it? All beyond the reach of sight

  Is dark, unknown, mysterious. What avails

  The strenuous ascent, if some precipice

  The daring climber claim, or loosened rock

  Dash him to death, or cold and hunger make

  Ravage upon his strength? Passion is sweet,

  And ’tis enjoyed and known; and round about

  The habitations at the mountain’s base,

  In the familiar valleys of the mind,

  Twine the sweet flowers of soft affections,

  Filling the air with fragrance and delight,

  And mellow fruits of love and labour hang

  Ripe for the plucking; shall I these renounce,

  The sure and known, for the unsure, unknown?

  Are these not safe, substantial and possessed?

  While that I seek,—Where is it? Is this Truth,

  This idea of Reality which haunts

  My mind, and drives me whither I know not,

  Itself a speculation? What abides?

  Alas! all that we have and know is caught

  In transiency; changes that never end

  Roll wave - like o’er the restless universe

  .And man is tossed therein; so it befalls

  That everything which comes into his grasp—

  Bearing the face of an enduring joy—

  After a little fever of delights torn away again: nothing endures:

  All things are dying even while they live;  And life is passing while it seems to wait.

  There is no sweet possession, no rare joy,

  No cherished circumstance, no prized delight

  No lovely thing, of which it can be said,—

  "There is no time when this will never be."

  What comes to pass, passes, and conies no more;

  What grows, decays; what rises, falls; what lives

  And flourishes, dies and doth fade away:

  Where then is surety; Where is knowledge? Where

  Is rest and refuge?

    Prophet. There is rest in Truth.

  Eolaus. Is there no rest in death?

    Prophet. There is no rest

  In death.

  Eolaus. No rest in death nor life?

    Prophet. No rest

  In death nor life; yet or in death or life,

  Where Truth is, there is rest.

  Eolaus. Prophet of Good

  Lead me to the Abiding; set my feet

  Upon the austere Highway which doth lead

  To the Eternal City; I would find

  The rest and refuge of undying Truth.

    Prophet. Look thou within. Lo, in the midst of change

  Abides the Changeless; at the heart of strife

  The Perfect Peace reposes. At the root

  Of all the restless striving of the world

  Is passion, and at passion’s heart is stored

  Truth; yea, the Law of laws is in thy mind,

  And written on the tablet of thy heart

  Are its eternal edicts: subjugate

  Thy passions, and the truth will be revealed,  For whoso follows passion findeth pain,

  But whoso conquers passion findeth peace.

  Eolaus. Not to be subject unto passion, but

  To subject passion,—is this then the way?

    Prophet. Thou hast well said. As the sweet nut is held.

  In the hard shell, and cannot be enjoyed

  But by destruction of the husk, so Truth

  In passion is preserved, but is not known

  Till passion be destroyed and cast away.

  He who preserveth passion, dreading loss

  Of sweetness and enjoyment, cannot know

  The bliss of Truth, nor find where wisdom is:

  He is a prodigal, feeding upon

  The husks of life, the empty shows of things.

  And knowing not its kernel, seeing not

  The changeless substance of Reality.

  He only knows who conquers evil; he,

  Who masters self, passes beyond the dim

  Uncertain light of faith, and on him breaks

  The light of Perfect Knowledge which enfolds

    Emancipation, gladness, perfect peace.

  Eolaus. I know that sorrow follows passion; know

  That grief and emptiness and heartaches wait

  Upon all earthly joys; so am I sad;

  Yet Truth must be, and, being, can be found;

  And though I am in sorrow, this I know—

  I shall be glad when I have found the Truth.

    Prophet. There is no gladness like the joy of Truth.

  The pure in heart swim in a sea of bliss

  That evermore nor sorrow knows, nor pain;

  For who can see the Cosmos and be sad?

  To know is to be happy; they rejoice  Who have attained Perfection; these are they

  Who live, and know, and realize the Truth.

  Eolaus. I strive for that Perfection; shall I reach

  The Heights of Blessed Vision?

    Prophet. Comfort ye,

  The Heights of Blessed Vision ye shall reach.

  Eolaus. Yet how, and when, and where? I am confused.

  The Way is near, and yet I see it not!

    Prophet. He must be friendly with the worm and toad

  Who would be the companion of the wise,

  And know the Cosmic Splendour; he must stoop

  Who seeks to stand; must fall who fain would rise;

  Must know the low, ascending to the high:

  He who would know the Great, must not disdain

  To diligently wait upon the small:

  He wisdom finds who finds humility.

  Eolaus. Speak on, O Prophet! I attend thy words,

    Prophet. The beasts can neither bend nor stand erect

  Being beasts,—abandon bestial tendencies;

  But man can bend, and man can stand erect,

  Being man,— embrace pure thoughts and stainless deeds;

  Here is deliverance. Man’s redemption lies

  In man himself, yet is not born of self,

  But takes its rise in Truth: man can achieve

  He findeth Truth who findeth self-control.

  Eolaus. When I have found the meaning of thy

  words, I know I shall be wise as thou art wise;

  But now I hear thee, and yet hear thee not.

    Prophet. Thou wilt perceive the substance of my words,

  And understand their meaning, when they stir

  That meaning in thyself, and in thy mind

  Stand clear and well-reflected; thou canst know  Only by subjugation of thyself,

  And practice of the highest: all that’s real

  Is inward; outward things are fleeting shows,

  Vain and illusory, holding nor rest

  Nor refuge for the wise: obey the Right,

  And wrong shall ne’er again assail thy peace,

  Nor error hurt thee more: attune thy heart

  To Purity, and thou shalt reach the Place

  Where sorrow is not, and all evil ends.

  The Holy Ones know not the name of sin;

  Goodness and Truth make glad the good and true:

  The Perfect Ones behold the Perfect Law;

  Struggle and strife are ended in the Truth.

  All things are holy to the holy mind,

  All uses are legitimate and pure,

  All occupations blest and sanctified,

  And every day a Sabbath.

  Eolaus. I perceive

  Some glimmering of a Light transcending light,

  Some outline of a mighty Principle

  More beautiful than beauty; see some dim

    Appearing of the vision of a Life

  Vaster than life: the Cosmos is sublime!

  My eyes will open, I shall see the Truth,

  And, seeing, shall be glad for evermore!

    Prophet. Be mindful, or the thought that soars will sink:

  Be lowly, patient, well-instructed; hold

  Thyself in check-, by many single steps

  All journeys reach completion: as the tree

  That rears its stately head toward the sky—

    Bestowing shade and shelter—issued from

  A tiny seed, and, waiting patiently  Upon the law of growth, it came to be

  The thing majestic that it now appears,—

  So wisdom from a single act of good

    Well-planted, watched, and watered, comes at last

  To its sublime proportions.

  Eolaus. I will tend

  The plant of wisdom with all diligence,

  And watch its growth toward perfection.

  Show me the unobserved and lowly Way;

  Let praise, reward, and popularity

  Be no more sweet to me, and no more sought;

  Let self be blotted out, I seek the Truth.

    Prophet. Now listen, and attend:—the pigeons pick

  Holes in the buildings, and the storm o’erturns

  That they had weakened: little failings eat

  Holes in the citadel of Character

  Which, weakened thus, cannot withstand the storms

  Of circumstance, but weakly falls before

    Tempestuous temptations. As the bee

  Buildeth the honeycomb, the bird its nest,

  The builder his strong house, e’en bit by bit,

  Straw unto straw, and stone laid upon stone,

  Until the finished thing and perfect whole

  Crowns effort with success,—so the wise man.

  By adding thought to thought and deed to deed

  In ways of good, buildeth his character.

  Little by little he accomplishes

  His noble ends; in quiet patience works

  Diligently, while others sleep, or slake

  Their hot desires in riot; nowise moved

  From his main purpose by perplexities,

  Falls, errors, failures, difficulties, pains,  Daily he builds into his heart and mind

  Pure thoughts, high aspirations, selfless deeds,

  Until at last the edifice of Truth

  Is finished, and behold! there rises and appears

  The Temple of Perfection.

  Eolaus. I have found

  The little Gate mean and moss-grown which leads

  Into a dark, despised, neglected Way

  Which, further, leads to glorious esplanades

  And heights of Splendour; foolish men avoid

  The lowly, and thereby the lofty lose;

  Despise the small, and the majestical

  Miss, and see not. Prophet of Good and Truth,

  Wisely and well hast thou instructed me;

  Thou hast revealed to me the Path of Peace;

  My eyes are opened, and at last I see

  Thy lowly Way, and I will enter in.

    Prophet. The Perfect Way awaits thy strenuous tread;

  Behold where rise, precipitous, yet grand,

  The Hills of Virtue; higher, and beyond,

  The Peaks of Blessedness; and yet again,

  Upon the lofty Summits of the Truth,

  Where clouds and darkness are not, and where rests

  Eternal Splendour; there, abiding Joy

  Awaits thy coming. Onward, and disperse

  The dark delusions of thy self! Evil

  Is Good denied, is darkness and no more.

  Let self be nothing, and the Truth be all;

  Thus conquer pain: acquire serenity;

  Wisdom accompanies tranquillity;

  The self-subdued the fadeless Glory know:

  Be watchful, fearless, faithful, patient, pure:  By earnest meditation sound’ the depths

    Profound of life, and scale the heights sublime

  Of Love and Wisdom. He who does not find

  The Way of Meditation, cannot reach

    Emancipation and enlightenment.

  But thou wilt find the Way of Holy Thought;

  With mind made calm and steadfast, thou wilt see

  The Permanent amid the mutable,

  The Truth eternal in the things that change:

  Thou wilt behold the Perfect Law: Cosmos

  From Chaos rises when the conquered self

  Lies underneath man’s heel: Love be thy strength;

  Look on the passion-tortured multitudes,

  And have compassion on them; know their pain

  By thy long sorrow ended. Thou wilt come

  To perfect peace, and so wilt bless the world,

  Leading unto the High and Holy Way

  The feet of them that seek.—And now I go

  To my Abode; go thou unto thy work.

  Eolaus. Prophet of Peace, I go: and unto Thee,

  Spirit of Truth, I come. To all the world,

  And all that lives, for evermore be peace.

  COSMOS

  I am; Perfection is, and Peace;

   Evil is gone, beholding Me;

  And they from sin and sorrow cease

   Who look upon my Symmetry.

  When fault and failure find my Form,

   Lo, fault and failure are no more!

  I am the sunshine and the storm,

   The whisper, and the ocean’s roar!

  The creeping action that deceives,   The lie, the theft, the murderer’s ire,

  All these my Crucible receive,

   They burn in my Celestial Fire.

  All superstitions, errors, wiles,

   The crawling craft, the cruel lust,

  All that debases and defiles

   I grind, and scatter in in the dust.

  The Nations rise, the Empires fall,

   And I eternally rehearse,

  To scene and strain majestical,

   The Drama of the Universe.

  The Eons pass, the systems pale,

   Unchanged their changes behold;

  They listen, and I tell my Tale;

   I all their fleeting forms enfold.

  Who knoweth Me, becometh Me;

   Who hath my Vision finds release

  From Darkness and Captivity.

   I am; Perfection is, and Peace.              MISCELLANEOUS POEMS


                                          BUDDHA


  Under Mount Ratnagira’s western shade,

  Weary and worn with his long search for Truth,

    Sorrowing, unsatisfied, disconsolate,

  Sat Buddha, knowing not where he should turn

  To find the Truth that he had so long sought—

  The Truth that maketh steadfast, strong, and pure,

  The Truth that bringeth peace and blessed rest.

  The Schools had failed him; the philosophies,

  Hoary and ancient, had not stilled the cry

  Of passion in his heart; and passion’s child,

  Sorrow, was with him still; the scriptures, creeds,

  Proud pillars of the State, had failed to bear

  The weight of his great woe, crumbling away

  Under temptation, leaving him the prey

  Still of desire and pain and clouded mind.

    Mortifications he had tried, and they

  Had left him strengthless, wan, wanting the Truth;

  And now he seemed as one defeated, borne

  Upon the stream of Fate, helpless, alone.

  But while the Buddha brooded in the shade,

    Suddenly on his ear there fell a cry,

  A sob of pain, a pitiful strange sigh;

  Whereat he rose, and left the shade, and sought

  (He scarce knew why, but that there leaped within

  His sorrowing heart a mighty unknown love)

  Whence came the cry; and presently he saw,

  Upon the road, ’mid thirsty clouds of dust,

  Under the fierce blaze of the Indian sun,  A shepherd, driving hard a flock of sheep;

  And in the rear there lagged a little lamb

  With wounded feet, bleating most piteously,

  The while the ewe, with anguish deep and sore,

  Cried o’er her little one, knowing that she

  Was helpless to relieve her.

  When Buddha saw

  The piteous spectacle, compassion slew

  His own deep sorrow; and he straightway took

  The wounded Iamb, and bore it in his arms,

  Saying, ’Vain are the strivings of the soul

  After vain knowledge; vain the learned lore

  That hath not pity in it; vain is life

  That hath not love; and whatsoe’er is false,

  And what uncertain, though it seemeth true,

  This thing is true, that I should pity thee.

  The priests who pray and read, and read and pray,

  Die in their sins at last, and do not find

  The Love I mourn for, the deep Truth I seek;

  And better where it that I ease thy pain

  Than pray with them, and seek and never find.

  Thee will I love; yea, I will pity thee

  Whom none will pity; thee will I relieve;

  Tired of the soulless theories of men,

  I, Buddh, will stoop to thee, thou dumb, weak thing,

  Whom men despise, knowing that this is true,

    Whate’er is doubtful, and whate’er unsure,

  Pity and Love are right; what ever fades

  And perishes, Compassion will not fade,

  And Love will never perish.’’ So he took

  Into his arms the weary, wounded thing

  Which nestled in his bosom, and became  Quiet and peaceful; and the anxious ewe

  Walked by his side, looking into his face,

  Glad that her lamb had found those blessed arms:

  And so she walked, and dumbly worshipped him,

    Knowing him Buddha, the compassionate.

  And Buddha in that hour entered the Way

  Which he had vainly sought in schools and creeds;

  Entered the Path which no philosophy

  Leads unto, and which none shall ever find

  But by sweet deeds of Love, forgetting self;

  And in his heart there grew a holy Love;

  And in his mind a knowledge new and strange;

  And his whole being felt a painless peace;

    Sorrow and pain were not; and then he knew

  hat he had found the holy Truth at last.

  And from thenceforward Buddha lived the Truth,

  And taught its practice; and from far and near

  Came men and women who had sought the Truth,

  And at his feet they sat and worshipped him,

    Learning of love and pity; finding bliss

  And peace that cannot fail; and him they called

    Deliverer, Redeemer, Blessed Lord.

  And even they who understood not, sensed

  Faintly this truth which one day they should know:—

  Better than learning is a loving heart;

  And to give comfort to one wounded lamb

  Is higher than the wisdom of the schools,

  And greater than the world’s philosophy.                    IF MEN ONLY UNDERSTOOD


   If men only understood

  That the wrong act of a Brother

  Should not call from them another,

  But should be annulled with kindness,

  That their eyes should aid his blindness,

  They would find the Heavenly Portal

  Leading on to Love immortal—

   If they only understood.

   If men only understood

  That their wrong can never smother

  The wrong-doing of another;

  That by hatred hate increases,

  And by Good all evil ceases,

  They would cleanse their hearts and actions.

    Banish thence all vile detractions—

   If they only understood.

   If men only understood

  That the heart that sins must sorrow,

  That the hateful mind to-morrow

  Reaps its barren harvest, weeping,

  Starving, resting not, nor sleeping;

    Tenderness would fill their being.

  They would see with Pity’s seeing—

   If they only understood.

   If men only understood

  All the emptiness and aching

  Of the sleeping mid the waking

  Of the souls they judge so blindly,

  Of the hearts they pierce unkindly.

  They, with gentler words and feeling,  Would apply the balm of healing—

   If they only understood.

   If men only understood

  That their hatred and resentment

  Slays their peace and sweet contentment

  Hurts themselves, helps not another,

  Does not cheer one lonely Brother,

  They would seek the better doing

  Of good deeds which leaves no rueing-—

   If they only understood.

   If men only understood

  How Love conquers; how prevailing

  Is its might, grim hate assailing;

  How Compassion endeth sorrow,

  Maketh wise, and doth not borrow

  Pain of passion; they would ever

  Live in Love, in hatred never—

   If they only understood.                    PRACTICE AND PERCEPTION


    Questioning Life and Destiny and Truth,

  I sought the dark and labyrinthine Sphinx,

  Who spake to me this strange and wondrous thing:—

  " Concealment only lies in blinded eyes,

  And God alone can see the Form of God."

  I sought to solve this hidden mystery

  Vainly by paths of blindness and of pain,

  But when I found the Way of Love and Peace,

    Concealment ceased, and I was blind no more:

  Then saw I God e’en with the eyes of God.                                        LIBERTY


  The unwise say, " Our sufferings are unjust,

  Our pains and woes rise from the scattered dust

  Of sinful ancestors; we are not free;

  Our fathers robbed us of our liberty

  By what they did; and we are weak and frail

  Because they erred; they fell, and we must fail.

  " Our drunkenness comes from their love of wine;

  Our lusts their revels made; and we divine

  Our manifold diseases by the ways

  In which they walked; and as they trod the maze

  Made by their feet, so we must likewise tread,

  For we are bound and driven by the dead."

  Thy sins are thine, O man! and from thy deeds

  Thy life, with all its weal and woe, proceeds;

  By self, and not by others, thou art bound;

  In thine own will and heart the root is found

  Of all thy lack of peace; open thou thine eyes,

  Leave the dead past, and look within; be wise.

  Make pure thy heart, and thou wilt make thy life

  Rich, sweet, and beautiful, unmarred by strife;

  Guard well thy mind, and, noble, strong, and free,

  Nothing shall harm, disturb or conquer thee;

  For all thy foes are in thy heart and mind;

  There also thy salvation thou wilt find.

  Mind is the Master-power that moulds and makes.

  And Man is Mind and evermore he takes

  The Tool of Thought, and, shaping what he wills,

  Brings forth a thousand joys, a thousand ills:—

  He thinks in secret, and it comes to pass;

    Environment is but his looking-glass.  In his own heart he fosters dark desires,

  Or strives for good, or loftily aspires;

  In his own life he reaps what he has sown,

  Or pain or peace, he garners in his own.

  Thou man, that bowest to heredity,

  Know this—the Law of life is Liberty,

  By Thought we rise; by Thought we fall; by Thought

  We stand or go: all destiny is wrought

  By its swift potency; and he who stands

  Master of Thought, and his desires commands,

  Willing and weaving thoughts of Love and Might,

  Shapes his high end in Truth’s unerring Light.                          LONG I SOUGHT THEE


   Long I sought thee, Spirit holy,

   Master Spirit, meek and lowly;

  Sought thee with a silent sorrow, brooding o’er the woes of men;

   Vainly sought thy yoke of meekness

   ’Neath the weight of woe and weakness;

  Finding not, yet in my failing, seeking o’er and o’er again.

   In unrest and doubt and sadness

   Dwelt I, yet I knew thy Gladness

  Waited somewhere; somewhere greeted torn and sorrowing hearts like

mine;

   Knew that somehow I should find thee,

   Leaving sin and woe behind me,

  And at last thy Love would bid me enter into Rest divine.

   Hatred, mockery, and reviling

   Scorched my seeking soul, defiling

  That which should have been thy Temple, wherein thou should’st move

and dwell;

   Praying, striving, hoping, calling;

   Suffering, sorrowing in my falling,

  Still I sought thee, groping blindly in the gloomy depths of hell.

   And I sought thee till I found thee;

   And the dark Powers all around me

  Fled and left me silent, peaceful, brooding o’er thy holy themes;

   From within me and without me

   Fled they when I ceased to doubt thee;

  And I found thee in thy Glory, mighty Master of my dreams!

   Yea, I found thee, Spirit holy,

   Beautiful and pure and lowly;

  Found thy Joy and Peace and Gladness; found thee in thy House of Rest;

   Found thy strength in Love and Meekness,   And my pain and woe and weakness

  Left me, and I walked the Pathway trodden only by the blest.                                        REALITY


  I see men gaze upon the distant skies

   Of ideals inaccessible and vain;

  And miss the Holy Way which near them lies—

   The hourly conquest over sin and pain.

  I see uplifted and imploring hands

   Aching with emptiness; I see the cause,

    Self-made, of man’s long sorrow; see his bands

   Self-wrought, self-bound; I see the broken laws.

  Wisdom lies hidden in our common life,

   And he will find it who shall rightly ask;

  Where springs the fretful fever and the strife

   There Truth abides—e’en in the daily task.

  Behold where Love Eternal rests concealed!

   (The deathless Love that seemed so far away!)

  E’en in the lowly heart; it stands revealed

   To him who lives the sinless life to-day.

  Wrapped in our nearest duty is the Key

   Which shall unlock for us the Heavenly Gate;

    Unveiled, the Heavenly Vision he shall see,

   Who cometh not too early nor too late.

  The glory of the Truth no Future veils

   From tear - stained eyes; no Past obliterates,

  For toil - worn feet, the narrow, weed - grown trails

   Which wind through common ways to joyful Gates.

    Where’er we go immortal splendour goes;

   But eyes, self-blinded, look and cannot see;

  Th’ Eternal Glory shines upon man’s woes,

   Piercing the dark night of his misery.

  Lo! where the shadowless Effulgence gleams—

   In tasks well done, in stainless thoughts and deeds,  In words of love and pity, not in dreams

   Of sky - bound glories holding future meeds.

  Peace cometh only to the peaceful soul;

   Love, painless, nestles in the Love-born heart;

  Joy springs where self is sunken for the whole;

   From conquered sins immortal beauties start.

  Our task is with us, and the Path Sublime,

   Rising from swamps of self, through Duty’s way,

  Cuts its clear course up the steep hills of Time

   Unto the splendour of the Perfect Day.                        TO-MORROW AND TO-DAY


   In the dark land of To-morrow

   I dwelt with pain and sorrow,

  And I sighed for joys and blessings that escaped me as I ran;

   And the darkness gathered round me,

   For the morrow ever found me

  Living in "What I ought to do," and not in what I can.

   And I sought for loving-kindness

   In the dim, dark haunts of blindness;

  In the lightless caves of self I searched for blessedness and rest;

   And I reached out hands appealing,

   Sadly groped for light and healing,

  Striving for " what I want to have, " not what is true and best.

   Then I found that selfish hoping,

   Darkly seeking, blindly groping

  In vain wishing and regretting chased life’s glory frommy brow;

   So I ceased from selfish fretting,

   Turned to Love, and, self-forgetting,

  Left " what I hope to get and keep," for what I will be now.

   So I fled from self and sorrow,

   Left the dark land of To-morrow,

  And thought of what kind deeds to do, what loving words to say;

   And the light of peace and gladness

   Chased away the clouds of sadness,

  For I lost the past and future in the bright world of To-day.                              STAR OF WISDOM


  Star that of the birth of Vishnu,

  Birth of Krishna, Buddha, Jesus,

  Told the wise ones, Heavenward looking,

    Waiting, watching for thy gleaming.

  In the darkness of the night-time.

  In the starless gloom of midnight;

  Shining Herald of the coming

  Of the kingdom of the righteous:

  Teller of the mystic story

  Of the lowly birth of Godhead

  In the stable of the passions,

  In the manger of the mind-soul;

  Silent singer of the secret

  Of compassion deep and holy

  To the heart with sorrow burdened,

  To the soul with waiting weary:—

  Star of all-surpassing brightness,

  Thou again dost deck the midnight;

  Thou again dost cheer the wise ones

    Watching in the creedal darkness,

  Weary of the endless battle

  With the grinding blades of error;

  Tired of lifeless, useless idols,

  Of the dead forms of religions;

  Spent with watching for thy shining;

  Thou hast ended their despairing;

  Thou hast lighted up their pathway;

  Thou hast brought again the old Truths

  To the hearts of all thy Watchers;

  To the souls of them that love thee  Thou dust speak of Joy and Gladness,

  Of the Peace that endeth sorrow.

  Blessed are they that can see thee,

  Weary wanderers in the Night-time;

  Blessed they who feel the throbbing,

  In their bosoms feel the pulsing

  Of a deep Love stirred within them

  By the great power of thy shining.

  Let us learn thy lesson truly;

  Learn it faithfully and humbly;

  Learn it meekly, wisely, gladly,

  Ancient star of holy Vishnu,

  Light of Krishna, Buddha, Jesus.              WOULD YOU SCALE THE HIGHEST


                                    HEAVEN


  Would you scale the highest heaven,

   Would you pierce the lowest hell,—

  Live in dreams of constant beauty,

   Or in basest thinkings dwell.

  For your thoughts are heaven above you,

   And your thoughts are hell below;

  Bliss is not, except in thinking,

   Torment naught but thought can know.

    Worlds would vanish but for thinking;

   Glory is not but in dreams;

  And the Drama of the ages

   From the Thought Eternal streams.

  Dignity and shame and sorrow,

   Pain and anguish, love and hate

  Are but maskings of the mighty

   Pulsing Thought that governs Fate.

  As the colours of the rainbow

   Make the one uncoloured beam,

  So the universal changes

   Make the One Eternal Dream.

  And the Dream is all within you,

   And the Dreamer waileth long

  For the Morning to awake him

   To the living thought and strong.

  That shall make the ideal real,

   Make to vanish dreams of hell

  In the highest, holiest heaven

   Where the pure and perfect dwell.  Evil is the thought that thinks it;

   Good, the thought that makes it so;

  Light and darkness, sin and pureness

   Likewise out of thinking grow.

  Dwell in thought upon the Grandest,

   And the Grandest you shall see;

  Fix your mind upon the Highest,

   And the Highest you shall be.            TO THEM THAT SEEK THE HIGHEST


                                      GOOD


  To them that seek the highest Good

   All things subserve the wisest ends;

   Naught comes as ill, and wisdom lends

  Wings to all shapes of evil brood.

  The darkening sorrow veils a Star

   That waits to shine with gladsome light;

   Hell waits on heaven; and after night

    Comes golden glory from afar.

  Defeats are steps by which we climb

   With purer aim to nobler ends;

   Loss leads to gain, and joy attends

  True footsteps up the hills of time.

  Pain lead to paths of holy bliss,

   To thoughts and words and deeds divine;

   And clouds that gloom and rays that shine,

  Along life’s upward highway kiss.

    Misfortune does but cloud the way

   Whose end and summit in the sky

   Of bright success, sunkiss’d and high,

  Awaits our seeking and our stay.

  The heavy pall of doubts and fears

   That clouds the Valley of our hopes,

   The shades with which the spirit copes,

  The bitter harvesting of tears,

  The heartaches, miseries, and griefs,

   The bruisings born of broken ties,

   All these are steps by which we rise

  To living ways of sound beliefs.  Love, pitying, watchful, runs to meet

   The Pilgrim from the Land of Fate;

   All glory and all good await

  The coming of obedient feet.                          ONE THING LACKING


  E’en at the Master’s holy feet, low kneeling,

   Came one who knew nor wordly want nor stress

  Yet sad with fruitless search for Truth, and feeling

   Perchance the Teacher of the world might bless

  Then asked he softly, and with humble pleading,—

   "Good Master, canst Thou calm my inward strife?

  Show me the lofty highway of Thy leading;

   What shall I do to gain Eternal Life?"

  Then He, the Lord of Life, looked down in kindness

   Upon the Kneeling form, and, answering, said,—

  "Thou knowest the commandments, be not mindless

   Of these, and thou shalt live, though thou wert dead."

  Replied the Kneeling one,—"All these things keeping

   From my youth up, I sought Thee out this day,

  Yet still I wander unawakened, sleeping;

   I have not found the high and holy Way."

  Yet lackest thou one thing, yield thy desiring,"

   (Thus spake the Master), "do not grasp, but give;

  Sell that thou holdest, and, with free aspiring,

   Come, follow Me, and thou shalt truly live;

  For whoso follows Me, all selfish clinging

   Yielding with pure and undivided mind

  Shall nothing lack; yea, for his earthly bringing

   Surely the Heavenly Treasure he shall find."

  Now he who knelt was very rich, and cherished

   His earthly treasure in his inmost heart;

  And even there his spirit paused and perished,

   Losing renunciation’s better part:

  Noble but not complete, the Master leaving

   To cleave unto his perishable day,  He chose the path of passing things and grieving,

   And, sorrow-stricken, went his lonely way.                                          YASHAS


  Lo, in the night, when all the world was sleeping,

   Yashas, the noble and aspiring youth,

  Pondering upon the world’s great sorrow, weeping,

   Searched for the holy pathway unto Truth.

  " I search in vain," said he, " and will betake me

   Unto the Blessed One, and seek release;

  Healer of sorrow, he perchance will make me

   Partaker in his deep, Nirvanic peace."

  Then came the youth, with footsteps fast and faster,

   Unto the Blessed Teacher of mankind,

  And, weeping, fell before the Holy Master,

   Saying, "Great Lord, I seek and cannot find.

  How great is my distress and tribulation!

   Thou knowest all my sorrow and my pain;

  Give me the holy balm of thy salvation,

   Let me depart not from thy side again."

  The Blessed One, seeing his perturbation,

   Spake softly thus unto the gentle youth

  " Lo, here is no distress, no tabulation;

   Come unto Me, and I will show you Truth

  The Truth will bring you joy, dispelling sadness,

   And as the night before the light of day

  Flees and departs, e’en so your rising gladness

   Sorrow and pain and care will chase away."

  Then spake He of things pure and high and holy

   Giving full freely of His wisdom’s store,

  And Yashas, listening, rapt, all meek and’lowly

   Drank deeply of the Master’s wondrous lore;

  And lo! the cooling breath of Wisdom o’er him

   Stole softly, fanning all his care to rest;    Sorrow departed, and Compassion bore him

   Unto the Path the Master’s feet had prest.                              THE LOWLY WAY


  All ways are waiting for my feet to tread,

  The light and dark, the living and the dead,

  The broad and narrow way, the high and low,

  The good and bad, and with quick step or slow,

  I now may enter any way I will,

  And find, by walking, which is good, which ill.

  And all good things my wand’ring feet await,

  If I but come, with vow inviolate,

  Unto the narrow, high and holy way

  Of heart-born purity, and therein stay;

  Walking, secure from him who taunts and scorns,

  To flowery meads, across the path of thorns.

  And I may stand where health, success, and power

  Await my coming, if, each fleeting hour,

  I cling to love and patience: and abide

  With stainlessness; and never step aside

  From high integrity; so shall I see

  At last the land of immortality.

  And I may seek and find; I may achieve;

  I may not claim, but, losing, may retrieve,

  The Law bends not for me, but I must bend

  Unto the Law, if I would reach the end

  Of my afflictions, if I would restore

  My soul to Light and Life and weep no more.

  Not mine the arrogant and selfish claim

  To all good things; be mine the lowly aim

  To seek and find, to know and comprehend,

  And wisdom-ward all holy footsteps wend

  Nothing is mine to claim or to command,

  But all is mine to know and understand.                        THE MUSIC OF THE SEA


  I love to hear the music of the sea,

   As, playing on the everlasting shore,

  Its strange, profound, and mystic melody,

   It chants the soul of man for evermore.

  It sings of wreckful passion when it beats

   With unrestrained wildness on the rocks;

  Then with succeeding sorrow it retreats,

   Sobbing o’er pain of self- inflicted shocks.

  Of martyrdom and silent pain it speaks

   When, dumbly moaning, languidly it rolls;

  And weirdly wails, as on the rocks it breaks,

   The deadness and despair of human souls.

  Its scintillations on the pebbly beach,

   Mingling with sunshine and the playful breeze,

  Are bubbling merriment and mirth that reach

   No deeper than the sensuous vision sees.

  When, scarcely murmuring, placidly it lies,

   It whispers of the silent heart of peace;

  Of that unutterable state where dies

   Passion, and all our human sorrows cease.

    Playful, perturbed, peaceful, tempestuous,

   Reflected in thy heart, thy peace, thy strife,

  Is the strange passion and peace in us,

   The madness and the wisdom of our life.

  Thou symbol of the human soul, O sea!

   I love to hear thee, on the lonely shore

  Chanting thy everlasting melody,

   Singing the soul of man for evermore.                              LOVE’S CONQUEST


  I stood upon the shore, and saw the rocks

   Resist the onslaught of the mighty sea,

  And when I thought how all the countless shocks

   They had withstood through an eternity,

  I said, " To wear away this solid main

  The ceaseless efforts of the waves are vain."

  But when I thought how they the rocks had rent,

   And saw the sand and shingles at my feet

  (Poor passive remnants of resistance spent)

   Tumbled and tossed where they the waters meet,

  Then saw I ancient landmarks’ neath the waves,

  And knew the waters held the stones their slaves.

  I saw the mighty work the waters wrought

   By patient softness and unceasing flow;

  How they the proudest promontory brought

   Unto their feet, and massy hills laid low;

  How the soft drops the adamantine wall

    Conquered at last, and brought it to its fall.

  And then I knew that hard, resisting sin

   Should yield at last to Love’s soft ceaseless roll

  Coming and going, ever flowing in

   Upon the proud rocks of the human soul;

  That all resistance should be spent and past,

  And every heart yield unto it at last.              TO MY DAUGHTER NORA ON HER


                          TENTH BIRTHDAY


  Since when thou earnest, with thy native charms,

  A weeping infant to thy mother’s arms,

  Ten fleeting years have lifted up thy head

  Unto my breast; ten years of love are fled,

  But all their store of innocence and bliss

  Remains with thee; thy mother’s and my kiss

  Seal it for ever thine! Those guileless ways

  Which, walking, have filled up thy tender days,

  May’st thou for ever keep; may thy pure heart

  Keep always pure, that no unholy dart

  Pierce it with anguish; may remorse and pain

  Shrink from thy hallowed presence, and no stain

  Soil thy white robes of peace. O! be thou sure

  Bliss follows in the footsteps of the pure.

  And whatsoe’er shall tempt of wrong or strife,

  Hold fast the rare gem of a blameless life;

  Nor lose, nor lightly hold, but bind to thee

  The priceless jewel of thy purity.                          THE INWARD PURITY


  Find ye that life is anguish, and that self-love is a chain

  That binds thy quivering soul, and cuts with biting stings of pain?

  Grieve ye where Slander’s serpents trail beneath fair flowers of Trust?

  Or weep where Friendship buried lies ’neath Hatred’s fulsome dust?

  Then listen,—Selfish sweets are brief, and fleeting self-hood’s ties,

  But there abides a fadeless Love, a Life that never dies;

  A path there is which Serpent slime hath never yet defiled,

  Where weary feet find rest and peace, and are no more beguiled:

  And that pure Love and Life are his whose inmost heart is free.

  From unforgiveness, judgment false, and self and enmity;

  And that fair Path of Peace he walks whose memory holds no stain

  Of injuries past; that blameless heart hath reached the end of pain.                                  SELF-SACRIFICE


  Great glory crowns the heights of hope by arduous struggle won;

  Bright honour rounds the hoary head that mighty works hath done;

  Fair riches come to him who strives in ways of golden gain,

  And fame enshrines his name who works with genius-glowing brain:

  But greater glory waits for him who, in the bloodless strife

    ’Gainst self and wrong, adopts, in love, the sacrificial life;

  And brighter honour rounds the brow of him who, ’mid the scorns

  Of blind idolaters of self, accepts the crown of thorns;

  And fairer, purer riches come to him greatly strives

  To walk in ways of love and truth to sweeten human lives;

  And he who serveth well mankind exchanges fleeting fame

  For Light eternal, Joy and Peace, and robes of heavenly flame.                      I TAKE REFUGE IN TRUTH


  I come to thee, O Master! on thy breast

   I lay my weary head; I lave thy feet

  With tears and kisses, travail of my quest;

   I bring my aching heart and sore defeat,

  And seek thy holy joy and perfect rest.

  Place thou thy hand upon my burning brow;

   Soothe thou my soul, and bid my sins depart;

  I ask thy sweet salvation even now;

   Thy rest I seek to ease my throbbing heart;

  Thou art the Truth, to thee I cling and bow.

  Thou changest not amid Earth’s changing scenes;

   All worldly joys, strong passions that decay,

  The sordid thought, the action that demeans,

   These are not thee, and they will pass away:

  On thy abiding strength my spirit leans.

  Lead thou my feet unto thy Holy Place;

   I take thy chastening; thy great love I see;

  Thy rod I kiss, and in my deep disgrace,

   With longing, humble heart I cling to thee,

    Knowing thou wilt not turn away thy face.                  I, TRUTH, AM THY REDEEMER


  I, Truth, am thy Redeemer, come to Me;

   Lay down thy sin and pain wild unrest;

  And I will calm thy spirit’s stormy sea,

   Pouring the oil of peace upon thy breast:

  Friendless and lone—lo, I abide with thee.

    Defeated and deserted, cast away;

   What refuge hast thou? Whither canst thou fly?

  Upon My changeless breast thy burdens lay;

   I am thy certain refuge, even I:

  All things are passing; I alone can stay.

  Lo I, the Great Forsaken, am the Friend

   Of the forsaken; I, whom men despise,

  The weak, the helpless, and despised defend;

   I gladden aching hearts and weeping eyes:

  Rest thou in Me, I am thy sorrow’s end.

  Lovers and friends and wealth, pleasures and fame—

   These fail and change, and pass into decay;

  But my Love does not change; and in thy blame

   I blame thee not, nor turn My face away:

  In My calm bosom hide thy sin and shame.                              THE WHITE ROBE


  The White Robe of the Heart Invisible

   Is stained with sin and sorrow, grief and pain,

  And all repentant pools and springs of prayer

   Shall not avail to wash it white again.

  While in the path of ignorance I walk,

   The stains of error will not cease to cling;

    Defilements mark the crooked path of self,

   Where anguish lurks and disappointments sting.

    Knowledge and wisdom only can avail

   To purify and make my garment clean,

  For therein lie love’s waters; therein rests

   Peace undisturbed, eternal, and serene.

  Sin and repentance is the path of pain,

   Knowledge and wisdom is the path of Peace;

  By the near way of practice I will find

 

   Where bliss begins, how pains and sorrows cease.

  Self shall depart, and Truth shall take its place;

   The Changeless One, the Indivisible

  Shall take up His abode in me, and cleanse

   The white Robe of the Heart Invisible.                          THE RIGHTEOUS MAN


  No harmful shaft can reach the righteous man,

   Standing erect amid the storms of hate,

  Defying hurt and injury and ban,

   Surrounded by the trembling slaves of Fate.

  Majestic in the strength of silent power,

   Serene he stands, nor changes not nor turns;

    Patient and firm in suffering’s darkest hour,

   Time bends to him, and death and doom he spurns.

  Wrath’s lurid lightnings round about him play,

   And hell’s deep thunders roll about his head;

  Yet heeds he not, for him they cannot slay

   Who stands whence earth and time and space are fled.

    Sheltered by deathless love, what fear hath he?

   Armoured in changeless Truth, what can he know

  Of loss and gain? Knowing eternity,

   He moves not whilst the shadows come and go.

  Call him immortal, call him Truth and Light

   And splendour of prophetic majesty

  Who bideth thus amid the powers of Night,

   Clothed with the glory of divinity.                                          CHOICE


  The will to evil and the will to Good

   Are both within thee: which wilt thou employ?

  Thou knowest what is right and what is wrong;

   Which wilt thou love and foster? which destroy?

  Thou art the chooser of thy thoughts and deeds;

   Thou art the maker of thine inward state;

  The power is thine to be what thou wilt be;

   Thou buildest Truth and Love, or lies and hate.

  If thou dost choose the evil, loving self,

   Thy cries and prayers for Good shall all be vain;

  Thy thought and act bringeth thee good or ill;

   Deep in thy heart thou makest joy and pain.

  As thou pursuest Good, striving to make

   Evil depart, thou shalt rejoice and say,—

  " Lo! Light and Love and Peace attend on me;

   Truth fadeth not, and Good abounds away."

  Choose as thou wilt thy thoughts and words and deeds,

   And as thou choosest so shall be thy life;

  The will to Good shall bring thee Joy and Peace,

   The will to evil, wretchedness and strife.