                        4. BODILY CONDITIONS


  There are today scores of distinct schools devoted to the healing of the

body; a fact which shows the great prevalence of physical suffering, as the

hundreds of religions, devoted to the comforting of men’s minds prove the

universality of mental suffering. Each of these schools has its place in so far

as it is able to relieve suffering, even where it does not eradicate the evil; for

with all these schools of healing, the facts of disease and pain remain with us,

just as sin and sorrow remain despite of the many religions.

  Disease and pain, like sin and sorrow, are too deep-seated to be removed

by palliatives. Our ailments have an ethical cause deeply rooted in the mind. I

do not infer by this that physical conditions have no part in disease; they play

an important part as instruments, as factors in the chain of causation. The

microbe that carried the black death was the instrument of uncleanliess, and

uncleanliness is, primarily, a moral disorder. Matter is visible mind, and that

bodily conflict which we call disease has a causal affinity to that mental

conflict which is associated with sin. In his present human or self-conscious

state,  man’s  mind  is  continually  being  disturbed  by  violently  conflicting

desires, and his body attacked by morbid elements. He is in a state of mental

inharmony and bodily discomfort. Animals in their wild and primitive state

are free from disease because they are free from inharmony. They are in

accord with their surroundings, have no moral responsibility and no sense of

sin,  and  are  free  from  those  violent  disturbances  of  remorse,  grief,

disappointment,  etc.,  which  are  so  destructive  of  man’s  harmony  and

happiness, and their bodies are not afflicted. As man ascends into the divine

or cosmic-conscious state, he will leave behind and below him all these inner

conflicts, will overcome sin and all sense of sin, and will dispel remorse and

sorrow. Being thus restored to mental harmony, he will become restored to

bodily harmony, to wholeness, health.

  The body is the image of the mind, and in it are traced the visible features

of hidden thoughts. The outer obeys the inner, and the enlightened scientist of

the future may be able to trace every bodily disorder to its ethical cause in the

mentality.

  Mental  harmony,  or  moral  wholeness,  makes  for  bodily  health.  I  say

makes for it, for it will not produce it magically, as it were - as though oneshould swallow a bottle of medicine and then be whole and free - but if the

mentality  is  becoming  more  poised  and  restful,  if  the  moral  stature  is

increasing,  then  a  sure  foundation  of  bodily  wholeness  is  being  laid,  the

forces  are  being  conserved  and  are  receiving  a  better  direction  and

adjustment; and even if perfect health is not gained, the bodily derangement,

whatever it be, will have lost its power to undermine the strengthened and

uplifted mind.

  One who suffers in body will not necessarily at once be cured when he

begins to fashion his mind on moral and harmonious principles; indeed, for a

time, while the body is bringing to a crisis, and throwing off, the effects of

former inharmonies, the morbid condition may appear to be intensified. As a

man  does  not  gain  perfect  peace  immediately  he  enters  upon  the  path  of

righteousness,  but  must,  except  in  rare  instances,  pass  through  a  painful

period of adjustment; neither does he, with the same rare exceptions, at once

acquire  perfect  health.  Time  is  required  for  bodily  as  well  as  mental

readjustment, and even if health is not reached, it will be approached.

  If the mind be made robust, the bodily condition will take a secondary

and subordinate place, and will cease to have that primary importance which

so many give to it. If a disorder is not cured, the mind can rise above it, and

refuse to be subdued by it. One can be happy, strong, and useful in spite of it.

The statement so often made by health specialists that a useful and happy life

is impossible without bodily health is disproved by the fact that numbers of

men who have accomplished the greatest works - men of genius and superior

talent in all departments - have been afflicted in their bodies, and today there

are plenty of living witnesses to this fact. Sometimes the bodily affliction acts

as a stimulus to mental activity, and aids rather than hinders its work. To

make a useful and happy life dependent upon health, is to put matter before

mind, is to subordinate spirit to body.

  Men of robust minds do not dwell upon their bodily condition if it be in

any way disordered - they ignore it, and work on, live on, as though it were

not. This ignoring of the body not only keeps the mind sane and strong, but it

is the best resource for curing the body. If we cannot have a perfectly sound

body, we can have a healthy mind, and healthy mind is the best route to a

sound body.

  A sickly mind is more deplorable than a disordered body, and it leads tosickliness of body. The mental invalid is in a far more pitiable condition than

the bodily invalid. There are invalids (every physician knows them) who only

need  to  lift  themselves  into  a  strong,  unselfish,  happy  frame  of  mind  to

discover that their body is whole and capable.

  Sickly  thoughts  about  oneself,  about  one’s  body  and  food,  should  be

abolished by all who are called by the name of man. The man who imagines

that the wholesome food he is eating is going to injure him, needs to come to

bodily vigour by the way of mental strength. To regard one’s bodily health

and safety as being dependent on a particular kind of food which is absent

from nearly every household, is to court petty disorders. The vegetarian who

says he dare not eat potatoes, that fruit produces indigestion, that apples give

him acidity, that pulses are poison, that he is afraid of green vegetables and

so on, is demoralising the noble cause which he professes to have espoused,

is making it look ridiculous in the eyes of those robust meat eaters who live

above such sickly fears and morbid self-scrutinies. To imagine that the fruits

of the earth, eaten when one is hungry and in need of food, are destructive of

health and life is to totally misunderstand the nature and office of food. The

office  of  food  is  to  sustain  and  preserve  the  body,  not  to  undermine  and

destroy it. It is a strange delusion - and one that must react deleteriously upon

the body - that possesses so many who are seeking health by the way of diet,

the delusion that certain of the simplest, most natural, and purest of viands

are bad of themselves, that they have in them the elements of death, and

not of life. One of these food-reformers once told me that he believed his

ailment (as well as the ailments of thousands of others) was caused by eating

bread; not by an excess of bread, but by the bread itself; and yet this man’s

bread food consisted of nutty, home-made, whole meal loaves. Let us get rid

of our sins, our sickly thoughts, our self-indulgences and foolish excesses

before attributing our diseases to such innocent causes.

    Dwelling upon one’s petty troubles and ailments is a manifestation of

weakness of character. To so dwell upon them in thought leads to frequent

talking about them, and this, in turn, impresses them more vividly upon the

mind, which soon becomes demoralised by such petting and pitying. It is as

convenient to dwell upon happiness and health as upon misery and disease;

as easy to talk about them, and much more pleasant and profitable to do so.

  “Let us live happily then, not hating those who hate us!  Among men who hate us let us dwell free from hatred!

  Let us live happily then, free from ailments among the ailing!

  Among men who are ailing let us dwell free from ailments!

  Let us live happily then, free from greed among the greedy!

  Among men who are greedy let us dwell free from greed!”

  Moral principles are the soundest foundations for health, as well as for

happiness. They are the true regulators of conduct, and they embrace every

detail of life. When earnestly espoused and intelligently understood they will

compel  a  man  to  reorganise  his  entire  life  down  to  the  most  apparently

insignificant detail. While definitely regulating one’s diet, they will put an

end to squeamishness, food-fear, and foolish whims and groundless opinions

as to the harmfulness of foods. When sound moral health has eradicated self-

indulgence and self-pity, all natural foods will be seen as they are -nourishers

of the body, and not its destroyers.

  Thus a consideration of bodily conditions brings us inevitably back to the

mind,  and  to  those  moral  virtues  which  fortify  it  with  an  invincible

protection.  The  morally  right  are  the  bodily  right.  To  be  continually

transposing  the  details  of  life  from  passing  views  and  fancies,  without

reference to fixed principles, is to flounder in confusion; but to discipline

details by moral principles is to see, with enlightened vision, all details in

their proper place and order.

  For  it  is  given  to  moral  principle  alone,  in  their  personal  domain,  to

perceive the moral order. In them alone resides the insight that penetrates to

causes, and with them only is the power to at once command all details to

their order and place, as the magnet draws and polarises the filings of steel.

  Better even than curing the body is to rise above it; to be its master, and

not to be tyrannised over by it; not to abuse it, not to pander to it, never to put

its claims before virtue; to discipline and moderate its pleasures, and not to be

overcome by its pains - in a word, to live in the poise and strength of the

moral powers, this, better than bodily cure, is a yet a safe way to cure, and it

is a permanent source of mental vigour and spiritual repose.                                    5. POVERTY


  Many of the greatest men through all ages have abandoned riches and

adopted poverty to better enable them to accomplish their lofty purposes.

Why, then, is poverty regarded as such a terrible evil? Why is it that this

poverty, which these great men regard as a blessing, and adopt as a bride,

should be looked upon by the bulk of mankind as a scourge and a plague?

The answer is plain. In the one case, the poverty is associated with a nobility

of mind which not only takes from it all appearance of evil, but which lifts it

up and makes it appear good and beautiful, makes it seem more attractive and

more to be desired than riches and honour, so much so that, seeing the dignity

and happiness of the noble mendicant, thousands imitate him by adopting his

mode of life. In the other case, the poverty of our great cities is associated

with everything that is mean and repulsive - with swearing, drunkenness,

filth, laziness, dishonesty and crime. What, then, is the primary evil: is it

poverty, or is it sin? The answer is inevitable - it is sin. Remove sin from

poverty, and its sting is gone; it has ceased to be the gigantic evil that it

appeared, and can even be turned to good and noble ends. Confucius held up

one of his poor disciples, Yen-hwui by name, as an example of lofty virtue to

his richer pupils, yet “although he was so poor that he had to live on rice and

water, and had no better shelter than a hovel, he uttered no complaint. Where

this poverty would have made other men discontented and miserable, he did

not allow his equanimity to be disturbed.” Poverty cannot undermine a noble

character, but it can set it off to better advantage. The virtues of Yen-hwui

shone all the brighter for being set in poverty, like resplendent jewels set in a

contrasting background.

  It is common with social reforms to regard poverty as the cause of the

sins  with  which  it  is  associated;  yet  the  same  reformers  refer  to  the

immoralities of the rich as being caused by their riches. Where there is a

cause its effect will appear and were affluence the cause of immorality, and

poverty  the  cause  of  degradation,  then  every  rich  man  would  become

immoral and every poor man would come to degradation.

  An evil-doer will commit evil under any circumstances, whether he be

rich or poor, or midway between the two conditions. A right doer will do

right howsoever he be placed. Extreme circumstances may help to bring outthe evil which is already there awaiting its opportunity, but they cannot cause

the evil, cannot create it.

  Discontent  with  one’s  financial  condition  is  not  the  same  as  poverty.

Many  people  regard  themselves  as  poor  whose  income  runs  into  several

hundreds – and in some cases several thousands of pounds a year, combined

with light responsibilities. They imagine their affliction to be poverty; their

real trouble is covetousness. They imagine their affliction to be poverty; their

real trouble is covetousness. They are not made unhappy by poverty, but by

the thirst for riches. Poverty is more often in the mind than in the purse. So

long as a man thirsts for more money he will regard himself as poor, and in

that sense he is poor, for covetousness is poverty of mind. A miser may be a

millionaire, but he is as poor as when he was penniless.

  On the other hand, the trouble with so many who are living in indigence

and degradation is that they are satisfied with their condition. To be living in

dirt,  disorder,  laziness,  and  swinish  self-indulgence,  revelling  in  foul

thoughts,  foul  words  and  unclean  surroundings,  and  to  be  satisfied  with

oneself,  is  deplorable.  Here  again,  “poverty”  resolves  itself  into  a  mental

condition,  and  its  solution,  as  a  “problem”,  is  to  be  looked  for  in  the

improvement  of  the  individual  from  within,  rather  than  of  his  outward

condition. Let a man be made clean and alert within, and he will no longer be

content with dirt and degradation without. Having put his mind in order, he

will then put his house in order; indeed, both he and others will know that he

has put himself right by the fact that he has put his immediate surroundings

right. His altered heart shows in his altered life.

  There  are,  of  course,  those  who  are  neither  self-deceived  nor  self-

degraded and yet are poor. Many such are satisfied to remain poor. They are

contented, industrious, and happy, and desire nothing else; but those among

them  who  are  dissatisfied,  and  are  ambitious  for  better  surroundings  and

greater  scope  should,  and  usually  do,  use  their  poverty  as  a  spur  to  the

exercise of their talents and energies. By self-improvement and attention to

duty, they can rise into the fuller, more responsible life which they desire.

  Devotion to duty is, indeed, not only the way out of that poverty which

is regarded as restrictive, it is also the royal road to affluence, influence, and

lasting joy, yea, even to perfection itself. When understood in its deepest

sense it is seen to be related to all that is best and noblest in life. It includesenergy,  industry,  concentrated  attention  to  the  business  of  one’s  life,

singleness  of  purpose,  courage  and  faithfulness,  determination  and  self-

reliance, and that self-abnegation which is the key to all real greatness. A

singularly  successful  man  was  once  asked,  “What  is  the  secret  of  your

success?” and he replied, “Getting up at six o’ clock in the morning, and

minding my own business.” Success, honour and influence always come to

him who diligently attends to the business of his life, and religiously avoids

interfering with the duties of others.

  It may here be urged, and is usually so urged, that the majority of those

who are in poverty - for instance, the mill and factory workers - have not the

time or opportunity to give themselves to any special work. This is a mistake.

Time and opportunity are always at hand, are with everybody at all times.

Those of the poor above mentioned, who are content to remain where they

are, can always be diligent in their factory labour, and sober and happy in

their homes; but those of them who feel that they could better fill another

sphere, can prepare for it by educating themselves in their spare time. The

hard-worked poor are, above all, the people who need to economise their

time and energies; and the youth who wishes to rise out of such poverty, must

at  the  outset  put  aside  the  foolish  and  wasteful  indulgences  of  alcohol,

tobacco, sexual vice, late hours at music halls, clubs and gaming parties, and

must give his evenings to the improvement of his mind in that course of

education which is necessary to his advancement. By this method numbers of

the  most  influential  men  throughout  history  -  some  of  them  among  the

greatest - have raised themselves from the commonest poverty; a fact which

proves that the time of necessity is the hour of opportunity, and not as is so

often imagined and declared, the destruction of opportunity; that the deeper

the poverty, the greater is the incentive to action in those who are dissatisfied

with themselves, and are bent upon achievement.

  Poverty is an evil or it is not, according to the character and the condition

of mind of the one that is in poverty. Wealth is an evil or not, in the same

manner. Tolstoy chafed under his wealthy circumstances. To him they were a

great  evil.  He  longed  for  poverty  as  the  covetous  long  for  wealth.  Vice,

however, is always an evil, for it both degrades the individual who commits

it, and is a menace to society. A logical and profound study of poverty will

always bring us back to the individual, and to the human heart. When oursocial reformers condemn vice as they now condemn the rich; when they are

as eager to abolish wrong-living as they now are to abolish low wages, we

may look for a diminution in that form of degraded poverty which is one of

the dark spots on our civilisation. Before such poverty disappears altogether,

the  human  heart  will  have  undergone,  during  the  process  of  evolution,  a

radical change. When that heart is purged from covetousness and selfishness;

when  drunkenness,  impurity,  indolence  and  self-indulgence  are  driven  for

ever from the earth, then poverty and riches will be known no more, and

every man will perform his duties with a joy so full and deep as is yet (except

to the few whose hearts are already pure) unknown to men, and all will eat of

the fruit of their labour in sublime self-respect and perfect peace.                6. MAN’S SPIRITUAL DOMINION


  The kingdom over which man is destined to rule with undisputed sway is

that of his own mind and life; but this kingdom, as already shown, is not

separate from the universe, is not confined to itself alone; it is intimately

related to entire humanity, to nature, to the current of events in which it is, for

the time being, involved, and to the vast universe. Thus the mastery of this

kingdom embraces the mastery of the kingdom embraces the mastery of the

knowledge of life; it lifts a man into the supremacy of wisdom, bestowing

upon  him  the  gift  of  insight  into  human  hearts,  giving  him  the  power  to

distinguish between good and evil, also to comprehend that which is above

both good and evil, and to know the nature and consequences of deeds.

  At present men are more or less under the sway of rebellious thoughts,

and the conquest of these is the supreme conquest of life. The unwise think

that everything can be mastered but oneself, and they seek for happiness for

themselves  and  others  by  modifying  external  things.  The  transposing  of

outward effects cannot bring permanent happiness, or bestow wisdom; the

patching and coddling of a sin-laden body cannot produce health and well-

being. The wise know that there is no real mastery until self is subdued, that

when oneself is conquered, the subjugation of externals is finally assured, and

they find happiness for ever springing up within them, in the calm strength of

divine virtue. They put away sin, and purify and strengthen the body by rising

superior to the sway of its passions.

  Man can reign over his own mind; can be lord over himself. Until he does

so reign, his life is unsatisfactory and imperfect. His spiritual dominion is the

empire of the mental forces of which his nature is composed. The body has

no causative power. The ruling of the body - that is, of appetite and passion –

is the discipline of mental forces. The subduing, modifying, redirecting and

transmuting of the antagonising spiritual elements within, is the wonderful

and mighty work which all men must, sooner or later, undertake. For a long

time man regards himself as the slave of external forces, but there comes a

day when his spiritual eyes open, and he sees that he has been a slave this

long time to none and nothing but his own ungoverned, unpurified self. In

that day, he rises up and, ascending his spiritual throne, he no longer obeys

his desires, appetites, and passions, as their slave, but henceforth rules themas his subjects. The mental kingdom through  which he has been wont to

wander as a puling beggar and a whipped serf, he now discovers is his by

right of lordly self-control - his to set in order, to organise and harmonise, to

abolish its dissensions and painful contradictions, and bring it to a state of

peace.

  Thus rising up and exercising his rightful spiritual authority, he enters the

company of those kingly ones who in all ages have conquered and attained,

who  have  overcome  ignorance,  darkness,  and  mental  suffering,  and  have

ascended into Truth.              7. CONQUEST: NOT RESIGNATION


  He who has undertaken the sublime task of overcoming himself, does not

resign himself to anything that is evil; he subjects himself only to that which

is good. Resignation to evil is the lowest weakness; obedience to good is the

highest  power.  To  resign  oneself  to  sin  and  sorrow,  to  ignorance  and

suffering, is to say in effect, “I give up; I am defeated; life is evil, and I

submit.” Such resignation to evil is the reverse of religion. It is a direct denial

of good; it elevates evil to the position of supreme power in the universe.

Such submission to evil shows itself in a selfish and sorrowful life; a life

alike devoid of strength against temptation, and of that joy and calm which

are the manifestation of a mind that is dominated by good.

  Man  is  not  framed  for  perpetual  resignation  and  sorrow,  but  for  final

victory and joy. All the spiritual laws of the universe are with the good man,

for  good  preserves  and  shields.  There  are  no  laws  of  evil.  Its  nature  is

destruction and desolation.

  The conscious modification of the character away from evil and towards

good, forms, at present, no part in the common course of education. Even our

religious  teachers  have  lost  this  knowledge  and  practice,  and  cannot,

therefore, instruct concerning it. Moral growth is, so far, in the great mass of

mankind, unconscious, and is brought about by the stress and struggle of life.

The time will come, however, when the conscious formation of character will

form an important part in the education of youth, and when no man will be

able  to  fill  the  position  of  preacher  unless  he  be  a  man  of  habitual  self-

control, unblemished integrity, and exalted purity, so as to be able to give

sound instruction in the making of character, which will then be the main

feature of religion.

  The doctrine herein set forth by the author is the doctrine of conquest

over evil; the annihilation of sin; and necessarily the permanent establishment

of man in the knowledge of good, and in the enjoyment of perpetual peace.

This is the teaching of the Masters of religion in all ages. Howsoever it may

have been disguised and distorted by the unenlightened, if is the doctrine of

all the perfect ones that were, and will be the doctrine of all the perfect ones

that are to come. It is the doctrine of Truth.

  And the conquest is not of an evil without; not of evil men, or evil spirits,or evil things; but of the evil within; of evil thoughts, evil desires, evil deeds;

for when every man has destroyed the evil within his own heart, to where in

the whole vast universe will any one be able to point, and say, “There is

evil?” In that great day when all men have become good within, all traces of

evil will have vanished from the earth; sin and sorrow will be unknown; and

there will be universal joy for evermore.

 

  The End.                    BOOK THIRTEEN


                        LIGHT ON LIFE’S


                          DIFFICULTIES                                  FOREWORD


  WHEN A MAN enters a dark room he is not sure of his movements, he

cannot see objects around him, or properly locate them, and is liable to hurt

himself  by  coming  into  sudden  contact  with  them.  But  let  a  light  be

introduced, and immediately all confusion disappears. Every object is seen,

and there is no danger of being hurt. To the majority, life is such a dark room,

and  their  frequent  hurts—their  disappointments,  perplexities,  sorrows  and

pains—are caused by sudden contact with principles which they do not see,

and are therefore not prepared to deal with. But when the light of wisdom is

introduced into the darkened understanding, confusion vanishes, difficulties

are  dissolved,  all  things  are  seen  in  their  true  place  and  proportion,  and

henceforth the man walks open-eyed and unhurt, in the clear light of wise

comprehension.

  James Allen

 

  I, Truth, am thy Redeemer, come to Me;

  Lay down thy sin and pain and wild unrest;

  And I will calm thy spirit’s stormy sea,

  Pouring the oil of peace upon thy breast:

  Friendless and love—lo, I abide with thee.

    Defeated and deserted, cast away,

  What refuge hast thou? Whither canst thou fly?

  Upon my changeless breast thy burdens lay;

  I am thy certain refuge, even I:

  All things are passing; I alone can stay.

  Lo I, the Great Forsaken, am the Friend

  Of the forsaken; I, whom man despise,

  The Weak, the helpless, and despised defend;

  I gladden aching hearts and weeping eyes;

  Rest thou in Me, I am thy sorrow’s end.  Lover, friends and wealth, pleasure and fame—

  These fail and change, and pass into decay;

  I blame thee not, nor turn my face away:

  In My calm bosom hide thy sin and shame.        1. THE LIGHT THAT LEADS TO PERFECT


                                      PEACE


  THIS BOOK IS INTENDED to be a strong and kindly companion, as

well as a source of spiritual renewal and inspiration to those who aim at a life

well-lived and made strong and serene. It will help its readers to transform

themselves into the ideal character they would wish to be, and to make their

life here that blessed thing which the majority only hope for in some future

life.

  Our life is what we make it by our own thoughts and deeds. It is our own

state and attitude of mind which determine whether we are happy or unhappy,

strong or weak, sinful or holy, foolish or wise. If one is unhappy, that state of

mind belongs to himself, and is originated within himself. It is a state which

responds to certain outward happenings, but its cause lies within and not in

those outward occurrences. If one is weak in will, he has brought himself to,

and remains in, that condition by the course of thought and action which he

has  chosen  and  is  still  choosing.  If  one  is  sinful,  it  is  because  he  has

committed, and continues to commit, sinful acts. If he is foolish, it is because

he himself does foolish things.

  A man has no character, no soul, no life apart from his thoughts and

deeds. What they are, that he is. As they are modified, so does he change. He

is endowed with will, and can modify his character. As the carpenter changes

the block of wood into a beautiful piece of furniture, so can the erring and

sin-stricken man change himself into a wise and truth-loving being.

  Each man is responsible for the thoughts which he thinks and the acts

which he does, for his state of mind, and the life which he lives. No power,

no event, no circumstance can compel a man to evil and unhappiness. He

himself is his own compeller. He thinks and acts by his own volition. No

being, however wise and great—even the Supreme—can make him good and

happy. He himself must choose the good, and thereby find the happy.

  And because of this—that when a man wishes and wills he can find the

Good and the True, and enjoy its bliss and peace—there is eternal gladness in

the Courts of Truth, and holy joy among the Perfect Ones.

  The Gates of Heaven are forever open, and no one is prevented fromentering by any will or power but his own. But no one can enter the Kingdom

of Heaven so long as he is enamoured of, and chooses, the seductions of hell,

so long as he resigns himself to sin and sorrow.

  There  is  a  larger,  higher,  nobler,  diviner  life  than  that  of  sinning  and

suffering, which is so common—in which, indeed, nearly all are immersed—

a life of victory over sin, and triumph over evil; a life wise and happy, kind

and tranquil, virtuous and peaceful. This life can be found and lived now, and

he who lives it is steadfast in the midst of change; restful among the restless;

peaceful, though surrounded by strife.

  Should death confront him, he is calm. Though assailed by persecution,

he  knows  no  bitterness,  and  his  heart  is  compassionate  and  filled  with

rejoicing. In this supremely beautiful life there is no evil, sin and sorrow are

ended, and aching hearts and weeping eyes are no more.

  The life of triumph is not for those who are satisfied with any lower

conditions. It is for those who thirst for it and are willing to achieve it; who

are eager for righteousness as the miser is for gold. It is always at hand, and

is offered to all, and blessed are they who accept and embrace it. They will

enter the World of Truth; they will find the Perfect Peace.          2. LIGHT ON FACTS AND HYPOTHESES


  WHEN FREEDOM OF THOUGHT and freedom of expression abound,

there  is  much  controversy  and  much  confusion.  Yet  it  is  from  such

controversial confusion that the simple facts of life emerge, attracting us with

their eternal uniformity and harmony, and appealing forcibly to us with their

invisible simplicity and truth. We are living in an age of freedom and mental

conflict. Never were religious sects so numerous. Schools—philosophical,

occult, and otherwise—abound, and each is eager for the perpetuation and

dominance of its own explanation of the universe. The world is in a condition

of mental ferment. Contradiction has reached the point of confusion, so that

the earnest seeker for Truth can find no solid rock of refuge in the opposing

systems which are presented to him. He is thereby thrown back upon himself,

upon those incontrovertible facts of his own being which are ever with him—

which are, indeed, himself, his life.

    Controversy is ranged around hypotheses, not around facts. Fact is fixed

and  final;  hypothesis  is  variable  and  vanishing.  In  his  present  stage  of

development, man is not alive to the beautiful simplicity of facts, nor to the

power of satisfaction which is inherent in them. He does not perceive the

intrinsic loveliness of truth, but must add something to it. Hence, when fact is

named,  the  question  almost  invariably  arises,  "How  can  you  explain  the

fact?" and then follows a hypothesis which leads to another hypothesis, and

so  on  and  on  until  the  fact  is  altogether  lost  sight  of  amid  a  mass  of

contradictory suppositions. Thus arise the sects and controversial schools.

  The clear perception of one fact will lead to the perception of other facts,

but a supposition, while appearing to elucidate a fact, does in reality cover it

up. We cannot realize the stately splendour of Truth while playing with the

gaudy and attractive toys of pretty hypotheses. Truth is not an opinion, nor

can  any  opinion  enlarge  or  adorn  it.  Fact  and  supposition  are  eternally

separate, and the cleverest intellectual jugglery— while it may entertain and

deceive even the elect—cannot in the slightest degree alter a fact or affect the

nature of things-as-they-are. Because of this, the true teacher abandons the

devious path of hypothesis, and deals only with the simple facts of life. He

fixes  the  attention  of  men  and  women  upon  these,  instead  of  increasing

confusion  and  intensifying  wordy  warfare  by  foisting  another  assumptionupon a world already lost and bewildered in a maze of hypotheses.

  The facts of life are ever before us, and can be understood and known if

we but abandon our egotism and the blinding delusions which that egotism

creates. Man need not go beyond his own being to find wisdom, and the facts

of  that  being  afford  a  sufficient  basis  on  which  to  erect  a  temple  of

knowledge of such beauty and dimensions that it shall at once emancipate

and glorify.

  Man is; and as he thinks, so he is. A perception and realization of these

two facts alone—of man’s being and thinking—lead into a vast avenue of

knowledge which cannot stop short of the highest wisdom and perfection.

One  of  the  reasons  why  men  do  not  become  wise  is  that  they  occupy

themselves  with  interminable  speculations  about  a  soul  separate  from

themselves—that is, from their own mind—and so blind themselves to their

actual nature and being. The supposition of a separate soul veils the eyes of

man so that he does not see himself, does not know his mentality, is unaware

of the nature of his thoughts without which he would have no conscious life.

  Man’s life is actual; his thoughts are actual; his life is actual. To occupy

ourselves with the investigation of things that are is the way of wisdom. Man

considered  as  above,  beyond,  and  separate  from  mind  and  thought,  is

speculative and not actual, and to occupy ourselves with the study of things

that are not, is the way of folly.

  Man cannot be separated from his mind; his life cannot be separated from

his thoughts. Mind, thought, and life are as inseparable as light, radiance, and

colour, and are no more in need of another factor to elucidate them than are

light, radiance, and colour. The facts are all-sufficient and contain within

themselves the groundwork of all knowledge concerning them.

  Man as mind is subject to change. He is not something "made" and finally

completed, but has within him the capacity for progress. By the universal law

of evolution he has become what he is, and is becoming that which he will

be.  His  being  is  modified  by  every  thought  he  thinks.  Every  experience

affects his character. Every effort he makes changes his mentality. Herein is

the secret of man’s degradation, and also of his power and salvation if he but

utilize this law of change in the right choice of thought.

  To live is to think and act, and to think and act is to change. While man is

ignorant  of  the  nature  of  thought,  he  continues  to  change  for  better  andworse;  but,  being  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  thought,  he  intelligently

accelerates and directs the process of change, and only for the better.

  What  the  sum  total  of  a  man’s  thoughts  are,  that  he  is.  From  this

sameness of thought with man there is not the slightest fractional deviation.

There is a change as a result with the addition and subtraction of thought, but

the mathematical law is an invariable quality.

  Seeing that man is mind, that mind is composed of thought, and that

thought is subject to change, it follows that deliberately to change the thought

is to change the man.

  All religions work upon the heart, the thought of man, with the object of

directing it into purer and higher channels. Success in this direction, whether

partial or complete, is called "salvation"—that is, deliverance from one kind

of thought, one condition of mind, by the substitution of another thought,

another condition.

  It is true that the dispensers of religion today do not know this because of

the  hypothetical  veil  which  intervenes  between  the  fact  and  their

consciousness. But they do it without knowing it, and the Great Teachers

who  founded  the  various  religions,  built  upon  this  fact,  as  their  precepts

plainly show. The chief things upon which these Teachers lay such stress,

and so constantly reiterate—such as the purification of the heart, the thinking

of right thoughts, and the doing of good deeds—what are they but calls to a

higher, nobler mode of thought-energizing forces urging men and women to

make an effort in the choosing of thoughts which shall lift them into realms

of greater power, greater good, greater bliss?

    Aspiration, meditation, devotion—these are the chief means which men

in all ages employ to reach up to higher modes of thought, wider airs of

peace, vaster realms of knowledge, for "as he thinketh in his heart, so is he."

He is saved from himself—from his own folly and suffering—by creating

within new habits of thoughts, by becoming a new thinker, a new man.

  Should a man by a supreme effort succeed in thinking as Jesus thought—

not by imitation, but by a sudden realization of his indwelling power—he

would be as Jesus.

  In the Buddhistic records there is an instance of a man, not the possessor

of  great  piety  or  wisdom,  who  asked  Buddha  how  one  might  attain  the

highest wisdom and enlightenment. Buddha replied, "By ceasing all desire."It is recorded that the man let go of all personal desires and at once realized

the highest wisdom and enlightenment.

  One of the sayings of Buddha runs, "The only miracle with which the

wise man concerns himself is the transformation of a sinner into a saint."

Emerson also referred to this transforming power of change of thought when

he said: "It is as easy to be great as to be small," which is closely akin to that

other great and oft-repeated but little understood saying; "Be ye therefore

perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect."

  And, after all, what is the fundamental difference between a great man

and a small one? It is one of thought, of mental attitude. True, it is one of

knowledge, but then, knowledge cannot be separated from thought. Every

substitution of a better for a worse thought is a transforming agency which

marks an important advance in knowledge. Throughout the whole range of

human  life,  from  the  lowest  savage  to  the  highest  type  of  man,  thought

determines character, condition, knowledge.

  The mass of humanity moves slowly along the evolutionary path urged by

the blind impulse of its dominant thoughts as they are stimulated and called

forth by external things. But the true thinker, the sage, travels swiftly and

intelligently along a chosen path of his own. The multitudes, unenlightened

concerning their spiritual nature, are the slaves of thought, but the sage is the

master of thought. They follow blindly, he chooses intelligently. They obey

the  impulse  of  the  moment,  thinking  of  their  immediate  pleasure  and

happiness; he commands and subdues impulse, resting upon that which is

permanently  right.  They,  obeying  blind  impulse,  violate  the  laws  of

righteousness; he, conquering impulse, obeys the law of righteousness. The

sage stands face to face with the facts of life. He knows the nature of thought.

He understands and obeys the law of his being.

  But the sorrow-burdened victim of blind impulse can open his mental

eyes and see the true nature of things when he wishes to do so. The sage—

intelligent, radiant, calm—and the fool—confused, darkened, disturbed—are

one in essence, and are divided only by the nature of their thoughts. When the

fool turns away from and abandons his foolish thoughts and chooses and

adopts wise thoughts, lo! he becomes a sage.

  Socrates saw the essential oneness of virtue and knowledge, and so every

sage sees. Learning may aid and accompany wisdom, but it does not lead toit. Only the choosing of wise thoughts, and, necessarily, the doing of wise

deeds, leads to wisdom. A man may be learned in the schools, but foolish in

the  school  of  life.  Not  the  committing  of  words  to  memory,  but  the

establishing of oneself in purer thoughts, nobler thinking, leads to the peace-

giving revelations of true knowledge.

  Folly and wisdom, ignorance and enlightenment, are not merely the result

of thought, they are thought itself. Both cause and effect—effort and result—

are contained in thought.

  All that we are is the result of what we have thought.

  It is founded on our thoughts; it is made up of our thoughts.

  Man is not a being possessing a soul. He himself is soul. He himself is the

thinker and doer, actor and knower. His composite mentality is himself. His

spiritual nature is rounded by his sphere of thought. He it is that desires and

sorrows, enjoys and suffers, loves and hates. The mind is not the instrument

of a metaphysical, superhuman soul. Man is soul; mind is being; mind is

man.

  Man can find himself. He can see himself as he is. When he is prepared to

turn  from  the  illusory  and  self-created  world  of  hypothesis  in  which  he

wanders and to stand face to face with actuality, then will he know himself as

he is. Moreover, he can picture himself as he would wish to be, and he can

create within him the new thinker, the new man. For every moment is the

time of choice—and every hour is destiny.          3. LIGHT ON THE LAW OF CAUSE AND


                    EFFECT IN HUMAN LIFE


  HOW FREQUENTLY PEOPLE associate the word "law" with hardness

and cruelty! It seems to embody for them nothing but an inflexible tyranny.

This  arises  partly  from  their  inability  to  perceive  principles  apart  from

persons, and partly from the idea that the office of law is solely to punish.

Viewed from such an attitude of mind, the term "law" is hazily regarded as

some sort of indefinite personality whose business it is to hunt transgressors

and crush them with overwhelming punishments.

  Now while law punishes, its primary office is to protect. Even the laws

which man makes are framed by him to protect himself from his own baser

passions. The law of our country is instituted for the protection of life and

property, and it only comes into operation as a punishing factor when it is

violated.  Offenders  against  it  probably  think  of  it  as  cruel,  and  doubtless

regard it with terror, but to them that obey it, it is an abiding protector and

friend, and can hold for them no terror.

  So with the Divine Law which is the stay of the Universe, the heart and

life of the Cosmos—it is that which protects and upholds, and it is no less

protective  in  its  penalties  than  in  its  peaceful  blessings.  It  is,  indeed,  an

eternal protection which is never for one moment withheld, and it shields all

beings  against  themselves  by  bringing  all  violations  of  itself,  whether

ignorant or willful, through pain to nothingness.

  Law  cannot  be  partial.  It  is  an  unvarying  mode  of  action,  disobeying

which,  we  are  hurt;  obeying,  we  are  made  happy.  Neither  protection  nor

supplication can alter it, for if it could be altered or annulled the universe

would collapse and chaos would prevail. It is not less kind that we should

suffer  the  penalty  of  our  wrongdoing  than  that  we  should  enjoy  the

blessedness  of  our  right-doing.  If  we  could  escape  the  effects  of  our

ignorance and sin, all security would be gone, and there would be no refuge,

for  we  could  then  be  equally  doubtful  of  the  result  of  our  wisdom  and

goodness. Such a scheme would be one of caprice and cruelty, whereas law is

a method of justice and kindness.

  Indeed, the supreme law is the principle of eternal kindness, faultless inworking and infinite in application. It is none other than that;

  Eternal Love, forever full, Forever flowing free, of which the Christian

sings and the "Boundless Compassion" of Buddhistic precepts and poetry.

  The law which punishes us is the law which preserves us. When in their

ignorance men would destroy themselves, its everlasting arms are thrown

about them in loving, albeit sometimes painful, protection. Every pain we

suffer  brings  us  nearer  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Divine  Wisdom.  Every

blessing we enjoy speaks to us of the perfection of the Great Law, and of the

fullness of bliss that shall be man’s when he has come to his heritage of

Divine Knowledge.

  We progress by learning, and we learn, up to a certain point, by suffering.

When the heart is mellowed by love, the law of love is perceived in all its

wonderful kindness. When wisdom is acquired, peace is assured.

  We cannot alter the law of things, which is of sublime perfection. But we

can alter ourselves so as to comprehend more and more of that perfection and

make its grandeur ours. To wish to bring down the perfect to the imperfect is

the height of folly, but to strive to bring the imperfect up to the perfect is the

height of wisdom. Seers of the Cosmos do not mourn over the scheme of

things. They see the universe as the perfect whole, not as an imperfect jumble

of parts. The Great Teachers are men and women of abiding joy and heavenly

peace.

  The blind captive of unholy desire may cry;

  Ah! Love: could you and I with him conspire

  To grasp this sorry scheme of things entire,

  Would we not shatter it to bits, and then

  Remold it nearer to the heart’s desire?

  This is the wish of the carnal nature, the wish to enjoy unlawful pleasures

to any extent, and not reap any painful consequences. It is such men who

regard the universe as a "sorry scheme of things." They want the universe to

bend to their will and desire; want lawlessness, not law. But the wise man

bends his will and subjects his desire to the Divine Order, and he sees the

universe as the glorious perfection of an infinitude of parts.

  Buddha always referred to the moral law of the universe as the Good

Law, and indeed it is not rightly perceived if it is thought of as anything butgood; for in it there can be no grain of evil, no element of kindness. It is no

iron-hearted monster crushing the weak and destroying the ignorant, but a

soothing love and brooding compassion shielding the tenderest from harm,

and protecting the strongest from a too destructive use of their strength. It

destroys all evil, it preserves all good. It enfolds the tiniest seedling in its

care, and it destroys the most colossal wrong with a breath. To perceive it is

the beatific vision. To know it is the beatific bliss; and they who perceive and

know it are at peace. They are glad forevermore.

  Such is the law which moves the righteousness,

  Which none at last can turn aside or stay;

  The heart of it is love; the end of it

  Is peace and consummation sweet: obey.    4. LIGHT ON VALUES— SPIRITUAL AND


                                  MATERIAL


  IT IS AN OLD-TIME AXIOM that "everything has its price." Everybody

knows this commercially, but how few know it spiritually. Business consists

of a mutual interchange of equitable values. The customer gives money and

receives  goods,  and  the  merchant  gives  goods  and  receives  money.  This

method is universal, and is regarded by all as just.

  In spiritual things the method is the same, but the form of interchange is

different. For  material things  a material thing is given in exchange. Now

these  two  forms  of  exchange  cannot  be  transposed;  they  are  of  reverse

natures, and remain eternally separate. Thus a man may bring money to a

shop and ask for food, or clothing, or literature, and he will receive goods to

the value of his money. But if he were to take a dollar to a teacher of Truth,

and ask to be supplied with a dollar’s worth of religion, or righteousness, or

wisdom, he would be told that those things cannot be purchased with money,

that their spiritual nature excludes them from business transactions.

  The  wise  teacher,  however,  would  also  tell  him  that  these  spiritual

necessities must be purchased. Though money cannot buy them, they have

their price, and something must be parted with before they can be received. In

a word, instead of offering money he must offer up self, or selfishness. For so

much  selfishness  given  up,  so  much  religion,  righteousness,  and  wisdom

would be immediately received, without fail, and with perfect equity. For if a

man is sure of receiving perishable food and clothing for the money he puts

down,  how  much  more  surely  will  he  receive  the  imperishable  spiritual

sustenance and protection for the selfishness which he lays down! Shall the

law operate in the lesser and fail in the greater? Man may fail to observe the

law, but the law is infallible.

  A man may love his money, but he must part with it before he can receive

the  material  comforts  of  life.  Likewise,  a  man  may  love  his  selfish

gratifications, but he must give them up before he can receive the spiritual

comforts of religion.  Now when a tradesman gives goods for money, it is not that he may keep

the money, but that he may give it in exchange for other goods. The primary

function of business is not to enable everybody to hoard up money, but to

facilitate the interchange of commodities. The  miser is the greatest of all

failures, and he may die of starvation and exposure while being a millionaire,

because he is a worshipper of the letter of money, and an ignorer of its spirit

—the spirit of mutual interchange.

  Money is a means, not an end; its exchange is a sign that goods are being

justly  given  and  received.  Thus  commerce,  with  all  its  innumerable

ramifications of detail, is reducible to one primary principle, namely: Mutual

interchange of the material necessities of life.

  Now let us follow this principle into the spiritual sphere, and trace there

its  operation.  When  a  spiritual  man  gives  spiritual  things—kindness,

sympathy, love—and receives happiness in return, it is not that he may hoard

and hug to himself that happiness, but that he may give it to others, and so

receive back spiritual things. The primary function of spirituality is not to

hoard up personal pleasure, but to render actual the interchange of spiritual

blessings.

  The most selfish man—he whose chief object is the getting of happiness

for himself—is a spiritual miser. His mind may perish of spiritual destitution,

though he be surrounded with the objects which he has obtained to pander to

his pleasure, because he is worshipping the letter of happiness and is ignoring

its spirit—the spirit of unselfish interchange. The object of selfishness is the

getting  of  personal  pleasure,  or  happiness;  the  object  of  religion  is  the

defusion of virtue. Thus religion, with all its innumerable creeds, may be

resolved into one primary principle, namely: Mutual interchange of spiritual

blessings.

  What, then, are the spiritual blessings? They are kindness, brotherliness,

goodwill,  sympathy,  forbearance,  patience,  trustfulness,  peacefulness,  love

unending, and compassion unlimited. These blessings, these necessities for

the  starving  spirit  of  man,  can  be  obtained,  but  their  price  must  be  paid.

Unkindness,  uncharitableness,  ill  will,  hardness,  ill  temper,  impatience,

suspicion, strife, hatred, and cruelty—all these, along with the happiness, the

personal satisfaction, which they give, must be yielded up. These spiritual

coins, dead in themselves, must be parted with, and when parted with, therewill  be  immediately  received  their  spiritual  counterparts,  the  living  and

imperishable blessings to which they are a means and of which they are a

sign.

  To conclude, when a man gives money to a merchant and receives goods

in return, he does not wish to have his money again. He has willingly parted

with it forever and is satisfied with the exchange. So when a man gives up

unrighteousness in exchange for righteousness, he does not wish to have his

selfish pleasures back again. He has given them up forever, and is satisfied

and at peace.

  Thus also, when one bestows a gift, even though it be a material gift, he

does not look for the receiver to send him back its value in money, because it

is a spiritual deed and not a business transaction. The material thing thus

represents the interchange of spiritual blessings, and its accompanying bliss,

the bliss of a gift bestowed and that of a gift received.

  "Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing?" Everything in the universe—

every object and every thought—is valued. Material things have a material

value, spiritual things have a spiritual value, and to confound these values is

not wise. To seek to purchase spiritual blessings with money, or material

luxuries with virtue, is the way of selfishness and folly. It is to confound

barter with religion and to make a religion of barter. Sympathy, kindness,

love cannot be bought and sold; they can only be given and received. When a

gift is paid for, it ceases to be a gift.

  Because everything has a value, that which is freely given is gained with

accumulation. He who gives up the lesser happiness of selfishness gains the

greater happiness of unselfishness. The universe is just, and its justice is so

perfect that he who has once perceived it can no more doubt or be afraid. He

can only wonder and be glad.                    5. LIGHT ON THE SENSE OF


                                PROPORTION


  IN A NIGHTMARE there is no relation of one thing to another; all things

are haphazard, and there is a general confusion and misery. Wise men have

likened the self-seeking life to a nightmare. There is a close resemblance

between a selfish life, in which the sense of proportion is so far lost that

things are only seen as they affect one’s own selfish aims, and in which there

are feverish excitements and overwhelming troubles and disasters, and that

state of troubled sleep known as nightmare.

  In a nightmare, too, the controlling will and perceiving intelligence are

asleep; and in a selfish life the better nature and spiritual perceptions are

locked in profound slumber.

  The uncultivated mind lacks the sense of proportion. It does not see the

right relation of one natural object to another, and is thereafter dead to the

beauty and harmony with which it is surrounded.

  And what is this sense of proportion but the faculty of seeing things as

they are! It is a faculty which needs cultivating, and its cultivation, when

applied to natural objects, embraces the entire intelligence and refines the

moral character. It enters, however, into spiritual things as well as things

natural, and here is more lacking, and more greatly needed. For to see things

as they are in the spiritual sphere is to find no ground for grief, no lodging

place for lamentation.

  Whence spring all this grief and anxiety, and fear and trouble? Is it not

because things are not as men and women wish them to be? Is it not because

the  multiplicity  of  desires  prevents  them  from  seeing  things  in  their  true

perspective and right proportion?

  When one is overwhelmed with grief, he sees nothing but his loss; its

nearness to him blots out the whole view of life. The thing in itself may be

small, but to the sufferer it assumes a magnitude which is out of proportion to

the surrounding objects of life.

  All who have passed the age of thirty can look back over their lives at

times when they were perplexed with anxiety, overwhelmed with grief, or

even, perhaps, on the verge of despair, over incidents which, seen now intheir right proportion, are known to be very small.

  If the would-be suicide will today stay his hand and wait, he will at the

end of ten years marvel at his folly over so comparatively small a matter.

  When the mind is possessed by passion or paralyzed with grief, it has lost

the power of judgment. It cannot weigh and consider. It does not perceive the

relative values and proportions of the things by which it is disturbed. Awake

and acting, it yet moves in a nightmare which holds its faculties in thrall.

  The passionate partisan lacks a sense of proportion to such an extent that,

to  him,  his  own  side  or  view  appears  all  that  is  right  and  good,  and  his

opponent’s all that is bad and wrong. To this partiality his reason is chained,

so that whatever reason he may bring to bear upon the matter is enlisted in

the service of bias, and is not exercised in order to find the just relation which

exists between the two sides. He is so convinced that his own party is all

right, and the other, equally intelligent party is all wrong, that it is impossible

for him to be impartial and just. The only thing he understands as justice is

that of getting his own way, or placing some ruling power in the hands of his

party.

  Just as the sense of proportion in things material puts an end to the spirit

of repugnance, so in things spiritual it puts an end to the spirit of strife. The

true artist does not see ugliness anywhere; he sees only beauty. That which is

loathsome to others fills, to him, its rightful place in nature, and it appears in

his picture as a thing of beauty. The true seer does not see evil anywhere; he

sees universal good. That which is hateful to others, he sees in its rightful

place in the scheme of evolution, and it is held dispassionately in his mind as

an object of contemplation.

  Men and women worry, and grieve, and fight because they lack this sense

of proportion, because they do not see things in their right relations. The

objects  of  their  turbulence  are  not  things-in-themselves,  but  their  own

opinions  about  things,  self-created  shadows,  the  unreal  creations  of  an

egoistic nightmare.

  The  cultivation  and  development  of  the  ethical  sense  of  proportion

converts the heated partisan into a gentle peacemaker, and gives the calm and

searching of the prophet to the hitherto blind instrument in the clashing play

of selfish forces.

  The  spiritual  sense  of  proportion  gives  sanity;  it  restores  the  mind  tocalmness;  it  bestows  impartiality  and  justice  and  reveals  a  universe  of

faultless harmony.      6. LIGHT ON ADHERENCE TO PRINCIPLE


  THE MAN OF TRUTH never departs from the divine principles which

he has espoused. He may be threatened with sickness, poverty, pain, loss of

friends and position, yea, even with immediate death, yet he does not desert

the principles which he knows to be eternally true. To him, there is one thing

more grievous, more to be feared and shunned than all the above evils put

together, and that is—the desertion of principle. To turn coward in the hour

of trial, to deny conscience, to join the rabble of passions, desires, and fears

in  turning  upon,  accusing,  and  crucifying  the  Eternal  Christ  of  Divine

Principle, because, forsooth, that principle has not given him personal health,

affluence and ease—this, to the man of Truth, is the evil of evils, the sin of

sins.

  We cannot escape sickness and death. Though we avoid them for a long

time, in the end they will overtake us. But we can avoid wrongdoing, we can

avoid fear and cowardice. When we habitually avoid wrongdoing and cast

out fear, the evils of life will not subdue us when they overtake us, for we

shall have mastered them. Instead of avoiding them for a season we shall

have conquered them on their own ground.

  There are those that teach that it is right to do wrong when the wrong is to

protect another; that it is good, for instance, to tell a lie when its object is the

well-being  of  another—that  is,  that  it  is  right  to  desert  a  principle  of

truthfulness under severe trial. Such teaching has never emanated from the

lips of the Great Teachers. It has not been uttered even by those lesser, yet

superbly  noble  men,  the  prophets,  saints  and  martyrs,  for  those  divinely

illuminated men knew full well that no circumstance can make a wrong a

right, and that a lie has no saving and protective power. Wrongdoing is a

greater evil than pain, and a lie is more deadly and destructive than death.

Jesus rebuked Peter for trying to shield his Master’s life by wrongdoing, and

no rightminded person would accept life at the expense of the moral character

of another when it appeared possible to do so.

  All men admire and revere the martyrs, those steadfast men and women

who feared wrong, cowardice, and lying, but who did not fear pain and death;

those who were steadfast and calm in their adherence to principle even when

brought to the utmost extremity of trial. Yea, even when the taunts and jeersof enemies assailed them, and the tears and agonies of loved ones appealed to

them, they flinched not nor turned back, knowing that the future good and

salvation of the whole world depended upon their firmness in that supreme

hour. For this, they stand through all time as monuments of virtue, centers of

saving, and uplifting power for all humankind.

  But he who lied to save himself, or for the sake of the two or three beings

whom he personally loved, is rarely heard of, for in the hour of desertion of

principle, his power was gone. If he is heard of, he is not loved for that lie.

He is always looked upon as one who fell when the test was applied; as an

example of the highest virtue he is rejected by all men in all times.

  Had  all  men  believed  that  an  untruth  was  right  under  extreme

circumstances, we should have had no martyrs and saints, the moral fiber of

humanity would have been undermined, and the world left to grope in ever

deepening darkness.

  The attitude which regards wrongdoing for the sake of others as the right

thing  to  do  is  based  on  the  tacit  assumption  that  wrong  and  untruth  are

inferior evils to unhappiness, pain, and death. But the man of moral insight

knows that wrong and untruth are the greater evils, and so he never commits

them, even though his own life or the lives of others appear to be at stake.

  It is easy for a man in the flowery time of ease or the heyday of prosperity

to persuade himself that he is staunchly adhering to principle. But when pain

overtakes him, when the darkness of misfortune begins to settle down upon

him, and the pressure of circumstances hems him in—then he is on his trial,

and has come to the testing time. In that season it will be brought to light

whether he clings to self or adheres to Truth.

    Principles are for our salvation in the hour of need. If we desert them in

that hour, how can we be saved from the snares and pains of self?

  If a man does wrong to his conscience, thinking thereby to avoid some

immediate or pressing pain, he does not but increase pain and evil. The good

man is less anxious to avoid pain than wrongdoing.

  There is neither wisdom nor safety in deserting permanent and protective

principles when our happiness seems to be at stake. If we desert the true for

the pleasant, we shall lose both the pleasant and the true. But if we desert the

pleasant for the true, the peace of truth will soothe away our sorrow.

  If we barter the higher for the lower, emptiness and anguish will overtakeus, and then, having abandoned the Eternal, where is our rock of refuge? But

if we yield up the lower for the higher, the strength and satisfaction of the

higher will remain with us, fullness of joy will overtake us, and we shall find

in truth a rock of refuge from the evils and sorrows of life.

  To find the permanent amid all the changes of life, and, having found it,

adhere to it under all circumstances—this only is true happiness, this only is

salvation and lasting peace.          7. LIGHT ON THE SACRIFICE OF THE


                                        SELF


    SELF-SACRIFICE  IS  ONE  of  the  fundamental  principles  in  the

teachings of the Great Spiritual Masters. It consists in yielding up self, or

selfishness, so that Truth may become the source of conduct. Self is not an

entity that has to be cast out, but a condition of mind that has to be converted.

  The renunciation of self is not the annihilation of the intelligent being, but

the annihilation of every dark and selfish desire. Self is the blind clinging to

perishable things and transient pleasures as distinguished from the intelligent

practice of virtue and righteousness. Self is the lusting, coveting, desiring of

the heart, and it is this that must be yielded up before Truth can be known,

with its abiding calm and endless peace.

  To give up things will not avail; it is the lust for things that must be

sacrificed. Though a man sacrifice wealth, position, friends, family, fame,

home, wife, child— yea, and life also—it will avail nothing if self is not

renounced.

  Buddha renounced the world and all that it held dear to him, but for six

years he wandered and searched and suffered and not till he yielded up the

desires of the heart did he become enlightened and arrive at peace.

  By giving up only the objects of self-indulgence, no peace will ensue, but

torment will follow. It is self-indulgence, the desire for the object, that must

be abandoned— then peace enters the heart.

  Sacrifice is painful so long as there is any vestige of self remaining in the

heart. While there remains in the heart a lurking desire for an unworthy object

or pleasure that has been sacrificed, there will be periods of intense suffering

and  fierce  temptation.  But  when  the  desire  for  the  unworthy  object  or

pleasure is put away forever from the mind, and the sacrifice is complete and

perfect, then, concerning that particular object or pleasure, there can be no

more  suffering  or  temptation.  So  when  self  in  its  entirety  is  sacrificed,

sacrifice, in its painful aspect, is at an end, and perfect knowledge and perfect

peace are reached.

  Hatred is self. Covetousness is self. Envy and jealousy are self. Vanity

and boasting are self. Gluttony and sensuality are self. Lying and deceptionare self. Speaking evil of one’s neighbour is self. Anger and revenge are self.

    Self-sacrifice consists in yielding up all these dark conditions of mind and

heart. The process is a painful one in its early stages, but soon a divine peace

descends at intervals upon the pilgrim. Later, this peace remains longer with

him, and finally, when the rays of Truth begin to be radiated in the heart,

remains with him.

  This sacrifice leads to peace; for in the perfect life of Truth, there is no

more sacrifice, and no more pain and sorrow. For where there is no more self

there is nothing to be given up. Where there is no clinging of the mind to

perishable things there is nothing to be renounced. Where all has been laid on

the altar of Truth, selfish love is swallowed up in divine love. And in divine

love  there  is  no  thought  of  self,  for  there  is  the  perfection  of  insight,

enlightenment, and immortality, and therefore perfect peace.            8. LIGHT ON THE MANAGEMENT OF


                                  THE MIND


    FOLLOWING THE LAST CHAPTER, a few hints on the management

of one’s mind will doubtless be opportune. Before a man can see even the

necessity for thorough and complete self-government, he will have to throw

off  a  great  delusion  in  which  so  many  are  involved—the  delusion  of

believing that his lapses of conduct are entirely due to those about him, and

not entirely to himself.

  "I could make far greater progress if I were not hindered by others," or "It

is  impossible  for  me  to  make  any  headway,  seeing  that  I  live  with  such

irritable people," are commonly expressed complaints which spring from the

error of imagining that others are responsible for one’s own folly.

  The violent or irritable man always blames those about him for his fits of

anger, and by continually living in this delusion, he becomes more and more

confirmed in his rashness and perturbations. For how can a man overcome—

nay, how can he even try to overcome, his weakness if he convinces himself

that it springs entirely from the actions of others? Moreover, firmly believing

this as he does, he vents his anger more and more upon others in order to try

to make matters better for himself, and so becomes completely lost to all

knowledge of the real origin of his unhappy state.

  Men cast the blame of their unprosperous acts

  Upon the abettors of their own resolve,

  Or anything but their weak guilty selves.

  Being Responsible for Every Action

  All a man’s weaknesses, sins, and falls take rise in his own heart, and he

alone is responsible for them. It is true there are tempters and provokers, but

temptations and provocations are powerless to him who refuses to respond to

them. Tempters and provokers are but foolish men, and he who gives way to

them has become a willing cooperator in their folly. He is unwise and weak,

and the source of troubles is in himself. The pure man cannot be tempted; the

wise man cannot he provoked.

  Let a man fully realize that he is absolutely responsible for his everyaction, and he has already gone a considerable distance along the path which

leads to wisdom and peace, for he will then commence to utilize temptation

as a means of growth, and the wrong conduct of others he will regard as a test

of his own strength.

  Socrates thanked the gods for the gift of a shrewish wife in that it enabled

him the better to cultivate the virtue of patience. It is a simple and easily

perceived truth that we can better grow patient by living with the impatient,

better grow unselfish by living with the selfish. If a man is impatient with the

impatient, he is himself impatient. If he is selfish with the selfish, then he is

himself selfish. The test and measure of virtue is trial, and, like gold and

precious stones, the more it is tested the brighter it shines. If a man thinks he

has virtue, yet gives way when its opposing vice is presented to him, let him

not delude himself—he has not yet attained to the possession of that virtue.

  If a man would rise and become a man indeed, let him cease to think the

weak and foolish thought, "I am hindered by others," and let him set about to

discover that he is hindered only by himself. Let him realize that the giving

way to another is but a revelation of his own imperfection, and lo! upon him

will descend the light of wisdom, and the door of peace will open unto him,

and he will soon become the conqueror of self.

  The fact that a man is continually troubled and disturbed by close contact

with others is an indication that he requires such contact to impel him onward

to  a  clearer  comprehension  of  himself;  and  toward  a  higher  and  more

steadfast state of mind.

  The  very  things  which  he  regards  as  insurmountable  hindrances  will

become  to  him  the  most  valuable  aids  when  he  fully  realizes  his  moral

responsibility and his innate power to do right. He will then cease to blame

others for his unmanly conduct, and will commence to live steadfastly under

all circumstances. The scales of self-delusion will quickly fall from his eyes,

and  he  will  then  see  that  often  when  he  imagined  himself  provoked,  he

himself  was  really  the  provoker.  As  he  rises  above  his  own  mental

disturbances the necessity for coming in contact with the same condition in

others will cease, and he will pass, by a natural process, into the company of

the good and the pure. He will then awaken in others the nobility which he

has arrived at in himself.

  Be noble! and the nobleness that lies  In other men, sleeping, but never dead,

  Will rise in majesty to meet thine own.      9. LIGHT ON SELF-CONTROL: THE DOOR


                                OF HEAVEN


  THE FOREMOST LESSON which the world has to learn on its way to

wisdom is the lesson of self-control. All the bitter punishments which men

undergo in the school of experience are inflicted because they have failed to

learn this lesson. Apart from self-control, salvation is a meaningless word,

and peace is an impossibility. For how can a man be saved from any sin

while he continues to give way to it? Or how can he realize abiding peace

until  he  has  conquered  and  subdued  the  troubles  and  disturbances  of  his

mind?

    Self-control is the Door of Heaven; it leads to light and peace. Without it

a man is already in hell; he is lost in darkness and unrest. Men inflict upon

themselves far-reaching sufferings, and pass through indescribable torments,

both of body and soul, through lack of self-control. Not until they resort to its

practice can their sufferings and torments pass away. For it has no substitute,

nothing can take its place, and there is no power in the universe that can do

for a man that which he, sooner or later, must do for himself by entering the

practice of self-control.

  By self-control a man manifests his divine power and ascends toward

divine wisdom and perfection. Every man can practice it. The weakest man

can begin now, and until he does begin, his weakness will remain, or he will

become weaker still.

    Calling or not calling upon God or Jesus, Brahma or Buddha, Spirits or

Masters, will not avail men who refuse to govern themselves and purify their

hearts. Believing or disbelieving that Jesus is God, that Buddha is omniscient,

or the Spirits or Masters guide human affairs, cannot help men who continue

to  cling  to  the  elements  of  strife  and  ignorance  and  corruption  within

themselves.

  What theological affirmation or denial can justify, or what outward power

put right, the man who refuses to abandon a slanderous or abusive tongue, or

give up an angry temper, or to sacrifice his impure imaginings? The flower

reaches the upper light by first contending with the under darkness, and man

can only reach the Light of Truth by striving against the darkness withinhimself.

  The vast importance of self-control is not realized by men, its absolute

necessity is not apprehended by them, and the spiritual freedom and glory to

which it leads are hidden from their eyes. Because of this, men are enslaved

and  misery  and  suffering  ensue.  Let  a  man  contemplate  the  violence,

impurity, disease, and suffering which occur upon earth, and consider how

much of it is due to want of self-control, and he will gradually come to realize

the great need there is for self-control.

  I say again that self-control is the Gate of Heaven, for without it neither

happiness nor love nor peace can be realized and maintained. In the degree

that it is lacked by a man, in just that measure will his mind and life be given

over to confusion. And it is because such a large number of individuals have

not yet learned to practice it that the enforced restraint of national laws is

required  for  the  maintenance  of  law  and  order  and  the  prevention  of

destructive confusion.

    Self-control is the beginning of virtue, and it leads to the acquisition of

every noble attribute. It is the first essential quality in a well-ordered and

truly religious life, and it leads to calmness, blessedness and peace. Without

it, although there may be theological belief or profession, there can be no true

religion,  for  what  is  religion  but  enlightened  conduct?  And  what  is

spirituality but the triumph over the unruly tendencies of the mind?

  When men both depart from and refuse to practice self-control, they fall

into the great and dark delusion of separating religion from conduct. Then

they persuade themselves that religion consists not in overcoming self and

living blamelessly, but in holding a certain belief about Scripture, and in

worshiping a certain Saviour in a particular way. Hence arise the innumerable

complications and confusions of letter-worship, and the violence and bitter

strife into which men fall in defense of their own formulated religion.

  But true religion cannot be formulated; it is purity of mind, a loving heart,

a soul at peace with the world. It need not be defended, for it is Being and

Doing  and  Living.  A  man  begins  to  practice  religion  when  he  begins  to

control himself.            10. LIGHT ON ACTS AND THEIR


                              CONSEQUENCES


  ONE OF THE COMMONEST EXCUSES for wrongdoing is that, if right

were done, calamity would ensue. Thus the foolish concern themselves, not

with the act, but with the consequence of the act, a foreknowledge of which is

assumed.  The  desire  to  secure  pleasant  results,  and  to  escape  unpleasant

consequences, is at the root of that confusion of mind which renders men

incapable of distinguishing between good and evil, and prevents them from

practicing the one and abandoning the other. Even when it is claimed that the

wrong thing is done, not for one’s self, but in order to secure the happiness of

others, the delusion is the same, only it is more subtle and dangerous.

  The wise concern themselves with the act, and not with its consequences.

They consider, not what is pleasant or unpleasant, but what is right. Thus

doing what is right only, and not straining after results, they are relieved of

all burdens of doubt, desire, and fear. Nor can one who so acts ever become

so involved in an extricable difficulty, or be troubled with painful perplexity.

His course is so simple, straight, and plain that he can never be confused with

misgivings and uncertainties.

  Those who so act are said by Krishna to act "without regard to the fruits

of action," and he further declares that those who have thus renounced results

are supremely good, supremely wise.

  Those who work for pleasant results only, and who depart from the right

path  when  their  own,  or  others’  happiness  appears  to  be  at  stake,  cannot

escape  doubt,  difficulty,  perplexity,  and  pain.  Ever  forecasting  probable

consequences,  they  act  in  one  way  today,  and  in  another  way  tomorrow.

Unstable  and  blown  about  by  the  changing  wind  of  circumstance,  they

become more and more bewildered, and the consequences about which they

trouble do not accrue.

  But they who work for righteousness only, who are careful to do the right

act, putting away all selfish considerations, all thought of results, they are

steadfast, unchanging, untroubled, and at peace amid all vicissitudes, and thefruits of their acts are ever sweet and blessed.

  Even the knowledge, which only the righteous possess, that wrong acts

can never produce good results, and that right acts can never bring about bad

results, is in itself fraught with sweet assurance and peace. For whether the

fruits of acts are sought or unsought, they cannot be escaped.

  They who sow to self, and, ignorant of the law of Truth, think they can

make their own results, reap the bitter fruits of self.

  They who sow to righteousness, knowing themselves to be the reapers,

and  not  the  makers  of  the  consequences,  reap  the  sweet  fruits  of

righteousness.

  Right  is  supremely  simple,  and  is  without  complexity.  Error  is

interminably complex, and involves the mind in confusion.

  To put away self and passion, and establish one’s self in right-doing, this

is the highest wisdom.            11. LIGHT ON THE WAY OF WISDOM


  THE PATH OF WISDOM is the highest way, the way in which all doubt

and uncertainty are dispelled and knowledge and surety are realized.

  Amid  the  excitements  and  pleasures  of  the  world  and  the  surging

whirlpools of human passions, Wisdom—so calm, so silent and so beautiful

—is indeed difficult to find, difficult, not because of its incomprehensible

complexity, but because of its unobtrusive simplicity, and because self is so

blind and rash, and so jealous of its rights and pleasures.

  Wisdom is "rejected of men" because it always comes right home to one’s

self in the form of wounding reproof, and the lower nature of man cannot

bear to be reproved. Before Wisdom can be acquired, self must be wounded

to the death, and because of this, because Wisdom is the enemy of self, self

rises in rebellion, and will not be overcome and denied.

  The foolish man is governed by his passions and personal cravings. When

about to do anything he does not ask "Is this right?" but only considers how

much pleasure or personal advantage he will gain by it. He does not govern

his passions and act from fixed principles, but is the slave of his inclinations

and follows where they lead.

  The wise man governs his passions and puts away all personal cravings.

He never acts from impulse and passion, but dispassionately considers what

is right to be done, and does it. He is always thoughtful and self-possessed,

and guides his conduct by the loftiest moral principles. He is superior to both

pleasure and pain.

  Wisdom cannot be found in books or travel, in learning or philosophy; it

is acquired by practice only. A man may read the precepts of the greatest

sages continually, but if he does not purify and govern himself he will remain

foolish. A man may be intimately conversant with the writings of the greatest

philosophers, but so long as he continues to give way to his passions he will

not attain to wisdom.

  Wisdom is right action, right doing; folly is wrong action, wrong doing.

All reading, all studying is vain if man will not see his errors and give them

up.

  Wisdom says to the vain man, "Do not praise yourself," to the proud man,"Humble yourself," to the gossip, "Govern your tongue," to the angry man,

"Subdue your anger," to the resentful man, "Forgive your enemy," to the self-

indulgent man, "Be temperate," to the impure man, "Purge your heart of lust,"

and to all men, "Beware of small faults, do your duty faithfully, and never

intermeddle with the duty of another."

  These things are very simple; the doing of them is simple. But as it leads

to the annihilation of self, the selfish tendencies in a man object to them and

rise up in revolt against them, loving their own life of turbulent excitement

and feverish pleasure, and hating the calm and beautiful silence of Wisdom.

Thus men remain in folly.

    Nevertheless, the Way of Wisdom is always open, is always ready to

receive  the  tread  of  the  pilgrim  who  has  grown  weary  of  the  thorny  and

intricate ways of folly. No man is prevented from becoming wise but by

himself. No man can acquire Wisdom but by his own exertions. And he who

is prepared to be honest with himself, to measure the depths of his ignorance,

to come face to face with his errors, to recognize and acknowledge his faults,

and at once to set about the task of his own regeneration, such a man will find

the way of Wisdom. Walking with humble and obedient feet, he will, in due

time, come to the sweet City of Deliverance.                      12. LIGHT ON DISPOSITION


  I CANNOT HELP IT, it is my disposition." How often one hears this

expression as an excuse for wrongdoing. What does it imply? This, that the

person  who  utters  it  believes  that  he  has  no  choke  in  the  matter,  that  he

cannot alter his character. He believes that he must go on doing the wrong

thing to the end of his days because he was "born so," or because his father or

grandfather was like that; or, if not these, then someone along the family line

a hundred, or two or three hundred years ago must have been afflicted, and

therefore  he  is  and  must  remain  so.  Such  a  belief  should  be  uprooted,

destroyed, and cast away, for it is not only without reason, it is a complete

barrier  to  all  progress,  to  all  growth  in  goodness,  to  all  development  of

character and noble expansion of life.

    Character  is  not  permanent;  it  is,  indeed,  one  of  the  most  changeable

things in nature. If not changed by a conscious act of the will, it is being

continually  modified  and  reformed  by  the  pressure  of  circumstances.

Disposition is not fixed, except insofar as one fixes it by continuing to do the

same thing, and by persistence in the stubborn belief that he "cannot help it."

As soon as one gets rid of that belief he will find that he can help it. Further,

he  will  find  that  intelligence  and  will  are  instruments  which  can  mould

disposition to any extent, and that, too, with considerable rapidity if one is in

earnest.

  What is disposition but a habit formed by repeating the same thing over

and over again? Cease repeating (doing) the thing, and lo! the disposition is

changed, the character is altered. To cease from an old habit of thought or

action is, I know, difficult at first, but with each added effort the difficulty

decreases, and finally disappears, and then the new and good habit is formed

and the disposition is changed from bad to good, the character is ennobled,

the mind is delivered from torment and is lifted into joy.

  There is no need for anyone to remain the slave of a disposition which

causes him unhappiness, and which he himself regards as undesirable. He can

abandon it. He can break away from the slavery. He can deliver himself and

be free.            13. LIGHT ON INDIVIDUAL LIBERTY


  WITHIN THE SPHERE of his own mind man has all power, but in the

sphere  of  other  minds  and  outside  things,  his  power  is  limited.  He  can

command his own mind, but he cannot command the minds of others. He can

choose what he shall think, but he cannot choose what others shall think. He

cannot  control  the  weather  as  he  wills,  but  he  can  control  his  mind,  and

decide what his mental attitude toward the weather shall be.

  A man can reform the dominion of his own mind, but he cannot reform

the outer world because the outer world is composed of other minds having

the same freedom of choice as himself. A pure being cannot cleanse the heart

of one less pure, but by his life of purity and by elucidating his experience in

the attainment of purity, he can, as a teacher, act as a guide to others, and so

enable them more readily and rapidly to purify themselves. But even then

those others have the power to decide whether they shall accept or reject such

guidance, so complete is man’s choice. It is because of this dual truth—that

man has no power in the realm of others’ minds and yet has all power over

his own mind, that he cannot avoid the consequences of his own thoughts and

acts. Man is altogether powerless to alter or avert consequences, but he is

altogether powerful in his choice of causative thought. Having chosen his

thoughts, he must accept their full consequences. Having acted, he cannot

escape the full results of his act.

  Law reigns universally, and there is perfect individual liberty. A man can

do as he likes, but all other men can also do as they like. A man has power to

steal,  but  others  have  the  power  to  protect  themselves  against  the  thief.

Having sent out his thought, having acted his purpose, a man’s power over

that  thought  and  purpose  is  at  an  end.  The  consequences  are  certain  and

cannot be escaped, and they will be of the nature of the thought and act which

produced them—painful or blessed.

  Seeing that a man can think and do as he chooses, and that all others have

the like liberty, a man has to learn, sooner or later, to reckon with other

minds, and until he does this he will be ceaselessly involved in suffering. To

think and act apart from the consideration of others is both an abuse and an

infringement of liberty. Such thoughts and acts are annulled and brought to

naught by the harmonizing Principle of Liberty itself, and such annulling andbringing to naught is felt by the individual as suffering.

  When the mind, rising above ignorance, recognizes the magnitude of its

power within its own sphere and ceases to antagonize itself against others, it

harmonizes itself to those other minds. Having acknowledged their freedom

of  choice,  it  has  then  realized  spiritual  plenitude  and  the  cessation  of

suffering.

  Selfishness,  egotism,  and  despotism  are,  from  the  spiritual  standpoint,

transferable terms; they are one and the same thing. Every selfish thought or

act is a manifestation of egotism, is an effort of despotism, and it is met with

suffering and defeat. It is annulled because the Law of Liberty cannot, in the

smallest particular, be annulled.

  If  selfishness  could  conquer,  Liberty  would  be  non-existent,  but

selfishness fails of all results but pain, because Liberty is supreme. An act of

selfishness contains two elements of egotism: namely (1) the denial of liberty

of others and (2) the assertion of one’s own liberty beyond its legitimate

sphere. It thereby destroys itself. Despotism is death.

  Man  is  not  the  creature  of  selfishness,  he  is  the  maker  of  it.  It  is  an

indication of his power—his power to disobey even the law of his being.

Selfishness is power without wisdom; it is energy wrongly directed. A man is

selfish because he is ignorant of his nature and power as a mental being. Such

ignorance and selfishness entail suffering, and by repeated suffering and age-

long experience he at last arrives at knowledge and the legitimate exercise of

his power. The truly enlightened man cannot be selfish: he cannot accuse

others of selfishness, or try to coerce them into being unselfish.

  The selfish man is eager to bend others to his own way and will, believing

it to be the only right way for all. He thereby ignorantly wastes himself in

trying to check in others the power which he freely exercises himself, namely

—the power to choose their own way and exercise their own will. By so

doing, he places himself in direct antagonism with the like tendencies and

freedom of other minds, and brings into operation the instruments of his own

suffering. Hence, the ceaseless interplay of conflicting forces; the unending

fires of passion; the turmoil, strife, and woe. Selfishness is misapplied power.

  The  unselfish  man  is  he  who,  ceasing  from  all  personal  interference,

abandons the "I" as the source of judgment. Having recognized his unlimited

freedom through the abandonment of all egotism even in thought, he refrainsfrom encroachment upon the boundless freedom of others. He realizes the

legitimacy of their choice and their right to the free employment of their

power.

  However others may choose to act toward such a man, it can never cause

him any trouble or suffering, because he is perfectly willing that they should

so choose to act, and he harbours no wish that they should act in any other

way. He realizes that his sole duty, as well as his entire power, lies in acting

rightly toward them, and that he is in no way concerned with their actions

toward him that is both their choice and their business. To the unselfish man,

therefore, malice, envy, backbiting, jealousy, accusation, condemnation, and

persecution have passed away. Having ceased to practice these things, he is

not  disturbed  when  they  are  hurled  at  him.  Thus  liberation  from  sin  is

liberation from suffering. The selfless man is free; he has made the servitude

of sin impossible; he has broken every bond.              14. LIGHT ON THE BLESSING AND


                          DIGNITY OF WORK


  THAT "LABOUR IS LIFE" is a principle pregnant with truth, and one

which  cannot  be  too  often  repeated  or  too  closely  studied  and  practiced.

Labour  is  so  often  regarded  as  an  irksome  and  even  degrading  means  of

obtaining ease and pleasure, and not as what it really is—a thing happy and

noble in itself. The lesson contained in the maxim needs to be taken to heart

and more and more thoroughly learned.

  Activity, both mental and physical, is the essence of life. The complete

cessation of life is death, and death is immediately followed by corruption.

Ease and death are closely related. The more there is of activity, the more

abounding is life. The brainworker, the original thinker, the man of unceasing

mental activity, is the longest-lived man in a community. The agricultural

labourer, the gardener, the man of unceasing physical activity comes next

with length in years.

    Pure-hearted, healthy-minded people love work, and are happy in their

labours.  They  never  complain  of  being  "overworked."  It  is  very  difficult,

almost impossible, for a man to be overworked if he lives a sound and pure

life.  It  is  worry,  bad  habits,  discontent  and  idleness  that  kill—especially

idleness, for if labour is life, then idleness must be death. Let us get rid of sin

before we talk about being overworked.

  There are those who are afraid of work, regarding it as an enemy, and

who fear a breakdown by doing too much. They have to learn what a health-

bestowing friend work is. Others are ashamed of work, looking upon it as a

degrading thing to be avoided. The "pure in heart and sound in head" are

neither  afraid  nor  ashamed  of  work,  and  they  dignify  whatsoever  they

undertake. No necessary work can be degrading, but if a man regards his

work as such, he is already degraded, not by his task, but by his slavish

vanity.

  Man hath his daily work of body and mind Appointed, which declares his

dignity.

  The idle man who is afraid of work, and the vain man who is ashamed of

it,  are  both  on  the  way  to  poverty,  if  they  are  not  already  there.  Theindustrious man, who loves work, and the man of true dignity, who glorifies

work, are both on their way to affluence, if they are not already there. The

lazy man is sowing the seeds of poverty and crime; the vain man is sowing

the seeds of humiliation and shame. The industrious man is sowing the seeds

of affluence and virtue; the dignified worker is sowing the seeds of victory

and honour. Deeds are seeds, and the harvest will appear in due season.

  There is a common desire to acquire riches with as little effort as possible,

which is a kind of theft. To try to obtain the fruits of labour without labouring

is to take the fruits of another man’s labour; to try to get money without

giving its equivalent is to take that which belongs to another and not one’s

self. What is theft but this frame of mind carried to its logical extreme?

  Let us rejoice in our work. Let us rejoice that we have the strength and

capacity  for  work,  and  let  us  increase  that  strength  and  capacity  by

unremitting labour.

    Whatever our work may be, it is noble, and will be perceived by the

world as noble, if we perform it with a noble spirit. The virtuous do not

despise any labour which falls on their lot. And he who works and faints not,

who is faithful, patient, and uncompromising even in the time of poverty, he

will surely at last eat of the sweet fruits of his labour. Yea, even while he

labours and seems to fail, happiness will be  his constant companion, for,

"Blessed  is  the  man  that  has  found  his  work;  let  him  ask  no  other

blessedness."            15. LIGHT ON GOOD MANNERS AND


                                REFINEMENT


  More upward, working out the beast,

  And let the ape and tiger die.

  ALL CULTURE IS GETTING AWAY from the beast. Evolution is a

refining  process,  and  the  unwritten  laws  of  society  are  inherent  in  the

evolutionary law.

    Education is intellectual culture. The scholar is engaged in purifying and

perfecting  his  intellect;  the  spiritual  devotee  is  engaged  in  purifying  and

perfecting his heart.

  When a man aspires to nobler heights of achievement, and sets about the

realization of his ideal, he commences to refine his nature; and the more pure

a man makes himself within, the more refined, gracious, and gentle will be

his outward demeanour.

  Good  manners  have  an  ethical  basis,  and  cannot  be  divorced  from

religion. To be ill-mannered is to be imperfect, for what are ill manners but

the outward expression of inward defects? What a man does, that he is. If he

acts rudely, he is a rude man; if he acts foolishly, he is a foolish man; if he

acts gently, he is a gentleman. It is a mistake to suppose that a man can have

a gentle and refined mind behind a rough and brutal exterior (though such a

man may possess some strong animal virtues), as the outer is an expression of

the inner.

  One of the steps in the noble Eightfold Path to perfection as expounded

by Buddha is—Right Conduct or Good Behaviour. It should be plain to all

that the man who has not yet learned how to conduct himself toward others in

a kindly, gracious, and unselfish spirit has not yet entered the pathway of the

holy life.

  If a man refines his heart, he will refine his behaviour; if he refines his

behaviour, it will help him to refine his heart.

  To be coarse, brutish, and snappish may be natural to the beast, but the

man who aspires to be even an endurable member of society (not to mention

the higher manhood), will at once purge away any such bestial traits that maypossess him.

  All these things which aid in man’s refinement—such as music, painting,

poetry, manners—are servants and messengers of progress. Man degrades

himself  when  he  imitates  the  brute.  Let  us  not  mistake  barbarism  for

simplicity or vulgarity for honesty.

    Unselfishness,  kindliness,  and  consideration  for  others  will  always  be

manifested outwardly as gentleness, graciousness, and refinement. To affect

these  graces  by  simulating  them  may  seem  to  succeed,  but  it  does  not.

Affectation  and  hypocrisy  are  soon  divulged;  every  man’s  eye,  sooner  or

later, pierces through their flimsiness, and ultimately none but the actors of

them are deceived. As Emerson says:

  "What is done for effect, is seen to be done for effect; and what is done

for love, is felt to be done for love."

  Children who are well-bred are taught always to consider the happiness of

others  before  their  own:  to  offer  others  the  most  comfortable  seat,  the

choicest fruit, the best titbit, and so on, and also to do everything, even the

most trivial acts, in the right way. And these two things—unselfishness and

right action—are at the basis, not only of good manners, but of all ethics,

religion, and true living; they represent power and skill. The selfish man is

weak and unskilful in his actions. Unselfishness is the right way of thinking;

good manners are the right way of acting, As Emerson, again, says:

  "There  is  always  a  way  of  doing  everything,  if  it  be  to  boil  an  egg.

Manners are the happy way of doing things right."

  It is a frequent error among men to imagine that the Higher Life is an

ideal something quite above and apart from the common details of life, and

that to neglect these or to perform them in a slovenly manner is an indication

that the mind is preoccupied on "higher things." Whereas it is an indication

that the mind is becoming inexact, dreamy, and weak, instead of exact, wide

awake, and strong. No matter how apparently trivial the thing is which has to

be done, there is a right way of doing it, and to do it in the right way saves

friction, time, and trouble, conserves power, and develops grace, skill, and

happiness.

  The artisan has a variety of tools with which to ply his particular craft,

and he is taught (and also finds by experience) that each tool must be applied

to its special use, and never under any circumstances must one tool be madeto do service for another. By using every tool in its proper place and in the

right way, the maximum of dexterity and power is attained. Should a boy

learning a trade refuse instruction, and persist in using the tools in his own

way,  making  one  tool  do  service  for  another,  he  would  never  become

anything better than a clumsy bungler, and would be a failure in his trade.

  It is the same throughout the whole life. If a man opens himself to receive

instruction,  and  studies  how  to  do  everything  rightly  and  lawfully,  he

becomes  strong,  skilful,  and  wise,  master  of  himself,  his  thoughts  and

actions. But if he persists in following his momentary impulses, in doing

everything as he feels prompted, not exercising thoughtfulness, and rejecting

instruction,  such  a  man  will  attain  to  nothing  better  than  a  slovenly  and

bungling life.

  Confucius paid the strictest attention to dress, eating, deportment, passing

speech—to all the so-called trivialities of life, as well as to the momentous

affairs of state and the lofty moral principles which he expounded. He taught

his disciples that it is the sign of a vulgar and foolish mind to regard anything

as "trivial" that is necessary to be done, that the wise man pays attention to all

his duties, and does everything wisely, thoughtfully, and rightly.

  It is not an arbitrary edict of society that the man who persists in eating

with his knife be rejected, for a knife is given to cut with, and a fork to eat

with,  and  to  put  things  to  wrong  and  slovenly  uses—even  in  the  passing

details of life—does not make for progress, but is retrogressive and makes for

confusion.

  It is not a despotic condition in the law of things that so long as a man

persists in thinking and acting unkindly toward others he shall be shut out

from Heaven. He shall remain in the outer pain and unrest, for selfishness is

disruption and disorder. The universe is sustained by exactness, it rests on

order, it demands right doing, and the searcher of wisdom will watch all his

ways. He will think purely, speak gently, and act graciously, refining his

entire nature, both in the letter and the spirit.        16. LIGHT ON DIVERSITIES OF CREEDS


  THOSE WHO DEPART from the common track in matters of faith, and

strike out independently in search of the Higher Life, as distinguished from

the letter of religious dogma, are apt to sink into a pitfall which awaits them

at the first step, namely, the pitfall of pride.

  Attacking "creeds" and speaking contemptuously of "the orthodox" (as

though orthodoxy were synonymous with evil) are not uncommon practices

among those who fondly imagine they are in possession of greater spiritual

light. Departure from orthodoxy does not by any means include departure

from sin. Indeed, it is frequently accompanied with increased bitterness and

contempt. Change of opinion is one thing, change of heart is quite another.

To withdraw one’s adherence from creeds is easy; to withdraw one’s self

from sin is more difficult.

  Hatred and pride, and not necessarily orthodoxy and conformity, are the

things to be avoided. One’s own sin, and not another man’s creed, is the thing

to be despised.

  The  right-minded  man  cannot  pride  himself  on  being  "broader"  than

others, or assume that he is on a "higher plane" than others, or think with self-

righteous contempt of those who still cling to some form of letter worship

which he has abandoned.

    Applying the words "narrow," "bigoted," and "selfish" to others, is not the

indication of an enlightened mind. No person would wish these terms to be

applied to himself, and he who is becoming truly religious does not speak of

others in words which would wound him were they directed toward himself.

  Those who are learning how to exercise humility and compassion are

becoming  truly  enlightened.  Thinking  lowly  of  themselves  and  kindly  of

others; condemning their own sins with merciless logic, and thinking with

tender pity of the sins of others, they develop that insight into the nature and

law of things which enables them to see the truth that is in others, and in the

religions of others. They do not condemn their neighbour because he holds a

different faith, or because he adheres to a formal creed. Creeds must be, and

he  who  performs  faithfully  his  duty  in  his  own  particular  creed,  not

interfering with or condemning his neighbour in the performance of his duty,

is bringing the world nearer to perfection and peace.  Amid all the diversities of creeds there is a unifying power of undying

and  unalterable  Love—and  he  or  she  who  has  Love  has  entered  into

sympathetic union with all.

  He who has acquired the true spirit of Religion, who has attained to pure

insight and deep charity of heart, will avoid all strife and condemnation. He

will not fall into the delusion of praising his own sect (should he belong to

one) and try to prove that it alone is right, or disparage other sects and try to

prove that they are false. As the true man does not speak in praise of himself

or his own work, so the man of humility, charity, and wisdom does not speak

of his own sect as being superior to all others. He does not seek to elevate his

own particular religion by picking holes in forms of faith which are held

sacred by others.

  Nothing  more  explicit  and  magnanimous  has  ever  been  uttered,  in

reference to this particular phrase of the practice of charity, than is found in

the twelfth Edict of Asoka, the great Indian Ruler and Saint who lived some

two or three centuries previous to the Christian era, and whose life, dedicated

to the spread of Truth, testified to the beauty of his words. The edict runs

thus:

  "There should be no praising of one’s own sect and decrying of other

sects; but, on the contrary, a rendering of honour to other sects for whatever

cause honour may be due. By so doing, both one’s own sect may be helped

forward, and other sects will be benefited; by acting otherwise, one’s own

sect will be destroyed in injuring others. Whosoever exalts his own sect by

decrying others does so doubtless out of love for his own sect, thinking to

spread abroad the fame thereof. But, on the contrary, he inflicts the more an

injury upon his own sect."

  These are wise and holy words; the breath of charity is in them, and they

may be well pondered upon by those who are anxious to overthrow, not the

religions of other men, but their own shortcomings.

  It is a dark and deep-seated delusion that causes a man to think he can

best advance the cause of his religion by exposing what he regards as the

"evils" of other religions. The most part of it is, that while such a one rejoices

in the thought that by continually belittling other sects he will perhaps at last

wipe them out, and win all men to his side, he is all the time engaged in the

sad work of bringing into disrepute, and thereby destroying, his own sect.  Just as every time a man slanders another, he inflicts lasting injury upon

his own character and prospects, so every time one speaks evil of another

sect, he soils and demeans his own. And the man who is prone to attack and

condemn other religions is the one who suffers most when his own religion is

attacked and condemned.

  If a man does not like that his own religion should be denounced as evil

and false, he should carefully guard himself that he does not condemn other

religions as such. If it pleases him when his own cause is well spoken of and

helped, he should speak well of and help other causes which, while differing

from his own in method, have the same good view in end. In this way he will

escape the errors and miseries of sectarian strife, and will perfect himself in

divine charity.

  The heart that has embraced gentleness and charity avoids all those blind

passions  which  keep  the  fires  of  party  strife,  violence,  persecution,  and

bitterness  burning  from  age  to  age.  It  dwells  in  thoughts  of  pity  and

tenderness,  scorning  nothing,  despising  nothing,  and  not  stirring  up

animosity. For he who acquires gentleness gains that clear insight into the

Great Law which cannot be obtained in any other way. He sees that there is

good in all sects and religions, and he makes that good his own.

  Let the truth-seeker avoid divisions and offending distinctions, and let

him strive after charity; for charity does not slander, backbite, or condemn. It

does not think of trampling down another’s, and elevating its own.

  Truth cannot contradict itself. The nature of Truth is exactness, reality,

undeviating certitude. Why, then, the ceaseless conflict between the religions

and creeds? Is it not because of error? Contradiction and conflict belong to

the  domain  of  error,  for  error,  being  confusion,  is  in  the  nature  of  self-

contradiction. If the Christian says, "My religion is true and Buddhism is

false," and if the Buddhist says, "Christianity is false and Buddhism is true,"

we are confronted with an irreconcilable contradiction, for these two religions

cannot be both true and false. Such a contradiction cannot come from Truth,

and must therefore spring from error.

  But if both these religious partisans should now say or think, "Yes, truly

the contradiction springs from error, but the error is in the other man and his

religion,  and  not  me  and  mine,"  this  does  but  intensify  the  contradiction.

From where, then, springs the error, and where is Truth? Does not the veryattitude  of  mind  which  these  men  adopt  toward  each  other  constitute  the

error?  And  were  they  to  reverse  that  attitude,  exchanging  antagonism  for

good will, would they not perceive the Truth which does not stand in conflict

with itself?

  The man who says, "My religion is true, and my neighbour’s is false," has

not yet discovered the truth in his own religion, for when a man has done

that,  he  will  see  the  Truth  in  all  religions.  As  behind  all  the  universal

phenomena there is but one Truth, so behind all the religions and creeds there

is but one religion. For every religion contains the same ethical teaching, and

all the Great Teachers taught exactly the same thing.

  The precepts of the Sermon on the Mount are to be found in all religions.

The life which these precepts demand was lived by all the Great Teachers and

many of their disciples, for the Truth is a pure heart and a blameless life, and

not a set of dogmas and opinions. All religions teach purity of heart, holiness

of life, compassion, love, and good will. They teach the doing of good deeds

and  the  giving  up  of  selfishness  and  sin.  These  things  are  not  dogmas,

theologies, and opinions; they are things to be done, to be practiced, to be

lived. Men do not differ about these things, for they are the acknowledged

verities of every sect. What, then, do they differ about? About their opinions,

their speculations, their theologies.

  Men differ about that which is unreal, not that which is real; they fight

over  error,  and  not  over  Truth.  The  very  essential  of  all  religion  (and

religions) is that before a man can know anything of Truth, he must cease

from fighting his fellow man, and shall learn to regard him with good will

and love. How can a man do this while he is convinced that his neighbour’s

religion is false, and that it is his duty to do all that he can to undermine and

overthrow it? This is not doing unto others as we would that they should do

to us.

  That which is true and real is true and real everywhere and always. There

is no distinction between the pious Christian and the pious Buddhist. Purity

of heart, piety of life, holy aspirations, and the love of Truth are the same in

the  Buddhist  as  the  Christian.  The  good  deeds  of  the  Buddhist  are  not

different from the good deeds of the Christian. Remorse for sin and sorrow

for wrong thoughts and deeds springs in the hearts, not only of Christians, but

of men and women of all religions. Great is the need of sympathy. Great isthe need of love.

  All religions are the same in that they teach the same fundamental truths.

But men, instead of practicing these truths, engage opinions and speculations

about things which are outside the range of knowledge and experience, and it

is in defending and promulgating their own particular speculations that men

become divided and engage in conflict with each other.

    Condemnation is the beginning of persecution. The thought, "I am right

and you are wrong," is a seed prolific of hatred. It was out of this seed that

the Spanish Inquisition grew. He who would find the universal Truth must

abandon egotism and quench the hateful flames of condemnation. He must

remove from his heart the baneful thought, "All others are wrong," and think

the illuminating thought, "It is I who am wrong." And having thus thought, he

will cease from sin, and will live in love and good will toward all, making no

distinctions, engaging in no divisions, a peacemaker and not a partisan. Thus

living  charitably  disposed  to  all,  he  will  become  one  with  all.  He  will

comprehend the Universal Truth, the Eternal Religion; for while error and

selfishness divide, Truth demonstrates Truth and Religion unifies.              17. LIGHT ON LAW AND MIRACLE


  THE  LOVE  OF  THE  WONDERFUL  is  an  element  in  human  nature

which, like passions and desires, requires to be curbed, directed, and finally

transmuted; otherwise superstition and the obscuration of reason and insight

cannot be avoided. The idea of a miracle must be transcended before the

orderly, eternal, and beneficent nature of the law can be perceived. Then

peace and certainty, which a knowledge of it bestows, can be enjoyed.

  Just as a child when its eyes are opened to the phenomena of this world

becomes involved in wonder, and revels in tales of giants and fairies, so when

a man first opens his mental eyes to spiritual things does he become involved

in stories of marvels and miracles. As a child at last becomes a man and

leaves behind the crudities of childhood, understanding more accurately the

relative  nature  of  the  phenomena  around  him,  so  with  a  fuller  spiritual

development  and  greater  familiarity  with  the  inner  realities  a  man  at  last

leaves behind the era of childish wonderment. He comes into touch with the

law of things, and governs his life by principles that are fixed and invariable.

  Law is universal and eternal, and, although vast areas of knowledge are

waiting  to  be  revealed,  cause  and  effect  will  ever  prevail.  Every  new

discovery, every truth revealed, will serve to bring one nearer to a realization

of the beauty, stability, and supremacy of the law. And very gladdening it is

to know that law is inviolable and eternal throughout every department of

nature, For then we know that the same operations of the universe are ever

the same, and  can therefore be discovered, understood, obeyed. This is a

ground of certainty, and therefore of great hope and joy. The idea of miracle

is a denial of law and the substitution of an arbitrary and capricious power.

  It is true that around the lives of the Great Teachers of humanity stories of

miracles have grown, but they have emanated from the undeveloped minds of

the people, not from the Teachers themselves.

  Lao-Tze  expounded  the  Supreme  Law,  or  Reason,  which  admits  no

miracle, yet his religion has today become so corrupted with the introduction

of the marvellous as to be little better than a mass of superstition.

  Even Buddhism, whose founder declared that, "Seeing that the Law of

Karma  (cause  and  effect)  governs  all  things,  the  disciple  who  aims  at

performing miracles does not understand the doctrine," and that, "The desireto  perform  miracles  arises  either  from  covetousness  or  vanity,"  has

surrounded, in its corrupted form, the life of its Great Master with a number

of miracles.

  Even during the lifetime of Ramakrishna, the Hindu teacher who died in

1886, and who is regarded by his disciples as an incarnation of Deity to this

age, all sorts of miracles were attributed to him by the people, and are now

associated with his name. Yet, according to Max Muller, these miracles are

without  any  foundation  of  evidence  or  fact,  and  Ramakrishna  himself

ridiculed and repudiated miracle.

  As men become more enlightened, miracles and wonder-working will be

expunged  from  religion,  and  the  orderly  beauty  of  Law  and  the  ethical

grandeur of obedience to the Law will become revealed and known. No man

who desires to perform miracles or astral or psychological wonders, who is

curious to see invisible or supernatural beings, or who is ambitious to become

a "Master" or an "Adept," can attain a clear perception of Truth and the living

of the highest life. Childish wonderment about things must be supplanted by

knowledge of things, and vanity is a complete barrier to the entrance of the

true path which demands of the disciple lowliness of heart, humility. He is on

the true path who is cultivating kindness, forbearance, and a loving heart. The

marks of a true Master are not miracles and wonder-working, but infinite

patience, boundless compassion, spotless purity, and a heart at peace with all.                  18. LIGHT ON WAR AND PEACE


  WAR SPRINGS FROM INWARD STRIFE. "War in heaven" precedes

war on earth. When the inward spiritual harmony is destroyed by division and

conflict, it will manifest itself outwardly in the form of war. Without this

inward conflict war could not be, nor can war cease until the inward harmony

is restored.

  War  consists  of  aggression  and  resistance,  and  after  the  fight  has

commenced both combatants are like aggressors and resisters. Thus the effort

to put an end to war by aggressive means produces war.

  "I have set myself stubbornly against the war spirit," said a man a short

time ago. He did not know that he was, by that attitude of mind, practicing

and fostering the war spirit.

  To fight against war is to produce war. It is impossible to fight for peace,

because all fighting is the annihilation of peace. To think of putting an end to

war by denouncing and fighting it is the same as to try to quench fire by

throwing straw upon it.

  He, therefore, who is truly a person of peace, does not resist war, but

practices  peace.  He,  therefore,  who  takes  sides  and  practices  attack  and

defense is responsible for war, for he is always at war in his mind. He cannot

know the nature of peace, for he has not arrived at peace in his own heart.

  The true man of peace is he who has put away from his mind the spirit of

quarreling and party strife, who neither attacks others nor defends himself,

and whose heart is at peace with all. Such a man has already laid in his heart

the foundations of the empire of peace; he is a peacemaker, for he is at peace

with  the  whole  world  and  practices  the  spirit  of  peace  under  all

circumstances.

  Very  beautiful  is  the  spirit  of  peace,  and  it  says,  "Come  and  rest."

Bickerings, quarreling, party divisions—these must be forever abandoned by

him who would establish peace.

  War will continue so long as men will allow themselves, individually, to

be dominated by passion, and only when men have quelled the inward tumult

will the outward horror pass away.

  Self is the great enemy, the producer of all strife, and the maker of manysorrows.  He,  therefore,  who  will  bring  about  peace  on  earth,  let  him

overcome egotism, let him subdue his passions, let him conquer himself.          19. LIGHT ON THE BROTHERHOOD OF


                                        MAN


  THERE  IS  NO  LACK  OF  WRITING  and  preaching  about  "universal

brotherhood," and it has been adopted as a leading article of faith by many

newly formed societies. But what is so urgently needed to begin with is not

universal brotherhood, but particular Brotherhood. That is, the adoption of a

magnanimous, charitable, and kindly spirit toward those with whom we come

in immediate contact; toward those who contradict, oppose and attack us, as

well as toward those who love and agree with us.

  I  make  a  very  simple  statement  of  truth  when  I  say  that  until  such

particular  brotherhood  is  practiced,  universal  brotherhood  will  remain  a

meaningless term. For universal brotherhood is an end, a goal, and the way to

it  is  by  particular  brotherhood.  The  one  is  sublime  and  far-reaching

consummation, the other is the means by which that consummation must be

realized.

  I  remember  on  one  occasion  reading  a  paper  devoted  largely  to  the

teachings  of  universal  brotherhood,  and  the  leading  article—a  long  and

learned one— was an exposition of this subject. But on turning over a few

more pages, I found another piece by the same writer in which he accused of

misrepresentation, lying, and selfishness, not his enemies, but the brethren of

his own Society, who bear, at least as far as such sins are concerned, stainless

reputations.

  A scriptural writer asked the question, "If a man does not love his brother

whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?" In the same

manner, if a man does not love the brother whom he knows, how can he love

people of all creeds and all nations whom he does not know?

  To write articles on universal brotherhood is one thing; to live in peace

with  one’s  relations  and  neighbours  and  to  return  good  for  evil  is  quite

another.

  To endeavour to propagate universal brotherhood while fostering in our

heart some sparks of envy, spite, and resentment, malice, or hatred, is to be

self-deluded; for thus shall we be all the time hindering and denying, by our

actions, that which we eulogize by our words. So subtle is such self-delusion,that, until the very heights of love and wisdom are reached, we are all liable

at any moment to fall into it.

  It is not because our fellow men do not hold our views, or follow our

religion, or see as we see that universal brotherhood remains unrealized, but

because of the prevalence of ill will. If we hate, avoid, and condemn others

because  they  differ  from  us,  all  that  we  may  say  or  do  in  the  cause  of

universal brotherhood will be another snare to our feet, a mockery to our

aspirations, and a farce to the world at large.

  Let us, then, remove all hatred and malice from our hearts. Let us be

filled with goodwill toward those who try and test us by their immediate

nearness. Let us love them that hate us, and think magnanimously of those

who condemn us or our doctrine—in a word, let us take the first step toward

universal brotherhood, by practicing brotherhood in the place where it is most

needed. And as we succeed in being brotherly in these important particulars,

universal brotherhood will be found to be not far distant.                20. LIGHT ON LIFE’S SORROWS


  THERE  IS  GREAT  SORROW  IN  THE  WORLD.  This  is  one  of  the

supreme facts of life. Grief and affliction visit every heart, and many that are

today revelling in hilarious joy or sinful riot, will tomorrow be smitten low

with sorrow. Suddenly, and with swift and silent certainty, comes its poignant

arrow, entering the human heart, slaying its joy, laying low its hopes, and

shattering all its earthly plans and prospects. Then the humbled, smitten soul

reflects, and enters deeply and sympathetically into the hidden meanings of

human life.

  In the dark times of sorrow, men and women approach very near to Truth.

When in one brief hour the built up hopes of many years of toil fall like a toy

palace, and all earthly pleasures burst and vanish like petty bubbles in the

grasp,  then  the  crushed  spirit,  bewildered,  tempest-tossed,  and  without  a

refuge, gropes in dumb anguish for the Eternal, and seeks its abiding peace.

  "Blessed are they that mourn," said the Teacher of the West, and the

Teacher of the East declared that, "Where there is great suffering there is

great bliss." Both of these sayings express the truth that sorrow is a teacher

and purifier. Sorrow is not the end of life— though it is, in its consummation,

the end of the worldly life—it leads the bewildered spirit into rest and safety;

for the end of sorrow is joy and peace.

  Strong  searcher  for  Truth!  Strenuous  fighter  against  self  and  passion!

Seasons of sorrow must be your portion for a time. While any vestige of self

remains,  temptations  will  assail  you;  the  veil  of  illusion  will  cloud  your

spiritual vision, producing sorrow and unrest. When heavy clouds settle down

upon your spirit, accept the darkness as your own, and pass through it bravely

into the cloudless light beyond. Bear well in mind that nothing can overtake

you that does not belong to you and that is not for your eternal good. As the

poet has truly sung—

  Nor space nor time, nor deep nor high

  Can keep my own away from me.

  And not alone are the bright things of life yours;

  the dark things are yours also.

  When difficulties and troubles gather thickly about you; when failurescome and friends fall away; when the tongue that has sweetly praised you,

bitterly blames; when beloved lips that pressed against your lips, the soft,

warm kisses of love, taunt and mock you in the lonely hour of your solitary

grief;  or  when  you  lay  beneath  the  sod  the  cold  casket  of  clay  that  but

yesterday  held  the  responsive  spirit  of  your  beloved—when  these  things

overtake you, remember that the hour of your Gethsemane has come. The cup

of anguish is yours to drink. Drink it silently and murmur not, for in that hour

of oppressive darkness and blinding pain no prayer will save you, no cry to

heaven will bring you sweet relief. Faith and patience only will give you the

strength to endure, and to go through your crucifixion with a meek and gentle

spirit, not complaining, blaming no one, but accepting it as your own.

  When  one  has  reached  the  lowest  point  of  sorrow;  when,  weak  and

exhausted, and overcome with a sense of powerlessness, he cries to God for

help, and there comes no answering comfort and no relief—then, discovering

the painfulness of sorrow and the insufficiency of prayer alone, he is ready to

enter the path of self-renunciation, ready to purify his heart, ready to practice

self-control, ready to become a spiritual athlete, and to develop that divine

and invincible strength which is born of self-mastery.

  He will find the cause of sorrow in his own heart, and will remove it. He

will learn to stand alone; not craving sympathy from any, but giving it to all.

Not thoughtlessly sinning and remorsefully repenting, but studying how not

to  commit  sin.  Humbled  by  innumerable  defeats,  and  chastened  by  many

sufferings, he will learn how to act blamelessly toward others, how to be

gentle and strong, kind and steadfast, compassionate and wise.

  Thus he will gradually rise above sorrow, and at last Truth will dawn

upon his mind, and he will understand the meaning of abiding peace. His

mental eye will be open to perceive the Cosmic Order. He will be blessed

with the Vision of the Law, and will receive the Beatific Bliss.

  When the true order of things is perceived, sorrow is transcended. When

the contracted personal self, which hugs its own fleeting pleasures and broods

over its own petty disappointments and dissatisfactions, is broken up and cast

away, then the larger life of Truth enters the mind, bringing bliss and peace;

and the Universal Will takes the place of self. The individual becomes one

with humanity. He forgets self in his love for all. His sorrow is swallowed up

in the bliss of Truth.  Thus when you have, by experience, entered completely into the sorrow

that is never lifted from the heart of humankind; when you have reaped and

eaten all the bitter fruits of your own wrong thoughts and deeds—then divine

compassion for all suffering beings will be born in your heart, healing all

your wounds and drying all your tears. You will rise again into a new and

heavenly life, where the sting of sorrow cannot enter, for there is no self

there. After the crucifixion comes the transfiguration; the sorrowless state is

reached through sorrow, and "the wise do not grieve."

  Ever  remember  this—in  the  midst  of  sin  and  sorrow  there  abides  the

world of Truth. Redemption is at hand. The troubled may find peace; the

impure may find purity. Healing awaits the broken-hearted. The weak will be

adorned with strength, and the downtrodden will be lifted up and glorified.                  21. LIGHT ON LIFE’S CHANGES


  THE TENDENCY OF THINGS to advance from a lower to a higher

level, and from high to higher still, is universal. The worlds exist in order that

beings may experience, and by experiencing, acquire knowledge and increase

in wisdom.

  Evolution is only another name for progress. It signifies perpetual change,

but a purposeful change, a change accompanied by growth. Evolution does

not mean the creation of a new being from a being of a different order. It

means  the  modification  of  beings  by  experience  and  change;  and  such

modification is progress.

  The  fact  of  change  is  ever  before  us.  Nothing  can  escape  it.  Plants,

animals, and human beings germinate, reach maturity, and pass into decay.

Even the lordly suns and their attendant worlds rolling through illimitable

spaces, although their life is reckoned in millions of years, at last decay and

perish after having passed through innumerable changes. We cannot say of

any being or object—"This will remain forever as it is," for even while we

are saying it, the being or object would be undergoing change.

  Sadness and suffering accompany this change; and beings mourn for that

which has departed, for the things which are lost and gone. Yet in reality

change is good, for it is the open door to all achievement, advancement, and

perfection.

  Mind, as well as matter, is subject to the same change. Every experience,

every  thought,  every  deed,  changes  a  person.  There  is  little  resemblance

between the elderly and their period of childhood and youth.

  An eternally fixed, unchangeable being is not known. Such a being may

be assumed, but it is a postulate only. It is not within the range of human

observation and knowledge. A being not subject to change would be a being

outside progress.

  There is a teaching which declares that man has a spiritual soul that is

eternally  pure,  eternally  unchanged,  eternally  perfect,  and  that  sinning,

suffering,  changing  man  as  we  see  him  is  an  illusion—that,  indeed,  the

spiritual soul is the man, and the other is unreality.

  There is another teaching that affirms that man is eternally imperfect, thatstainless purity can never be reached, and that perfection is an impossibility,

an illusion.

  It  will  be  found  that  these  two  extremes  have  no  relation  to  human

experience. They are both of the nature of speculative metaphysics which

stand in opposition to the facts of life; so much so that the adherents of these

two extremes deny the existence of the commonest everyday facts of human

experience. That which is assumed is regarded as real; the facts of life are

declared to be unreal.

  It is well to avoid both these extremes, and find the middle way of human

experience. It is well to avoid opinions and speculations of our own or others,

it is well to refer to the facts of life. We see that man passes through birth and

growth  and  old  age,  that  he  experiences  sin,  sickness,  and  death;  that  he

sorrows and suffers, aspires and rejoices; and that he is ever looking forward

to  greater  purity  and  striving  toward  perfection.  These  are  not  opinions,

speculations, or metaphysics—they are universal facts.

  If  man  were  already  perfect,  there  would  be  no  need  for  him  to  be

perfected, and all moral teaching would be useless and ridiculous. Moreover,

a perfect being could not be subject to illusion and unreality.

  On the other hand, if a man could never attain to purity and perfection,

his  aspirations  and  striving  would  be  useless.  They  would  indeed  be

mockeries; and the heavenly perfection of saintly and divine men and women

would have to be belittled and denied.

  We see around us sin, sorrow, and suffering; and we see before us, in the

lives of the great teachers, the sinless, sorrowless, divine state. Therefore, we

know  that  man  is  an  imperfect  being,  yet  capable  of,  and  destined  for,

perfection. The divine state toward which he aspires, he will reach. The fact

that he so ardently desires it means that he can reach it, even if the fact were

not demonstrated in those great ones who have already attained.

  Man is not a compound of two beings, one real and perfect, the other

unreal and imperfect. He is one and real, and his experiences are real. His

imperfection  is  apparent,  and  his  advancement  and  progress  are  also

apparent.

  The realities of life claim men in spite of their metaphysics, and all come

under  the  same  law  of  change  and  progress.  He  who  affirms  the  eternal

sinlessness and perfection of man, should not, to be logical and consistent,ever speak of sins and faults, of disease and death; yet he refers to these

things as matters to be dealt with. Thus in theory he denies the existence of

that which he habitually recognizes in practice.

  He  also  who  denies  the  possibility  of  perfection  should  not  aspire  or

strive; yet we find him practicing self-denial and striving ceaselessly toward

perfection.

  Holding to the theoretical does not absolve one from the inevitable. The

teacher of the unreality of sickness, old age, and death is at last caught in the

toils of disease, succumbs to age, and disappears in death.

  Change  is  not  only  inevitable;  it  is  the  constant  and  unvarying  law.

Without  it,  everything  would  remain  forever  as  it  is,  and  there  would  be

neither growth nor progress.

  The  strenuous  struggle  of  all  life  is  a  prophecy  of  its  perfection.  The

looking  upward  of  all  beings  is  evidence  of  their  ceaseless  ascension.

Aspirations,  ideals,  moral  aims,  while  they  denote  man’s  imperfection,

assuredly point to his future perfection. They are neither unnecessary nor

aimless, but are woven into the fabric of things. They belong to the vital

essence of the universe.

    Whatsoever a man believes or disbelieves, what theories he holds or does

not hold, one thing is certain—he is found in the stream of life, and must

think  and  act.  To  think  and  act  is  to  experience;  and  to  experience  is  to

change and develop.

  That man is conscious of sin means that he can become pure; that he

abhors evil signifies that he can reach up to Good; that he is a pilgrim in the

land  of  error  assures  us,  without  doubt,  that  he  will  at  last  come  to  the

beautiful city of Truth.                    22. LIGHT ON THE TRUTH OF


                            TRANSITORINESS


  IT IS WELL SOMETIMES to meditate deeply and seriously on the truth

of  Transitoriness.  By  meditation  we  will  come  to  perceive  how  all

compounded things must pass away; yea, how even while they remain they

are already in the process of passing away. Such meditation will soften the

heart, deepen the understanding, and render one more fully conscious of the

sacred nature of life.

  What is there that does not pass away, among all the things of which a

man  says,  "This  will  be  mine  tomorrow"?  Even  the  mind  is  continually

changing. Old characteristics die and pass away, and new ones are formed. In

the  midst  of  life  all  things  are  dying.  Nothing  endures;  nothing  can  be

retained. Things appear and then disappear; they become, and then they pass

away.

  The  ancient  sages  declared  the  visible  universe  to  be  Maya,  illusion,

meaning thereby that impermanency is the antithesis of Reality. Change and

decay are in the very nature of visible things, and they are unreal—illusory—

in the sense that they pass away forever.

  He who would ascend into the realm of Reality, who would penetrate into

the  world  of  Truth,  must  first  perceive,  with  no  uncertain  vision,  the

transitory nature of the things of life. He must cease to delude himself into

believing  that  he  can  retain  his  hold  on  his  possessions,  his  body,  his

pleasures and objects of pleasure. For as the flower fades and as the leaves of

the  tree  fall  and  wither,  so  must  these  things,  in  their  season,  pass  away

forever.

  The perception of the Truth of Transitoriness is one of the few great steps

in wisdom, for when it is fully grasped, and its lesson has sunk deeply into

the heart, the clinging to perishable things which is the cause of all sorrow,

will  be  yielded  up,  and  the  search  for  the  Truth  which  abides  will  be

accelerated.

  Anguish is rife because men and women set their hearts on the acquisition

of things that perish, because they lust for the possession of those things

which even when obtained cannot be retained.  There is no sorrow that would not vanish if the clinging to transient things

were given up. There is no grief that would not be dispersed if the desire to

have and to hold things which in their very nature cannot endure were taken

out of the heart.

  Tens of thousands of grief-stricken hearts are today bewailing the loss of

some loved object which they called theirs in days that are past, are weeping

over that which is gone forever and cannot be restored.

  Men are slow to learn the lessons of experience and to acquire wisdom,

and unnumbered griefs and pains and sorrows have failed to impress them

with the Truth of Transitoriness. He who clings to that which is impermanent

cannot escape sorrow, and the intensity of his sorrow will be measured by the

strength of his clinging. He who sets his heart on perishable things embraces

the companionship of grief and lamentation.

  Men and women cannot find wisdom because they will not renounce the

clinging  to  things.  They  believe  that  clinging  to  perishable  objects  is  the

source of happiness, and not the cause of sorrow. They cannot escape unrest

and enter into the life of peace because desire is difficult to quench, and the

immediate and transitory pleasure which gratified desire affords is mistaken

for abiding joy.

  It  is  because  the  true  order  of  things  is  not  understood  that  grief  is

universal. It is ignorance of the fleeting nature of things that lies at the root of

sorrow.

  The sting of anguish will be taken out of life when the lust to hold and to

preserve the things of decay is taken out of the heart.

    Sorrow is ended for him who sees things as they are; who, realizing the

nature of transiency, detaches his heart and mind from the things that perish.

  There is a right use for perishable things, and when they are rightly used,

and not doted upon for themselves alone, their loss will cause no sorrow.

  If a rich man thinks in his heart, "My riches and possessions are no part of

me, nor can I call them mine, seeing that when I am summoned to depart

from this world, I cannot take them with me; they are entrusted to me to be

used rightly, and I mil employ them to the best of my ability for the good of

men  and  for  the  world,"  such  a  man,  though  surrounded  by  luxuries  and

responsibilities, will be lifted above sorrow, and will draw near to the Truth.

On the other hand, if the poor man does not covet riches and possessions, hiscondition will cause him no anxiety and unrest.

  He  who  by  a  right  understanding  of  life  rids  his  heart  of  all  selfish

grasping and clinging, who uses things wisely and in their proper place, and

who, with chastened heart, and mind clarified of all thirsty desires, remains

serene and self-contained in the midst of all changes, such a man will find

Truth. He will stand face to face with Reality.

  For in the midst of all error there abides the Truth; at the heart of the

transiency there reposes the Permanent; and illusion does but veil the eternal

and unchanging Reality.

  The nature of that Reality it is not my purpose to deal with here. Let it

suffice that I indicate that it is only found by abandoning, in the heart, all that

is not of Love and Compassion, Wisdom and Purity. In these things there is

no element of transitoriness, no sorrow, and no unrest.

  When the truth of Transitoriness is well perceived, and when the lesson

contained in the truth of Transitoriness is well learned, then does a man set

out to find the abiding Truth; then does he wean his heart from those selfish

elements which are productive of sorrow.

  He  whose  treasure  is  Truth,  who  fashions  his  life  in  accordance  with

Wisdom, will find the Joy which does not pass away. He will leave behind

him the land of lamentation, and, crossing the wide ocean of illusion, will

come to the Sorrowless Shore.    23. THE LIGHT THAT NEVER GOES OUT


  AMID  THE  MULTITUDE  of  conflicting  opinions  and  theories,  and

caught in the struggle of existence, whither shall the confused truth-seeker

turn to find the path that leads to peace unending? To what refuge shall he fly

from the uncertainties and sorrows of change?

  Will he find peace in pleasure? Pleasure has its place, and in its place it is

good; but as an end, as a refuge, it affords no shelter. He who seeks it as such

does but increase the anguish of life; for what is more fleeting than pleasure,

and what is more empty than the heart that seeks satisfaction in so ephemeral

a thing? There is, therefore, no abiding refuge in pleasure.

  Will he find peace in wealth and worldly success?

  Wealth  and  worldly  success  have  their  place,  but  they  are  fickle  and

uncertain possessions, and he who seeks them for themselves alone will be

burdened with many anxieties and cares. When the storms of adversity sweep

over  his  glittering  yet  frail  habitation,  he  will  find  himself  helpless  and

exposed. But even should he maintain such possessions throughout life, what

satisfaction will they afford him in the hour of death? There is no abiding

refuge in wealth and worldly success.

  Will he find peace in health? Health has its place, and it should not be

thrown away or despised, but it belongs to the body which is destined for

dissolution, and is therefore perishable. Even should health be maintained for

a hundred years, the time will come when the physical energies will decline

and debility and decay will overtake them. There is no abiding refuge in

health.

  Will he find refuge in those whom he dearly loves? Those whom he loves

have  their  place  in  his  life.  They  afford  him  means  of  practicing

unselfishness, and thereby arriving at Truth. He should cherish them with

loving care, and consider their needs before his own. But the time will come

when they will be separated from him, and he will be left alone.

  There is no abiding refuge in loved ones.

  Will he find peace in this Scripture or that? Scripture fills an importantplace. As a guide it is good, but it cannot be a refuge, for one may know the

Scripture by heart, and yet be in sore conflict and unrest. The theories of men

are subject to successive changes, and no limit can be set to the variety of

textual interpretations. There is no abiding refuge in Scripture.

  Will he find rest in this teacher or that? The teacher has his place, and as

an instructor he renders good service. But teachers are numerous, and their

differences are many. Though one may regard his particular teacher as in

possession of the Truth, that teacher will one day be taken from him. There is

no abiding refuge in a teacher.

  Will he find peace in solitude? Solitude is good and necessary in its place,

but he who courts it as a lasting refuge will be like one perishing of thirst in a

waterless desert. He will escape men and the turmoil of the city, but he will

not escape himself and the unrest of the heart. There is no abiding rest in

solitude.

  If, then, the seeker can find no refuge in pleasure, in success, in health, in

family and friends, in Scripture, in the teacher, or in solitude, whither shall he

turn to find that sanctuary which shall afford abiding peace?

  Let him take refuge in righteousness. Let him fly to the sanctuary of a

purified heart. Let him enter the pathway of a blameless, stainless life, and

walk it meekly and patiently until it brings him to the eternal temple of Truth

in his own heart.

  He  who  has  taken  refuge  in  Truth,  even  in  the  habitation  of  a  wise

understanding  and  a  loving  and  steadfast  heart,  is  the  same  whether  in

pleasure or pain; wealth or poverty; success or failure; health or sickness;

with friends or without; in solitude or noisy haunts; and he is independent of

bibles and teachers, for the spirit of Truth instructs him. He perceives without

fear or sorrow the change and decay which are in all things. He has found

peace; he has entered the abiding sanctuary; he knows the Light that will

never go out.                    BOOK FOURTEEN


                  MEN AND SYSTEMS.                              INTRODUCTION


  THE unceasing change, the insecurity, and the misery of life make it

necessary to find some basis of certainty on which to rest if happiness and

peace of mind are to be maintained. All science, philosophy, and religion are

some many efforts in search of this permanent basis; all interpretations on the

universe, whether from the material or spiritual side, are so many attempts to

formulate some unifying principle or principles by which to reconcile the

fluctuations and contradictions of life.

  it has been said that mathematics is the only exact science; that is, the

only science that eternally works out true without a single exception. Yet

mathematics  is  but  the  body  of  which  ethics  is  the  spirit.  There  is  not  a

mathematical problem but has its ethical counterpart, and the spirit of ethics

is as eternally exact as the form of mathematics.

  It  is  being  discovered  that  all  natural  sciences  are  fundamentally

mathematical. Even music popularly considered to be as far removed from

mathematics  as  possible-is  now  known  to  be  strictly  mathematical.  The

science of harmony revealed certain fixed tones which never vary in their

relative proportions, and all of which can be numerically resolved. These

tones, like the numbers which represent them, are eternally fixed; and though

their combinations- also like the combinations of numbers- are infinite, a

given combination will always produce the same result.

  This mathematical foundation in all things is the keystone in the temple

of science; and this mathematical certainty constitutes the "rock of ages," and

the "great peace," on which and in which the saints and sages have ever

found rest from the stress and turmoil of life.

    Human life and evolution at present is the learning of those preliminary

lessons which are leading the race towards the mastery and understanding of

this  basic  or  divine  knowledge;  for  without  such  a  permanent,  exact

mathematical basis no lesson could be learnt. When human beings are spoken

of as learning the lessons of God or of life, two things are inferred, namely;

(1) A state of ignorance on the part of the learner, and (2) that there is some

definite knowledge which he has to acquire. This is seen plainly in a child atschool. Its lessons imply that there is a permanent principle of knowledge

towards which it is progressing. Without such knowledge there could be no

lessons.

  Thus, when one speaks of erring men as learning the lessons of life, he

infers, whether he realizes it or not, the existence of a permanent basis of

knowledge towards the possession of which all men are moving.

  This basic principle, a knowledge of which the whole race will ultimately

acquire, is best represented by the term Divine Justice. Human justice differs

with every man according to this own light or darkness, but there can be no

variation in that Divine Justice by which the universe is eternally sustained.

Divine Justice is spiritual mathematics. As with figures and objects, whether

simple or complex, there is a right and unvarying result, and no amount of

ignorance or deliberate falsification can ever make it otherwise, so with every

combination of thoughts or deeds, whether good or bad, there is an unvarying

and inevitable consequence which nothing can avert.

  If this were not so, if we could have effect without cause, or consequence

unrelated to act, experience could never lead to knowledge, there would be

no foundation of security, and no lessons could be learnt.

  Thus every effect has a cause, and cause and effect are in such intimate

relationship as to leave no room for injustice to creep in. Nevertheless, there

is ignorance, and, through ignorance, the doing of life’s lessons wrongly; and

this doing of life’s sums wrongly is that error, or sin, which is the source of

man’s sufferings. How often the child at school weeps because it cannot do

its sums correctly! And older children in the school of life do the same thing

when the sum of their actions has worked out in the form of suffering instead

of happiness.

  The ground of certainty, then, on which we can securely rest amid all the

incidents of life is the mathematical exactitude of the moral law. The moral

order of the universe is not, cannot, be disproportionate, for if it were the

universe would fall to pieces. If a brick house cannot stand unless it be built

in  accordance  with  certain  geometrical  proportions,  how  could  a  vast

universe, with all its infinite complexities of form and motion, proceed in

unbroken majesty from age to age unless guided by unerring and infallible

justice?

  All the physical laws with which men are acquainted never vary in theiroperations. Given the same cause, there will always be the same effect. All

the spiritual laws with which men are acquainted have, and must have, the

same infallibility in their operations. Given the same thought or deed in a life

circumstance,  and  the  result  will  always  be  the  same.  Without  this

fundamental ethical justice there could be no human society, for it is the just

reactions of the deeds of individuals which prevents society from tottering to

its fall.

  It thus follows that the inequalities of life, as regards the distribution of

happiness and suffering, are the outworking of moral forces operating along

lines  of  flawless  accuracy,  this  perfect  law,  is  the  one  great  fundamental

certainty in life, the finding of which ensures a man’s perfection, makes him

wise and enlightened, and fills him with rejoicing and peace.

  Take away a belief in this certainty from a man’s consciousness, and he is

adrift on a self-created ocean of chance, without rudder, chart, or compass.

He has no ground on which to build a character or life, no incentive for noble

deeds, no center for moral action; he has no island of peace and no harbour of

refuge. Even the crudest idea of God as of a great man whose mind is perfect,

who cannot err, and who has "no, variables nor shadow of turning," is a

popular expression of a belief in this basic principle of Divine Justice.

    According  to  this  principle  there  is  neither  favour  nor  change,  but

unerring and unchangeable right. Thus all the sufferings of men are right as

effects, their causes being the mistakes of ignorance; but as effects they will

pass away. Man cannot suffer for something which he has never done, or

never left undone for this would be an effect without a cause.

  Man suffers through and himself. Where the effect is there is the cause.

Its seat is within, not without. The things which men are reaping to-day are of

the same kind which they formerly sowed. The good man of to-day may be

reaping the results of past evil; the bad man of to-day may be reaping the

results of past good. Seen thus, this divine principle throws an illuminating

light on those cases (common enough) where the good suffer and fail, and the

bad  enjoy  and  prosper.  Things  as  they  are  did  not  spring  into  existence

without a cause. They have behind them a long train of causes and effects,

and another such train will follow them in the future. In viewing the objects

in a landscape we allow for perspective; we must do the same in viewing

events.  This principle of Divine Justice is not distinct from Divine Law. It is the

same.  Partial  men  separate  justice  from  love,  and  even  regard  them  as

antagonistic, but in the divine life they blend into one.

  Nothing can transcend right. Nothing can be more loving than that we

should  experience  the  sequences  of  ignorance  and  error,  and  so  become

"perfected through suffering." In this Divine Love, which never alters, never

errs, never passes over a single deed, we have a sure rock of salvation, for

that  which  could  shift  and  change  could  afford  no  foothold.  Only  in  the

unchangeable,  the  eternally  true,  is  there  permanent  peace  and  safety.

Resorting to this divine principle, abandoning all evil, and cling to good, we

come to a knowledge and realization of that basis of certainty on which we

can firmly stand through all life’s changes; we have found the rock of ages

and the refuge of the saints.

  JAMES ALLEN

    "BRYNGOLEU,"

    ILFRACOMBE.                      1. MEN AND SYSTEMS


        THEIR CORRELATIONS AND COMBINED


                                    RESULTS


  THERE  is  to-day  a  widespread  revolt  against  those  modes  of  human

activity  designated  "Systems,"  and  these  systems  are  almost  invariably

referred  to  as  something  distinct  from,  and  yet  directing,  controlling,  or

tyrannizing over, humanity itself. Thus the leaders in the revolt referred to

speak  of  the  "commercial  system",  the  "social  system",  the  "competitive

system,"  the  "political  system,"  and  so  on;  and  the  particular  system

condemned is made responsible for-made the cause of -certain widespread

evils,  such  as  poverty,  vice,  &c.,  as  though  "systems"  were  some  sort  of

discarnate  and  gigantic  despots,  enslaving  and  crushing  an  innocent  and

unwilling humanity.

  Such an arbitrary and external form of system has no existence; it is a

delusion. Human systems cannot be separated from human desires and needs;

they are, indeed, the visible outworking of those desires and needs. A system

is  none  other  than  the  combined  and  concerted  mode  of  action  of  the

community; it signifies a tacit agreement on the part of all, or nearly all, that

things should be so and so; it is a method in which human kind agree to act.

And as men act, so systems appear; as they cease to act, so they disappear.

  And let it be understood that such agreement to act has no reference to, or

bearing upon, a man’s attitude towards a system-whether for or against- but

depends upon his actions. A man may violently condemn a system with his

lips, yet show that he is in agreement with it in his heart by the fact that he

continues to act in accordance with it, to follow it out in his daily life. We are

all aware of that form of religious hypocrisy (nearly always unconscious) that

continues to commit the sin which it violently denounces; thus showing, in

practice,  a  fundamental  agreement  with  that  which,  superficially  and  ion

theory,  is  opposed.  And  this  form  of  unconscious  inconsistency  is  not

confined to religion; it is a pronounced factor in all moral activities, and isnowhere more strongly in evidence than in those directions where the reform

of  "existing  systems"  is,  theoretically  at  any  rate,  the  primary  aim.  Thus,

when  i  have  asked  some  socialists,  who  condemn  the  present  capitalist

system  as  a  system  of  getting  rich  on  the  labour  of  the  poor,  why  they

themselves life on dividends- that is, on the fruits of other men’s labour, thus

propagating every day that which they denounce as an evil-the reply almost

invariably  has  been,  "You  should  blame  the  system,  not  me."  This  reply

shows  that  such  people  regard  themselves  as  the  helpless  victims  of  a

tyrannical  something  which  exists  external  to,  and  independent  of,

themselves and their actions, and which they call a "system." But a little

reflection will show that which they denounce as the "system" is none other

than the viewing as evil certain actions in others which they regard as good in

themselves.

    Human systems are human modes of action which are dependent for their

continuance on a fundamental tacit agreement among men to continue to act

in the same way; and such agreement implies that those who continue to

enact  any  particular  system  must  be  prepared  to  meet  and  to  accept  its

disadvantages as well as its advantages; for in the struggle for advantage

there must always be the corresponding disadvantage; in the battle of human

interests there must always be both victory and defeat.

  Viewed in this light, the term "innocent victims of the system," so much

in vogue, is seen to be shallow and delusive. There are no innocent victims of

a system in which all engage either in the letter or the spirit; if guilt there be,

then  all  are  guilty,  and  the  innocence  is  superficial  and  apparent,  not

fundamental and real. In reality, however, there is neither innocence nor guild

attached to a human system which has evolved through long processes of

struggle and time. There is merely the victory and happiness on the one hand,

and the defeat and misery on the other; and the defeated are not the innocent,

nor the victorious the guilty, for both these conditions in social life are the

just effects of men’s actions, as victory and defeat attach to a battle or a race.

  To make this more plain, let us take a simple illustration. Here are ten

men who mutually agree to engage, among themselves, in certain forms of

gambling. Now, the object of each of these men is to win, and so increase his

wealth, yet they all know that there is also the possibility of losing; know,

indeed, that some must lose, for such is the unavoidable hazard of the game.Immediately these men commence to act, by laying down their stakes, they

have created a system which might be called "the gambling system," and the

advantages and disadvantages of such a system soon become apparent. There

is  ceaseless  fluctuation  of  their  combined  wealth-some  winning  and

becoming  rich,  and  then  again  losing  and  becoming  poor;  but  ultimately

some lose all they possess and have to retire defeated, while others acquire

the losers’ part and become rich on their gains.

  Now, it cannot be said of the winners that they are guilty of exploiting

and crushing down the losers; nor can it be said of the losers that they are the

innocent victims of the system of gambling in which they are engaged. In the

mental attitude and actions of these ten men there is neither innocence nor

guilt,  but  a  mutual  engagement  in  a  method,  with  its  inevitable  results,

namely, the reaping of its advantages on the one hand, the suffering from its

disadvantages on the other.

  In  like  manner,  of  the  various  systems  in  which  men  have  involved

themselves, there are no innocent victims, no guilty tyrants. Victims there

are, if men choose to apply that term to the defeated, or to those who, for the

time being, are suffering loss; but they are the victims of their own deeds, and

not of an overruling and compelling injustice outside themselves. Of the ten

men who engage in gambling, none are victimized, none can possibly be

victimized, but themselves. Those outside the system- that is, those who do

not encourage and propagate it by their acts- remain untouched, uninjured by

it. So if our present commercial system should be a "system of greed," as

many social reformers style it, then not by any possibility whatever could any

but the greedy be injured by it.

    Doubtless there is much greed in the world, for in its present stage of

evolution  humanity  is  learning  its  lessons  largely  along  selfish  paths;  but

greed can never have any existence in external "system," it can only exist in

human hearts; nor can greed injure any but the greedy. Commercialism is free

from greed in the hands of those who have destroyed greed in themselves.

But they who are greedily will taint everything-even religion-with their own

impure condition.

    Industrialism,  the  outworking  of  a  nation’s  energies  and  abilities,  is

wholesome and noble; it is covetousness which produces woe, and the sole

sufferers from covetousness are the covetous themselves.  I will here anticipate the common query, "What of the innocent victims of

the rapacious company promoter?" by replying (and this reply will be found

adaptable to all human conditions and systems) they are not innocent, but

have  the  same  attitude  of  mind  as  the  unscrupulous  company  promoter,

namely, the desire to obtain money, and as much of its as possible, without

labouring for it. The company promoter is the instrument through whom they

reap  the  results  of  their  own  greed,  and  fall  victims  to  their  own

covetousness.

  Social  reformers  may  denounce  the  system  of  "capitalism"  or

"commercialism", but so long as they themselves continue to enact that side

of  commercialism  which  is  most  akin  to  covetousness,  namely,  its

speculative as distinguished from its industrial side, by keeping a keen eye to

"good investments," and following up increased "dividends" with avidity, just

so ling will that which they call "a system of greed" (and indeed to them it is

such) continue.

  Those who are striving to life by speculation, on the fruits of another’s

labours or who have the spirit to do should the opportunity arise (and the

number  of  those  who  are  anxious  to  acquire  money  without  giving  its

equivalent  is  very  large),  should  not  bemoan  the  existence  of  want  and

poverty, but should perceive and receive such conditions as the inevitable

disadvantages of the method which they are acting out, as luxury and riches

are its advantages.

  The hope of one day becoming suddenly rich without working for it, and

living ever after a life of unbroken ease, is a common chimera among the

poor.  While  covetousness  continues  to  sway  the  human  mind,  want  and

poverty will continue.

  Men desire, and then they act, and they combined acts constitute what

men call "systems". The ten gamblers desired to increase their wealth without

labouring for it, and at each other’s loss, and they acted accordingly. Their

combined  actions  constituted  the  system  with  its  combination  of  results.

Systems  are,  therefore,  deeds-  combined  and  reciprocal  of  a  number  of

individuals;  and  the  so-called  evils  in  the  world  which  men  attribute  to

systems as distinguished from men are the reactions upon individuals of their

own deeds.

  A system cannot be "unjust," because men inevitably reap the just effectsof their own deeds. The evils which prevail in the world are indications of

justice, not injustice. Poverty and want are the natural disadvantages of the

present social life, or system- that is, of the way in which men agree to act.

There is suffering, but there is not injustice. It could not be said of those

among the ten gamblers who were reduced to poverty that they were treated

unjustly by the winners, or that they were the innocent victims of the system

of gambling. Their lot was just; their poverty being the, inevitable result of

their own actions.

  Recently a socialist friend of mine was somewhat violently condemning

landlords and landlords, and i pulled him up by saying," But why do you

condemn landlords, seeing that you are one yourself? Have you not, only a

few  weeks  ago,  added  another  piece  of  land  to  that  which  you  already

possessed?"  He  replied,  "It’s  the  system,  not  me.  So  long  as  the  present

system lasts I shall have to work with it; but when it is altered, i shall be

willing to give up my land."

  If a gambler of were continually condemning the "system" of gambling as

a bad one, and yet continued to gamble, we should justly say that he was

confused both in his morals and perceptions; and he is equally confused who,

while  condemning  any  other  system,  social,  political,  or  whatsoever,  yet

continues to act it out. Such a man does not, in his heart, regard the system as

bad, but as good and just; this is evidenced by the fact that he continues to

propagate it by his actions.

    Systems are to men as light to the sun, rain to the clouds, or thoughts to

the  mind.  They  are  both  men  and  the  deeds  of  men.  To  regard  them  as

separate  from  men  is  confusion  of  thought  and  principle.  Nor  can  there

possibly be any injustice in their outworking, for the reaction of ignorant

deeds is certain; the recompense of enlightened deeds is sure.

  I see no evil in systems; i see evil in ignorance and wrong-doing. All

systems are legitimate, for men have liberty to act in their own way. The ten

gamblers  who  mutually  agree  to  enrich  and  impoverish  each  other  have

nobody to blame but themselves; and if the winners are satisfied with their

gains, the losers should be equally satisfied with their losses; if they are not,

then they should look to themselves and remedy their deeds. Their poverty is

good discipline, in that it is driving them to seek a better way of action.

  If a man regards a system as bad, he should withdraw from it in practice,and should bend his actions in another direction; for immediately two men

act in concert a system is formed, and the good and the bad which lurk in

their actions will soon be manifested in the system which they have launched

forth.

  In the life of humanity, in systems, in what are called good and bad, are

visible the outworking of the combined results of men’s deeds; and in all,

through all, and over all, justice reigns eternally triumphant.      2. WORK, WAGES, AND WELL-BEING


    ACTIVITY is a necessity of existence, and usefulness is the object of

being. Nature at once cuts off that which has become useless. Her economy is

faultless, and she will not be burdened with things which have ceased to be of

service in her progressive workshop. Nor does she allow her handy tools to

lie unused, nor her bright things to rust. Where so ever there is ability, there

also  are  scope  and  opportunity;  where  there  is  energy,  there  also  are

legitimate channels for its exercise; where there is a soaring mind, the means

of achievement are ready to hand. As the field waits for the plough, the sea

for the ship-, and the port for produce, so Nature in all her departments,

whether material or mental, stands ready to co-operate with man in all his

labours,  and  to  reward  him  according  to  his  diligence  and  industry.  The

statement, "There is no scope for my abilities," is either an expression of

vanity, an excuse for negligence, or a confession of lack of resource, or of

inability to utilize opportunity. Ability need never lie unused for a moment.

There is unlimited scope for all abilities. All that is required is the capacity

for work.

  Of all abilities, the capacity for work is the most useful and necessary,

and its possession is a glorious power; and this men discover when they are

disabled,  or  stricken  down  with  sickness.  When  they  are  thus  forcibly

prevented  from  engaging  in  wholesome,  invigorating  labour,  what  would

they not give to have once again the spirited and glowing use of brain or

muscle, or to spend exuberant strength in healthful exertion?

  Work is of two kinds- it is either loving labour or enforced slavery. The

man whose sole object is to get through his work in order to draw his pay,

who has no love for, and no interest in his work, beyond what it represents in

cash, is a slave and not a true worker. He labours only under the compulsion

of necessity. His entire interest is in getting instead of in doing. He gives his

labour  irk  somely  and  perfunctorily,  but  receives  his  pay  with  eagerness,

striving, when he things he safely can, to give less and less labour, and get

more and more wages. "Less work and more pay," is the cry of slaves, and

not of men.  On the contrary, the man whose heart is centered in his work, who aims at

the perfect performance of his duty, is a true worker whose usefulness and

influence are cumulative and progressive, carrying him on from success to

greater and greater success, from low spheres of labour to higher and higher

still. Thinking little or nothing of the wages, and much of reward, but eager

and willing in service, he is sealed by Nature as one of her chosen sons, fitted

by virtue of his unselfish labours to receive the greater excellence and fuller

reward.

  For while full recompense may, and frequently does, escape the man who

covetously seeks it, it cannot be withheld from him who ignores it in his

work. For the true recompense is never withheld, but in the selfish desire to

secure the recompense without giving its equivalent, disappointment is the

pay received, and the expected reward does not appear.

  The wages of work are sure. In the universal economy no man is cheated;

he  cannot  be  defrauded  of  his  just  earnings,  for  every  effort  receives  its

proportionate result; first work as the cause, and then wages as the effect. But

while wages is the result, it is not the end; it is only a means to a still greater

and more far-reaching result and end, namely, the progress and increased

happiness both of the individual and the race-in word, to wellbeing.

  The receiving of so much money for work done does not represent wages

in its entirety; it is, indeed, only a small portion of the actual wages of true

work; while the man who considers that the end of work is reached when he

has received the money due receives all he bargains for, he does not derive

complete satisfaction from his labours, nor comprehend or enter the higher

spheres of knowledge and usefulness which are reserved for the devotes of

unselfish duty.

  It is a day of definitely marked progress in the life of a man when, by the

illumination of spirit which proceeds from the development of higher sense

of duty, he passes from the burdensome sphere of slavery to the happy world

of work; when he leaves behind him the grasping and bartering, the drudgery

and  humiliation,  and,  accepting  his  place  among  his  fellows,  becomes  a

cheerful co-operator with humanity, and a willing and happy instrument in

the economy of things.

  Such a man receives the completion of wages in its sevenfold fullness as

follows:  1. Money

  2. Usefulness.

  3. Excellence.

  4. Power

  5. Independence

  6. Honour

  7. Happiness

  First, he receives the full amount of money of which his work is the

equivalent; but in addition to this, his usefulness to the world is increased,

and  continues  to  increase  in  an  ever  ascending  degree;  and  this  greater

usefulness is one of the pure delights of labour, for one of the chief rewards

of use is to be of greater use. To the slave, idleness is coveted as the reward

of labour; but the worker rejoices in more work still.

  This accumulating usefulness leads to the wages of excellence-skill, a

growing perfection in the work undertaken; and every child that has learned

its  lesson,  and  every  man  and  woman  that  has  mastered  a  problem  or  a

language, or surmounted a great difficulty, is acquainted with the happiness

which is the sure accompaniment of such success, although not until later do

they realize the full significance of all that is involved in such success in

relation to their career.

  For a point of excellence is at last reached which merges into power-

knowledge, mastery. The man who is devoted to his work becomes at last a

master in that work, whatever it may be. He becomes a teacher, a guide, and

instructor to others who are treading the lower levels of the path up which he

has climbed. He is sought out by others for the knowledge which he has

acquired through practice and experience. He is relied upon, and takes his

proper place amongst those who lead and serve mankind. Power is a form of

wages received as the result of long and arduous labour. It is received only by

him who has built it up, so to speak, unselfish toil leads to the reaping of

power.

    Associated with power is independence. The true worker takes his place

among his fellows as a useful citizen. The fearless flash of honesty is in his

eyes, the ring of worth is in his voice, and the steadfastness of self-reliance is

in his gait. He is not a drone in the human hive, but stands out in shiningcontrast to the skulking shirker who imagines that the highest good in life is

to get something without working for it. The slave who goes to his hated

work only because he is whipped to it by necessity comes down to beggary

and shame, and is despised and neglected; but the true worker ascends into

independence and honour, and is admired and sought.

  Honour-  This  is  one  of  the  higher  forms  of  wages,  and  it  comes

unerringly and unsought to all who are energetic and faithful in the work of

their life. It may be, and often is, late in coming, but come it must and does,

and always at its own proper time; for while money is the first and smallest

item in wages, honour is one of the last and greatest; and the greater the

honour, the longer and harder is the course of labour by which it is earned.

There are degrees of honour according to the measure of usefulness, and the

greatest men receive the greatest honour.

  They who receive the fullness of wages, receive the fullness of happiness,

for  true  work  as  surely  brings  about  happiness  as  idleness  and  enforced

labour are paid in the coin of unhappiness. From the perfection of happiness

proceeds well-being -a quiet conscience, a satisfied heart, a tranquil mind,

and the consciousness of having increased the happiness and aided in the

progress of mankind through the full and faithful exercise of one’s abilities.

  First work, and then wages; but well-being only follows when the work is

of the true kind, when it is loved for its own sake, and when the money

received for such work is utilized for further work and better achievement

instead of being squandered in folly and self-indulgence. Even he who only

works for the pay in coin will derive just the measure of well-being which

that pay can purchase if he spends it carefully, and will thus aid, in a small

measure, industrial progress; but he can also, by a foolish use of his wages,

make it an instrument of ill-being, and reduce himself to a dead and useless

limb on the tree of life.

  It  is  demanded  by  the  law  of  things  that  every  man  shall  receive  the

equivalent of what he gives. If he gives idleness, he receives inactivity- death;

if gives stinted and unwilling service, he receives stinted and hardly secured

pay; if he gives loving and generous labour, he recipes generous recompense

in a life replete with blessedness.

  It may here be asked, "But what about the toiling masses? What you say

may be, and doubtless is, true of certain favoured individuals, but how can itapply to the vast army of millworks and factory hands, whose toil is long and

hard and almost purely mechanical?"

  It applies with equal force to them. There are no favoured individuals;

and there was a time when those who now occupy the high places stood in

the low. There is no reason why the mill-worker should not be unselfish in

his labour and faithful and conscientious in duty; and there is every reason

why he should economize his entire financial, physical, and mental resources,

using his money for the improvement of his home and surroundings, and his

evenings and spare time in the culture of his intellectual and moral powers.

He will thus be preparing himself for higher spheres of usefulness and power,

which will not be withheld from him when he is sufficiently equipped and

strengthened to deal with intricate matters and carry weighty responsibilities;

while  the  process  of  preparation  itself  will  be  one  of  ever-increasing

knowledge, strength, and happiness.

  Work, wages, and well-being are three broad stages in individual and

racial evolution; and the political economy of the future will take into account

those higher mental and spiritual forms of wages which it now ignores, but

which  are  still  the  most  powerful  factors  in  the  well-being  of  men  and

nations.

  Well indeed will it be for that nation which is the first to realize and

wisely utilize the fact that its prosperity and happiness are not limited to its

material  resources,  but  that  in  the  mental  and  spiritual  material  of  its

inhabitants it possesses inexhaustible mines of living resources which, when

worked with the tools of suitably evolved educational methods, will afford

rich yields of prosperity and peace; that the surest and swiftest way to even

material success as well as to all the higher and nobler successes is by the

assiduous cultivation of character.    3. THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST AS A


                                DIVINE LAW


    NATURE and Spirit were at one time universally considered to be at

enmity, and even to-day the majority of people regard them as opposed to

each other; but a fuller knowledge of the Cosmos reveals the sublime fact that

the natural and the spiritual are two aspects of One Eternal Truth.

  Nature is the Spirit made visible and tangible. The seen is the expressed

form and letter of the unseen. We search in trackless deserts of speculation to

find the Real, while all the time it stands before us. The return from those

weary and fruitless wanderings to Truth is a coming back to the simple and

obvious; but whereas we went out with sealed eyes, we come back with them

unsealed; we look upon Nature with a vision clarified from ignorance and

egotism,  and  lo!  the  unclean  has  become  clean,  the  mortal  has  become

immortal, the natural is seen to be also the spiritual. Thus, when the physical

scientist reveals a natural law, he, at the same time, makes known to the

understanding mind- whether he himself knows it or not- a spiritual law. The

whole universe is spiritual, and every physical law is the letter of a moral

principle.  When  the  moral  nature  of  the  Cosmos  is  apprehended,  all

controversies about matter and spirit- as things opposed are at an end, and the

assiduous worker in physical realms-often spoken of contemptuously as a

"materialist"-  is  seen  to  be  a  revealer,  as  well  as  the  worker  in  spiritual

realms, the two phases of the universe being, as we have pointed out, but two

arcs of one perfect whole.

  When Charles Darwin made known the law of "the survival of the fittest,"

he revealed the working of Divine Justice in Nature. The almost universal

prejudice  and  passionate  opposition  among  religious  people  which  the

announcement of his discovery aroused was based, not on the fact itself, but

upon a total misunderstanding of that law. That opposition has to-day nearly

died out; but even yet one frequently hears this law referred to as a "cruel

law", and the belief in it denounced as tending to destroy pity and love.

  Such people always think of this law as "the survival of the cruelest," or"the survival of the strongest," and here is where the misunderstanding arises.

The correct term, "The Survival of the Fittest," must not be lost sight of; for

the fittest are never the cruelest, and rarely the strongest. The strongest and

curliest  creatures  have  long  since  passed  away,  and  have  given  place  to

weaker, but more intelligent, creatures and beings. Think of the numberless

insects, and of the many powerful enemies which beset them on every hand.

Yet these wonderful and beautiful creatures continue to flourish, and they

owe their continuance to their intelligence, which is greater, better and more

fitted to survive than the strength and cruelty of their enemies. For what is the

survival of the fittest but the survival of the best? In a world of continual

progress it must needs be that the best of every period takes precedence of the

worst-the  good  of  the  bad,  the  fit  of  the  unfit.  This,  indeed,  is  the  very

meaning  of  progress.  When  we  think  of  progress,  we  at  once  think  of

something, by its superiority- its greater fitness to the time and occasion-

taking precedence f something which is inferior and has fallen out of the line

of  advancement;  and  this  progress,  this  advancement,  this  survival  of  the

fittest, resolves itself into a moral principle, into a Divine Law.

  Opponents of this teaching tacitly assume that the most selfish are the

fittest to survive, and they thereupon condemn the teaching as callous, and

accuse Darwin of making selfishness supreme. But the error is theirs, and not

Darwin’s or the law’s. In their prejudice they wrest his meaning to a false

issue,  and  attack  that.  Their  error  consists  in  assuming  that  the  fittest  to

survive are the most selfish; whereas such are the worst specimens, and not

the best. When we realize that the unselfish are more fitted to survive than the

selfish,  this  law  assumes  an  aspect  the  very  opposite  from  that  which  its

opponents  have  given  it,  and  we  at  once  see  that  in  it  are  involved  the

profoundest moral principles, namely, the principles of Justice and Love.

    Remembering that it is the fittest that survive, what, then-in this universe

of law and order-constitutes the fittest? It is evident that the fittest are the

most advanced specimens of any given species. Not the strongest, not the

cruelest, not the most selfish, not even the finest physically; but the most

advanced, those most in line with the order of evolution.

  The fittest at one period are not the fittest at another. There was a time

when brute force was dominant; but that was when nothing higher had been

evolved. Yet even in that long distant period-ten million years back, whengigantic monsters held sway upon the earthy-something higher was being

evolved.  Already  intelligence,  yea,  and  unselfish  love,  were  beginning  to

make themselves felt, for those great beasts loved and protected their young;

and so all who most unselfishly shield their offspring, be they beasts or men,

will  be  most  protected  while,  obviously,  any  species  that  neglected  its

offspring would rapidly perish. Thus, long, long ages ago, the fragile babe of

intelligence was born in the manager of brute force, and since then, through

all the ages of struggle, it has been gradually but surely overcoming the brutal

strength  and  terror;  so  that  to-day  intelligence  has  conquered,  or  almost

conquered, for the strongest brutes have passed away for ever, having given

place to beings physically weaker and smaller, but better, and more morally

perfect.

  Without the operation of such a law man could never have come into

existence; for man is, up to the present, the crown and summit of a process of

struggle, selection, and progress which began many millions of years ago

when the first of life appeared upon the earth. Man is the product of the law

of  the  survival  of  the  fittest  operating  through  millions  of  years,  perhaps

millions of ages; yet in brute strength he is far inferior to many animals. He

rules the earth to-day because of the principle of intelligence within him. But

there is being evolved in man a higher principle than intelligence, namely,

Divine Love, which is as much higher and more powerful than intelligence as

intelligence is higher and more powerful than brute force. I use the term

"Divine Love" in order to distinguish it from human affection, and from that

intermittent kindly impulse, which are both spoken of as Love. Intelligence

may aid selfishness, but not so Love; in Love all selfishness is swallowed up

and brute force is no more, both being transmuted into gentleness.

  The beginnings of the Divine Love are already in the world. We see its

wonderful operation in the few men in whom it has been perfected, namely,

the Great Spiritual Teachers who, by their precepts and the example of their

lives, rule the world to-day; and selfish men worship them as God. We see in

these men the prophecy of what Love will do in the distant future, when a

large number of men possess it in an advanced degree; how selfishness and

selfish men will submit to it and be governed by it, as the brutes now submit

to  man’s  intelligence  and  are  ruled  by  it.  And  this  Love  is  making  its

appearance not only in the Great Teachers, but in men less evolved; andthough in these it is, as yet, in a more or less rudimentary form, nevertheless

the stirrings of its gentleness and joy are being felt in many human hearts.

  A common argument against the survival of the fittest is that were men to

put  it  into  practice  they  would  kill  off  all  their  weakling  and  invalids,

preserving  only  the  strong,  and  thus  destroying  all  pity  and  love  and

humanity. This argument is a demonstration of the error to which we have

already referred. It is ludicrously self-contradictory, for, while it admits that

the best elements are pity and love and humanity, it asserts that these would

perish if the fittest, or best survived. And here we are at the heart of the whole

matter.  The  best  does  survive,  and,  therefore,  pity,  compassion,  and  love

cannot be overthrown by selfishness is for every annihilated.

    Speaking of human beings, it is plain that the fittest to survive are not the

selfish and the cruel, but those who have developed the finest characteristics

of kindness, compassion, justice, and love- in a word, the most moral, the

purest, and wisest.

  To  talk  about  putting  this  law  "into  practice"  shows  ignorance  of  its

nature; for it is independent in its operation, and is always in activity, and all

men and creatures obey it; and should ever a race of men, under them is taken

notion that they were practicing it, do it such violence as to "kill off their

weaklings and invalids," the law would not cease to operate in their case, and

they, by virtue of that very law, would soon exterminate themselves.

  With the ceaseless march of human progress, cruelty is becoming less and

less fitted to survive against the growing intelligence and gentleness. The

cruel  races  have  nearly  all  died  out,  only  disorganized  remnants  of  them

remaining. The fierce animals of prey are becoming fewer, and brutal men

are  now  regarded  as  a  menace  to  society.  Gradually  and  inevitably,  also,

selfish and aggressive men will come to have less and less power in the

world, will become more out of harmony with the growing environment of

peace and goodwill, till at last they will pass away from the earth altogether,

as the gigantic brutes have passed away, no longer fitted to survive in a world

conquered by Love, in which righteousness and truth become triumphant.

  Thus this law, as represented by Darwin, is the aspect, in Nature, of the

operation of Justice, or Love; for in the Light of Truth, Justice and Love are

seen to be one. The spiritual aspect of the law was intimately known by all

the Great Teachers, and men have overlooked the fact that these Teachersembodied it in their teaching. Thus the precept of Jesus, "The meek shall

inherit the earth," is none other than a simple but Divine statement of the

survival of the fittest.                          4. JUSTICE IN EVIL


  TO-DAY we frequently meet with the assertion, "All is good." Pope, in

his famous easy on man, said:

    "Whatever is, is right"

  and nearly all are familiar with Browing’s oft-quoted line:

  "God’s in His heaven, all’s right with the world."

  In the face of these statements, the questions naturally arise: Are war and

famine  good?  Are  sickness  and  poverty  good?  Are  sorrow  and  suffering

good? These things belong to the category of the great facts of human life;

are they good? Again, are sin and selfishness right? Are drunkenness and

brutality right? Are crime and violence right? Are accidents by sea and land

right? Are catastrophes involving hundreds of thousands of lives right? These

things,  like  the  former,  are  everyday  facts.  They  are  real,  and  cause

widespread suffering; are they right?

  Many  persons  must  have  questioned  thus  during  the  past  years  of

unprecedented catastrophes in the form of volcanic eruptions, earthy quakes,

floods, famines, wars, and various forms of crimes and violence.

  Are these things right? If so, why are men so eager to escape them? Even

those  who  are  given  to  quoting,  "Whatever  is,  is  right,"  will,  in  the  next

breath, refer to certain "evils," and propose some method of being rid of

them.

  It is plain that, in the sense of adding to human happiness, these things are

not  right,  for  they  conduce  to  human  misery.  Even  those  who  deny  the

existence of evil in theory recognize it in practice, in their efforts to conquer

it.

    Nevertheless, those statements as to the Universal Good and the rightness

of all things are true. It is all a matter of relativity. The recognition of evil,

and the statement that all is good, are not contradictory. When the events of

life are related to human happiness, then some are recognized as "good," and

some as "evil"; but when they are related to the fundamental and eternal

principle of Justice, then all things are seen to be good, right, in harmonywith the Great Law of inviolable Equity.

  Take a simple example-that of physical pain. When we are considering

human happiness, bodily pain is an evil; but when we consider the principle

of Life itself, and its protection and continuance, then physical pain is seen to

be good, as it is a warning. Monitor urging man to the protection of his body

from hurt and extinction.

  And  it  is  with  mental  pain  as  with  physical-with  sorrow,  remorse,

loneliness, and grief it is evil because it destroys happiness; but as the effect

of ignorance and wrong-doing, it is just, and therefore good, as it urges men

to seek the paths of wisdom and right doing.

  The prophet Isaiah says:

  "I form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil: I the

Lord do all these things."

  He thus recognizes the justice of evil, that it has its place in the moral

universe as the opposite of good, just as darkness has its place in the physical

universe as the opposite of light.

  The prophet Amos expresses the same thing when he says:

  "Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord hat not done it?"

  The writings of the Hebrew prophets in the Old Testament teem with

statement of the truth that evil is rooted in justice, not in injustice; that all the

afflictions and calamities which overtake men spring from some violation, on

man’s part, of the moral law. So pronounced are they upon this point that

they even attribute the suffering caused by purely external occurrences - such

as floods, storms, earthquakes, drought, and dearth of food-to man’s inward

unrighteousness and his consequent departure from the Divine Order.

  And,  indeed,  a  profound  acquaintance  with  the  human  heart  and  with

human life does reveal the great truth-a truth never apparent on the surface,

and therefore hidden from the shallow and unthinking-that all tragedy is the

culminating  point  in  the  conflict  of  human  passions.  Where  there  are  no

violent passions there can be no tragedy, no disaster, no catastrophe. When

humanity has attained to inward harmony and peace, it will be free from all

those  forms  of  violence  which  now  devastate  the  world,  and  scourge

humankind with grief and lamentation.

    Maeterlinck perceives this truth clearly, for in his Wisdom and Destiny hesays:

    "Fatality shrinks back abashed from the soul that has more than once

conquered her; there are certain disasters she dare not send forth when this

soul is near.

  "The mere presence of the sage suffices to paralyze destiny; and of this

we find proof in the fact that there exists scarce a drama wherein a true sage

appears; when such is the case, the event must needs halt before reaching

bloodshed and tears. Not only is there no drama wherein sage is in conflict

with sage, but indeed there are very few whose action revolves round a sage.

And truly; can we imagine that an event shall turn into tragedy between men

who have earnestly striven to gain knowledge of self? It is rarely indeed that

though it be for an instant. They are afraid of a lofty soul, for they know that

events are no less afraid; and were there heroes to soar to the height the real

hero would gain, their weapons would fall to the ground, and the drama itself

become peace - the peace of enlightenment."

  It is a significant fact that while Shakespeare depicted nearly every type

of character, he never brought a sage into his dramas. The truth is that his

tragedies could not have taken place in the presence of a sage. Their outward

violence  stands  related  as  effect  to  the  hidden  cause  of  disordered  and

conflicting passions. The sage has lifted himself above such disorder and

conflict, and such is the power of his harmonious and tranquil spirit that in

his presence the passions of others will be calmed and subdued, and their

approaching tragic issue averted.

  It is a mighty truth, and one which stands clearly revealed in the mind of

the  sage  and  the  prophet,  that  all  the  evils  of  humanity  spring  from  the

ignorance, and, therefore, from the mistakes, the wrong-doing, of humanity

itself.  It  is,  therefore,  just  and  right.  But  though  just  and  right,  it  is  not

desirable;  it  is  evil,  and  needs  to  be  transcended.  It  is  just  and  right,  as

imprisonment  is  just  and  right  for  the  thief,  in  that  it  teaches  man,  and

ultimately brings him to the feet of wisdom. As physical pain is a protector of

man’s body, so mental pain is a protector of his mind and of his life.

  From  man’s  ignorance  of  the  Divine  Law-of  the  Moral  Order  of  the

universe-arise those thoughts and passions-inward conditions-which are the

source  of  tragedy,  disaster,  catastrophe.  Envy,  ill-will,  jealousy,  produce

strife and quarrelling, and ultimately bring about wars in which thousands arekilled  and  disabled,  and  hundreds  of  homes  are  filled  with  mourning.

Greediness, self-indulgence, and the thirst for pleasure lead, through gluttony,

indolence, and drunkenness, to disease, poverty, and plague. Covetousness,

lust, and selfishness in all its forms cause men to practice deception, lying,

and dishonesty, and to strive against others in the blind pursuance of their

petty  plans  and  pleasures,  thus  leading  to  deprivation,  loss  and  ruin;  and

where there are excessively violent passions there is always a violent life

ending in a premature and violent death.

  Man,  by  his  ignorance,  his  selfishness,  his  darkness  of  mind,  is  the

marker of sorrow and the cause of catastrophe. His sufferings are indications

that the Divine Law has been arrested, and is now asserting itself. The tragic

darkness of his life is the outcome of that same Justice from which his joyful

light proceeds. If every suicide, every ruin, every woe, even every accident,

could be traced to its original cause in the moral constitution of things, its

justice would be found to be without blemish.

  And that which applies to individuals applies in the same way to nations.

Widespread  selfishness  leads  inevitably  to  widespread  disaster;  national

corruption is followed by wholesale catastrophe, and by national disaster and

ruin.

  And  not  alone  poverty,  disease,  and  famine,  but  even  earthquakes,

volcanic eruptions, floods and all such external happenings, would be found,

in  their  original  cause,  to  be  intimately  related  to  men’s  moral  life.  That

external accidents have a moral cause is plainly seen in the case of violent

persons  bringing  about  fatal  accidents  to  themselves  through  folly  and

recklessness.

  Man’s body, both by chemical and gravitational affinity, is a portion of

the earth, as his mind, both spiritually and ethically, is a portion of the Moral

Order  of  the  universe.  His  life  and  being  are  interwoven  with,  and  are

inseparable from; the very nature and constitution of things; and, being a

moral entity, and therefore a reasonable agent, it is within the domain of his

power to discover and work with the Divine Law instead of striving against

it.

  All man’s pains, afflictions, disasters, calamities, are the shock resulting

from  running,  either  percipiently  or  blindly,  giants  the  Moral  Law,  as  a

reckless rider or blind man is hurt when he runs up against a wall; and thesesorrows  are  not  the  arbitrary  visitations  and  punishments  of  an  offended

Deity, but are matters of cause and effect, just as the pain of burning is the

effect of coming into too close contact with fire.

  In these days of social, political, and theological conflicts, and with wars,

famines,  floods,  crimes,  conflagrations,  and  volcanic  and  seismic

catastrophes taking place on every hand, a return to the study of the Hebrew

prophets burning, as they are, with the fire of Truth on national matters and

local  catastrophes-would  prove  not  only  scientifically  enlightening,  but

would  help  considerably  towards  unveiling,  in  the  mind  of  man,  the

revelation of the beauty and order of the Cosmos and the perfect justice of

human life.

  The evils of life are right because of the cause which man has created; but

man, having created causes which produce evil, can also create causes which

produce  good,  and  when  in  inward  passions  are  tamed  and  subdued,  the

outward violence will disappear, or will be powerless to hurt mankind.

    Between  the  inward  violence  of  surging  passions  and  the  outward

violence of Nature there is such a close correspondence as to render them, in

the inner order of things, of one indivisible essence. As the prophet Amos

again puts it:

  "For they know not to do right, faith the Lord, who store up violence and

robbery in their places. Therefore thus faith the Lord God: An adversary there

shall be even round about the land; and he shall bring down they strength

from thee, and thy places shall be spooled."

  The outward "adversary" is necessary to nullify the inward violence, is

brought into existence by it. When a nation becomes corrupt, it is conquered

and swallowed up. When cities become morally bankrupt, they fall to pieces,

or are destroyed by some outward force.                          5. JUSTICE AND LOVE


  ONE frequently hears justice referred to as being opposed to love. Such

an  error  arises  out  of  lack  of  understanding  of  the  profound  and

comprehensive  significance  of  these  two  principles,  for  two  divine  laws

cannot stand in opposition or contradiction to each other. Two basic laws,

both admittedly good, must harmonize; otherwise one would be evil, for good

cannot oppose good. The antagonism which men place between justice and

love does not exist in reality; it is an error arising from ignorance of the true

nature and right application of the principles involved.

  The element of kindness is never absent from justice; if it were, it would

be weak emotionalism and not love. There is often more love in a server

reproof than in a yielding acquiescence. The father who has little love for his

child,  though  he  may  not  treat  it  cruelly,  will  not  take  pains  to  train  it

properly; but the father who has great love for his child will train it with a

firm yet gentle hand. He will be just to his child because he loves it. He will

administer correction and reproof when necessary, that his child may profit

thereby.

  Justice is not separate from love; love is not separate from justice. The

essential oneness of the two principles is simply expressed in the divine edict:

"Whatsoever a man swath, that shall he also reap." It is in accordance both

with perfect love and perfect justice that man should reap the good results of

his good deeds, and the bad results of his bad deeds. All men admit this

theoretically, though the majority refuse to recognize the operation of such a

law in the universe, arguing, when overtaken with trouble, that in their case

they are not reaping what they have sown, as they have never done anything

to call for such misfortune, but are suffering innocently (unjustly), or are

afflicted through the wrong-doing of others.

  Such a law, however, obtains, and those who will search long enough,

and look deep below the surface of things, will find it, and be able to trace

with precision its faultless working. Nor would a right-minded man wish it to

be otherwise. He would know that the kindest thing that could be done to him

would be that he should suffer the full penalty of all his mistakes and wrong-

doing, so that he might thereby grow more rapidly in virtue and wisdom.

Petitions  to  Deity  to  abrogate  the  just  punishment  of  sins  committed  arewithout  avail,  and  can  only  spring  from  an  immature  moral  sense.  Woe

indeed would descend upon man if the law of justice could thus be set aside.

    Self-afflicted and torn with sorrow as he now is, there is hope in the law

which  bestows  no  special  favours  and  is  unfailingly  just.  But  if  man  by

offering up a prayer could escape the effects of his bad deeds, then justice

would be non-existent; and as for love, where would it be? For if one could

thus be deprived of his bad earnings, what assurance could he have of not

being robbed of his good earnings? Thus the ground of salvation would be

cut away, and caprice and despotism would take the place of love and justice.

  As a coin, which is one, has two distinct sides, so love and justice are two

aspects of the same thing. Men do not perceive the love that is hidden in

justice, nor the justice that hidden love, because they perceive only one side,

and do not to turn these principles round, as it were, and see them in their

completion.

  Justice, being a divine principle, cannot contain any element of cruelty.

All its apparent harshness is the chastening fire of love. Man himself, and not

the law per se, has brought about all the afflictions which are working for his

ultimate happiness and good. Love reigns supreme in the universe because

justice  is  supreme.  A  tender  and  loving  hand  administers  the  rod  of

chastisement. Man is protected, even against himself. Love and justice are

one.        6. SELF-PROTECTION: ANIMAL, HUMAN,


                                AND DIVINE


  MANY and wonderful are the means and methods of self-protection in

this world of combat! Natural history has revealed the fact that even plants

employ means of self-protection; and when we come to the animal world, the

methods adopted to avoid annihilation in the struggle for life are so numerous

and remarkable as to call forth our admiration and wonder. Nor in this fight

for life is "the battle to the fierce and the race to the strong" in all cases.

Indeed, the weak things of nature exhibit such ingenuity in the means which

they adopt to escape their enemies, that they are equally successful in holding

their  own  with  the  fiercest  creatures  that  have  few  enemies  to  fear.  The

insects, weakest of all creatures, have developed this self-protective ingenuity

to a remarkable degree, even to imitating in colour and form the twinges

upon which they rest, adopting the hue of the soil or the dead or living leaves

among which they live; and in some cases, through long experience, they

have  so  closely  imitated  in  colour  and  form  certain  flowers  which  they

habitually haunt that their enemies the birds, keen as is their sight, pass them

by; and even man, with all his intelligence, cannot distinguish them from the

flowers unless he had had some experience as an observant naturalist. The

smallest fishes adopt similar means of concealing themselves, although they

are in the lowest class of animal life.

  When  we  come  to  the  quadrupeds  (although  the  weaker  and  smaller

among them, those most hunted by the larger, adopt ruses similar to those

which prevail among the insects and fishes), brute strength largely takes the

place of stratagem. The beast has developed powerful weapons of defense,

such as horns, fangs, claws &c., combined with an iron or lithe muscularity,

with  which  he  maintains  his  place  on  the  earth,  and  defies  extinction.

Endurance,  speed,  strength,  and  ferocity  are  the  means  of  self-protection

among the brutes.

  Animal  self-protection  reaches  its  highest  excellence  in  the  superb

strength and cunning of the lion and the tiger, yet it appears weak and clumsy

when compared with the means of self-protection adopted by man; for self-

preservation, although it is not all-powerful in the human as in the animalworld is still a dominant impulse among human beings. Man is possessed of

the  entire  animal  nature  and  the  animal  impulses  and  instincts  are  strong

within him; but there is along with this animal life an added intelligence and

moral  sense-a  self-consciousness  --  by  virtue  of  which  his  self-protective

scope and power are greatly enlarged and intensified. He is still an animal,

with endurance, speed, strength, and ferocity; but he is also something more

and greater-he is an intelligent, self-conscious being.

  Among men of low order of intelligence the animal methods still largely

obtain. In the struggle of life the savage relies on brute strength. Even among

civilized communities there are still thousands of admirers of "the noble art

of self-defense," which can only be noble in the sense that we speak of the

ferocity of the lion as being noble; and is devoid of art, being compounded

entirely of brute force and cunning. Indeed, this practice is so closely allied to

the beast that it has long ceased to be a means of self-defense among civilized

men, and has become merely a vulgar pastime for the few.

  Working along physical lines, and still following the well-worn track of

animal instinct, man has invented numerous implements of destruction by

which to annihilate his enemy and preserve himself; and upon these, with

increasing ingenuity and subtlety, he continues to improve. Working along

the  new  path  of  pure  intelligence-which  is  pre-eminently  the  human  as

distinguished  from  the  animal  sphere  of  activity-he  discovers  means  of

adding to his physical comforts and for the peaceful protection of his body,

and asserts his right and power to live, not by brute force, but by toil of hand

and keenness of brain. The basic struggle here, indeed, is not directly a fight

for food and life, but for the artificial means by which food is procured and

life maintained, namely, money. The fierce animal struggle has evolved into

the more kindly human one; in place of the bloody strife with tooth and claw

there is the more amicable combat of wit and skill. Man has discovered-

though he has as yet only partially learned this- that there are better methods

of self-protection than that of attacking, killing, and despoiling others; that by

such a method he endangers his own comfort, happiness, and even life; and

that it is better to engage in a bloodless competition for supremacy, and leave

every person to take his place in life according to the measure of his mental

capacity.

  Right has begun to take the place of might; and although the struggle islargely one for money, it is not altogether so, but is surely evolving into one

for the securing of those mental qualities which increase man’s nobility, and

better fit him as an instrument of life and progress. Such are the intellectual

qualities  of  reason,  judgement,  tact,  foresight,  ingenuity,  resource,

inventiveness; and the moral qualities of kindness, forbearance, sympathy,

forgiveness,  reverence,  honesty,  justice.  Human  education  at  present  is

almost entirely along these intellectual and moral lines. The instruments by

which man struggles with man for the capacity to live and to endure are

faculties, not fangs; talents, not talons.

    Intellectual and moral excellence constitute the passport to existence in

the human world.

  The intellectually vigorous and the morally upright take the lead in the

race of life. Nevertheless, the weaker ones take their place, and have scope

and  opportunity  for  development.  Slowly  man  is  learning  that  in  the

protection of others- the weak, the suffering, and the afflicted-he is affording

a surer protection for himself.

  Such methods of self-protection we perceive an enormous advance upon

the savage instinct of the brute. Commerce, crafts, and games take the place

of  plunder  and  destruction;  and  limited  animal  affection  is  enlarged  to

benevolence and philanthropy. In human competition the brute still lurks, but

its ferocity is subdued; its nature is largely transmuted into something better,

more  beneficent;  its  dark  horror  is  lightened  up  with  the  warm  rays  of

kindness; its harshness is softened by the gentleness of a larger and ever-

increasing love.

  But high as is human over animal self-protection, there is another, form

of self-protection that is as high above the human as that is above the animal,

and that is divine or spiritual protection. By this method the man does not

fight  with  others  physically,  after  the  manner  of  the  brute;  he  does  not

struggle with others mentally, as does the human being; he fights with the

brute within himself, in order to annihilate it; he struggles with the greed in

his  own  nature,  that  he  may  fit  himself  to  live  the  higher,  nobler,  more

enduring life of peace, goodwill, and wisdom.

  In  divine  protection  the  fierce  struggle  with  others  is  at  an  end,  the

competition of self-interest is no more, and the weapons employed are self-

sacrifice and non-resistance. And these weapons can only be understood andemployed by him whose moral elevation is such as to gain him admittance to

the World of Divine Things. Just as the fanged and tallied brute cannot grasp

and use those mental weapons of resource and inventiveness which the more

highly  endowed  and  talented  human  being  employs  with  such  ease  and

power,  so  the  self-seeking  man  cannot  comprehend  and  wield  those

instruments of self-sacrifice and non-resistance with which the divine man

not merely shields himself but protects the whole world.

    Self-interest,  resistance  to,  and  competition  with  others,  are  the  most

powerful  factors  in  the  purely  human  life;  but  in  the  divine  life,  self-

obliteration, and deep-felt sympathy with, and compassion for others, are the

dominant motives.

  The divine man conquers by non-retaliation and by yielding where others

enter into selfish strife; and his gentle powers are so invincible that the lesser

selfish powers, great and potent as those are when compared with the merely

animal  equipment’s,  dissolve  away  in  ineffectual  weakness.  As  bestial

instincts  cannot  vie  with  human  powers,  so  human  powers  cannot  stand

against divine principles; and the divine man stands upon, and acts from,

such principles. In him the human qualities mentioned are merged into the

divine principles of Patience, Humility, Purity, Compassion, and Love.

  Both the animal and the human are concerned only with the protection

and  preservation  of  the  body,  which  is  temporal;  but  the  divine  man’s

preservation is concerned with the spirit, which is eternal, like the principles

upon which he stands. In a word, divine preservation consists in preserving

the mind from passion and selfishness, and imbuing it with pureness and

wisdom.

  We get a glimpse into the vast power inherent in self-sacrifice and non-

resistance when we contemplate the lives and characters of the few divine

men who practiced these principles - in Jesus, Buddha, and others. All men,

broadly  speaking,  yield  and  bow  down  to  these  great  Masters  in  Divine

Things. Men who have reached the greatest heights in worldly achievement-

monarchs,  conquerors,  successful  generals,  statesmen,  orators,  financiers-

bow in humble reverence and awe before the names of those Great Ones,

recognizing intuitively that their own conquests and achievements, with all

their worldly glory, are as nothing compared with that supreme self-conquest,

that mighty spiritual achievement, which those gentle teachers of mankindexhibited. To-day some five hundred millions of people bow down to Buddha

as their Guide and Master, and some three hundred millions likewise bend

before Jesus as their Saviour and the Keeper of their lives.

  In these three methods of self-protection-animal, human, and spiritual-we

perceive the fundamental forces which are at work in the evolution of sentient

beings; an evolution beginning with the lowest creature and extending to the

deviants being of whom we have any direct knowledge. We also see that

there  is  no  inherent  evil  in  any  of  these  methods,  that  all  are  equally

legitimate, and belong to the cosmic order of things. Each in its own sphere is

right and necessary, leading to higher and higher intelligence, and deeper and

deeper knowledge. The animal defends itself in accordance with its nature

and the limits of its knowledge; the human being protects itself likewise in

harmony with the dictates of his human nature; and the divine being eternally

preserves himself in peace and blessedness by virtue of his clearer insight and

deeper wisdom.

  Nor is any measure of force lost during the process of evolution. The

brute passion is, in man, transmuted into intellectual and moral energy, and in

the divine man both are merged into control and equanimity.                    7. AVIATION AND THE NEW


                            CONSCIOUSNESS


  DR. BUCKE, in his work Cosmic Consciousness, published some ten

years ago, stated that aerial navigation would become an accomplished fact in

the  near  future,  and  that  it  would  revolutionize  the  social  and  economic

conditions of the world.

  So far as the advent of the new means of travel is concerned, he has

proved to be a true prophet, and I am convinced that his prophecy of its

revolutionizing  aspect  will  shortly  begin  to  be  proved  true.  Of  this  great

revolution in its completion Dr. Bucke says:

    "Before aerial navigation boundaries, tariffs, and perhaps, distinctions of

language will fade out. Great cities will no longer have reason for being, and

will melt away. The men who now dwell in cities will inhabit, in summer, the

mountains and the sea shores; building often in airy and beautiful spots, now

almost  or  quite  inaccessible,  commanding  the  most  extensive  and

magnificent views. In the winter they will probably dwell in communities of

moderate size. As the herding together, as now, in great cities, so the isolation

of  the  worker  of  the  soil  will  become  a  thing  of  the  past.  Space  will  be

practically annihilated; there will be no crowding together and no enforced

solitude."

  The above is a beautiful picture of the result upon human society of the

discovery  of  aviation,  and  it  will  no  doubt  prove  true.  Not  that  such  a

condition  will  be  brought  about  rapidly.  It  will  at  least  require  several

hundred years, and it is highly probable that it will be several thousand years

before it is fully realized. As yet we are only in the crudest beginnings of

flying, and the mastery of the air as a medium of human transit affords more

scope for improvement and invention than any of the mechanical modes of

locomotion hitherto employed. Invention will follow upon invention, through

a long period of time, until men will be able to propel themselves through the

air  with  a  swiftness,  a  safety,  and  a  skill  perhaps  equal  to  that  of  the

migratory  birds  for  the  swiftest  type.  It  was  Edison  who  long  years  ago

declared that the ultimate and perfected flying-machine would be built on the

principle of the bird. While conforming more or less to this principle, thepresent machines are more on the principle of the kite, the motor-driving

power taking the place of the string. In his book The Coming Race Lord

Lytton describes the individuals of that race as each possessing a pair of

mechanical wings which were under the complete control of the operator, and

by  means  of  which  he  soared  into  their  and  propelled  himself  gracefully

through  space.  Doubtless  this  will  be  form  which  the  perfected  flying-

machine will take, and it conforms to that "principle of the bird" referred to

by Edison.

  But the phase of aviation with which we are here concerned is that which

connects  it  with  the  evolving  consciousness  of  man;  for  out  of  that  self-

consciousness,  which  is  now  man’s  dominant  condition,  and  which  is

inevitably connected with struggle and suffering, with labour and sorrow, the

beginnings  of  a  higher,  diviner  form  of  consciousness  are  making  their

appearances.  From  man’s  present  state  of  imperfection,  combined  with

ceaseless  aspiration  towards  a  better,  but  as  yet  undefined,  state,  there  is

surely  coming,  as  form  a  matrix,  a  new  order  of  life,  a  more  blessed

condition, a greatly evolved form of consciousness hitherto unknown to man

except in a few isolated cases.

  Invention  is  allied  to  progress-is,  indeed,  an  outward  manifestation  of

inward  growth.  All  man’s  inventions  are  adaptations  to  his  expanding

consciousness,  and  they  definitely  mark  important  turning-points  in  the

evolution of the race. At the moment man’s necessity the new and needed

thing appears. Just as the human intellect was preparing to break from the

bonds  of  old  superstitions,  and  sally  forth  in  joyous  and  untrammelled

freedom,  the  printing  press  appeared  as  the  chief  instrument  of  man’s

liberation. The coming of the steam engine tallied with the accelerated speed

of human thought as it began to shake off its ancient lethargy; and when the

expanding human mind could no longer move in a contracted local circle, or

remain satisfied with petty selfish differences, the locomotive came forth to

meet man’s wider range, and to afford him scope for his increased mental

activities and enlarged sympathies.

  And now another invention has entered the field of actuality; one growing

out of, yet more important than, any which have preceded it- that of flying.

Man has hitherto employed the solid earth and the less solid water as the

medium of material transit; but now he is to make and obedient servant of thetenuous  atmosphere,  using  it  to  speed  bird-like  directly  to  his  desired

destination.  And  this  is  an  important  outward  sign  of  the  new  stride  in

evolution  which  the  race  is  now  taking.  Rapid  and  restless  changes  are

marking the present transition period. Old religions and forms of government

are  passing  away.  New  modes  of  thought  and  action  are  everywhere

appearing.  Man’s  consciousness  is  expanding.  The  human  form  of

consciousness is about to touch, is indeed touching, the point of completion,

and  from  it  there  will  spring,  is  already  springing,  the  Divine  form  of

consciousness  which  is  destined  to  transform  the  entire  human  race.  For

under  that  the  reign  of  consciousness  nearly  everything,  as  it  at  present

obtains  in  the  world,  will  be  reversed.  Man,  being  then  Divine,  will  act

divinely. All those powerful human passions which now dominate the race,

and are the chief springs of action, will then take a subordinate place, and will

be under the control and guidance of man’s Divine will and wisdom. He will

be master of himself and master of the earth.

  Already  man  has  been  feeling  the  growing  wings  of  this  new

consciousness wherewith he will soar into the highest regions of knowledge

and blessedness. For ages, and under the guise of numerous religions, he has

aspired to it, and the prophets have foretold it, and now he is to obtain his

Divine birth right.

  Aviation is the first outward symbol, as it were, of this new mind which is

now taking shape. It is also more than a symbol, for its will form the first

important material instrument by the aid of which the new consciousness will

begin  to  materialize  its  glorious  ideas  and  magnificent  schemes  for  the

happiness of to-day is misery compared with that blessed state which will

obtain on the earth when the Divine condition has become well established.

  The  beginnings  of  this  new  condition,  as  aided  by  aviation,  will  be

noticed in the breaking down of certain material limitations between man and

man, and between nations, and the disappearance of war; along with it will

come a free and fraternal industrial intercourse between the nations, and a

growing tendency to adopt in practice those fundamental religious principles

which are universal, and thus to inaugurate one great world-wide religion. As

aviation becomes more perfected, and enters into man’s economical schemes,

these new conditions-the first seedlings, as it were, of the new consciousness-

will  begin  to  appear,  for  when  men  are  rapidly  fitting  from  country  tocountry, from continent to continent, on "the wings of the wind," they will be

brought  so  close  together,  both  socially  and  industrially,  that  the  old

animosities  which  now  exist  between  them  will  die  out,  the  old  national

barriers  will  quietly  break  down  and  disappear,  and,  without  any

revolutionary upheaval, the nations will become as one country, sinking all

those interests which are not for the mutual good of all nations.

  The locomotive is an instance of the above, though in the region of self-

consciousness,  in  that  it  rendered  civil  war  impossible,  making  of  each

nation, formerly divided against itself, a united family working harmoniously

together.  Aviation,  however,  will  be  connected  with  a  higher  region  of

consciousness altogether, namely, the cosmic consciousness, and its results

will be much more striking and more far-reaching than those which have

hitherto taken place in man’s self-conscious condition.

  At present we are only in the experimental stage of aviation, but this will

be quickly followed by the economic stage, in which flying will be adapted to

human travel and mercantile uses; and almost immediately this is reached the

new conditions is societies and nations will begin to manifest themselves, and

once having commenced they will gradually absorb the old forms of life,

using them as material on which to feed their growing beauty and grandeur.

And new and grand men will arise having this higher consciousness, and they

will be the leading instruments in establishing this new order of things upon

the earth.                      8. THE NEW COURAGE


  THE  virtue  of  courage  is  generally  referred  to  in  its  physical

manifestation, and it is significant in this particular- that its symbol is a beast

of prey, namely, the lion. The dictionary rendering adheres to this physical

aspect of courage, for on turning up the word I find its meanings are given as

"bravery,  fearlessness,  intrepidity,"  no  other  rendering  being  given.  The

solider is the human type of courage, and the current sayings concerning

courage are: "As courageous as a lion" and "As brave as a solider."

  The lion and the solider are alike fearless in attack and defense, and both

will forfeit life rather than yield; but it is an entirely animal physical attack

and defense. Courage, however, cannot be confined to this phase-indeed, this

is its lowest manifestation -for it has many aspects, many modes of action;

and  as  man  rises  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  scale  his  courage  becomes

transmuted, taking a newer and higher form. But before proceeding to the

highest form of courage, which is the subject of this article, it is necessary

that the lower forms should be first considered.

  With the physical form of courage already referred to all are familiar. It is

common both to animals and men. It arises in fearlessness. Its twofold mode

of action is attack and defense. It will be seen, however, that this kind of

courage is inevitably associated with suffering, even with destruction and

death, as daily manifested both in the animal and human spheres of life; self-

protection being its dominant motive, whether in attack or defense.

  But man is not only and merely an animal, a physical being; he is also a

moral and intellectual being; and along with his moral evolution he began to

develop a higher kind of courage-not the highest, or the New Courage herein

referred to; but yet a great advance on the purely animal courage, namely,

moral courage. In physical courage the other person’s body or property is

attacked, while one’s own body or property is defended. In moral courage the

other person’s ideas, opinions, or principles are attacked, one’s own ideas,

opinions, and principles being defended. There is the same fearlessness, the

same attack and defense so far as the spirit of courage is concerned; but as

regards its letter, these conditions have undergone a change; their physicalaspect has disappeared, and, having undergone a process of transmutation,

has  reappeared  in  a  new  form,  for  moral  courage  is  concerned  not  with

persons as persons, but with their principles. It is, indeed, purely mental; and

while it is still concerned with destruction and is associated with suffering,

the destruction is a bloodless and intellectual one, namely, the destruction of

other men’s opinions, and its suffering is mental and not physical.

  This form of courage is now generally recognized, and is always referred

to as moral courage, to distinguish it from common or physical courage. It is,

without doubt, a comparatively recent development in the evolution of the

race, and is entirely absent from animals. A few thousand years ago it was, in

all probability, an exceeding rare and new faculty, and it is still in process of

development, large numbers of the race not yet having evolved it; for while it

is  probable  that  at  least  seventy-five  per  cent  of  the  race  possess  a

considerable development of physical courage, it is doubtful whether twenty

per cent possess any marked degree of moral courage; so much so that those

in full possession of it are marked off from their fellows as men of a higher

grade  of  character,  and  generally-  though  not  necessarily  and  always-  as

leaders of men in their particular sphere of action.

  But  the  New  Courage,  up  to  a  consideration  of  which  the  preceding

remarks have been leading, is a still higher form of courage- is, indeed, as

much  above  and  beyond  moral  courage  as  moral  courage  is  above  and

beyond physical courage; and is as separate and distinct from it as that is

from its precedent form. I have called it the New Courage because it is now

new in the race, its manifestation being at present very rare, and, therefore,

little understood. Though very different from moral courage, it results from

it, just as moral courage, though very different from physical courage, though

very different from physical courage results from it. Physical courage is of

the animal; moral courage is of the human; the New Courage is of the Divine.

The  new  Courage  is,  therefore,  Divine  fearlessness  as  distinguished  from

animal or human fearlessness.

  This  Divine  fearlessness  has  a  twofold  aspect.  It  at  first  consists  in

fearlessly  attacking  and  overcoming  the  enemies  within  one’s  own  mind-

instead of the enemies without, as in the other two forms of courage- and is

afterwards  characterized  by  an  entirely  new  method  of  conduct  towards

others, especially where external enmity and opposition have to be met. It isits latter and perfected stage with which we are here concerned - that is, with

its outward manifestation.

  We have seen how a man having physical courage acts in defense of his

life and property; also how a man having moral courage acts in defense of his

opinions; and now, how does one act who has Divine courage?

  He  who  has  the  New  Courage  does  not  attack  other  men  or  defend

himself; does not attack their opinions or defend his own; he is the defender

of all men, and that from which he defends them is their own folly, their own

ungoverned passions. While never seeking to protect himself, he so acts as to

shield others from their deadliest enemy, namely, the evil within themselves.

  Both physical and moral courage make much noise. In the one there is the

clash of arms and the roar of artillery, along with the shouts of the victories

and the groans of the dying; in the other there is the fierce war of opinions

and the clamour of conflicting tongues. But in the New Courage there is a

profound silence; yet this silence has more influence and enduring power in

one  man  than  that  noise  has  in  entire  humanity.  The  New  Courage  may,

indeed  be  described  as  the  courage  to  be  silent.  Thus,  when  the  man  of

Divine courage is attacked, abused, or slandered, he remains serenely silent.

Yet this is not a proud and selfish silence. It is a silence based upon a right

knowledge  of  life  and  having  a  profound  and  beneficent  purpose;  that

purpose being the good of the attacking person (and, through him, of all

mankind)  by  protecting  him  from  the  evil  passion  by  which  he  is  so

injuriously influenced.

  To remain silent, calm, and compassionate in the midst of a seething sea

of human passions externally pressing upon one-to achieve this requires a

lofty courage such as is yet almost unknown to men; so much so that the few

men who have it, although misunderstood and persecuted through life, are

afterwards worshiped by mankind as Divine and miraculous beings. And here

we see how this courage continues to operate even after its possessor is gone

from  mortal  vision.  The  physically  courageous  man  conquers  another  in

fight; the morally courageous man conquers the opinions of many men, and

wins thousands to his cause; but the divinely courageous man conquers the

world,  and  his  conquest  is  one  of  blessedness  and  peace,  and  not  of

bloodshed or party strife.

  In the New Courage, attack and defense, and they obtain in the two lowerkinds of courage, have entirely disappeared. Nevertheless, they have not been

destroyed; they still exist in the sporty, but have become blended into one,

have been transmuted into a sublime and universal kindness; for when the

Divine man refrains from engaging in combat with his adversary, and lets

him go feeling that he has all the victory, it is because his thought is all for

his  mistaken  enemy,  and  not  for  his  own  defense.  He  is  prompted  by  a

profound  compassion  for  his  enemy,  a  compassion  based  on  Divine  and

perfect knowledge; and if his silent act does not always subdue the passions

of his adversary at the time being, it subdues the passions of thousands of

men through hundreds of future generations merely by its recital, so great and

far-reaching is the power of one deed of truth.

  In the New Courage, then, silent kindness (and by this meant something

vastly different from that human impulse commonly called kindness) is both

attack  and  defense.  Instead  of  attempting  to  conquer  passion  by  fiercer

passion - which is the human way- it conquers it, and far more successfully,

by its opposite, namely, gentleness, which is the Divine way. In the human

sense, passion is not opposed at all, but is left alone; yet, in reality, it is

opposed by something far more powerful than passion, for in all combats

between  Divine  gentleness  and  human  passion  gentleness  is  the  supreme

victor.  Thus,  the  man  of  Divine  courage,  while,  viewed  from  the  lower

standards of bravery, is not protecting or defending himself, and may for the

time being be regarded as a coward, is, in reality, defending himself far more

perfectly and successfully than the passionate fighters and partisans; for he

who protects his enemy with love, and shields all men with the acts of Divine

gentleness, is throwing around himself an eternal shield and protection.

  For instances of this New Courage one has to go to the Great Spiritual

Leaders of the race, so rare is it. The most striking instance is that of Jesus,

who, when mocked, smitten, and crucified, did not retaliate, or offer the least

resistance,  or  speak  a  world  in  self-defense;  and  the  fact  that  the  rabble

taunted Him with the accusation, "He saved others, Himself He cannot save,"

seems to show that they regarded Him both as an impostor and a coward.

Think of the sublime courage required to pass through such an ordeal, and

you will have some conception as to how far the New Courage transcends the

ordinary human forms of bravery. That transcendent act of courage, too, is to-

day universally recognized as Divine, and it still continues to lift men abovetheir warring, selfish passions.

  When the Buddha was abused and falsely accused by His enemies, He

always remained silent; and it not infrequently happened that those who came

as  accusing  enemies  went  away  as  worshiping  friends  and  disciples,  so

powerful was His silent gentleness.

  It will be long, as we count time, before such courage becomes general in

the race; but everything is making towards it. Other men will come who

possess it, and then more and more, until at last the race will stand at this

Divine  level.  Then  selfishness  and  sorrow  will  be  ended,  and  the  painful

conflict of human passions will no more be heard upon earth.                        BOOK FIFTEEN


              THE SHINING GATEWAY                          EDITOR’S FOREWORD


  Students of the works of James Allen all over the world will welcome

with joy another book from his able pen. In this work we find the Prophet

of  Meditation in one of his deepest and yet most lucid expositions. How

wonderfully he deals with fundamental principles! Here the reader will find

no vague statement of generalities, for the writer enters with tender reverence

into every detail of human experience. It is as though he came back to The

Shining  Gate, and, standing there, he reviewed all the way up which his

own feet have travelled, passing over no temptation that is common to man;

knowing that the obstacles that barred his ascending pathway, or the clouds

that at times obscured his vision, are the common experiences of all those

who have set their faces towards the heights of Blessed Vision. As we read

his words now, he seems to stand and beckon to us, saying, "Come on, my

fellow Pilgrims; it is straight ahead to the Shining Gateway; I have blazed the

track for you." In sending forth this, another posthumous volume from his

pen, we have no doubt but that it will help many and many an aspiring soul

up to the heights, until at last they too stand within The shining Gateway.

  LILY L. ALLEN.

    "Bryngoleu," Ilfracombe, ENGLAND

 

    BE H O L D T H E S H I N I N G G A T E W A Y

  He who attaineth unto Purity

  The faultless Parthenon of Truth doth use

  Awake! Disperse the dreams of self and sin?

  Behold the Shining Gateway! Enter in!                  1. THE SHINING GATEWAY OF


                                MEDITATION


  Be watchful, fearless, faithful, patient, pure:

  By earnest meditation sound the depths

    Profound of life, and scale the heights sublime

  Of Love and Wisdom. He who does not find

  The Way of Meditation cannot reach

    Emancipation and enlightenment.

  The  unregenerate  man  is  subject  to  these  three  things  — Desire,

Passion,  Sorrow. He  lives  habitually  in  these  conditions,  and  neither

questions nor examines them. He regards them as his life itself, and cannot

conceive  of  any  life  apart  from  them.  To-day  he  desires,  to-morrow  he

indulges his passions, and the third day he grieves; by these three things

(which are always found together) he is impelled, and does not know why he

is  so  impelled;  the  inner  forces  of  desire  and  passion  arise,  almost

automatically, within him, and he gratifies their demands Sans question; led

on  blindly  by  his  blind  desires,  he  falls,  periodically,  into  the  ditches  of

remorse and sorrow. His condition is not merely unintelligible to him, it is

unperceived: for so immersed is he in the desire (or self) consciousness that

he cannot step outside of it, as it were, to examine it.

  To such a man the idea of rising above desire and suffering into a new life

where such things do not obtain seems ridiculous. He associates all life with

the pleasurable gratification of desire, and so, by the law of reaction, he

also  lives  in  the  misery  of  afflictions,  fluctuating  ceaselessly  between

pleasure and pain.

  When  reflection  dawns  in  the  mind,  there  arises  a  sense  (dim  and

uncertain at first) of a calmer, wiser, and loftier life; and as the stages of

introspection and self-analysis are reached, this sense increases in clearness

and intensity, so that by the time the first three stages are fully completed, a

conviction of the reality of such a life and of the possibility of attaining it is

firmly fixed in the mind.

  Such conviction, which consists of a steadfast belief in the supremacy ofpurity and goodness over desire and passion, is called faith. Such faith is the

stay,  support  and  comfort  of  the  man  who,  while  yet  in  the  darkness,  is

searching earnestly for the Light which breaks upon him for the first time in

all its dazzling splendour and ineffable majesty when he enters the Shining

Gateway of Meditation. Without such faith he could not stand for a single

day against the trials, failures, and difficulties which beset him continually,

much  less  could  be  courageously  fight  and  overcome  them,  and  his  final

conquest and salvation would be impossible.

  Upon  entering  the  stage  of  meditation,  faith  gradually  ripens  into

knowledge,  and  the  new  regenerate  life  begins  to  be  realised  in  its  quiet

wisdom,  calm  beauty,  and  ordered  strength,  and  day  by  day  its  joy  and

splendour increase.

  The  final  conquest  over  sin  is  now  assured.  Lust,  hatred,  anger,

covetousness, pride and vanity, desire for pleasure, wealth, and fame, worldly

honour and power –all these have become dead things, shortly to pass away

for ever; there is no more life nor happiness in them; they have no part in the

life of the regenerate one, who knows that he can never again go back to

them, for now the "Old man" of self and sin is dead, and the "new man" of

Love and Purity is born within him. He has become (or becomes, as the

process  of  meditation  ripens  and  bears  fruit)  a  new  being,  one  in  whom

Purity, Love, Wisdom, and Peacefulness are the ruling qualities, and wherein

strifes,  envies,  suspicions,  hatreds,  and  jealousies  cannot  find  lodgement.

"Old things have passed away, and, behold, all things have become new";

men and things are seen in a different light, and a new universe is unveiled;

there  is  no  confusion;  as  out  of  the  inner  chaos  of  conflicting  desires,

passions, and sufferings the new being arises, there arises in the outer world

of apparently irreconcilable conditions a new Cosmos, ordered, sequential,

harmonious, ineffably glorious, faultless in equity.

    Meditation  is  a  process  both  of Purification and Adjustment.

Aspiration is the purifying element, and the harmonising power resides in the

intellectual train of thought involved.

  When the stage of meditation is reached and entered upon, two distinct

processes of spiritual transmutation is reached and entered upon, two distinct

processes of spiritual transmutation begin to take place, namely:

  1.    Transmutation of passion.  2.    Transmutation of affliction.

  The two conditions proceed simultaneously, as they are interdependent,

and  act  and  react  one  upon  the  other.  Passion  and  affliction,  or  sin  and

suffering, are two aspects of one thing, namely, the Self in man, that self

which is the source of all the troubles which afflict mankind. They represent

Power, but power wrongly used. Passion is a lower manifestation of a divine

energy  which  possesses  a  higher  use  and  application.  Affliction  is  the

limitation and negation of that energy, and is therefore a means of restoring

harmony. "It says, in effect to the self-bound man, "Thus far shalt thou go

and no farther." The man of meditation transfers the passional energy from

the realm of evil (Self-following) to the realm, of good (self-overcoming).

To-day he reflects, tomorrow he overcomes his passions, and the third day he

rejoices. The mind is drawn from its downward tendency, and is directed

upwards. The base metal of error is transmuted into the pure gold of Truth.

Lust, hatred, and selfishness disappear; and purity, love, and goodwill take

their place. As the stage proceeds, the mind becomes more and more firmly

fixed in the higher manifestations, and it becomes increasingly difficult for it

to think and act in the lower; and just in the measure that the mind is freed

from the lower, violent, and inharmonious activities, just so much is passion

transmuted into power, and affliction into bliss.

  This means that there is no such thing as affliction to the sinless man.

When sin is put away, affliction disappears.

    Selfhood is the source of suffering; Truth is the source of bliss.

  When the unregenerate man is abused, or slandered, misunderstood, or

persecuted, it causes him intense suffering; but when these things are brought

to bear on the regenerate man, there arises in him the rapture of heavenly

bliss. None but he who has put away the great enemy, self, under his feet can

fully enter into and understand the saying:

  Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall

say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely,  for  my  sake.  Rejoice,  and  be

exceeding glad.

  And  why  does  the  righteous  (regenerate)  man  rejoice  under  those

conditions which cause such misery to the unrighteous (unregenerate) man?

It  is  because,  having  overcome  the  evil  in  himself,  he  ceases  to  see  evil

without. To the good man all things are good, and he utilises everything forthe good of the world. To him persecution is not an evil, it is a good. Having

acquired insight, knowledge, and power, he, by meeting that persecution in a

loving spirit, helps and uplifts his persecutors, and accelerates their spiritual

progress, though they themselves know it not at the time. Thus he is filled

with unspeakable bliss because he has conquered the forces of evil; because,

instead of succumbing to those forces, he has learned how to use and direct

them for the good and gain of mankind. He is blessed because he is at one

with  all  men,  because  he  is  reconciled  to  the  universe,  and  has  brought

himself into harmony with the Cosmic Order.

  The following symbol will perhaps help the mind of the reader to more

readily grasp what has been explained.

  LOVE, LIGHT, AND LIFE KNOWLEDGE

                    A

                    S

                    P

                    I

                    R
  
                    A

                    T

                    I

                    O

                    N

    PASSION AFFLICTION

                    D

                    E

                    S
  
                    I

                    R

                    E

    IGNORANCE

  LUST, DARKNESS AND DEATH

  There is at first the underworld of lust,  darkness, and death which is

associated with ignorance; rooted in this is the foot of the cross—desire; in

the body of the cross, desire branches out into two arms— the right (active orpositive) are, passion, being equalised and balanced by the left (passive or

negative) arm of affliction; uniting these, and rising out of them at the head of

the cross, is aspiration; here, wounded and bleeding, rests the thorn-crowned

head, of humanity; at the end of this, and right at the summit of the cross, is

knowledge, which, while being at the apex of the self-life, is the base of the

Truth-life; and above rises the heavenly world of Love, Light, and Life.

  In this supremely beautiful world the regenerate man lives, even while

living on this earth. He has reached Nirvana, the Kingdom of Heaven. He has

taken up his cross, and there is no more sin and sufferings desire and passion

and  affliction  are  passed  away.  Harmony  is  restored,  and  all  is  bliss  and

peace.

  The cross is the symbol of pain. Desire is painful, passion is painful,

affliction is painful, and. aspiration is painful; this is why these things are

symbolised by a cross which has two pairs of conflicting poles. Affliction is

the  harmonising  and  purifying  element  in  passion;  aspiration  is  the

harmonising and purifying element in desire. Where the one is, the other

must be also. Take away the one, and the other disappears. Suffering, or

affliction,  is  necessary  to  counteract  passion;  aspiration,  or  prayer,  is

necessary to purge away desire; but for the regenerate man all these things

are  ended;  he  has-risen  into  a  new  life  and  a  new  order  of  things—the

consciousness of purity; lacking nothing and being at one with all things, he

does not need to pray for anything; redeemed and reconciled, contented and

ill peace, he finds nothing in the universe to hate or fear, and his is both the

duty and the power to work without ceasing for the present good and the

ultimate salvation of mankind.                                2. TEMPTATION


  I know that sorrow follows passion; know

  That grief and emptiness and heartache wait

  Upon all earthly joys; so am I sad;

  Yet Truth must be, and being, can be found;

  And though I am in sorrow, this I know—

  I shall be glad when I have found the Truth.

  The  only  external  tempters  of  man  are The  objects  of  Sensation.

These, however, are powerless in themselves until they are reflected in his

mind  as  desirable  objects  to  possess.  His  only  enemy,  therefore,  is  his

coveting  of  the  objects  of  sensation. By  ceasing  to  covet  objects  of

sensation,  temptation  and  the  painful  fighting  against  impure  desires  pass

away.  This  ceasing  to  covet  objects  of sensation is  called  the

relinquishing of desire; it is the renunciation of the inner defilement,

by which a man ceases to be the slave of outward things, and becomes their

master.

    Temptation  is  a  growth,  a  process  more  or  less  slow,  the  duration  of

which can be measured by the sage who has gained accurate knowledge of

the nature of his thoughts and acts and the laws governing them, by virtue of

having subjected himself to a long course of training in mental discipline and

self-control. It has its five stages, which can be clearly defined, and their

development traced with precision. But the man who is still immersed in

temptation has, as yet, little or no knowledge of the nature of his thoughts and

acts and the laws governing them. He has lived so long in outward things—in

the objects of sensation—and has given so little time to introspection and the

cleansing of his heart, that he lives in almost total ignorance of the real nature

of his thoughts and acts which he thinks and commits every day. To him,

temptation seems to be instantaneous, and his powerlessness to combat the

sudden and, apparently, unaccountable onslaught, causes him to regard it as a

mystery, and mystery being the mother of superstition, he may and usually

does fall back upon some speculative belief to account for his trouble, such as

the belief in an invisible Evil Being, or power, outside himself who suddenly,

and without warning, attacks and torments him. Such a superstition rendershim more powerless still, for he has sufficient knowledge to understand that

he cannot hope to successfully cope with a being more powerful than himself,

and of whose whereabouts and tactics he is altogether unacquainted; and so

he  introduces  other  beliefs  and  superstitions  which  his  dilemma  seems  to

necessitate, until at last; in addition to all his sins and sufferings, he becomes

burdened with a mass of supernatural beliefs which engross his attention, and

take  him  farther  and  farther  away  from  the  real  cause  of  his  difficulty.

Meantime he continues to be tempted and to fall, and must do so until by

self-subjugation and self-purification he has acquired the ability to trace the

relation between cause and effect in his spiritual nature, when, with purified

and enlightened vision, he will see that the moment of temptation is but

the fulfilment of those impure desires which he secretly harbours in

his own heart. And, later, with a still purer heart, and when he has gained

sufficient  control  over  his  wandering  thoughts  to  be  able  to  analyse  and

understand them, he will see that the actual moment of temptation itself

has its inception, its growth, and its fruition.

  What,  then,  are  the  stages  in  temptation?  And  how  is  the  process  of

temptation born in the mind? How does it grow and bear its bitter fruit? The

stages are five, and are as follows .

  1. PERCEPTION

  2. COGITATION

  3. CONCEPTION

  4. ATTRACTION

  and

  5. DESIRE

  The first stage is that in which objects of sensation are perceived  as

objects. This  is  pure  perception,  and  is  without  sin  or  defilement.  The

second stage is that in which objects of sensation are considered as objects

of personal pleasure. This is a brooding of the mind upon objects, with an

undefined  groping  for  pleasurable  sensation,  and  is  the  beginning  of

defilement and sin. In the third stage objects of sensation are conceived as

objects  of  pleasure. In this stage the objects are associated with certain

pleasurable  sensations,  and  these  sensations  are  conceived  and  called  up

vividly in the mind. In the fourth stage objects of sensation are perceived as

objects of pleasure. At this stage the pleasure as connected with the objectis distinctly defined, yet there is a confusion of pleasure and object, so that

the two appear as one, and a wish to possess the object arises in the mind;

there is also a going out of the mind towards the object. The fifth and last

stage is an intense desire, a coveting and lusting to possess the object in order

to experience the pleasure and gratification which it will afford. With every

repetition, in the mind, of the first four stages, this desire is added to, as fuel

is added to fire, and it increases in intensity and ardour until at last the whole

being is aflame with a burning passion which is blind to everything but its

own immediate pleasure and gratification. And when this painful fruition of

thought is reached, a man is said to be tempted. There is a still further stage

of Action, which is merely the doing of the thing desired, the outworking of

the sin already committed in the mind. From desire to action is but a short

step.

  The following table will better enable the mind of the reader to grasp the

process and principle involved.

  Inaction - Holiness; Rest.

  1.    Perception.          Objects of Sensation Perceived as such.

  2.    Cogitation.          Objects of Sensation Considered as a source of

pleasure.

  3.    Conception.        Objects of Sensation Conceived as affording

pleasure.

  4.    Attraction.          Objects of Sensation Perceived as pleasurable in

possession.

  5.    Desire.              Objects of Sensation Coveted as such: i.e., desired

for personal delight and pleasure.

    Action—Sin; Unrest.

  Every time a man is tempted, he passes, from inaction, though all the

five  stages  in  succession,  and  his  fall  is  a  passing  on  into Action. The

process varies greatly in duration according to the nature of the temptation

and the character of the tempted; but after much yielding and many falls, the

mind becomes so familiar with the transition that it passes through all the

stages  with  such  rapidity  as to  make  the  temptation  appear  as  an

instantaneous, indivisible experience.

  The sage, however, never loses sight of the duration of time occupied inthe process of temptation, but watches its growth and transition; and just as

the scientist can measure the time occupied in the transition of sensation from

the brain to the bodily extremities, or from the extremities to the brain, which,

ordinarily, appears not to occupy duration, so the sage measures (though by a

different method) the passage from pure perception to inflamed desire in a

sudden experience of temptation.

  This knowledge of the nature of temptation destroys its power, or rather

its apparent power, for power exists in holiness only. Ignorance is at the

root of all sin, and it fades away when knowledge is admitted into the mind.

Just  as  darkness  and  the  effects  of  darkness  disappear  when  light  is

introduced,  so  sin  and  its  effects  are  dispersed  when  knowledge  of  one’s

spiritual nature is acquired and embraced.

  How, then, does the sage avoid sin and remain in peace? Knowing the

nature of sinful acts—how they are the result of temptation; knowing also the

nature of temptation-how it is the end—and fruition of a particular train of

thought, he  cuts  off  that  train  of  thought  at  its  commencement, not

allowing his mind to go out into the world of sensation, which is the world of

pain and sorrow. He stands over his mind„ eternally vigilant, and does not

allow his thoughts to pass beyond the safe gates of  pure  perception. To

him  "all  things  are  pure"  because  his  mind  is  pure-He  sees  all  objects,

whether material or mental, as they are, and not as the pleasure-seeker sees

them —as objects of personal enjoyment; nor as the tempted one sees them—

as sources of evil and pain. His normal sphere, however, is that of Inaction,

which is perfect holiness and rest. This is a position of entire indifference to

considerations of pleasure and pain, regarding all things from the standpoint

of right, and not from that of enjoyment. Is, then, the sage, the sinless one,

deprived of all enjoyment? Is his life a dead monotony of inaction—inertia?

Truly, he is delivered from all those sensory excitement which the world calls

"pleasure", but which conceals, as a mask, the drawn features of pain; and,

being released from the bondage of cravings and pleasures, he lives without

ceasing in the divine, abiding joy which the pleasure-seeker and the wanderer

in sin can neither know nor understand; but inaction in this particular means

inaction as regards sin; inaction in the lower animal activities which, being

cut  off,  their  energy  is  transferred  to  the  higher  intellectual  and  moral

activities, releasing their power, and giving them untrammelled scope andfreedom.

  Thus  the  sage  avoids  sin  by  extracting  its  root  within  himself,  not

allowing it to grow into attraction, to blossom into desire, and to bear the

bitter fruits of sinful actions. The unwise man, however, allows the thought of

pleasure to take root in his mind, where its growth, evokes sensations which

are  pleasant  to  him,  and  on  these  sensations  he  dwells  with  enjoyment,

thinking in his heart, "So long as I do not commit the sinful act, I am free

from sin." He does not know that his thoughts are causes the effects of which

are actions, and that there is no  escape  from  sinful  acts  for  him  who

dwells  in  sinful  thoughts. And so the process develops in his mind and

blossoms into desire, and in the final moment of temptation (which is but the

moment  of  opportunity  brought  into  prominence  by  that  desire),  with  the

coveted object at his unreserved command, the fall of the man into sinful

action is swift and certain.                              3. REGENERATION


  Submit to naught but nobleness; rejoice

  Like a strong athlete straining for the prize,

  When thy full strength is tried; be not the slave

  Of lusts and cravings and indulgences,

  Of disappointments, miseries, and griefs,

  Fears, doubts, and lamentations, but control

  Thyself with calmness; master, that in thee

  Which masters others, and which heretofore

  Has mastered thee; let not thy passions rule,

  But rule thy passions; subjugate thyself Till

  passion is transmuted into peace,

  And wisdom crown thee; so shalt thou attain

  And, by attaining, know.

  HAVING considered and examined the nature of temptation in its five

interdependent stages, let us now turn to the process of regeneration, and also

consider its nature, so that the reader who has already received some measure

of  enlightenment  may  be  still  further  guided  in  his  strenuous  climbing

towards the Perfect Life.

  The five stages in regeneration (already enumerated) are:—1. Reflection;

2. Introspection; 3. Self-analysis; 4. Meditation; and 5. Pure Perception.

  The first stage in a pure and true life is that of thoughtfulness. The

thoughtless cannot enter the right way in life. Only the reflective mind can

acquire wisdom. When a man, ceasing to go after enjoyment, brings himself

to  a  standstill  in  order  to  examine  his  position,  and  to  reflect  upon  the

condition of the world and the meaning of life, then he has entered upon the

first stage of regeneration. When a man begins to think seriously, and with a

deep and noble purpose in view, he has stepped out of the broad way where

the thoughtless and the frivolous clutch at the bubbles of pleasure, and has

entered  the  narrow  way  where  the  thoughtful  and  the  wise  comprehend

eternal verities. Such a man’s liberation from sin and suffering is already

assured;  for  though  he  is,  as  yet,  surrounded  by  much  uncertainty,  he  isalready realising a foretaste of the peace which awaits him; his passions,

though still strong, are quieter; his mind is calmer and clearer; his intercourse

with others is purer and graver; and in his moments of deepest thought he

sees, as in a vision, the strength and calmness and wisdom which he knows

will one day be his well-earned possessions.

  Thus he passes on to the second stage.

  Reflecting day by day, with ever-increasing earnestness upon life in all its

phases,  he  comes  to  perceive  the  passions  and  desires  in  which  men  are

involved, and realises the sorrows which are connected with their strangely

ephemeral existence. He sees the burning fevers of lusts and ambitions and

cravings for pleasure, and the chilling agues of anxieties and fears, and the

uncertainty of slowly approaching death, and he aspires to know the meaning

of it all; is eager to find the source and cause of that seems so sorrowful and

inexplicable. Recognising himself as a unit in humanity, as one involved in

like passions and sorrows with all other men, he vaguely understands that

somehow the secret of all life is inevitably bound up with the neophyte, with

mind purified, calmed, and his own existence, and so, unsatisfied with the

surface theories which are based on observation only, and which still leave

him subject to passions and sorrows, and the prey of anxieties and fears, he

turns his thoughts inwardly upon his own mind, thinking, perchance, that the

wished-for  revelation  of  wisdom  and  peace  awaits  him  there.  Thus  he

becomes introspective, and so he passes on to the third stage.

  When the introspective habit is fully ripened and acquired, there is called

up in the mind a subtle process of inductive thought by the aid of which the

innermost recesses of the man’s nature, and, therefore, of all humanity, begin

to unveil themselves, and yield up their secrets to the penetrating insight of

the patient searcher who, unravelling now the tangled threads of thought, and

tracing out the warp and woof of the web of life as it is woven in the mental

processes and by the swift-flying shuttle of thought, begins, for the first time,

to somewhat clearly comprehend the inner causes of human deeds and the

meaning and purpose of existence. As this process of thought is proceeded

with, the desires and passions are purified away from the mind; the calmness

necessary to a right perception of Truth is acquired; and gradually the fixed

principles of things are presented to the comprehension and the eternal laws

of life are coherently grasped by the understanding.  And now, quietly, and almost as imperceptibly as the soft light of dawn

stealing upon the sleeping world, controlled, passes into the fourth stage, and

opens  his  long-sleeping  eyes  upon  the  rising  light  of  Truth.  He  becomes

habitually  meditative,  and  in  meditation  he  finds  the  master-key  which

unlocks the Door of Knowledge. It is at this advanced stage in the process of

regeneration that the sinner becomes the saint, and the pupil is transformed

into  the  master;  for  here  the  process  of  transmutation,  hitherto  slow  and

painful, is greatly accelerated, so that the spiritual forces formerly spent in

pleasures,  gratifications,  passions,  and  afflictions  are  now  conserved,

controlled, and turned into channels of productive and reproductive thought,

and so wisdom is born in the mind, and bliss, and peace.

  As skill and power are acquired in meditation, the fifth and last stage is

reached, where the perfect insight of the seer and the sage is evolved, so that

the  facts  of  life  are  grasped,  and  the  laws  and  principles  of  things  stand

revealed. Here the man is altogether regenerated, is purified and perfected; all

human passions are conquered, and human sorrows transcended. Here things

are seen as they are; all the intricacies of life stand out naked in the light of

Truth, and there is no more doubt and perplexity, no more sin and anguish;

for  he  whose  pure  and  enlightened  eyes  perceive  the  hidden  causes  and

effects which operate infallibly in human life—he who knows how the bitter

fruits of passion ripen, and where the dark waters of sorrow spring—he it is

who no more sins and no more sorrows. Lo! he has come to peace.

  The five stages so passed through may be thus presented:

    Ignorance—Sin; Suffering.

  1.    Reflection.                    Deep and earnest thought on the nature and

meaning of life.

  2.    Introspection.               Looking inwardly, for the causes and effects

which operate in life.

  3.    Self-analysis.                Searching the springs of thought and

purifying the motives in order to find the truth of life.

  4.    Meditation.                  Pure and discriminative thought on the facts

and principles of life.

  5.    Pure Perception.           Insight. Direct knowledge of the laws of life.

    Enlightenment—Purity; Peace.  The whole process of regeneration may be likened to the growth of a

plant.  At  first  the  small  seed  of reflection is  cast  into  the  dark  soil  of

ignorance; then the little rootlets come forth and grope about for light and

sustenance (introspection); next the strenuous self-examination is as the

plant reaching upwards toward the light; and then the development of the bud

and  opening  flower  of meditation,  ending  at  last  in  that  pure  and  wise

insight which  is  the  spiritual  glory  of  the  sage,  the  perfect  flower  of

enlightenment.

  Thus beginning in sin and suffering, and passing through thoughtfulness,

self-searching, self-purification, meditation, and insight, the seeker after the

pure life and the divine wisdom reaches at last the undented habitation of a

spotless life, and so passes beyond the dark halls of suffering, knowing the

perfect Law.                      4. ACTIONS AND MOTIVES


  Obey the Right,

  And wrong shall ne’er again assail thy peace,

  Nor error hurt thee more: attune thy heart

  To Purity, and thou shalt reach the

  Place Where sorrow is not, and all evil ends.

  It has been said that " the way to hell is paved with good intentions," and

one frequently hears sin excused on the ground that it was done with a "good

motive."

  There  are  actions  which  are  bad-in-themselves,  and  there  are  actions

which are good-in-themselves, and good intentions cannot make the former

good— selfish intentions cannot make the latter bad. Foremost among actions

which are bad-in- themselves are those which are classified as "criminal" by

all civilised communities. Thus murder, theft, adultery, libel, etc., are always

bad, and it is not necessary to inquire into the motive which prompts them.

Black and white remain black and white to all eternity, and are not altered by

specious argumentations. A lie is eternally a lie, and no number of good

intentions can turn it into a truth. If a man tell a lie with a good intention, he

has  none  the  less  uttered  a  lie;  if  a  man  speak  the  truth  with  a  selfish

intention, he has none the less spoken the truth.

  Beside those actions above mentioned, there are others which, while not

classified by the law of the land as criminal, are yet recognised as wrong by

nearly all intelligent people-actions pertaining to social and family life, and to

our  everyday  relations  with  our  fellowmen.  Thus  when  a  child  wilfully

violates its duty to its parents, the father does not stop to inquire into the

motives of the child, but metes out the due correction, because the act of

disobedience is wrong-in-itself.

  The reader may here ask, "In being taught, then, to regard the motive, the

condition of heart, as all important, and the act as secondary, have we been

taught  wrongly?"  No,  you  have  not.  The motive  is all  important,  for  it

determines  the  nature  of  the  act,  and  here  we  must  distinguish  between

intentions and motives. When people speak of good and bad motives, they

nearly always mean good or bad intentions— that is, the action is done with acertain object, good or bad, in view. The motive is the deeply seated cause

in the mind, the habitual condition of heart; the intention is the purpose in

view. Thus an act- may spring from an impure motive, yet be done with the

best intention. It is possible for one to be involved in wrong motives, and yet

at the same time to be so charged with good intentions as to be continually

intruding himself on other people, and interfering in their business and their

lives under the delusion that they "need his help."

    Intentions are more or less superficial, and are largely matters of impulse,

while motives are more deeply seated, and are concerned with a man’s fixed

moral condition. A man may do an action to-day with a good intention, and

in a few weeks’ time do the same action with a bad intention; but in both

instances the motive underlying the action will be the same.

  In reality a wrong act cannot spring from a right motive, although it may

be guided by a good intention. A man who can resort, whether habitually or

under stress of temptation, to murder, theft, lying or other actions known as

bad, is in a dark, confused condition of mind, and is not capable of acting

from right motives. Such acts can only spring from an impure source; and

this is why the Great Teachers rarely refer to motives, but always refer to

actions,. In their precepts they tell us what actions are bad and what are good,

without any reference to motive, for the bad and good acts-in-themselves are

the fruits of bad and good motives. "By their fruits you shall know them."

  In being exhorted to "judge not," we are not taught to persuade ourselves

that grapes are figs and figs grapes, but must employ our judgment in clearly

distinguishing between the two; so in like manner must we distinguish with

unmistakable clearness between bad actions and good actions, so as to avoid

the former and embrace the latter; for only in this way can one purify his

heart  and  render  himself  capable  of  acting  from  right  motives.  A  clear

perception of what is bad or good, both in ourselves and others, is not false

judgment, it is wisdom. It is only when one harbours groundless suspicion

about others, and reads into their actions bad and selfish intentions, that he

falls  into  that  judging  against  which  we  are  warned,  and  which  is  so

pernicious.

  There is no need to doubt the good intentions of those about us, while, at

the same time, being fully alive to a knowledge of those bad actions which

were  better  left  undone,  and  those  good  actions  which  were  better  done;taking care not to do the former, and to do the latter ourselves, thus teaching

by our lives instead of accusing and condemning others. Numberless wrong

actions are committed every day with good intentions; and this is why so

many good purposes are frustrated and end in disappointment, because the

underlying motive is impure, and the good fruit which is sought does not

appear; the act is out of harmony with the good intent; the means are not

adapted to the end. Bad actions, bring forth bitter fruit; good actions bring

forth sweet fruit.

  The law runs, "Thou shalt not kill; thou shalt not steal; thou shalt not

commit adultery"; not "Thou shalt not kill, steal or commit adultery with a

bad motive.

  Wrong actions are always accompanied with self-delusion, and the chief

form which such self-delusion assumes is that of self-justification. If a man

flatter  himself  that  he  can  commit  a  sinful  act,  and  yet  be  free  from  sin

because he is prompted by a "pure motive," no limit can be set to the evil

which he may commit.

  It  will  be  found  that  bad  actions,  in  the  majority  of  instances,  are

accompanied with good intentions. The object of the slanderer generally is to

protect his fellow-men from one another. Troubled with foolish suspicions, or

smarting  under  the  thought  of  injury,  he  warns  men  against  each  other,

speaking only of their bad qualities, and, in his eagerness, distorting the truth.

His intention is good, namely, to protect his neighbours; but his motive is

bad, namely, hatred of those whom he slanders. Such a man’s good intention

is frustrated by his bad action, and he at last only succeeds in separating

himself from all truth-loving people.

  The sore of a bad action is not cured by plastering it over with good

intentions, nor is the cause of the defilement removed from the heart.

  Men who are involved in bad actions cannot work from pure motives. An

issue of foul water always proceeds from an impure source; and an issue of

impure actions proceeds from a heart that is defiled.

  It greatly simplifies life, and solves all complex problems of conduct,

when certain actions are recognised as eternally bad, and others as eternally

good, and the bad are for ever abandoned, and final refuge is taken in the

good.

  The wise and good perform good actions; and motive, act, and intentionbeing harmoniously adjusted, their lives are powerful for good, and free from

disappointment, and the good fruit of their efforts appears in due season.

They do not need to defend their actions by subtle and specious arguments,

not to enter into interminable metaphysical speculations concerning motives;

but are content to act and to leave their actions to bear their own fruit.

  Let us not try to persuade ourselves that our good intentions will wipe out

the results of our bad actions; but let us resort to the practice of good actions;

for  only  in  this  way  can  we  acquire  goodness;  only  thus  can  the  life  be

established  on  fixed  principles,  and  the  mind  be  rendered  capable  of

comprehending, and working from, pure motives.                  5. MORALITY AND RELIGION


  The wise man

  By adding thought to thought and deed to deed

  In ways of good, buildeth his character.

  Little by little he accomplishes

  His noble ends; in quiet patience works

  Diligently.

  Daily he builds into his heart and mind

  Pure thoughts, high aspirations, selfless deeds.

  Until at last the edifice of Truth

  Is finished, and behold! there rises and appears

  The Temple of Perfection.

  There  is  no  surer  indication  of  confusion  and  decadence  in  spiritual

matters than the severance of morality from religion. "He is a highly moral

man, but he is not religious"; "He is exceptionally good and virtuous, but is

not at all spiritual," are common expressions on the lips of large numbers of

people who thus regard religion as something quite distinct from goodness,

purity, and right-living.

  If  religion  be  regarded  merely  and  only  as  worship  combined  with

adherence to a particular form of faith, then it would be correct to say, "He is

a very good man, but is not religious," in some instances, just as it would be

equally correct to say, "He is an immoral man, but is very religious," in other

instances, for murderers, thieves, and other evil-doers are sometimes devout

worshippers and zealous adherents to a creed.

  Such a narrowing down of religion, however, would’ render much of the

Sermon on the Mount superfluous, from a religious point of view, and would

lead to the confounding of the means of religion with its end, the idolising

of the letter of religion to the exclusion of the spirit; and this is what

actually occurs when morality is severed from religion, and is regarded as

something alien and distinct from it.

  Religion,  however,  has  a  broader  significance  than  this,  and  the  most

obscure  creed  embodies  in  its  ritual  some  longing  human  cry  for  that

goodness, that virtue, that morality, which many, with thoughtless judgement,divorce from religion. And is not a life of moral excellence, of  good and

noble character, of pure-heartedness, the very end and object of religion? Is it

not the substance and spirit, of which worship and adherence to a form of

faith are but the shadow and letter?

  In  religion,  as  in  other  things,  there  are  the  means  and  the  end,  the

methods and the attainment. Worship, beliefs about God, adherence to creeds

—these are some of the means; goodness, virtue, morality—these are the end.

The  methods  are  many  and  Various,  and  they  are  embodied  in  countless

forms of faith; but the end is one—it is moral grandeur!

  Thus  the  moral  man,  far  from  being  irreligious  because  he.  may  not

openly profess some form of worship, possesses the substance of religion,

diffuses its spirit, has attained its end; and when the sweet Kernel of religion

is found and enjoyed, the shell, protective and necessary in its place, has

served its purpose, and may be dispensed with.

  Let not this, however, be misunderstood. The "moral" man does not refer

to one who has only the outward form of morality, appearing moral in the

eyes of the world, but keeping his vices secret; nor does it refer to him whose

morality extends only to legal limits; nor to those who are proud of their

morality—for  pride  is  the  reverse  of  moral—but  to  those  who  delight  in

purity, who are gracious, gentle, unselfish, and thoughtful, who, being good

at heart, pour forth the fragrance of pure thoughts and good deeds. By the

"moral" is meant the good, the pure, the noble, and the true-hearted.

  A man may call himself Christian, Jew, Buddhist, Mohammedan, Hindu

—or by any other name—and be immoral; but if one is pure-hearted, if he is

true and noble and beautiful in character—in a word, if he is moral—then he

is an inhabitant of the "Holy City" in which, there is "no temple"; he is, by

example and influence, a regenerator of mankind; he is one of the company

of the Children of Light.          6. MEMORY, REPETITION, AND HABIT


  I shall gain.

  By purity and strong self-mastery,

  The awakened vision that doth set men free

  From painful slumber and the night of grief.

  When a particular combination of words has been repeated a number of

times, it is said to have been committed to memory—that is, it can then be

repeated without visual reference to the words themselves, and without pause

or effort; indeed, the words have then a tendency to repeat themselves in the

mind, and sometimes people are troubled with the ringing of a refrain, or the

repetition of a sentence in the mind, which they find it very difficult to get rid

of and forget.

  There is a sense in which the whole of life is a process of committing to

memory. At first there is act, from act springs experience, from experience

arises recollection, from recollection repetition, and  from  repetition  is

formed habit;  hence  proceeds  impulse,  faculty,  character,  individualised

existence.

  Life is a repetition of the same things over again. There is very little

difference between the days and years in the life of a man; one is almost

entirely  a  repetition  of  the  other.  Every  being  is  an  accumulation  of

experiences gathered, learnt, and woven into the life by a ceaseless series of

repetitions extending over an incalculable number of lives which thread their

way through eons of time.

  The  life  of  a  man,  from  the  germ-cell  to  maturity,  is  a  repetition,  in

synthesis, of the entire process of evolution. There is a cosmic memory at the

root  of  all  growth  and  progress,  which  is  an  informing  and  sustaining

principle in the process of evolution.

  The  sensuous  memory  of  man  is  fickle  and  ephemeral,  but  the  super

sensuous  memory  which  is  inherent  in  all  matter,  building  up  forms  and

faculty is infallible in its reproduction of experiences.

  Life  is  ceaseless  reiteration.  Nature  ever  travels  over  old  and  familiar

ground. Man is daily repeating that which he has learnt though: the schools of

experience in which the lessons were acquired may be long forgotten; but theacquired habit is not forgotten; it is carried forward and continues to act. The

unconscious and automatic ease which marks the play of faculty is not the

ready-made  mechanism  of  an  arbitrary  creator;  it  is skill  acquired  by

practice;  it  is  the  consummation  of  millions  of  repetitions  of.  the  same

thought and act.

    Thoughts  and  deeds  long  persisted  in  become  at  last  spontaneous

impulses.

  It is a profound truth that "there is nothing new under the sun." It is

possible  and  highly  probable  that,  in  the  round  of  eternity,  even  all  our

modern inventions and mechanical marvels have been produced innumerable

times on this or other worlds. In this world,  new combinations of matter

appear from time to time, but are they new in the universe? Who dare say

that,  in  the  mind  which  overarches  eternity,  the  cosmic  memory  is  not

reproducing things long since fashioned out of itself?

  Nothing  can  be  added  to,  or  taken  from,  the  universe.  Its  matter  can

neither be increased nor decreased. Chemical combinations of matter vary,

but matter itself cannot vary. Life likewise does not change. In the forms of

life there is continuous flux, but in the principle of life there is no increase or

diminution. Forms come forth only to retreat and disappear; but that which

disappears is not lost; the memory of it is retained, and it continues to be

repeated. Eternal disintegration is balanced by eternal restitution.

  The  mind  of  man  is  not  separate  from  the  Eternal  Mind;  in  its  daily

repetitions is indelibly written the record of all its past. Character  is  an

accumulation of deeds. Each man is the last reckoning in the long sum of

evolution, and there is no falsification of the account. The mind continues to

automatically perform the habit which encloses a million repetitions of the

same  deed.  Compared  with  this  ineffaceable,  unconscious  memory,  the

memory of three score years and ten is as a fading vapour to an Egyptian

Pyramid. The tendencies, impulses, and habits of which a man is a victim are

the repetitions of his accumulated deeds. They enfold the destiny which he

has wrought. The grace, goodness, and genius which a man exhibits without

conscious effort are the fruits of the accumulated labours of his mind. He

repeats with ease that which was learned by painful labour. The wise man

sees a reflection of himself in the fate which overtakes him.

  Life flows in channels. Every man is in a rut. Men tell their fellows to"get out of their ruts," but they themselves are in ruts of another kind. The

flow of law, of nature, cannot be avoided, but it can be utilised. We cannot

avoid ruts, but we can avoid bad ones; we can follow along good ones.

  In their training and education, the children of to-day are strictly confined

to ways which are worn by the feet of a thousand generations. In his fixed

habits  and  characteristics,  the  man  of  to-day  is  reviving  the  actions  of  a

thousand lives.

  It is true that men are bound; but it is equally true that they can unbind.

The law by which a man becomes the sorrowful victim of his own wrong

deeds is a blessed, and not a cursed, law; for by the same law he can become

the instrument of all that is good. Habits chain a man, but he himself forged

the  links.  He  whose  inner  eye  has  opened  to  perceive  the  law  does  not

complain. The bondage of evil is a heavy slavery, but the bondage of good is

a blessed service.

  The will of man is powerless to alter the law of life, but it is powerful to

obey it. The Great Law makes for good; it puts a heavy penalty on evil. Man

can break his chains, and shake himself free; and when he enters earnestly

upon the work of self-liberation, all the universe will be with him in his

labour. Repetition and habit he cannot avoid, but he can set going repetitions

that are harmonious, he can form habits that will crystallise into pure and

noble characteristics.

  In the self-built archives of the mind are stored away the entire records of

man’s evolution. Man is an epitomised history of the world. In his outbursts

of  rage  we  hear  again  the  roar  of  the  lion  in  the  forest;  in  his  selfish

schemings to secure his coveted ends we see the tiger stalking its prey; his

lusts,  revenges,  hatreds,  and  fears  are  the  instinct  born  of  primeval

experiences. The universe does not forget; life remembers and restores.

    Between  the  sensuous  and  the  super  sensuous  worlds  is  the  Lethean

stream, the river of forgetfulness. Only he who has passed into the super

sensuous world—the world of pure goodness—remembers with the Memory

of Life which transcends a million deaths. Only he whose will obeys the

Universal Will, whose heart is in harmony with the Cosmic Order, receives

the vision which pierces through the vale of time and matter, and sees the

before and the beyond.

  Man  quickly  forgets,  and  it  is  well  that  he  forgets;  the  universeremembers and records. The repetition of an evil deed is its own retribution;

the repetition of a good deed is its own reward. The deepest punishment of

evil is evil; the highest reward of good is good. When a deed is done, it is not

ended; it is but begun; it remains with the doer—to curse him, if evil; to bless

him, if good. Deeds accumulate by repetition, and they remain as character,

and in character is both curse and blessing.

    Suffering inheres in the discordant repetition of evil; bliss inheres in the

rhythmic  repetitions  of  good.  Seeing  that  we  cannot  escape  the  law  of

repetition,  let  us  choose  to  do  those  things  which  are  good;  and  as  one

establishes habits of purity, the divine memory will be awakened within him.                        7. WORDS AND WISDOM


  I would find

  Where Wisdom is, where Peace abides, where Truth,

  Majestic, changeless, and eternal, stands

    Untouched by the illusions of the world;

  For surely there is Knowledge, Truth, and Peace

  For him who seeks.

    Thoughts, words, acts—these combine to make up the entire life of every

individual. Words and acts are thoughts expressed. We think in words. In the

process of thinking, words are stored up in the consciousness, where they

await expression and use as occasion may call them forth.

  Words fit the mind which received them; they are the tally of the intellect

which uses them. The meaner the mind, the more meagre is the vocabulary.

A limited and a capacious intellect alike expresses itself through a limited and

an extensive use of words. A great mind expresses itself by the vehicle of

flowing and noble language.

  Words stand for conceptions. Conceptions are embodied in words. At the

moment  that  a  conception  is  formed  in  the  mind,  its  corresponding  word

arises  in  the  thought.  Conceptions  and  words  cannot  be  hidden  away

indefinitely.  Sooner  or  later  they  will  come  forth  into  the  outer  world  of

expression. The matter of the universe is in ceaseless circulation. Its hidden

things are continuously coming forth into open and visible life. Likewise the

mental  operations  of  men  are  ever  in  active  circulation,  and  their  hidden

thoughts are daily expressing themselves in words and acts. The words and

actions of every man are determined by the thoughts in which he habitually

dwells.

  Speech is audible thought. A man reveals himself through his speech.

Whether he is pure or impure, foolish or vice, he makes his inner condition

known through his speech. The foolish man is known by the way in which he

talks; the wise man is known by the purity, gravity, and excellence of his

speech. "He who would gain a knowledge of men." says Confucius, "must

first learn to understand the meaning of words "

  All wise men, saints, and great teachers have declared that the first step inwisdom is to control the tongue. The disciple of speech is a mental disciple.

When a man controls his tongue, he controls his mind; when he purifies his

speech, he purifies his mind. Speech and mind cannot be separated. They are

two aspects of character.

  A man may read Scripture, study religions, and practise mystical arts; but

if he allows his tongue to run loosely, he will be as foolish at the end of all

his labours as he was at the beginning.

  A man may not read Scripture, nor study religions, nor practise ascetic

arts; but if he controls his tongue, and studies how to speak wisely and well,

he will become wise.

  Wisdom is perceived in the words which are its expression. We speak of

certain  men—of  Shakespeare  for  instance—as  being  wise.  We  never  saw

Shakespeare, and we know very little of his life; how, then, do we know he

was wise? By his words only. Where there are wise words, we know there is

a wise mind. A foolish man may, like a parrot, repeat wise words, but a wise

man frames wise sentences; his wisdom is shown in originally expressed

language.

  Why do men speak of words as being bad or good, degrading or inspiring,

low or lofty, weak or strong? Is it not because they, unconsciously recognise

that words cannot be dissociated from thoughts? Why do pure-minded people

avoid a man who habitually uses impure language? Is it not because they

know that such words proceed from an unclean mind?

  It is impossible for any being to give utterance to words which are not

already lodged in his mind fit the form of thought. The impure mind cannot

speak pure words; the pure mind cannot speak impure words. The ignorant

cannot speak learnedly, nor the learned ignorantly. The foolish man cannot

speak wisely, nor the wise foolishly.

  Altered speech follows an altered mind. When a man turns from evil to

good, his conversation becomes cleansed. As a man increases in wisdom, he

watches, modifies, and perfects his speech.

  If the foolish and the wise are known by their words, what, then, is the

speech of folly, and what the language of wisdom?

  A man is foolish:

  If he talks aimlessly and incoherently.  If he engages in impure conversations.

  If he utters falsehood.

  If he speaks ill of the absent, and carries about evil reports concerning

others.

  If he frames flattering words.

  If he utters violent and abusive words.

  If his speech is irreverent, and his words are directed against the great and

good.

  If he speaks in praise of himself.

  A man is wise:

  If he talks with purpose and intelligence.

  If his conversation is chaste.

  If he utters words of sincerity and truth.

  If he speaks well of and in defence of, the absent.

  If he speaks words of virtuous reproof.

  If his speech is gentle and kindly.

  If he talks reverently of the great and good.

  If he speaks in praise of others.

  We are all, now and always, justified and condemned by our words. The

law of Truth is not held in abeyance, and every day is judgement day. For

"every idle word" which one speaks he is at once ’’called to account" in an

immediate and certain loss of happiness and influence. By the words which

we habitually utter we publish to the universe the degree of our intelligence

and  the  standard  of  our  morality,  and  receive  back  through  them  the

judgement  of  the  world.  The  fool  thinks  he  is  harshly  judged  and  badly

treated by others, not knowing that his real scourge is his own ungoverned

tongue.

  To control the tongue, to discipline the speech, to strive for the use of

purer and gentler words—this is a very lowly thing, and one that is much

despised; but it cannot be neglected by him who eagerly aspires to walk the

way of wisdom.                    8. TRUTH MADE MANIFEST


  Upon the lofty Summits of the Truth

  Where clouds and darkness are not, and where rests

  Eternal Splendour; there, abiding Joy

  Awaits thy coming.

  Be watchful, fearless, faithful, patient, pure:

  By earnest meditation sound the depths

    Profound of life, and scale the heights sublime

  Of Love and Wisdom.

  Truth is rendered visible through the media of deeds. It is something seen

and not heard. Words do not contain the Truth; they only symbolise it. Good

deeds are the only vessels which contain Truth.

  It has been frequently said that being must precede doing. Being always

does precede doing; but being; and doing cannot be arbitrarily separated. A

man’s deeds are the expression of himself. Acts are the language of Reality.

If a man’s inner being is allied to Truth, his deeds will speak it forth; if with

error, his deeds will make manifest that error.

  No man can hide what he is. He must necessarily act, and every time he

acts he reveals himself.

  In the light of Reality no man can deceive humanity or the universe; but

he can deceive himself.

  Deeds  of  purity,  love,  gentleness,  patience,  humility,  compassion,  and

wisdom  are  Truth  made  manifest.  These  qualities  cannot  be  contained

between the covers of a book, but only the words which refer to them; they

are Life.

  Deeds of impurity, hatred, anger, pride, vanity, and folly are error making

itself known. A man’s deeds are the publication of himself to the world.

  Truth cannot be comprehended through reading, but only by correcting

and converting one’s self. Precepts are aids to the acquirement of wisdom,

but wisdom is acquired only by practice.

  If a man would know what measure of Truth he possesses, he should ask

himself, "What am I? What are my deeds?"  Men dispute about words, thinking that Truth is heard and read. Truth is

neither heard nor read; it is seen.

  Good deeds are the visible embodiments of Truth; they are messengers of

Knowledge; angels of Wisdom; but the eye of error is dark, and cannot see

them.                        9. SPIRITUAL HUMILITY


  Who would be the companion of the wise,

  And know the Cosmic Splendour; he must stoop

  Who seeks to stand; must fall who fain would rise;

  Must know the low, ascending to the high;

  He who would know the Great must not disdain

  To diligently wait upon the small;

  He wisdom finds who finds humility,

    Throughout the Sacred Scriptures of all religions there runs, like a silver

thread, the teaching of Humility. Not only all the Scriptures, but the sages of

all time have declared that only through the portal of humility is it possible

for man to enter into the possession of the Life of Truth; and as that life is

entirely of a spiritual Nature, so the humility that leads to it is purely and

absolutely spiritual; and being such, it can never be materialised, can never be

embodied in a dogma, or laid down as a formula. It is not an outward thing,

nor does it consist of that practice of self-abasement that has usurped its

name.

  But priests have taught, and many have been led to believe, that self-

depreciation is true humility, while in reality it is its extreme antithesis. Self-

depreciation is self-degradation; may, it is even a sort of self-destruction, it is

spiritual suicide. The man who believes that all his righteousness is as filthy

rags, that there is no good thing in him, and that he can never rise by any

effort  of  his  own,  is  by  that  very  attitude  of  his  mind,  rendering  himself

impotent; he is strangling the Spirit; he is undermining and disintegrating all

that  is  highest  and  noblest  in  his  character.  Instead  of  building  up  his

character he is engaged in despoiling it. "As a man thinketh in his heart, so is

he"; what our thoughts are, such are our characters. We are in reality beings

composed  of  thoughts;  thoughts  are  the  bricks  which  we  are  continually

laying down in the building of our souls. If we put a large percentage of

rotten bricks into the building, we shall build but a miserable hovel, and

every self-depreciating thought is a brick that is already crumbling. It will be

found to be a rule marvellously accurate in its application that those who

continually live in this attitude of self-depreciation are throughout life, or, at