necessary - you do not beg of the storekeeper to give it to you; you ask the

price of it, pay for it with your money, and then it becomes your own. You

recognise the perfect justice in giving an equivalent for what you receive, and

would not wish it to be otherwise. The same just law prevails in spiritual

things. If you are in need of any spiritual thing - joy, assurance, peace, or

whatelsesoever - you can only come into full possession of it by giving an

equivalent; you must pay the price for it. As you must give a portion of your

material substance for a worldly thing so you must give a portion of your

immaterial substance for a spiritual thing. You must yield up some passion or

lust or vanity or indulgence before the spiritual possession can be yours. The

miser who clings to his money and will not give up any of it because of the

pleasure which its possession affords him cannot have any of the material

comforts of life. He lives in continual want and discomfort in spite of all his

wealth. The man who will not give up his passions, who clings to anger,

unkindness,  sensuality,  pride,  vanity,  self-indulgence,  for  the  momentary

pleasure which their gratification affords him is a spiritual miser; he cannot

have  any  spiritual  comforts,  and  suffers  continual  spiritual  want  and

uneasiness in spite of the wealth of worldly pleasures which he fondly hugs

and refuses to give up.

  The  man  who  is  wise  in  worldly  things  neither  begs  nor  steals,  but

labours and purchases, and the world honours him for his uprightness. The

man who is wise in spiritual things neither begs nor steals, but labours in his

own  inner  world,  and  purchases  his  spiritual  possessions.  Him  the  whole

universe honours for his righteousness.

  It is another law in worldly things that a man who engages himself to

another in any form of employment shall be content with the wages upon

which  he  agreed.  If  at  the  end  of  his  week’s  work,  and  on  receiving  his

wages, he were to ask his employer for a larger sum, pleading that, though he

could not justly claim it and did not really deserve it, yet he expected it, he

would  not  only  not  receive  the  larger  sum  but  would,  doubtless,  be

discharged from his post. Yet in spiritual things men do not think it to be

either foolish or selfish to ask for those blessings - spiritual wages - upon

which they never agreed, for which they never laboured, and which they do

not deserve. Every man gets from the law of the universe that upon which he

agrees and for which he works - no more, no less; and he is continuallyentering into agreements with the Supreme Law - the Master of the universe.

For every thought and act which he gives he receives its just equivalent; for

all  work  done  in  the  form  of  deeds  he  receives  the  wages  due  to  him.

Knowing this, the enlightened man is always content, always satisfied, and in

perfect  peace,  knowing  that  whatever  he  receives  (be  it  that  men  call

misfortune or good fortune) he has earned. The Great Law never cheats any

man of his just due, but it says to the railer and the complainer “Friend didst

thou not agree with me for a penny a day?”

  Again, if a man would grow rich in worldly goods he must economise,

and  husband  his  financial  resources  until  he  has  accumulated  sufficient

capital to invest in some branch of industry; then he must judiciously invest

his  little  store  of  capital,  neither  holding  it  too  tightly  nor  letting  it  go

carelessly. He thus increases both in worldly wisdom and worldly riches. The

idle spendthrift cannot grow rich; he is wasteful and riotous. He who would

grow rich in spiritual things must also economise, and husband his mental

resources. He must curb his tongue and his impulses, not wasting his energy

in idle gossip, vain argument, or excesses of temper. In this way he will

accumulate a little store of wisdom which is his spiritual capital, and this he

must send out into the world for the good of others, and the more he uses it

the  richer  will  he  become.  Thus  does  a  man  increase  in  both  heavenly

wisdom and heavenly riches. The man who follows his blind impulses and

desires and does not control and govern his mind is a spiritual spendthrift. He

can never become rich in divine things.

  It is a physical law that if we would reach the summit of a mountain we

must climb thither. The path must be sought and then carefully followed, and

the climber must not give up and go back because of the labour involved and

the difficulties to be overcome, nor on account of aching climbs, otherwise

his object cannot be accomplished. And this law is also spiritual. He who

would reach the high altitudes of moral or intellectual grandeur must climb

thither  by  his  own  efforts.  He  must  seek  out  the  pathway  and  then

assiduously follow it, not giving up and turning back, but surmounting all

difficulties, and enduring for a time trials, temptations, and heartaches, and at

last he will stand upon the glorious summit of moral perfection, the world of

passion, temptation, and sorrow beneath his feet, and the boundless heavens

of dignity stretching vast and silent above his head.  If a man would reach a distant city, or any place of destination, he must

travel thither. There is no law by which he can be instantly transported there.

He can only get there by putting forth the necessary exertion. If he walks he

will put forth great exertion, but it will cost him nothing in money; if he

drives or takes train, there will be less actual labour, but he must pay in

money for which he has laboured. To reach any place requires labour; this

cannot be avoided; it is law. Equally so spiritually. He who would reach any

spiritual  destination,  such  as  purity,  compassion,  wisdom,  or  peace,  must

travel thither, and must labour to get there. There is no law by which he can

suddenly be transported to any of these beautiful spiritual cities. He must find

the most direct route and then put forth the necessary labour, and at last he

will come to the end of his journey.

  These are but a few of the many laws, or manifestations of the One Great

Law,  which  are  to  be  understood,  applied  and  obeyed  before  the  full

manhood and maturity of spiritual life and blessedness can be attained. There

is no worldly or physical law which is not operative, with equal exactness, in

the spiritual realm - that is, the inner and invisible world of man’s beings.

Just as physical things are the shadows and types, of spiritual realities so

worldly wisdom is the reflected image of Divine Wisdom. All those simple

operations of human life in worldly things which men never question, but

follow and obey implicitly because of their obvious plainness and exactness,

obtain in spiritual things with the same unerring accuracy; and when this is

understood, and these laws are as implicitly obeyed in spiritual as in worldly

matters,  then  has  a  man  reached  the  firm  standing-ground  of  exact

knowledge; his sorrows are at an end, and he can doubt no more.

  Life  is  uninvolved,  uncompromising  justice;  its  operations  are  simple,

invincible  logic.  Law  reigns  for  ever,  and  the  heart  of  law  is  love.

Favouritism and caprice are the reverse of both law and love. The universe

has no favourites; it is supremely just, and gives to every man his rightful

earnings. All is good because all his according to law, and because all his

according to law, man can find the right way in life, and, having found it, can

rejoice  and  be  glad.  The  Father  of  Jesus  is  the  Unfailing  Good  which  is

embodied in the law of things. “No evil can happen to a good man either in

life or death.” Jesus recognised the good in his own fate, and exonerated all

his persecutors from blame. “No man,” he declared, “taketh my life from me,but I lay it down of myself.” That is, he himself had brought about his own

end.

  He who has, by simplifying his life and purifying his mind, arrived at an

understanding of the beautiful simplicity of being, perceives the unvarying

operation of law in all things, and knows the result of all his thoughts and

deeds upon himself and the world - knows what effects are bound up with the

mental causes which he sets in motion. He then thinks and does only those

thoughts and deeds that are blessed in their inception, blessed in their growth,

and blessed in their completion. Humbly accepting the lawful results of all

the deeds done when in a state of ignorance, he neither complains nor fears

nor  questions,  but  is  at  rest  in  obedience,  is  perfectly  blessed  in  his

knowledge of the Good Law.

  “The tissue of our life to be

  We weave with colours all our own,

  And in the field of Destiny

  We reap as we have sown.

  “And if we reap as we have sown,

  And take the dole we deal,

  The law of pain is love alone,

  The wounding is to heal.”                        14. HAPPY ENDINGS

  “Such is the Law which moves to righteousness,

  Which none at last can turn aside or stay;

  The heart of it is Love, the end of it

  Is peace and consummation sweet. Obey.”

  The Light of Asia.

 

  “So, haply, when thy task shall end,

  The wrong shall lose itself in right,

  And all thy week-day Sabbaths blend

  With the long Sabbath of the Light!”

    Whittier.

 

  Life has many happy endings, because it has much that is noble and pure

and beautiful. Although there is much sin and ignorance in the world, many

tears, and much pain and sorrow, there is also much purity and knowledge,

many smiles, and much healing and gladness. No pure thought, no unselfish

deed can fall short of its felicitous result, and every such result is a happy

consummation.

  A pleasant home is a happy ending; a successful life is a happy ending; a

task well and faithfully done is a happy ending; to be surrounded by kind

friends is a happy ending. A quarrel put away, grudges wiped out, unkind

words confessed and forgiven, friend restored to friend - all these are happy

endings. To find that which one has long and tediously sought; to be restored

from tears to gladness; to awaken in the bright sunlight out of the painful

nightmare of sin, to strike, after much searching, the Heavenly Way in life -

these are, indeed, blessed consummations.

  He who looks for, finds, and enters the byways which I have indicated

will come to this one without seeking it, for his whole life will be filled with

happy endings. He who begins right and continues right does not need to

desire and search for felicitous results; they are already at hand; they followas consequences; they are the certainties, the realities of life.

  There are happy endings which belong solely to the material world; these

are transient, and they pass away. These are happy endings which belong to

the spiritual world; these are eternal, and they do not pass away. Sweet are

companionships, pleasures, and material comforts, but they change and fade

away. Sweeter still are Purity, Wisdom, and the knowledge of Truth, and

these never change nor fade away. Wherever a man goes in this world he can

take his worldly possessions with him; but soon he must part company with

them, and if he stands upon these alone, deriving all his happiness from them,

he will come to a spiritual ending of great emptiness and want. But he has

attained to the possession of spiritual things can never be deprived of his

source  of  happiness:  he  will  never  have  to  part  company  with  it,  and

wherever he goes in the whole universe he will carry his possession with him.

His spiritual end will be the fulness of joy.

  Happy in the Eternal Happiness is he who has come to that Life from

which the thought of self is abolished. Already, even now and in this life, he

has entered the Kingdom of Heaven, Nirvana, Paradise, the New Jerusalem,

the Olympus of Jupiter, the Valhalla of the Gods. He knows the Final Unity

of Life, the Great Reality of which these fleeting and changing names are but

feeble utterances. He is at rest on the bosom of the Infinite.

  Sweet is the rest and deep the bliss of him who has freed his heart from

its lusts and hatreds and dark desires; and he who, without any shadow of

bitterness or selfishness resting upon him, and looking out upon the world

with boundless compassion and love, can breathe, in his inmost heart, the

blessing:

  Peace unto all living things,

  making no exceptions or distinctions - such a man has reached that happy

ending which can never be taken away, for this is the perfection of life, the

fulness of peace, the consummation of perfect blessedness.                                  BOOK SIX


        THE MASTERY OF DESTINY.          1. DEEDS, CHARACTER, AND DESTINY


  THERE is, and always has been, a widespread belief in Fate, or Destiny,

that is, in an eternal and inscrutable Power which apportions definite ends to

both individuals and nations. This belief has arisen from long observation of

the facts of life.

  Men are conscious that there are certain occurrences which they cannot

control,  and  are  powerless  to  avert.  Birth  and  death,  for  instance,  are

inevitable, and many of the incidents of life appear equally inevitable.

  Men strain every nerve for the attainment of certain ends, and gradually

they become conscious of a Power which seems to be not of themselves,

which frustrates their puny efforts, and laughs, as it were, at their fruitless

striving and struggle.

  As  men  advance  in  life,  they  learn  to  submit,  more  or  less,  to  this

overruling Power which they do not understand, perceiving only its effects in

themselves and the world around them, and they call it by various names,

such as God, Providence, Fate, Destiny, etc.

  Men of contemplation, such as poets and philosophers, step aside, as it

were, to watch the movements of this mysterious Power as it seems to elevate

its  favourites  on  the  one  hand,  and  strike  down  its  victims  on  the  other,

without reference to merit or demerit.

  The greatest poets, especially the dramatic poets, represent this Power in

their  works,  as  they  have  observed  it  in  Nature.  The  Greek  and  Roman

dramatists usually depict their heroes as having foreknowledge of their fate,

and  taking  means  to  escape  it;  but  by  so  doing  they  blindly  involve

themselves in a series of consequences which bring about the doom which

they  are  trying  to  avert.  Shakespeare’s  characters,  on  the  other  hand,  are

represented,  as  in  Nature,  with  no  foreknowledge  (except  in  the  form  of

presentiment)  of  their  particular  destiny.  Thus,  according  to  the  poets,

whether  the  man  knows  his  fate  or  not,  he  cannot  avert  it,  and  every

conscious or unconscious act of his is a step towards it.

  Omar Khayyam’s Moving Finger is a vivid expression of this idea of

Fate:

  "The Moving Finger writes, and having writ,  Moves on: nor all thy Piety nor Wit

  Shall lure it back to cancel half a line,

  Nor all thy Tears wash out a Word of it."

  Thus, men in all nations and times have experienced in their lives the

action  of  this  invincible  Power  or  Law,  and  in  our  nation  today  this

experience has been crystallized in the terse proverb, "Man proposes, God

disposes."

  But, contradictory as it may appear, there is an equally widespread belief

in man’s responsibility as a free agent.

  All  moral  teaching  is  an  affirmation  of  man’s  freedom  to  choose  his

course  and  mold  his  destiny:  and  man’s  patient  and  untiring  efforts  in

achieving his ends are declarations of consciousness of freedom and power.

  This dual experience of fate on the one hand, and freedom on the other,

has  given  rise  to  the  interminable  controversy  between  the  believers  in

Fatalism and the upholders of free will —a controversy which was recently

revived under the term "Determinism versus Freewill."

    Between apparently conflicting extremes there is always a "middle way"

of balance, justice, or compensation which, while it includes both extremes,

cannot  be  said  to  be  either  one  or  the  other,  and  which  brings  both  into

harmony; and this middle way is the point of contact between two extremes.

  Truth  cannot  be  a  partisan,  but,  by  its  nature,  is  the  Reconciler  of

extremes; and so, in the matter which we are considering, there is a "golden

mean"  which  brings  Fate  and  Free  will  into  close  relationship,  wherein,

indeed, it is seen that these two indisputable facts in human life, for such they

are, are but two aspects of one central law, one unifying and all-embracing

principle, namely, the law of causation in its moral aspect.

  Moral  causation  necessitates  both  Fate  and  Free  will,  both  individual

responsibility and individual predestination, for the law of causes must also

be the law of effects, and cause and effect must always be equal; the train of

causation, both in matter and mind, must be eternally balanced, therefore

eternally just, eternally perfect. Thus every effect may be said to be a thing

preordained, but the predetermining power is a cause, and not the fiat of an

arbitrary will.

  Man finds himself involved in the train of causation. His life is made upof causes and effects. It is both a sowing and a reaping. Each act of his is a

cause which must be balanced by its effects. He chooses the cause (this is

Free will), he cannot choose, alter, or avert the effect (this is Fate); thus Free

will stands for the power to initiate causes, and destiny is involvement in

effects.

  It is therefore true that man is predestined to certain ends, but he himself

has (though he knows it not) issued the mandate; that good or evil thing from

which there is no escape, he has, by his own deeds, brought about.

  It may here be urged that man is not responsible for his deeds, that these

are the effects of his character, and that he is not responsible for the character,

good or bad, which was given him at his birth. If character was "given him"

at birth, this would be true, and there would then be no moral law, and no

need for moral teaching; but characters are not given ready made, they are

evolved; they are, indeed, effects, the products of the moral law itself, that is

— the products of deeds. Character result of an accumulation of deeds which

have been piled up, so to speak, by the individual during his life.

  Man is the doer of his own deeds; as such he is the maker of his own

character; and as the doer of his deeds and the maker of his character, he is

the molder and shaper of his destiny. He has the power to modify and alter

his deeds, and every time he acts he modifies his character, and with the

modification  of  his  character  for  good  or  evil,  he  is  predetermining  for

himself new destinies— destinies disastrous or beneficent in accordance with

the nature of his deeds. Character is destiny itself; as a fixed combination of

deeds, it bears within itself the results of those deeds. These results lie hidden

as moral seeds in the dark recesses of the character, awaiting their season of

germination, growth, and fruitage.

  Those  things  which  befall  a  man  are  the  reflections  of  himself;  that

destiny which pursued him, which he was powerless to escape by effort, or

avert by prayer, was the relentless ghoul of his own wrong deeds demanding

and  enforcing  restitution;  those  blessings  and  curses  which  come  to  him

unbidden are the reverberating echoes of the sounds which he himself sent

forth.

  It is this knowledge of the Perfect Law working through and above all

things; of the Perfect Justice operating in and adjusting all human affairs, that

enables  the  good  man  to  love  his  enemies,  and  to  rise  above  all  hatred,resentment, and complaining; for he knows that only his own can come to

him, and that, though he be surrounded by persecutors, his enemies are but

the blind instruments of a faultless retribution; and so he blames them not,

but calmly receives his accounts, and patiently pays his moral debts.

  But this is not all; he does not merely pay his debts; he takes care not to

contract any further debts. He watches himself and makes his deeds faultless.

While paying off evil accounts, he is laying up good accounts. By putting an

end to his own sin, he is bringing evil and suffering to an end.

  And now let us consider how the Law operates in particular instances in

the outworking of destiny through deeds and character. First, we will look at

this present life, for the present is the synthesis of the entire past; the net

result of all that a man has ever thought and done is contained within him. It

is noticeable that sometimes the good man fails and the unscrupulous man

prospers— a fact which seems to put all moral maxims as to the good results

of righteousness out of account— and because of this, many people deny the

operation of any just law in human life, and even declare that it is chiefly the

unjust that prosper.

    Nevertheless, the moral law exists, and is not altered or subverted by

shallow  conclusions.  It  should  be  remembered  that  man  is  a changing,

evolving being. The good man was not always good; the bad man was not

always bad. Even in this life, there was a time, in a large number of instances,

when the man who is now just, was unjust; when he who is now kind, was

cruel; when he who is now pure, was impure.

    Conversely, there was a time in this life, in a number of instances, when

he who is now unjust, was just; when he who is now cruel, was kind; when

he who is now impure, was pure. Thus, the good man who is overtaken with

calamity today is reaping the result of his former evil sowing; later he will

reap the happy result of his present good sowing; while the bad man is now

reaping the result of his former good sowing; later he will reap the result of

his present sowing of bad.

    Characteristics  are  fixed  habits  of  mind,  the  results  of  deeds.  An  act

repeated a large number of times becomes unconscious, or automatic— that

is, it then seems to repeat itself without any effort on the part of the doer, so

that it seems to him almost impossible not to do it, and then it has become a

mental characteristic.  Here is a poor man out of work. He is honest, and is not a shirker. He

wants work, and cannot get it. He tries hard, and continues to fail. Where is

the justice in his lot? There was a time in this man’s condition when he had

plenty of work. He felt burdened with it; he shirked it, and longed for ease.

He thought how delightful it would be to have nothing to do.

  He did not appreciate the blessedness of his lot. His desire for ease is now

gratified, but the fruit for which he longed, and which he thought would taste

so sweet, has turned to ashes in his mouth. The condition which he aimed for,

namely, to have nothing to do, he has reached, and there he is compelled to

remain till his lesson is thoroughly learned.

  And he is surely learning that habitual ease is degrading, that to have

nothing to do is a condition of wretchedness, and that work is a noble and

blessed thing. His former desires and deeds have brought him where he is;

and now his present desire for work, his ceaseless searching and asking for it,

will just as surely bring about its own beneficent result. No longer desiring

idleness, his present condition will, as an effect, the cause of which is no

longer propagated, soon pass away, and he will obtain employment; and if his

whole mind is now set on work, and he desires it above all else, then when it

comes he will be overwhelmed with it; it will flow in to him from all sides,

and he will prosper in his industry.

  Then, if he does not understand the law of cause and effect in human life,

he will wonder why work comes to him apparently unsought, while others

who seek it strenuously fail to obtain it. Nothing comes unbidden; where the

shadow is, there also is the substance. That which comes to the individual is

the product of his own deeds.

  As cheerful industry leads to greater industry and increasing prosperity,

and labour shirked or undertaken discontentedly leads to a lesser degree of

labour and decreasing prosperity, so with all the varied conditions of life as

we see them— they are the destinies wrought by the thoughts and deeds of

each particular individual. So also with the vast variety of characters— they

are the ripening and ripened growth of the sowing of deeds.

  As the individual reaps what he sows, so the nation, being a community

of individuals, reaps also what it sows. Nations become great when their

leaders are just men; they fall and fade when their just men pass away. Those

who are in power set an example, good or bad, for the entire nation.  Great will be the peace and prosperity of a nation when there shall arise

within it a line of statesmen who, having first established themselves in a

lofty integrity of character, shall direct the energies of the nation toward the

culture of virtue and development of character, knowing that only through

personal industry, integrity, and nobility can national prosperity proceed.

  Still, above all, is the Great Law, calmly and with infallible justice meting

out to mortals their fleeting destinies, tear-stained or smiling, the fabric of

their hands. Life is a great school for the development of character, and all,

through strife and struggle, vice and virtue, success and failure, are slowly

but surely learning the lessons of wisdom.        2. THE SCIENCE OF SELF-CONTROL


  WE live in a scientific age. Men of science are numbered by thousands,

and they are ceaselessly searching, analyzing, and experimenting with a view

to discovery and the increase of knowledge.

  The shelves of our libraries, both public and private, are heavy with their

load  of  imposing  volumes  on  scientific  subjects,  and  the  wonderful

achievements  of  modern  science  are  always  before  us—  whether  in  our

homes or in our streets, in country or town, on land or sea— there shall we

have  before  us  some  marvelous  device,  some  recent  accomplishment  of

science, for adding to our comfort, increasing our speed, or saving the labour

of our hands.

  Yet, with all our vast store of scientific knowledge, and its startling and

rapidly increasing results in the world of discovery and invention, there is, in

this age, one branch of science which has so far fallen into decay as to have

become  almost  forgotten;  a  science,  nevertheless,  which  is  of  greater

importance  than  all  the  other  sciences  combined,  and  without  which  all

science  would  but  subserve  the  ends  of  selfishness,  and  aid  in  man’s

destruction—I refer to the Science of Self-control.

  Our modern scientists study the elements and forces which are outside

themselves, with the object of controlling and utilizing them. The ancients

studied the elements and forces which were within themselves, with a view to

controlling  and  utilizing  them,  and  the  ancients  produced  such  mighty

Masters  of  knowledge  in  this  direction,  that  to  this  day  they  are  held  in

reverence as gods, and the vast religious organizations of the world are based

upon their achievements.

  Wonderful  as  are  the  forces  in  nature,  they  are  vastly  inferior  to  that

combination of intelligent forces which comprise the mind of man, and which

dominate  and  direct  the  blind  mechanical  forces  of  nature.  Therefore,  it

follows that, to understand, control, and direct the inner forces of passion,

desire, will, and intellect, is to be in possession of the destinies of men and

nations.

  As  in  ordinary  science,  there  are,  in  this  divine  science,  degrees  ofattainment; and a man is great in knowledge, great in himself, and great in his

influence on the world, in the measure that he is great in self-control.

  He who understands and dominates the forces of external nature is the

natural scientist; but he who understands and dominates the internal forces of

the mind is the divine scientist; and the laws  which operate in gaining a

knowledge of external appearances, operate also in gaining a knowledge of

internal varieties.

  A  man  cannot  become  an  accomplished  scientist  in  a  few  weeks  or

months,  nay,  not  even  in  a  few  years.  But  only  after  many  years  of

painstaking investigation can he speak with authority, and be ranked among

the  masters  of  science.  Likewise,  a  man  cannot  acquire  self-control,  and

become possessed of the wisdom and peace giving knowledge which that

self-control confers, but by many years of patient labour; a labour which is all

the  more  arduous  because  it  is  silent,  and  both  unrecognized  and

unappreciated by others; and he who would pursue this science successfully

must  learn  to  stand  alone,  and  to  toil  unrewarded,  as  far  as  any  outward

emolument is concerned.

  The  natural  scientist  pursues,  in  acquiring  his  particular  kind  of

knowledge, the following five orderly and sequential steps:

  1. Observation: that is, he closely and persistently observes the facts of

nature.

  2. Experiment: Having become acquainted, by repeated observations,

with  certain  facts,  he  experiments  with  those  facts,  with  a  view  to  the

discovery  of  natural  laws.  He  puts  his  facts  through  rigid  processes  of

analysis, and so finds out what is useless and what of value; and he rejects the

former and retains the latter.

  3. Classification: Having accumulated and verified a mass of facts by

numberless observations and experiments, he commences to classify those

facts, to arrange them in orderly groups with the object of discovering some

underlying  law,  some  hidden  and  unifying  principle,  which  governs,

regulates, and binds together these facts.

  4. Deduction: Thus he passes on to the fourth step of deduction. From

the facts and results which are before him, he discovers certain invariable

modes of action, and thus reveals the hidden laws of things.

  5. Knowledge: Having proven and established certain laws, it may besaid of such a man that he knows. He is a scientist, a man of knowledge.

  But the attainment of scientific knowledge is not the end, great as it is.

Men do not attain knowledge for themselves alone, nor to keep it locked

secretly in their hearts, like a beautiful jewel in a dark chest. The end of such

knowledge is use, service, the increase of the comfort and happiness of the

world. Thus, when a man has become a scientist, he gives the world the

benefit of his knowledge, and unselfishly bestows upon mankind the results

of all his labours.

  Thus, beyond knowledge, there is a further step of Use: that is, the right

and unselfish use of the knowledge acquired; the application of knowledge to

invention for the common weal.

  It will be noted that the five steps or processes enumerated follow in

orderly succession, and that no man can become a scientist who omits any

one of them. Without the first step of systematic observation, for instance, he

could not even enter the realm of knowledge of nature’s secrets.

  At first, the searcher for such knowledge has before him a universe of

things: these things he does not understand; many of them, indeed, seem to

be irreconcilably opposed one to the other, and there is apparent confusion;

but by patiently and laboriously pursuing these five processes, he discovers

the order, nature, and essences of things; perceives the central law or laws

which bind them together in harmonious relationship, and so puts an end to

confusion and ignorance.

  As with the natural scientist, so with the divine scientist; he must pursue,

with  the  same  self-sacrificing  diligence,  five  progressive  steps  in  the

attainment of self-knowledge, self-control. These five steps are the same as

with the natural scientist, but the process is reversed, the mind, instead of

being  centered  upon  external  things,  is  turned  back  upon  itself,  and  the

investigations are pursued in the realm of mind (of one’s own mind) instead

of in that of matter.

  At first, the searcher for divine knowledge is confronted with that mass of

desires, passions, emotions, ideas, and intellections which he calls himself,

which is the basis of all his actions, and from which his life proceeds.

  This combination of invisible, yet powerful, forces appears confusedly;

  some of them stand, apparently, in direct conflict with each other, without

any appearance or hope of reconciliation; his mind in its entirety, too, withhis life which proceeds from that mind, does not seem to have any equitable

relation to many other minds and lives about him, and altogether there is a

condition of pain and confusion from which he would fain escape.

  Thus, he begins by keenly realizing his state of ignorance, for no one

could acquire either natural or divine knowledge, if he were convinced that

without study or labour he already possessed it.

  With  such  perception  of  one’s  ignorance,  there  comes  the  desire  for

knowledge, and the novice in self-control enters upon the ascending pathway,

in which are the following five steps:

  1. Introspection. This coincides with the observation of the natural

scientist. The mental eye is turned like a searchlight upon the inner things of

the mind, and its subtle and ever varying processes are observed and carefully

noted. This stepping aside from selfish gratifications, from the excitements of

worldly  pleasures  and  ambitions,  in  order  to  observe,  with  the  object  of

understanding, one’s nature, is the beginning of self-control. Hitherto, the

man has been blindly and impotently borne along by the impulses of his

nature, the mere creature of things and circumstances, but now he puts a

check upon his impulses and, instead of being controlled, begins to control.

  2. Self-analysis. Having observed the tendencies of the mind, they are

then closely examined, and are put through a rigid process of analysis. The

evil tendencies (those that produce painful effects) are separated from the

good  tendencies  (those  that  produce  peaceful  effects);  and  the  various

tendencies, with the particular actions they produce, and the definite results

which  invariably  spring  from  these  actions,  are  gradually  grasped  by  the

understanding,  which  is  at  last  enabled  to  follow  them  in  their  swift  and

subtle interplay and profound ramifications. It is a process of testing  and

proving, and, for the searcher, a period of being tested and proved.

  3. Adjustment. By this time, the practical student of things divine has

clearly  before  him  every  tendency  and  aspect  of  his  nature,  down  to  the

profoundest promptings of his mind, and the most subtle motives of his heart.

There is not a spot or corner left, which he has not explored and illuminated

with the light of self-examination.

  He  is  familiar  with  every  weak  and  selfish  point,  every  strong  and

virtuous  quality.  It  is  considered  the  height  of  wisdom  to  be  able  to  see

ourselves as others see us, but the practitioner of self-control goes far beyondthis: he not only sees himself as others see him, he sees himself as he is.

Thus, standing face to face with himself, not striving to hide away from any

secret  fault;  no  longer  defending  himself  with  pleasant  flatteries;  neither

underrating nor overrating himself or his powers, and no more cursed with

self-praise  or  self-pity,  he  sees  the  full  magnitude  of  the  task  which  lies

before him; sees dearly ahead the heights of self-control, and knows what

work he has to do to reach them.

  He is no longer in a state of confusion, but has gained a glimpse of the

laws which operate in the world of thought, and he now begins to adjust his

mind in accordance with those laws. This is a process of weeding, sifting,

cleansing. As the farmer weeds, cleans, and prepares the ground for his

crops, so the student removes the weeds of evil from his mind, cleanses and

purifies it preparatory to sowing the seeds of righteous actions which shall

produce the harvest of a well ordered life.

  4. Righteousness.  Having  adjusted  his  thoughts  and  deeds  to  those

minor laws which operate in mental activities in the production of pain and

pleasure, unrest and peace, sorrow and bliss, he now perceives that there is

involved  in  those  laws  one  Great  Central  Law  which,  like  the  law  of

gravitation in the natural world, is supreme in the world of mind; a law to

which all thoughts and deeds are subservient, and by which they are regulated

and kept in their proper sphere.

  This  is  the  law  of  Justice  or  Righteousness,  which  is  universal  and

supreme.  To  this  law  he  now  conforms.  Instead  of  thinking  and  acting

blindly, as the nature is stimulated and appealed to by outward things, he

subordinates his thoughts and deeds to this central principle. He no longer

acts from self, but does what is right— what is universally and eternally

right. He is no longer the abject slave of his nature and circumstances, he is

the master of his nature and circumstances.

  He is no longer carried hither and thither on the forces of his mind; he

controls and guides those forces to the accomplishment of his purposes. Thus,

having his nature in control and subjection, not thinking thoughts nor doing

deeds which oppose the righteous law, and which, therefore, that law annuls

with suffering and defeat, he rises above the dominion of sin and sorrow,

ignorance and doubt, and is strong, calm, and peaceful.

  5. Pure Knowledge. By thinking right and acting right, he proves, byexperience, the existence of the divine law on which the mind is framed, and

which is the guiding and unifying principle in all human affairs and events,

whether individual or national. Thus, by perfecting himself in self-control, he

acquires divine knowledge; he reaches the point where it may be said of him,

as of the natural scientist, that he knows.

  He has mastered the science of self-control, and has brought knowledge

out of ignorance, order out of confusion. He has acquired that knowledge of

self which includes knowledge of all men; that knowledge of one’s own life

which embraces knowledge of all live — as for all minds are the same in

essence (differing only in degree), are framed upon the same law; and the

same  thoughts  and  acts,  by  whatsoever  individual  they  are  wrought,  will

always produce the same results.

  But this divine and peace bestowing knowledge, as in the case of the

natural scientist, is not gained for one’s self alone; for if this were so, the aim

of evolution would be frustrated, and it is not in the nature of things to fall

short of ripening and accomplishment; and, indeed, he who thought to gain

this knowledge solely for his own happiness would most surely fail.

  So, beyond the fifth step of Pure Knowledge, there is a still further one

of Wisdom, which is the right application of the knowledge acquired; the

pouring out upon the world, unselfishly and without stint, the result of one’s

labours, thus accelerating progress and uplifting humanity.

  It may be said of men who have not gone back into their own nature to

control and purify it, that they cannot clearly distinguish between good and

evil, right and wrong. They reach after those things which they think will

give them pleasure, and try to avoid those things which they believe will

cause them pain.

  The source of their actions is self, and they only discover right painfully

and in a fragmentary way, by periodically passing through severe sufferings,

and  lashings  of  conscience.  But  he  who  practices  self-control,  passing

through  the  five  processes,  which  are  five  stages  of  growth,  gains  that

knowledge which enables him to act from the moral law which sustains the

universe. He knows good and evil, right and wrong, and, thus knowing them,

lives in accordance with good and right. He no longer needs to consider what

is pleasant or what is unpleasant, but does what is right; his nature is in

harmony with his conscience, and there is no remorse; his mind is in unisonwith the Great Law, and there is no more suffering and sin; for him evil is

ended, and good is all in all.3. CAUSE AND EFFECT IN HUMAN CONDUCT


  IT is an axiom with the scientists that every effect is related to a cause.

Apply this to the realm of human conduct, and there is revealed the principle

of Justice.

  Every scientist knows (and now all men believe) that perfect harmony

prevails throughout every portion of the physical universe, from the speck of

dust to the greatest sun. Everywhere there is exquisite adjustment. In the

sidereal universe, with its millions of suns rolling majestically through space

and carrying with them their respective systems of revolving planets, its vast

nebula, its seas of meteors, and its vast army of comets traveling through

illimitable  space  with  inconceivable  velocity,  perfect  order  prevails;  and

again,  in  the  natural  world,  with  its  multitudinous  aspects  of  life,  and  its

infinite variety of forms, there are the clearly defined limits of specific laws,

through  the  operation  of  which  all  confusion  is  avoided,  and  unity  and

harmony eternally obtain.

  If this universal harmony could be arbitrarily broken, even in one small

particular, the universe would cease to be; there could be no cosmos, but only

universal chaos. Nor can it be possible in such a universe of law that there

should exist any personal power which is above, outside, and superior to,

such law in the sense that it can defy it, or set it aside; for whatsoever beings

exist, whether they be men or gods, they exist by virtue of such law; and the

highest, best, and wisest among all beings would manifest his greater wisdom

by his more complete obedience to that law which is wiser than wisdom, and

than which nothing more perfect could be devised.

  All things, whether visible or invisible, are subservient to, and fall within

the scope of, this infinite and eternal law of causation. As all things seen

obey it, so all things unseen — the thoughts and deeds of men, whether secret

or open— cannot escape it.

  "Do right, it recompenseth; do one wrong, the equal retribution must be

made."

  Perfect justice upholds the universe; perfect justice regulates human life

and conduct. All the varying conditions of life, as they obtain in the worldtoday, are the result of this law reacting on human conduct. Man can (and

does) choose what causes he shall set in operation, but he cannot change the

nature of effects; he can decide what thoughts he shall think, and what deeds

he shall do, but he has no power over the results of those thoughts and

deeds; these are regulated by the overruling law.

  Man has all power to act, but his power ends with the act committed. The

result of the act cannot be altered, annulled, or escaped; it is irrevocable. Evil

thoughts and deeds produce conditions of suffering; good thoughts and deeds

determine conditions of blessedness. Thus man’s power is limited to, and his

blessedness or misery is determined by his  own  conduct. To know this

truth, renders life simple, plain, and unmistakable; all the crooked paths are

straightened out, the heights of wisdom are revealed, and the open door to

salvation from evil and suffering is perceived and entered.

  Life may be likened to a sum in arithmetic. It is bewilderingly difficult

and  complex  to  the  pupil  who  has  not  yet  grasped  the  key  to  its  correct

solution,  but  once  this  is  perceived  and  laid  hold  of,  it  becomes  as

astonishingly simple as it was formerly profoundly perplexing. Some idea of

this  relative  simplicity  and  complexity  of  life  may  be  grasped  by  fully

recognizing and realizing the fact that, while there are scores, and perhaps

hundreds, of ways in which a sum may be done wrong, there is only one

way by which it can be done right, and that when that right way is found

the pupil knows it to be the right; his perplexity vanishes, and he knows

that he has mastered the problem.

  It  is  true  that  the  pupil,  while  doing  his  sum  incorrectly,  may  (and

frequently  does) think he  has  done  it  correctly,  but  he  is  not  sure;  his

perplexity is still there, and if he is an earnest and apt pupil, he will recognize

his own error when it is pointed out by the teacher. So in life, men may think

they are living rightly while they are continuing, through ignorance, to live

wrongly;  but  the  presence  of  doubt,  perplexity,  and  unhappiness  are  sure

indications that the right way has not yet been found.

  There are foolish and careless pupils who would like to pass a sum as

correct before they have acquired a true knowledge of figures, but the eye and

skill of the teacher quickly detect and expose the fallacy. So in life there can

be no falsifying of results; the eye of the Great Law reveals and exposes.

Twice  five  will  make  ten  to  all  eternity,  and  no  amount  of  ignorance,stupidity, or delusion can bring the result up to eleven.

  If one looks superficially at a piece of cloth, he sees it as a piece of cloth,

but  if  he  goes  further  and  inquires  into  its  manufacture,  and  examines  it

closely  and  attentively,  he  sees  that  it  is  composed  of  a  combination  of

individual threads, and that, while all the threads are interdependent, each

thread pursues its own way throughout, never becoming confused with its

sister  thread.  It  is  this  entire  absence  of  confusion  between  the  particular

threads  which  constitutes  the  finished  work  a piece  of  cloth;  any

inharmonious commingling of the thread would result in a bundle of waste

or a useless rag.

  Life is like a piece of cloth, and the threads of which it is composed are

individual lives. The threads, while being interdependent, are not confounded

one with the other. Each follows its own course. Each individual suffers and

enjoys the consequences of his own deeds, and not of the deeds of another.

The course of each is simple and definite; the whole forming a complicated,

yet harmonious, combination of sequences. There are action and reaction,

deed and consequence, cause and effect, and the counterbalancing reaction,

consequence, and effect is always in exact ratio with the initiatory impulse.

  A durable and satisfactory piece of cloth cannot be made from shoddy

material, and the threads of selfish thoughts and bad deeds will not produce a

useful  and  beautiful  life  —  a  life  that  will  wear  well,  and  bear  close

inspection. Each man makes or mars his own life; it is not made or marred by

his neighbor, or by anything external to himself. Each thought he thinks, each

deed  he  does,  is  another  thread—  shoddy  or  genuine—  woven  into  the

garment of his life; and as he makes the garment so must he wear it. He is not

responsible for his neighbor’s deeds; he is not the custodian of his neighbor’s

actions; he is responsible only for his own deeds; he is the custodian of his

own actions.

  The "problem of evil" subsists in a man’s own evil deeds, and it is solved

when those deeds are purified. Says Rousseau:

  "Man, seek no longer the origin of evil; thou thyself art its origin."

  Effect can never be divorced from cause; it can never be of a different

nature from cause. Emerson says:

  "Justice is not postponed; a perfect equity adjusts the balance in all parts of life."

  And there is a profound sense in which cause and effect are simultaneous,and form one perfect whole. Thus, upon the instant that a man thinks, say, a

cruel thought, or does a cruel deed, that same instant he has injured his own

mind; he is not the same man he was the previous instant; he is a little viler

and a little more unhappy; and a number of such successive thoughts and

deeds would produce a cruel and wretched man. The same thing applies to

the contrary— the thinking of a kind thought, or doing a kind deed— an

immediate nobility and happiness attend it; the man is better than he was

before, and a number of such deeds would produce a great and blissful soul.

  Thus individual human conduct determines, by the faultless law of cause

and  effect,  individual  merit  or  demerit,  individual  greatness  or  meanness,

individual happiness or wretchedness. What a man thinks, that he does; what

he does, that he is. If he is perplexed, unhappy, restless, or wretched, let him

look to himself, for there and nowhere else is the source of all his trouble.                4. TRAINING OF THE WILL


    WITHOUT strength of mind, nothing worthy of accomplishment can be

done, and the cultivation of that steadfastness and stability of character which

is commonly called "willpower" is one of the foremost duties of man, for its

possession  is  essentially  necessary  both  to  his  temporal  and  eternal  well

being. Fixedness of purpose is at the root of all successful efforts, whether in

things  worldly  or  spiritual,  and  without  it  man  cannot  be  otherwise  than

wretched, and dependent upon others for that support which should be found

within himself.

  The mystery which has been thrown around the subject of cultivation of

the will by those who advertise to sell "occult advice" on the matter for so

many dollars, should be avoided and dispelled, for nothing could be further

removed  from  secrecy  and  mystery  than  the  practical  methods  by  which

alone strength of will can be developed.

  The  true  path  of  will  cultivation  is  only  to  be  found  in  the  common

everyday  life  of  the  individual,  and  so  obvious  and  simple  is  it  that  the

majority,  looking  for  something  complicated  and  mysterious,  pass  it  by

unnoticed.

  A little logical thought will soon convince a man that he cannot be both

weak and strong at the same time, that he cannot develop a stronger will

while remaining a slave to weak indulgences, and that, therefore, the direct

and only way to that greater strength is to assail and conquer his weaknesses.

All the means for the cultivation of the will are already at hand in the mind

and life of the individual; they reside in the weak side of his character, by

attacking and vanquishing which the necessary strength of will be developed.

He  who  has  succeeded  in  grasping  this  simple,  preliminary  truth,  will

perceive  that  the  whole  science  of  will  cultivation  is  embodied  in  the

following seven rules:

  1. Break off bad habits.

  2. Form good habits.

  3. Give scrupulous attention to the duty of the present moment.  4. Do vigorously, and at once, whatever has to be done.

  5. Live by rule.

  6. Control the tongue.

  7. Control the mind.

  Anyone who earnestly meditates upon, and diligently practices, the above

rules, will not fail to develop that purity of purpose and power of will which

will  enable  him  to  successfully  cope  with  every  difficulty,  and  pass

triumphantly through every emergency.

  It will be seen that the first step is the breaking away from bad habits.

This  is  no  easy  task.  It  demands  the  putting  forth  of  great  efforts,  or  a

succession  of  efforts,  and  it  is  by  such  efforts  that  the  will  can  alone  be

invigorated  and  fortified.  If  one  refuses  to  take  the  first  step,  he  cannot

increase  in  willpower,  for  by  submitting  to  a  bad  habit,  because  of  the

immediate  pleasure  which  it  affords,  one  forfeits  the  right  to  rule  over

himself, and is so far a weak slave. He who thus avoids self-discipline, and

looks  about  for  some  "occult  secrets"  for  gaining  willpower  at  the

expenditure  of  little  or  no  effort  on  his  part,  is  deluding  himself,  and  is

weakening the willpower which he already possesses.

  The increased strength of will which is gained by success in overcoming

bad habits enables one to initiate good habits; for, while the conquering of a

bad  habit  requires  merely  strength  of  purpose,  the  forming  of  a  new  one

necessitates the intelligent direction of purpose. To do this, a man must

be  mentally  active  and  energetic,  and  must  keep  a  constant  watch  upon

himself. As a man succeeds in perfecting himself in the second rule, it will

not be very difficult for him to observe the third, that of giving scrupulous

attention to the duty of the present moment.

    Thoroughness is a step in the development of the will which cannot be

passed over. Slipshod work is an indication of weakness. Perfection should

be aimed at, even in the smallest task. By not dividing the mind, but giving

the whole attention to each separate task as it presents itself, singleness of

purpose  and  intense  concentration  of  mind  are  gradually  gained  —  two

mental powers which give weight and worth of character, and bring repose

and joy to their possessor.

  The fourth rule — that of doing vigorously, and at once, whatever has to

be  done  —  is  equally  important.  Idleness  and  a  strong  will  cannot  gotogether, and procrastination is a total barrier to the acquisition of purposeful

action. Nothing should be "put off" until another time, not even for a few

minutes. That which ought to be done now should be done now. This seems a

little thing, but it is of far reaching importance. It leads to strength, success,

and peace.

  The man who is to manifest a cultivated will must also live by certain

fixed rules. He must not blindly gratify his passions and impulses, but must

school them to obedience. He should live according to principle, and not

according to passion.

  He should decide what he will eat and drink and wear, and what he will

not eat and drink and wear; how many meals per day he will have, and at

what times he will have them; at what time he will go to bed, and at what

time get up. He should make rules for the right government of his conduct in

every department of his life, and should religiously adhere to them. To live

loosely and indiscriminately, eating and drinking and sensually indulging at

the beck and call of appetite and inclination, is to be a mere animal, and not a

man with will and reason.

  The  beast  in  man  must  be  scourged  and  disciplined  and  brought  into

subjection, and this can only be done by training the mind and life on certain

fixed rules of right conduct. The saint attains to holiness by not violating his

vows, and the man who lives according to good and fixed rules, is strong to

accomplish his purpose.

  The sixth rule, that of controlling the tongue, must be practiced until one

has perfect command of his speech, so that he utters nothing in peevishness,

anger, irritability, or with evil intent. The man of strong will does not allow

his tongue to run thoughtlessly and without check.

  All these six rules, if faithfully practiced, will lead up to the seventh,

which is the most important of them all — namely, rightly controlling the

mind. Self-control is the most essential thing in life, yet least understood; but

he who patiently practices the rules herein laid down, bringing them into

requisition in all his ways and undertakings, will learn, by his own experience

and  efforts,  how  to  control  and  train  his  mind,  and  to  earn  thereby  the

supreme crown of manhood — the crown of a perfectly poised will.                              5. THOROUGHNESS


    THOROUGHNESS consists in doing little things as though they were the

greatest  things  in  the  world.  That  the  little  things  of  life  are  of  primary

importance, is a truth not generally understood, and the thought that little

things can be neglected, thrown aside, or slurred over, is at the root of that

lack of thoroughness which is so common, and which results in imperfect

work and unhappy lives.

  When  one  understands  that  the  great  things  of  the  world  and  of  life

consist of a combination of small things, and that without this aggregation of

small things the great things would be non-existent, then he begins to pay

careful attention to those things which he formerly regarded as insignificant.

He  thus  acquires  the  quality  of  thoroughness,  and  becomes  a  man  of

usefulness and influence; for the possession or non-possession of this one

quality may mean all the difference between a life of peace and power, and

one of misery and weakness.

  Every employer of labor knows how comparatively rare this quality is —

how difficult it is to find men and women who will put thought and energy

into their work, and do it completely and satisfactorily. Bad workmanship

abounds.  Skill  and  excellence  are  acquired  by  few.  Thoughtlessness,

carelessness,  and  laziness  are  such  common  vices  that  it  should  cease  to

appear strange that, in spite of "social reform," the ranks of the unemployed

should continue to swell, for those who scamp their work today will, another

day, in the hour of deep necessity, look and ask for work in vain.

  The law of the survival of the fittest is not based on cruelty, it is based on

justice: it is one aspect of that divine equity which everywhere prevails. Vice

is  "beaten  with  many  stripes";  if  it  were  not  so,  how  could  virtue  be

developed?  The  thoughtless  and  lazy  cannot  take  precedence  of,  or  stand

equally with, the thoughtful and industrious. A friend of mine tells me that

his father gave all his children the following piece of advice:

    "Whatever your future work may be, put your whole mind upon it and do

it thoroughly; you need then have no fear as to your welfare, for there are so

many who are careless and negligent that the services of the thorough man

are always in demand."

  I  know  those  who  have,  for  years,  tried  almost  in  vain  to  securecompetent workmanship in spheres which do not require exceptional skill,

but which call chiefly for forethought, energy, and conscientious care. They

have discharged one after another for negligence, laziness, incompetence, and

persistent  breaches  of  duty  —  not  to  mention  other  vices  which  have  no

bearing on this subject; yet the vast army of the unemployed continues to cry

out against the laws, against society, and against Heaven.

  The cause of this common lack of thoroughness is not far to seek; it lies

in that thirst for pleasure which not only creates a distaste for steady labour,

but renders one incapable of doing the best work, and of properly fulfilling

one’s duty. A short time ago, a case came under my observation (one of

many  such),  of  a  poor  woman  who  was  given,  at  her  earnest  appeal,  a

responsible and lucrative position. She had been at her post only a few days

when she began to talk of the "pleasure trips" she was going to have now she

had  come  to  that  place.  She  was  discharged  at  the  end  of  a  month  for

negligence and incompetence.

  As two objects cannot occupy the same space at the same time, so the

mind that is occupied with pleasure cannot also be concentrated upon the

perfect performance of duty.

  Pleasure has its own place and time, but its consideration should not be

allowed to enter the mind during those hours which should be devoted to

duty.  Those  who,  while  engaged  in  their  worldly  task,  are  continually

dwelling  upon  anticipated  pleasures,  cannot  do  otherwise  than  bungle

through their work, or even neglect it when their pleasure seems to be at

stake.

    Thoroughness is completeness, perfection; it means doing a thing so well

that there is nothing left to be desired; it means doing one’s work, if not

better than anyone else can do it, at least not worse than the best that others

do. It means the exercise of much thought, the putting forth of great energy,

the persistent application of the mind to its task, the cultivation of patience,

perseverance, and a high sense of duty. An ancient teacher said, "If anything

has to be done, let a man do it, let him attack it vigorously"; and another

teacher said, "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might."

  He who lacks thoroughness in his worldly duties, will also lack the same

quality in spiritual things. He will not improve his character; will be weak

and half-hearted in his religion, and will not accomplish any good and usefulend.  The  man  who  keeps  one  eye  on  worldly  pleasure  and  the  other  on

religion, and who thinks he can have the advantage of both conditions, will

not be thorough either in his pleasure seeking or his religion, but will make a

sorry business of both. It is better to be a whole-souled worldling than a half-

hearted religionist; better to give the entire mind to a lower thing than half of

it to a higher.

  It is preferable to be thorough, even if it be in a bad or selfish direction,

rather than inefficient and squeamish in good directions, for thoroughness

leads more rapidly to the development of character and the acquisition of

wisdom; it accelerates progress and unfoldment; and while it leads the bad to

something  better,  it  spurs  the  good  to  higher  and  ever  higher  heights  of

usefulness and power.        6. MIND-BUILDING AND LIFE-BUILDING


    EVERYTHING, both in nature and the works of man, is produced by a

process of building. The rock is built up of atoms; the plant, the animal, and

man are built up of cells; a house is built of bricks, and a book is built of

letters. A world is composed of a large number of forms, and a city of a large

number of houses. The arts, sciences, and institutions of a nation are built up

by the efforts of individuals. The history of a nation is the building of its

deeds.

  The  process  of  building  necessitates  the  alternate  process  of  breaking

down.  Old  forms  that  have  served  their  purpose  are  broken  up,  and  the

material of which they are composed enters into new combinations. There is

reciprocal integration and disintegration. In all compounded bodies, old cells

are ceaselessly being broken up, and new cells are formed to take their place.

  The works of man also require to be continually renewed until they have

become old and useless, when they are torn down in order that some better

purpose may be served. These two processes of breaking down and building

up in Nature are called death and life; in the artificial works of man they are

called destruction and restoration.

  This dual process, which obtains universally in things visible, also obtains

universally in things invisible. As a body is built of cells, and a house of

bricks, so a man’s mind is built of thoughts. The various characters of men

are none other than compounds of thoughts of varying combinations. Herein

we see the deep truth of the saying, "As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he."

Individual characteristics are fixed processes of thought; that is, they are

fixed in the sense that they have become such an integral part of the character

that they can be only altered or removed by a protracted effort of the will, and

by much self-discipline. Character is built in the same way as a tree or a

house is built— namely, by the ceaseless addition of new material, and that

material is thought. By the aid of millions of bricks a city is built; by the aid

of millions of thoughts a mind, a character, is built.

  Every man is a mind builder, whether he recognizes it or not. Every man

must  perforce  think,  and  every  thought  is  another  brick  laid  down  in  the

edifice of mind. Such "brick laying" is done loosely and carelessly by a vast

number of people, the result being unstable and tottering characters that areready to go down under the first little gust of trouble or temptation.

  Some, also, put into the building of their minds large numbers of impure

thoughts; these are so many rotten bricks that crumble away as fast as they

are  put  in,  leaving  always  an  unfinished  and  unsightly  building,  and  one

which can afford no comfort and no shelter for its possessor.

    Debilitating thoughts about one’s health, enervating thoughts concerning

unlawful  pleasures,  weakening  thoughts  of  failure,  and  sickly  thoughts  of

self-pity and self-praise are useless bricks with which no substantial mind

temple can be raised.

  Pure thoughts, wisely chosen and well placed, are so many durable bricks

which will never crumble away, and from which a finished and beautiful

building, and one which affords comfort and shelter for its possessor, can be

rapidly erected.

  Bracing thoughts of strength, of confidence, of duty; inspiring thoughts of

a large, free, unfettered, and unselfish life, are useful bricks with which a

substantial mind temple can be raised; and the building of such a temple

necessitates  that  old  and  useless  habits  of  thought  be  broken  down  and

destroyed.

  "Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul! As the swift seasons roll."

  Each man is the builder of himself. If he is the occupant of a jerry-built

hovel of a mind that lets in the rains of many troubles, and through which

blow the keen winds of oft-recurring disappointments, let him get to work to

build a more noble mansion which will afford him better protection against

those mental elements. Trying to weakly shift the responsibility for his jerry-

building  on  to  the  devil,  or  his  forefathers,  or  anything  or  anybody  but

himself,  will  neither  add  to  his  comfort,  nor  help  him  to  build  a  better

habitation.

  When he wakes up to a sense of his responsibility, and an approximate

estimate of his power, then he will commence to build like a true workman,

and will produce a symmetrical and finished character that will endure, and

be  cherished  by  posterity,  and  which,  while  affording  a  never  failing

protection for himself, will continue to give shelter to many a struggling one

when he has passed away.

  The whole visible universe is framed on a few mathematical principles.

All the wonderful works of man in the material world have been broughtabout by the rigid observance of a few underlying principles; and all that

there  is  to  the  making  of  a  successful,  happy,  and  beautiful  life,  is  the

knowledge and application of a few simple, root principles.

  If a man is to erect a building that is to resist the fiercest storms, he must

build it on a simple, mathematical principle, or law, such as the square or the

circle;  if  he  ignores  this,  his  edifice  will  topple  down  even  before  it  is

finished.

    Likewise, if a man is to build up a successful, strong, and exemplary life

— a life that will stoutly resist the fiercest storms of adversity and temptation

— it must be framed on a few simple, undeviating moral principles.

  Four  of  these  principles  are Justice, Rectitude, Sincerity,  and

Kindness. These four ethical truths are to the making of a life what the four

lines of a square are to the building of a house. If a man ignores them and

thinks to obtain success and happiness and peace by injustice, trickery, and

selfishness, he is in the position of a builder who imagines he can build a

strong  and  durable  habitation  while  ignoring  the  relative  arrangement  of

mathematical lines, and he will, in the end, obtain only disappointment and

failure.

  He may, for a time, make money, which will delude him into believing

that injustice and dishonesty pay well; but in reality his life is so weak and

unstable that it is ready at any moment to fall; and when a critical period

comes, as come it must, his affairs, his reputation, and his riches crumble to

ruins, and he is buried in his own desolation.

  It is totally impossible for a man to achieve a truly successful and happy

life who ignores the four moral principles enumerated, whilst the man who

scrupulously observes them in all his dealings can no more fail of success and

blessedness than the earth can fail of the light and warmth of the sun so long

as  it  keeps  to  its  lawful  orbit;  for  he  is  working  in  harmony  with  the

fundamental laws of the universe; he is building his life on a basis which

cannot be altered or overthrown, and, therefore, all that he does will be so

strong  and  durable,  and  all  the  parts  of  his  life  will  be  so  coherent,

harmonious, and firmly knit that it cannot possibly be brought to ruin.

  In all the universal forms which are built up by the Great Invisible and

unerring Power, it will be found that the observance of mathematical law is

carried out with unfailing exactitude down to the most minute detail. Themicroscope  reveals  the  fact  that  the  infinitely  small  is  as  perfect  as  the

infinitely great.

  A snowflake is as perfect as a star. Likewise, in the erection of a building

by man, the strictest attention must be paid to every detail.

  A  foundation  must  first  be  laid,  and,  although  it  is  to  be  buried  and

hidden, it must receive the greatest care, and be made stronger than any other

part of the building; then stone upon stone, brick upon brick is carefully laid

with the aid of the plumb line, until at last the building stands complete in its

durability, strength, and beauty.

  Even so it is with the life of a man. He who would have a life secure and

blessed, a life freed from the miseries and failures to which so many fall

victims, must carry the practice of the moral principles into every detail of his

life, into every momentary duty and trivial transaction. In every little thing he

need be thorough and honest, neglecting nothing.

  To  neglect  or  misapply  any  little  detail—  be  he  commercial  man,

agriculturist, professional man, or artisan— is the same as neglecting a stone

or a brick in a building, and it will be a source of weakness and trouble.

  The majority of those who fail and come to grief do so through neglecting

the apparently insignificant details.

  It is a common error to suppose that little things can be passed by, and

that the greater things are more important, and should receive all attention;

but a cursory glance at the universe, as well as a little serious reflection on

life, will teach the lesson that nothing great can exist which is not made up of

small details, and in the composition of which every detail is perfect.

  He who adopts the four ethical principles as the law and base of his life,

who raises the edifice of character upon them, who in his thoughts and words

and actions does not wander from them, whose every duty and every passing

transaction is performed in strict accordance with their exactions, such a man,

laying down the hidden foundation of integrity of heart securely and strongly,

cannot fail to raise up a structure which shall bring him honour; and he is

building a temple in which he can repose in peace and blessedness— even the

strong and beautiful Temple of his life.        7. CULTIVATION OF CONCENTRATION


    CONCENTRATION, or the bringing of the mind to a center and keeping

it there, is vitally necessary to the accomplishment of any task. It is the father

of thoroughness and the mother of excellence. As a faculty, it is not an

end in itself, but is an aid to all faculties, all work. Not a purpose in itself, it is

yet  a  power  which  serves  all  purposes.  Like  steam  in  mechanics,  it  is  a

dynamic force in the machinery of the mind and the functions of life.

  The faculty is a common possession, though in its perfection it is rare—

just as will and reason are common possessions, though a perfectly poised

will  and  a  comprehensive  reason  are  rare  possessions—  and  the  mystery

which  some  modern  mystical  writers  have  thrown  around  it  is  entirely

superfluous.

  Every successful man, in whatever direction his success may lie, practices

concentration, though he may know nothing about it as a subject of study;

every time one becomes absorbed in a book or task, or is rapt in devotion or

assiduous in duty, concentration, in a greater or lesser degree, is brought into

play.

  Many books purporting to give instructions on concentration make its

practice and acquisition an end in itself. Than this, there is no surer nor

swifter way to its destruction. The fixing of the eyes upon the tip of the nose,

upon a doorknob, a picture, a mystical symbol, or the portrait of a saint; or

the centering of the mind upon the navel, the pineal gland, or some imaginary

point in space (I have seen all these methods seriously advised in works on

this  subject)  with  the  object  of  acquiring  concentration,  is  like  trying  to

nourish the body by merely moving the jaw as in the act of eating, without

taking food. Such methods prevent the end at which they aim.

  They lead towards dispersion and not concentration; towards weakness

and imbecility rather than towards power and intelligence. I have met those

who have squandered, by these practices, what measure of concentration they

at first possessed, and have become the prey of a weak and wandering mind.

    Concentration is an aid to the doing of something; it is not the doing of

something in itself. A ladder has no divine knowledge, or the sweeping of a

floor — without resorting to methods which have no practical bearing on life;

for what is concentration but the bringing of a well controlled mind to thedoing of that which has to be done?

  He who does his work in an aimless, a hurried, or thoughtless manner,

and resorts to his artificial "concentration methods" — to his doorknob, his

picture, or nasal extremity — in order to gain that which he imagines to be

some kind of mystical power — but which is a very ordinary and practical

quality — though he may drift towards insanity (and I knew one man who

became insane by these practices), he will not increase in steadiness of mind.

  The great enemy of concentration — and therefore of all skill and power

— is a wavering, wandering, undisciplined value in and of itself, but only in

so far as it enables us to reach something which we could not otherwise

reach.  In  like  manner,  concentration  is  that  which  enables  the  mind  to

accomplish  with  ease  that  which  it  would  be  otherwise  impossible  to

accomplish; but of itself it is a dead thing, and not a living accomplishment.

    Concentration is so interwoven with the uses of life that it cannot be

separated from duty; and he who tries to acquire it apart from his task, his

duty, will not only fail, but will diminish, and not increase, his mental control

and executive capacity, and so render himself less and less fit to succeed in

his undertakings.

  A  scattered  and  undisciplined  army  would  be  useless.  To  make  it

effective in action and swift in victory it must be solidly concentrated and

masterfully directed. Scattered and diffused thoughts are weak and worthless.

Thoughts  marshaled,  commanded,  and  directed  upon  a  given  point,  are

invincible; confusion, doubt, and difficulty give way before their masterly

approach. Concentrated thought enters largely into all successes, and informs

all victories.

  There  is  no  more  secret  about  its  acquirement  than  about  any  other

acquisition, for it is governed by the underlying principle of all development,

namely, practice. To be able to do a thing, you must begin to do  it, and

keep  on  doing  it  until  the  thing  is  mastered.  This  principle  prevails

universally— in all arts, sciences, trades; in all learning, conduct, religion. To

be able to paint, one must paint; to know how to use a tool skillfully, he must

use the tool; to become learned, he must learn; to become wise, he must do

wise things; and to successfully concentrate his mind, he must concentrate it.

But the doing is not all— it must be done with energy and intelligence.

  The beginning of concentration, then, is to go to your daily task and putyour mind on it, bringing all your intelligence and mental energy to a focus

upon  that  which  has  to  be  done;  and  every  time  the  thoughts  are  found

wandering aimlessly away, they should be brought promptly back to the thing

in hand.

  Thus the "center" upon which you are to bring your mind to a point, is

(not your pineal gland or a paint in space), but the work which you are doing

every day; and your object in thus concentrating is to be able to do your work

with smooth rapidity and consummate skill; for until you can thus do your

work, you have not gained any degree of control over the mind; you have not

acquired the power of concentration.

  This powerful focusing of one’s thought and energy and will upon the

doing of things is difficult at first as everything worth acquiring is difficult—

but daily efforts, strenuously made and patiently followed up, will soon lead

to such a measure of self-control as will enable one to bring a strong and

penetrating mind to bear upon any work undertaken; a mind that will quickly

comprehend all the details of the work, and dispose of them with accuracy

and dispatch.

  He  will  thus,  as  his  concentrative  capacity  increases,  enlarge  his

usefulness in the scheme of things, and increase his value to the world, thus

inviting nobler opportunities, and opening the door to higher duties; he will

also experience the joy of a wider and fuller life.

  In the process of concentration there are the four following stages:

  1. Attention.

  2. Contemplation.

  3. Abstraction.

  4. Activity in Repose.

  At first the thoughts are arrested, and the mind is fixed upon the object of

concentration, which is the task in hand— this is attention. The mind is then

roused into vigorous thought concerning the way of proceeding with the task

— this is contemplation.

  Protracted contemplation leads to a condition of mind in which the doors

of the senses are all closed against the entrance of outside distractions, the

thoughts being wrapped in, and solely and intensely centered upon, the work

in  hand  —  this  is abstraction.  The  mind  thus  centered  in  profoundcogitation reaches a state in which the maximum of work is accomplished

with the minimum of friction— this is activity in repose.

  Attention is the first stage in all successful work. They who lack it fail in

everything.  Such  are  the  lazy,  the  thoughtless,  the  indifferent  and

incompetent. When attention is followed by an awakening of the mind to

serious thought, then the second stage is reached. To ensure success in all

ordinary, worldly undertakings, it is not necessary to go beyond these two

stages.

  They are reached, in a greater or lesser degree, by all that large army of

skilled and competent workers which carries out the work of the world in its

manifold departments, and only a comparatively small number reach the third

stage of abstraction; for when abstraction is reached, we have entered the

sphere of genius.

  In the first two stages, the work and the mind are separate, and the work

is done more or less laboriously, and with a degree of friction; but in the third

stage, a marriage of the work with the mind takes place, there is a fusion, a

union, and the two become one: then there is a superior efficiency with less

labour  and  friction.  In  the  perfection  of  the  first  two  stages,  the  mind  is

objectively engaged, and is easily drawn from its center by external sights

and sounds; but when the mind has attained perfection in abstraction, the

subjective method of working is accomplished, as distinguished from the

objective.

  The thinker is then oblivious to the outside world, but is vividly alive in

his mental operations. If spoken to, he will not hear; and if plied with more

vigorous appeals, he will bring back his mind to outside things as one coming

out of a dream; indeed, this abstraction is a kind of waking dream, but its

similarity to a dream ends with the subjective state: it does not obtain in the

mental  operations  of  that  state,  in  which,  instead  of  the  confusion  of

dreaming,  there  is  perfect  order,  penetrating  insight,  and  a  wide  range  of

comprehension. Whoever attains to perfection in abstraction will manifest

genius in the particular work upon which his mind is centered.

    Inventors, artists, poets, scientists, philosophers, and all men of genius,

are men of abstraction. They accomplish subjectively, and with ease, that

which the objective workers— men who have not yet attained beyond the

second stage in concentration— cannot accomplish with the most strenuouslabour.

  When the fourth stage— that of activity in repose— is attained, then

concentration in its perfection is acquired. I am unable to find a single word

which will fully express this dual condition of intense activity combined with

steadiness, or rest, and have therefore employed the term "activity in repose."

  The term appears contradictory, but the simple illustration of a spinning

top will serve to explain the paradox. When a top spins at the maximum

velocity, the friction is reduced to the minimum, and the top assumes that

condition of perfect repose which is a sight so beautiful to the eye, and so

captivating to the mind, of the schoolboy, who then says his top is "asleep."

  The top is apparently motionless, but it is the rest, not of inertia, but of

intense and perfectly balanced activity. So the mind that has acquired perfect

concentration  is,  when  engaged  in  that  intense  activity  of  thought  which

results in productive work of the highest kind, in a state of quiet poise and

calm repose. Externally, there is no apparent activity, no disturbance, and the

face of a man who has acquired this power will assume a more or less radiant

calmness, and the face will be more sublimely calm when the mind is most

intensely engaged in active thought.

  Each stage of concentration has its particular power. Thus the first stage,

when perfected, leads to usefulness; the second leads to skill, ability, talent;

the third leads to originality and genius; while the fourth leads to mastery and

power, and makes leaders and teachers of men.

  In the development of concentration, also, as in all objects of growth, the

following  stages  embody  the  preceding  ones  in  their  entirety.  Thus  in

contemplation,  attention  is  contained;  in  abstraction,  both  attention  and

contemplation are embodied; and he who has reached the last stage, brings

into play, in the act of contemplation, all the four stages.

  He who has perfected himself in concentration is able, at any moment, to

bring his thoughts to a point upon any matter, and to search into it with the

strong light of an active comprehension. He can both take a thing up and lay

it  down  with  equal  deliberation.  He  has  learned  how  to  use  his  thinking

faculties to fixed purposes, and guide them towards definite ends. He is an

intelligent doer of things, and not a weak wanderer amid chaotic thought.

  Decision,  energy,  alertness,  as  well  as  deliberation,  judgment,  and

gravity,  accompany  the  habit  of  concentration;  and  that  vigorous  mentaltraining  which  its  cultivation  involves,  leads,  through  ever  increasing

usefulness and success in worldly occupations, towards that higher form of

concentration  called  "meditation,"  in  which  the  mind  becomes  divinely

illumined, and acquires the heavenly knowledge.              8. PRACTICE OF MEDITATION


  WHEN aspiration is  united  to concentration,  the  result  is

meditation. When a man intensely desires to reach and realize a higher,

purer, and more radiant life than the merely worldly and pleasure loving life,

he engages in aspiration; and when he earnestly concentrates his thoughts

upon the finding of that life, he practices meditation.

  Without  intense  aspiration,  there  can  be  no  meditation.  Lethargy  and

indifference are fatal to its practice. The more intense the nature of a man, the

more  readily  will  he  find  meditation,  and  the  more  successfully  will  he

practice it. A fiery nature will most rapidly scale the heights of Truth in

meditation, when its aspirations have become sufficiently awakened.

    Concentration is necessary to worldly success: meditation is necessary to

spiritual success. Worldly skill and knowledge are acquired by concentration:

spiritual skill and knowledge are acquired by meditation. By concentration a

man can scale the highest heights of genius, but he cannot scale the heavenly

heights of Truth: to accomplish this, he must meditate.

  By concentration a man may acquire the wonderful comprehension and

vast power of a Caesar; by meditation he may reach the divine wisdom and

perfect peace of a Buddha. The perfection of concentration is power; the

perfection of meditation is wisdom.

  By concentration, men acquire skill in the doing of the things of life —

in  science,  art,  trade,  etc.,—  but  by  meditation,  they  acquire  skill  in life

itself; in right living, enlightenment, wisdom, etc. Saints, sages, saviours—

wise men and divine teachers — are the finished products of holy meditation.

  The four stages in concentration are brought into play in meditation; the

difference  between  the  two  powers  being  one  of direction,  and  not  of

nature. Meditation is therefore spiritual concentration; the bringing of the

mind to a focus in its search for the divine knowledge, the divine life; the

intense dwelling, in thought, on Truth.

  Thus a man aspires to know and realize, above all things else, the Truth;

he  then  gives attention to  conduct,  to  life,  to  self-purification:  giving

attention to these things, he passes into serious contemplation of the facts,problems, and mystery of life: thus contemplating, he comes to love Truth so

fully and intensely as to become wholly absorbed in it, the mind is drawn

away from its wanderings in a multitude of desires, and, solving one by one

the problems of life, realizes that profound union with Truth which is the

state of abstraction; and thus absorbed in Truth, there is that balance and

poise of character, that divine action in repose, which is the abiding calm

and peace of an emancipated and enlightened mind.

    Meditation  is  more  difficult  to  practice  than  concentration  because  it

involves  a  much  more  severe  self-discipline  than  that  which  obtains  in

concentration. A man can practice concentration without purifying his heart

and life, whereas the process of purification is inseparable from meditation.

  The object of meditation is divine enlightenment, the attainment of Truth,

and  is  therefore  interwoven  with  practical  purity  and  righteousness.  Thus

while, at first, the time spent in actual meditation is short — perhaps only

half an hour in the early morning — the knowledge gained in that half hour

of vivid aspiration and concentrated thought is embodied in practice during

the whole day.

  In meditation, therefore, the entire life of a man is involved; and as he

advances in its practice he becomes more and more fitted to perform the

duties of life in the circumstances in which he may be placed, for he becomes

stronger, holier, calmer, and wiser. The principle of meditation is twofold,

namely:

  1. Purification of the heart by repetitive thought on pure things.

  2. Attainment of divine knowledge by embodying such purity in practical

life.

  Man is a thought being, and his life and character are determined by the

thoughts in which he habitually dwells. By practice, association, and habit,

thoughts  tend  to  repeat  themselves  with  greater  and  greater  ease  and

frequency; and so "fix" the character in a given direction by producing that

automatic action which is called "habit."

  By daily dwelling upon pure thoughts, the man of meditation forms the

habit of pure and enlightened thinking which leads to pure and enlightened

actions  and  well  performed  duties.  By  the  ceaseless  repetition  of  pure

thoughts, he at last becomes one with those thoughts, and is a purified being,

manifesting his attainment in pure actions, in a serene and wise life.  The  majority  of  men  live  in  a  series  of  conflicting  desires,  passions,

emotions,  and  speculations,  and  there  are  restlessness,  uncertainty,  and

sorrow; but when a man begins to train his mind in meditation, he gradually

gains control over this inward conflict by bringing his thoughts to a focus

upon a central principle.

  In this way the old habits of impure and erroneous thought and action are

broken up, and the new habits of pure and enlightened thought and action are

formed; the man becomes more and more reconciled to Truth, and there is

increasing harmony and insight, a growing perfection and peace.

  A powerful and lofty aspiration towards Truth is always accompanied

with a keen sense of the sorrow and brevity and mystery of life, and until this

condition of mind is reached, meditation is impossible. Merely musing, or

whiling away the time in idle dreaming (habits to which the word meditation

is frequently applied), are very far removed from meditation, in the lofty

spiritual sense which we attach to that condition.

  It is easy to mistake reverie for meditation. This is a fatal error which

must  be  avoided  by  one  striving  to  meditate.  The  two  must  not  be

confounded. Reverie is a loose dreaming into which a man falls; meditation is

a strong, purposeful thinking into which a man rises. Reverie is easy and

pleasurable; meditation is at first difficult and irksome.

  Reverie  thrives  in  indolence  and  luxury;  meditation  arises  from

strenuousness and discipline. Reverie is first alluring, then sensuous, and then

sensual.  Meditation  is  first  forbidding,  then  profitable,  and  then  peaceful.

Reverie is dangerous; it undermines self-control. Meditation is protective; it

establishes self-control.

  There are certain signs by which one can know whether he is engaging in

reverie or meditation.

  The indications of reverie are:

  1. A desire to avoid exertion.

  2. A desire to experience the pleasures of dreaming.

  3. An increasing distaste for one’s worldly duties.

  4. A desire to shirk one’s worldly responsibilities.

  5. Fear of consequences.

  6. A wish to get money with as little effort as possible.  7. Lack of self-control.

  The indications of meditation are:

  1. Increase of both physical and mental energy.

  2. A strenuous striving after wisdom.

  3. A decrease of irksomeness in the performance of duty.

  4. A fixed determination to faithfully fulfill all worldly responsibilities.

  5. Freedom from fear.

  6. Indifference to riches.

  7. Possession of self-control.

  There are certain times, places, and conditions in and under which it is

impossible to meditate, others wherein it is difficult to meditate, and others

wherein meditation is rendered more accessible; and these, which should be

known and carefully observed, are as follows:

  Times, Places, and Conditions in which Meditation is Impossible:

  1. At, or immediately after, meals.

  2. In places of pleasure.

  3. In crowded places.

  4. While walking rapidly.

  5. While lying in bed in the morning.

  6. While smoking.

  7. While lying on a couch or bed for physical or mental relaxation.

  Times, Places and Conditions in which Meditation is Difficult:

  1. At night.

  2. In a luxuriously furnished room.

  3. While sitting on a soft, yielding seat.

  4. While wearing gay clothing.

  5. When in company.

  6. When the body is weary.

  7. If the body is given too much food.

  Times, Places, and Conditions in which it is Best to Meditate:

  1. Very early in the morning.

  2. Immediately before meals.  3. In solitude.

  4. In the open air or in a plainly furnished room.

  5. While sitting on a hard seat.

  6. When the body is strong and vigorous.

  7. When the body is modestly and plainly clothed.

  It  will  be  seen  by  the  foregoing  instructions  that  ease,  luxury,  and

indulgence  (which  induce  reverie)  render  meditation  difficult,  and  when

strongly pronounced make it impossible; while strenuousness, discipline, and

self-denial (which dispel reverie), make meditation comparatively easy. The

body,  too,  should  be  neither  overfed  nor  starved;  neither  in  rags  nor

flauntingly clothed. It should not be tired, but should be at its highest point of

energy and strength, as the holding of the mind to a concentrated train of

subtle and lofty thought requires a high degree of both physical and mental

energy.

    Aspiration  can  often  best  be  aroused,  and  the  mind  renewed  in

meditation, by the mental repetition of a lofty precept, a beautiful sentence or

a  verse  of  poetry.  Indeed,  the  mind  that  is  ready  for  meditation  will

instinctively adopt this practice. Mere mechanical repetition is worthless, and

even a hindrance.

  The words repeated must be so applicable to one’s own condition that

they are dwelt upon lovingly and with concentrated devotion. In this way

aspiration  and  concentration  harmoniously  combine  to  produce,  without

undue strain, the state of meditation. All the conditions above stated are of

the  utmost  importance  in  the  early  stages  of  meditation,  and  should  be

carefully  noted  and  duly  observed  by  all  who  are  striving  to  acquire  the

practice; and those who faithfully follow the instructions, and who strive and

persevere,  will  not  fail  to  gather  in,  in  due  season,  the  harvest  of  purity,

wisdom,  bliss,  and  peace;  and  will  surely  eat  of  the  sweet  fruits  of  holy

meditation.                9. THE POWER OF PURPOSE


    DISPERSION  is  weakness;  concentration  is  power.  Destruction  is  a

scattering, preservation a uniting, process. Things are useful and thoughts are

powerful  in  the  measure  that  their  parts  are  strongly  and  intelligently

concentrated. Purpose is highly concentrated thought.

  All the mental energies are directed to the attainment of an object, and

obstacles which intervene between the thinker and the object are, one after

another, broken down and overcome. Purpose is the keystone in the temple of

achievement.  It binds and holds together in a complete whole that which

would otherwise lie scattered and useless.

  Empty  whims,  ephemeral  fancies,  vague  desires,  and  half-hearted

resolutions  have  no  place  in  purpose.  In  the  sustained  determination  to

accomplish  there  is  an  invincible  power  which  swallows  up  all  inferior

considerations, and marches direct to victory.

  All  successful  men  are  men  of  purpose.  They  hold  fast  to  an  idea,  a

project, a plan, and will not let it go; they cherish it, brood upon it, tend and

develop it; and when assailed by difficulties, they refuse to be beguiled into

surrender; indeed, the intensity of the purpose increases with the growing

magnitude of the obstacles encountered.

  The men who have molded the destinies of humanity have been men

mighty of purpose. Like theRoman laying his road, they have followed along

a well defined path, and have refused to swerve aside even when torture and

death confronted them. The Great Leaders of the race are the mental road

makers, and mankind follows in the intellectual and spiritual paths which

they have carved out and beaten.

  Great is the power of purpose. To know how great, let a man study it in

the lives of those whose influence has shaped the ends of nations and directed

the destinies of the world. In an Alexander, a Caesar, or a Napoleon, we see

the power of purpose when it is directed in worldly and personal channels; in

a Confucius, a Buddha, or a Christ, we perceive its vaster power when its

course is along heavenly and impersonal paths.

  Purpose  goes  with  intelligence.  There  are  lesser  and  greater  purposesaccording with degrees of intelligence. A great mind will always be great of

purpose. A weak intelligence will be without purpose. A drifting mind argues

a measure of undevelopment.

  What can resist an unshakable purpose? What can stand against it or turn

it aside? Inert matter yields to a living force, and circumstance succumbs to

the power of purpose. Truly, the man of unlawful purpose will, in achieving

his ends, destroy himself, but the man of good and lawful purpose cannot fail.

It only needs that he daily renew the fire and energy of his fixed resolve, to

consummate his object.

  The weak man, who grieves because he is misunderstood, will not greatly

achieve; the vain man, who steps aside from his resolve in order to please

others and gain their approbation, will not highly achieve; the double minded

man, who thinks to compromise his purpose, will fail.

  The  man  of  fixed  purpose  who,  whether  misunderstandings  and  foul

accusations, or flatteries and fair promises, rain upon him, does not yield a

fraction of his resolve, is the man of excellence and achievement; of success,

greatness, power.

    Hindrances  stimulate  the  man  of  purpose;  difficulties  nerve  him  to

renewed exertion; mistakes, losses, pains, do not subdue him; and failures are

steps in the ladder of success, for he is ever conscious of the certainty of final

achievement.

  All things at last yield to the silent, irresistible, all conquering energy of

purpose.

  "Out of the night that covers me,

  Black as the pit from pole to pole,

  I thank whatever gods may be

  For my unconquerable soul.

  In the fell clutch of circumstance

  I have not whined nor cried aloud;

  Under the bludgeoning of chance

  My head is bloody but unbowed.

  It matters not how strait the gate,

  How charged with punishment the scroll;

  I am the master of my fate,  I am the captain of my soul."            10. THE JOY OF ACCOMPLISHMENT


  JOY is always the accompaniment of a task successfully accomplished.

An undertaking completed, or a piece of work done, always brings rest and

satisfaction. "When a man has done his duty, he is light-hearted and happy,"

says  Emerson;  and  no  matter  how  insignificant  the  task  may  appear,  the

doing  of  it  faithfully  and  with  whole-souled  energy  always  results  in

cheerfulness and peace of mind.

  Of all miserable men, the shirker is the most miserable. Thinking to find

ease and happiness in avoiding difficult duties and necessary tasks, which

require the expenditure of labour and exertion, his mind is always uneasy and

disturbed, he becomes burdened with an inward sense of shame, and forfeits

manliness and self-respect.

  "He who will not work according to his faculty, let him perish according

to his necessity," says Carlyle; and it is a moral law that the man who avoids

duty,  and  does  not  work  to  the  full  extent  of  his  capacity,  does  actually

perish, first in his character and last in his body and circumstances. Life and

action  are  synonymous,  and  immediately  a  man  tries  to  escape  exertion,

either physical or mental, he has commenced to decay.

  On the other hand, the energetic increase in life by the full exercise of

their powers, by overcoming difficulties, and by bringing to completion tasks

which coiled for the strenuous use of mind or muscle.

  How  happy  is  a  child  when  a  school  lesson,  long  laboured  over,  is

mastered at last! The athlete, who has trained his body through long months

or years of discipline and strain, is richly blessed in his increased health and

strength; and is met with the rejoicings of his friends when he carries home

the prize from the field of contest. After many years of ungrudging toil, the

heart  of  the  scholar  is  gladdened  with  the  advantages  and  powers  which

learning bestows.

  The business man, grappling incessantly with difficulties and drawbacks,

is  amply  repaid  in  the  happy  assurance  of  well  earned  success;  and  the

horticulturist, vigorously contending with the stubborn soil, sits down at last

to eat of the fruits of his labour.

  Every successful accomplishment, even in worldly things, is repaid with

its own measure of joy; and in spiritual things, the joy which supervenesupon the perfection of purpose is sure, deep and abiding. Great is the heartfelt

joy (albeit ineffable) when, after innumerable and apparently unsuccessful

attempts, some ingrained fault of character is at last cast out to trouble its

erstwhile victim and the world no more.

  The striver after virtue — he who is engaged in the holy task of building

up a noble character — tastes, at every step of conquest over self, a joy which

does not again leave him, but which becomes an integral part of his spiritual

nature.

  All life is a struggle; both without and within there are conditions against

which  man  must  contend;  his  very  existence  is  a  series  of  efforts  and

accomplishments, and his right to remain among men as a useful unit of

humanity  depends  upon  the  measure  of  his  capacity  for  wrestling

successfully  with  the  elements  of  nature  without,  or  with  the  enemies  of

virtue and truth within.

  It is demanded of man that he shall continue to strive after better things,

after greater perfection, after higher and still higher achievements; and in

accordance with the measure of his obedience to this demand, does the angel

of joy wait upon his footsteps and minister unto him; for he who is anxious to

learn, eager to know, and who puts forth efforts to accomplish, finds the joy

which eternally sings at the heart of the universe.

  First in little things, then in greater, and then in greater still, must man

strive; until at last he is prepared to make the supreme effort, and strive for

the accomplishment of Truth, succeeding in which, he will realize the eternal

joy.

  The  price  of  life  is  effort;  the  acme  of  effort  is  accomplishment;  the

reward of accomplishment is joy. Blessed is the man who strives against his

own selfishness; he will taste in its fullness the joy of accomplishment.                              BOOK SEVEN


              THE LIFE TRIUMPHANT:


        MASTERING THE HEART AND


                                    MIND.                                      FOREWORD


  EVERY BEING LIVES in his own mental world. His joys and sorrows

are the creations of his own mind, and are dependent upon the mind for their

existence. In the midst of the world, darkened with many sins and sorrows, in

which the majority live, there abides another world, lighted up with shining

virtues and unpolluted joy, in which the perfect ones live. This world can be

found and entered, and the way to it is by self-control and moral excellence.

It is the world of the perfect life, and it rightly belongs to man, who is not

complete until crowned with perfection. The perfect life is not the faraway,

impossible  thing  that  men  who  are  in  darkness  imagine  it  to  be;  it  is

supremely possible, and very near and real. Man remains a craving, weeping,

sinning, repenting creature just so long as he wills to do so by clinging to

those weak conditions. But when he wills to shake off his dark dreams and to

rise, he arises and achieves.

  James Allen

 

  Hail to Thee, Man divine! the conqueror

  Of sin and shame and sorrow; no more weak,

  Wormlike, and groveling art thou; no, nor

  Wilt thou again bow down to things that weak

    Scourgings and death upon thee; thou dost rise

    Triumphant in thy strength; good, pure and wise.                    1. FAITH AND COURAGE


  FOR THOSE WHO WILL FIGHT BRAVELY and not yield, there is

triumphant victory over all the dark things of life. I state this at the beginning,

that the reader may know there is no uncertainty about it. In the course of this

book I shall show what are the elements, in character and conduct, which go

to build up the life of calm strength and superlative victory.

  To stand face to face with truth; to arrive, after innumerable wanderings

and pains, at wisdom and bliss; not to be finally defeated and cast out, but

ultimately to triumph over every inward foe—such is man’s divine destiny,

such his glorious goal. And this, every saint, sage, and saviour has declared.

  In the present stage of the life of humanity, comparatively few reach this

place of triumph—though all will reach it at last—yet there is a glorious

company of perfect ones who have attained in the past, and their number is

being added to with each succeeding age. Men are as yet learners in the

school of life, and most men die learners. But there are some who, in this life,

through fixity of purpose and strenuous fighting against darkness, pain, and

ignorance, acquire a right knowledge of life and pass joyfully beyond the

pupil stage.

  Man is not to remain forever a schoolboy in the universe, to be whipped

for follies and errors. When he wills and wishes, he can set his mind upon his

task and master the lessons of life, becoming a confident and skilled scholar,

living in understanding and peace, and not in ignorance and misery.

  The  sorrows  of  life  are  profound  and  deeply  rooted,  but  they  can  be

fathomed and rooted out. The passions and emotions of human nature are, in

their ungoverned state, overwhelming and painfully conflicting, but they can

be so softened down, harmonized, and wisely directed and understood, as to

become obedient servants for the outworking of enlightened purposes.

  The difficulties of life are great, its battle fierce, and its wished-for issues

are uncertain and elusive; so much so, that every hour men and women are

breaking down under the strain. Yet these conditions have no objective and

arbitrary existence. In their true nature they are subjective and purely mental,

and  can  be  transcended.  There  is  no  inherent  and  permanent  evil  in  theuniversal order; and the mind can be lifted up to the moral altitude where evil

can touch it no more.

  A steadfast faith in an Eternal and Universal Justice, in an over-ruling

Good, is the prelude to the Life Triumphant. The man who aims to become

strong, serene, and steadfast at heart must, at the onset, have no doubt that the

Heart  of  Life  is  good.  He  who  is  to  gaze  upon  the  Cosmic  Order  and

experience the rapture of emancipation must realize that there is no disorder

in his life but that which he creates. This realization is difficult, so prone is

the mind, in its imperfect stages, to self-pity and self-justification, but it can

be attained, and must be attained by him who is to live the freed life. At first

it must be believed, and the belief must be adhered to, until it ripens into

realization and knowledge.

  The  sufferings  of  life  are  greatly  reduced  when  they  are  accepted  as

disciplinary  experiences,  and  the  man  of  faith  does  so  accept  them.  The

sufferings  of  life  are  transcended  and  put  away  when  all  experiences  are

accounted good, and are utilized in the development of character, and the

man of knowledge does so regard and utilize them.

  Faith  is  the  grey  dawn  which  precedes  the  full  and  perfect  day  of

knowledge. Without it there can be no attainment of strength, no permanent

security  of  heart.  The  man  of  faith  does  not  succumb  when  difficulties

present  themselves;  he  does  not  despair  when  troubles  overtake  him.

However steep and dark his path may seem, he looks forward to a brighter

pathway ahead. He sees a destination of rest and light beyond. They who

have no faith in the triumph of good ignominiously succumb to the elements

of evil. And this must be so; for he who does not elevate good, elevates evil,

and, seeing evil as the master of life, he receives the wages of evil.

  There are those who, having yielded to defeat in the battle of life, talk

thoughtlessly about the wrongs they have suffered at the hands of others.

They believe—and try to make others believe—that they would have been

successful or rich or famous but for the treachery and villainy of those about

them.  They  tell,  for  the  thousandth  time,  how  they  have  been  deceived,

defrauded, and degraded by others. They imagine that they themselves are all

trust, all innocence, all honesty and good nature, and that nearly everyone

else is all that is bad and malicious. They tell how they would have been just

as prosperous and honoured as others if they had been as selfish as thoseothers; and that their great drawback, and the chief source, in themselves, of

their  failures,  is  that  they  were  born  with  too  great  an  endowment  of

unselfishness.

  Such self-praising complainers cannot distinguish between good and evil,

and their faith in human nature and the goodness of the universe is dead.

Looking upon others, they have eyes for evil only; looking upon themselves,

they  see  only  suffering  innocence.  Rather  than  discover  any  evil  in

themselves,  they  would  have  all  humanity  bad.  In  their  hearts  they  have

enthroned the wretched Demon of Evil as the Lord of Life, and see in the

course of things only a selfish scramble in which the good is always crushed

and  the  evil  rises  triumphant.  Blind  to  their  own  folly,  ignorance,  and

weakness, they see nothing but injustice in their fate, nothing but misery and

wretchedness in their present condition.

  He  who  would  have  even  a  useful  and  successful  life—yet  alone  a

spiritually noble and victorious one—must at once root out and cast away this

wretched condition of mind that negates all that is good and pure, and gives

preeminence to all that is base and impure. Misfortune, misery and defeat

most  surely  await  the  man  who  believes  that  dishonesty,  deceit  and

selfishness are the best weapons whereby to achieve a successful life. What

courage and strength can a man develop, and what quiet and happiness can he

enjoy,  who  believes  that  in  order  to  keep  pace  with  others  he  must

continually deny and discourage the better qualities of his nature? The man

who believes that evil is more powerful than good, and that bad men have the

best of life, is still involved in the elements of evil; and, being so involved, he

suffers—must necessarily suffer—defeat.

  It may appear to you that the world is given over to wickedness; that the

bad prosper, and the good fail; that there is nothing but chance, injustice, and

disorder. But do not believe this: regard it as an elusive appearance. Conclude

that you do not see life as it really is; that you have not yet fathomed the

causes of things, and that when you can look upon life through a purer heart

and a wiser mind, you will see and understand its equity. And truly when you

do so look at life, you will see good where you now see evil, order where

now appears disorder, and justice where now injustice seems to prevail.

  The universe is a cosmos, not a chaos, and the bad do not prosper. It is

true there is much evil in the world, otherwise there would be no necessity formoral aims, but there is also much misery in the world, and the evil and

misery are related as cause and effect. It is equally true that there is much

good in the world, and much abiding gladness, and the good and gladness are

related as cause and effect. He who has acquired that faith in the power and

supremacy of good, which no apparent injustice, no amount of suffering, and

no catastrophe can shake, will pass through all emergencies, all trials and

difficulties,  with  a  sublime  courage  that  defies  the  demons  of  doubt  and

despair. He may not succeed in all his plans. He may even encounter much

failure; but when he fails, it will be that he may frame nobler purposes and

ascend to higher achievements. He will only fail in order to reach a success

greater than that of which he first dreamed. His life will not, cannot, be a

failure. Some of its details will fail, but this will be but the breaking of weak

links in the chain of character and events, in order that the whole may be

made more strong and complete.

  There is an animal courage which can calmly face the fire of an enemy in

battle, or the fierce rage of beasts, but which fails in the battle of life and

breaks down when confronted with the beasts that rage within one’s own

heart. It requires a higher, diviner courage to remain calm in the hour of

deprivation and calamity than in the heat of battle, to overcome self than to

overcome another. And this diviner courage is the companion of faith.

  A mere theological belief (commonly confused with faith) will not avail.

Beliefs about God, Jesus, Creation, etc., are merely surface opinions (derived

chiefly from custom) which do not reach down to the real life of a man and

have no power to bestow faith. Such beliefs may accompany faith, but they

are distinct from it. Frequently, those who hold most tenaciously to particular

beliefs about God, Jesus, and the Bible are most lacking in faith—that is, they

give way to complaint, despondency, and grief immediately after some petty

trouble overtakes them. If one is given to irritability, anxiety, hopelessness,

and lamentations over the simple things of life, let him know that, in spite of

his  religious  belief  or  metaphysical  philosophy,  he  lacks  faith.  For  where

faith is there is courage, there is fortitude, there is steadfastness and strength.

  The opinions of men are lightly to be considered, for they are changing

with every new breeze of thought. They have very little part in the reality of

things, being the bubbles of a surface effervescence. But behind all opinions

there is the same human heart. The "godless" are they who are goodless, eventhough they may be members of churches and make a great profession of

faith in God. The "godly" are they who are goodly even though they make no

profession of religion. The complainers and bewailers are the faithless and

unbelieving. Those who deny or belittle the power of good, and in their lives

and actions affirm and magnify the power of evil, are the only real atheists.

  Faith bestows that sublime courage that rises superior to the petty and

selfish  disappointments  and  troubles  of  life,  that  acknowledges  no  defeat

except  as  a  step  to  victory;  that  is  strong  to  endure,  patient  to  wait,  and

energetic to struggle. It perceives the benign law of Truth in all things, and is

assured of the final triumph of the heart, and the kingly power of the mind.

  Light up, then, the lamp of faith in your heart, and walk through the

darkness  guided  by  its  illuminating  rays.  Its  light  is  dim,  and  cannot  be

compared with the sunlight brilliance of knowledge, but it suffices to lead

one safely through the mists of doubt and the black darkness of despair; along

the narrow, thorny ways of sickness and sorrow, and over the treacherous

planes of temptation and uncertainty. It enables man to ward off and outstrip

the foul beasts that rage in the jungle of his heart, and to reach safely the open

plains of a pure life and the mountain levels of conquest where the dim light

of faith is no longer needed. For, leaving behind him all the darkness, all the

doubt,  error,  and  sorrow,  he  enters  into  a  new  consciousness  and  upon  a

higher round of life, works, and acts, and lives self-contained and peaceful, in

the full and glorious light of knowledge.            2. MANLINESS, WOMANLINESS AND


                                  SINCERITY


  BEFORE A MAN CAN BE TRULY GODLY, he must be manly; before

a woman can be truly godly, she must be womanly. There can be no true

goodness apart from moral strength. Simpering, pretense, artificial behaviour,

flatteries, insincerities and smiling hypocrisies—let these things be forever

destroyed and banished from our minds. Evil is inherently weak, ineffectual,

and  cowardly.  Good  is  essentially  strong,  effective,  and  courageous.  In

teaching men and women to be good, I teach them to be strong, free, self-

reliant.  They  will  greatly  misunderstand  me  and  the  principles  which  I

enunciate who imagine that because I teach gentleness, purity, and patience I

teach the cultivation of an effeminate weakness. It is only the manly man and

the womanly woman who can properly understand those divine qualities. No

one is better equipped to achieve the Life Triumphant than they who, along

with active moral qualities and a high sense of purity and honour, are also

possessed of the strong animal nature of the normal man.

  That animal force which, in various forms, surges within you, and which,

in the hour of excitement, carries you blindly away, causing you to forget

your higher nature and to forfeit your manly dignity and honour—that same

force controlled, mastered, and rightly directed, will endow you with a divine

strength by which you can achieve the highest, noblest, most blissful victories

of true living.

  The savage within you is to be scourged and disciplined into obedience.

You are to be the master of your heart, your mind, yourself. Man is only

weak and abject when he gives up the reins of government to the lower,

instead of directing the lower by the higher. Your passions are to be your

servants and slaves, not your masters. See that you keep them in their places,

duly controlled and commanded, and they shall render you faithful, strong,

and happy service.

  You are not "vile." There is no part of your body or mind that is vile.

Nature does not make mistakes. The Universe is framed on Truth. All your

functions,  faculties,  and  powers  are  good,  and  to  direct  them  rightly  is

wisdom, holiness, happiness; to direct them wrongly is folly, sin, and misery.  Men waste themselves in excesses; in bad tempers, hatreds, gluttonies,

and  unworthy  and  unlawful  pleasures,  and  then  blame  life.  They  should

blame themselves. A man should have more self-respect than to abuse his

nature  in  any  way.  He  should  command  himself  always;  should  avoid

excitement and hurry; should be too noble to give way to anger, to resent the

actions and opinions of others, or fruitlessly to argue with an abusive and

cantankerous assailant.

  A quiet, unobtrusive, and unoffending dignity is the chief mark of a ripe

and perfect manhood. Honour others and respect yourself. Choose your own

path  and  walk  it  with  a  firm,  unflinching  step,  but  avoid  a  meddlesome

interference with others. In the true man opposing qualities are blended and

harmonized;  a  yielding  kindness  accompanies  an  unbending  strength.  He

adapts himself gently and wisely to others without sacrificing the steadfast

principles upon which his manhood is built. To have that iron strength that

can go calmly to death rather than yield one jot of truth, along with that

tender sympathy that can shield the weak and mistaken enemy, is to be manly

with a divine manhood.

  Be true to the dictates of your own conscience, and respect all who do the

same,  even  though  their  conscience  should  lead  them  in  a  direction  the

reverse of your own. One of the most unmanly tendencies is to pity another

because he chooses opinions or religion contrary to those of one’s self. Why

pity  a  man  because  he  is  an  agnostic,  or  an  atheist,  or  a  Buddhist,  or  a

Christian? Because he does not hold this opinion or that belief? Such pity

should be rightly named contempt. It is the office of pity to feel for the weak,

the afflicted, and the helpless.

  Pity never says "I pity you"; it does kind deeds. It is superciliousness that

professes pity for the strong, the self-reliant, for those who have the courage

to mark out their own path and to walk it boldly. Why should he be forced to

hold my opinion or yours? If what I say and do appeal to his reason and

conscience as right, then he will be one with me and will work hand and hand

with me. But if my work be not his work, he is nonetheless a man. He has his

duty, though it not be my duty. When I meet one who is self-respecting, and

who dares to think for himself, I will salute him as a man, and not harbour in

my  heart  a  contemptible  pity  for  him,  because,  indeed,  he  rejects  my

conclusions.  If we are to be responsible, self-acting beings in a law-begotten universe,

let us be masters of our own wills, and respect the free will of others. If we

are to be strong and manly, let us be large-hearted and magnanimous. If we

are to triumph over the miseries of life, let us rise superior to the pettiness of

our nature.

  Men  weep  in  their  weakness,  and  cry  out  in  misery  of  heart  and

degradation  of  mind.  How  plain,  then,  is  the  way  of  emancipation;  how

sublime  the  task  of  triumph!  Be  master  of  yourself.  Eliminate  weakness.

Exorcise  the  mocking  fiend,  selfishness,  in  whom  is  all  weakness  and

wretchedness. Do not pander to unnatural cravings, to unlawful desires, or to

morbid self-love and self-pity. Give them no quarter, but promptly stamp

them out with disciplinary decision and strength.

  A man should hold himself, as it were, in the hollow of his hand. He

should be able to take up and to lay down. He should know how to use

things, and not be used by them. He should neither be the helpless captive of

luxury nor the whipped slave of want, but should be self-contained and self-

sufficient, master of himself under all conditions. He must train and direct his

will in the way of self-mastery which is the way of obedience—obedience to

the law of his nature. Disobedience to law is the supreme evil in man, the

source of all his sin and sorrow. In his ignorance he imagines he can triumph

over law and subdue the wills of others. He thus destroys his power.

  Man can triumph over his disobedience, over ignorance, sin, egotism, and

lawlessness.  He  can  conquer  self;  and  herein  lies  his  manly  strength  and

divine power. He can comprehend the law of his being, and obey it as a child

obeys the will of its father. He can sit the crowned king of all his functions

and faculties, using them wisely in unselfish service, and not as instruments

of selfishness and greed. There is no bad habit that he cannot uproot, no sin

that he cannot subdue, no sorrow that he cannot comprehend and conquer.

"Let a man then know his worth, and keep things under his feet. Let him not

peep  or  steal,  or  skulk  up  and  down  with  the  air  of  a  charity  boy  or  an

interloper, in the world which exists for him."

  A  manly  self-reliance  is  not  only  compatible  with,  but  is  the

accompaniment of, a divine humility. A man is only arrogant and egotistic

when he usurps authority over others. He cannot claim nor exercise too great

an authority over himself. Strong self-command, with gentle considerationfor others, combine to make the truly manly man.

  To  begin  with,  a  man  must  be  honest,  upright,  sincere.  Deceit  is  the

blindest folly. Hypocrisy is the weakest thing on earth. In trying to deceive

others, a man most of all deceives himself. A man should be so free from

guile, meanness, and deceit as to be able to look everybody in the face with a

clear, open, unflinching gaze, free from shame and confusion, and with no

inward  shrinking  or  misgivings.  Without  sincerity  a  man  is  but  a  hollow

mask,  and  whatsoever  work  he  attempts  to  do,  it  will  be  lifeless  and

ineffectual. Out of a hollow vessel nothing but the sound of hollowness can

come; and from insincerity nothing but empty words can proceed.

  Many are not consciously hypocrites, yet fall victims, thoughtlessly, to

little insincerities which undermine happiness and destroy the moral fabric of

their character. Some of these people go regularly to their place of worship.

They pray daily, year after year, for a purer heart and life, yet come from

their devotions to vilify an enemy, or, worse still, to ridicule or slander an

absent friend for whom, when they meet him or her, they will have nothing

but smiles and smooth words. The pitiful part of it is that they are totally

unconscious  of  their  insincerity,  and  when  their  friends  desert  them,  they

speak complainingly of the faithlessness and hollowness of the world, and of

people  generally,  and  tell  you  sadly  that  there  are  no  true  friends  in  this

world. Truly, for such there are no abiding friendships. For insincerity, even

if not seen, is felt, and those who are incapable of bestowing trust and truth,

cannot receive it. Be true to others, and others will be true to you. Think well

of an enemy, and defend the absent friend. If you have lost faith in human

nature, discover where you have gone wrong yourself.

  In  the  Confucian  code  of  morals  sincerity  is  one  of  the  "Five  Great

Virtues," and Confucius thus speaks of it:

  "It is sincerity which places a crown upon your lives. Without it, our best

actions would be valueless; the seemingly virtuous, mere hypocrites; and the

shining light which dazzles us with its splendour, but a poor passing gleam

ready to be extinguished by the slightest breath of passion. . . To be pure in

mind, you must be free from self-deception— you must hate vice as you

would a disagreeable odour, and love virtue as you would some beautiful

object. There can be no self-respect without it, and this is why the superior

man must be guarded in his hours of solitude.  "The worthless man secretly employs his idle moments in vicious acts,

and there is no limit to his wickedness. In the presence of the pure he plays

the hypocrite, and puts forward none but his good qualities. Yet how does

this  disguise  hide  him  when  his  true  character  is  revealed  to  the  first

scrutinizing glance?

  "It has been said that there is a strict watch kept over that which is pointed

at by many hands, and gazed at by many eyes. It is in solitude, then, that the

upright man has the greatest reason to be guarded."

  Thus the sincere man does not do or say that which he would be ashamed

of were it brought to light. His uprightness of spirit enables him to walk

upright  and  confident  among  his  fellow  men.  His  presence  is  a  strong

protection,  and  his  words  are  direct  and  powerful  because  they  are  true.

Whatever may be his work, it prospers. Though he may not always please the

ears of men, he wins their hearts; they rely on him, trust, and honour him.

  Courage, self-reliance, sincerity, generosity and kindness—these are the

virtues which constitute a robust manhood. Without them, a man is but clay

in the hands of circumstances; a weak, wavering thing that cannot rise into

the freedom and joy of a true life. Every young man should cultivate and

foster these virtues, and as he succeeds in living them will he prepare to

achieve the Life Triumphant.

  I see coming upon the earth a new race of men and women—men who

will  be  men  indeed,  strong,  upright,  noble;  too  wise  to  stoop  to  anger,

uncleanness,  strife,  and  hatred—women  who  would  be  women  indeed,

gentle,  truthful,  pure;  too  compassionate  to  stoop  to  gossip,  slander,  and

deception. From their loins will proceed superior beings of the same noble

type; and the dark fiends of error and evil will fall back at their approach.

These noble men and women will regenerate the earth. They will dignify

man, and vindicate nature, restoring humanity to love, happiness, and peace;

and the life of victory over sin and sorrow will be established in the earth.                        3. ENERGY AND POWER


  HOW  WONDERFUL  is  the  universal  energy!  Never-tiring,

inexhaustible, and apparently eternal in its operation, it moves in atom and in

star, informing the fleeting shapes of time with its restless, glowing, pulsating

power.

  Man is a portion of this creative energy, and in him it manifests, through

a  combination  of  mental  faculties,  as  affection,  passion,  intelligence,

morality,  reason,  understanding,  and  wisdom.  He  is  not  merely  a  blind

conductor of energy, but he consciously uses, controls, and directs it. Slowly,

but with certainty, is he gaining control of the forces without, and is making

them do obedient service. And just as surely will he gain control of the forces

within—the  subtle  energies  of  thought—and  direct  them  into  channels  of

harmony and happiness.

  Man’s  true  place  in  the  Cosmos  is  that  of  a  king,  not  a  slave,  a

commander under the law of Good and not a helpless tool in the reign of

Evil. His own body and mind are the dual dominion over which he is to reign,

a Lord of Truth, the master of himself, the wise user and controller of his

store of pure, eternal, creative energy. Let him walk the earth unashamed,

strong, valiant, tender, and kind; no longer prostrate in self-abasement, but

walking erect in the dignity of perfect manhood; not grovelling in selfishness

and remorse, nor crying for pardon and mercy, but standing firm and free in

the sublime majesty of a sinless life.

  Long has man regarded himself as vile, weak, and unworthy, and has

been content to remain so. But in the new era which has just now burst upon

the world, he is to make a glorious discovery that he is pure, powerful, and

noble when he rises up and wills. The rising up is not against any outward

enemy; not against neighbour, nor governments, nor laws, nor spirits, nor

principalities, but against the ignorance, folly, and misery which beset him in

the dominion of his own mind. For it is only by ignorance and folly that man

is slavish; by knowledge and wisdom his kingdom is restored.

  Let them who will, preach man’s weakness and helplessness, but I will

teach his strength and power. I write for men, not for babes; for those who are

eager to learn, and earnest to achieve; for those who will put away (for the

world’s good) a petty personal indulgence, a selfish desire, a mean thought,and live on as though it were not, without craving and regret. The Truth is not

for the frivolous and the thoughtless. The Life Triumphant is not for triflers

and loiterers.

  Man is a master. If he were not, he could not act contrary to law. Thus his

so-called weakness is an indication of strength; his sin is the inversion of his

capacity  for  holiness.  For  what  is  his  weakness  and  sin  but  misdirected

energy, misapplied power? In this sense, the wrongdoer is strong, not weak;

but he is ignorant, and exerts his strength in wrong directions instead of right,

against the law of things instead of with it.

    Suffering  is  the  recoil  of  misdirected  strength,  The  bad  man  becomes

good by reversing his conduct. If you are weeping over your sins, cease to

commit those sins and establish yourself in their opposing virtues. It is thus

that  weakness  is  converted  into  strength,  helplessness  into  power,  and

suffering into bliss. By turning his energies from the old channels of vice, and

directing them into the new channels of virtue, the sinner becomes a saint.

  While the universal energy may be unlimited, in particular forms its sum

is strictly limited. A man is possessed of a given amount of energy, and he

can  use  it  or  misuse  it,  can  conserve  and  concentrate  it,  or  dissipate  and

disperse it. Power is concentrated energy; wisdom is that energy adapted to

beneficent ends. He is the man of influence and power who directs all his

energies towards one great purpose, and patiently works and waits for its

fulfilment, sacrificing his desires in other and more pleasant directions. He is

the man of folly and weakness who, thinking chiefly of pleasure, gratifies the

desire of the hour, or follows the whim and impulse of the moment, and so

drifts thoughtlessly into peevishness and poverty of mind.

  The  energy  used  in  one  direction  is  not  available  for  use  in  other

directions; this is a universal law both in mind and matter. Emerson calls it

"the law of compensation." Gain in a given direction necessitates loss in its

opposite direction. The force placed in one scale is deducted from the other

scale. Nature is always endeavouring to strike a balance. The energy which is

dissipated in idleness is not given to work. The pleasure-seeker cannot also

be a Truth-seeker.

  The force wasted in a fit of bad temper is drawn from the man’s store of

virtue,  particularly  the  virtue  of  patience.  Spiritually,  this  law  of

compensation is the law of sacrifice. Selfish pleasure must be sacrificed ifpurity is to be gained; hatred must be yielded up if love is to be acquired; vice

must be renounced if virtue is to be embraced.

  Earnest men soon discover that if they are to accomplish anything that is

successful,  strong,  and  enduring,  in  worldly,  intellectual,  or  spiritual

channels, they must curb their desires, and sacrifice much that seems sweet;

yea, even much that seems important.

    Hobbies,  bodily  and  mental  indulgences,  enticing  companionships,

alluring pleasures, and all work that does not tend to some central purpose in

his life must be sacrificed by the man of strong resolve. He opens his eyes to

the fact that time and energy are strictly limited, and so he economizes the

one and concentrates the other.

  Foolish  men  waste  their  energies  in  swinish  ease  and  gluttonous

indulgence, in frivolous pleasures and empty talk, in hateful thoughts and

irritable  outbursts  of  passion,  in  vain  controversy  and  meddlesome

interference. They then complain that many are more "fortunately equipped

than  they  are  for  a  useful,  successful,  or  great  life,  and  they  envy  their

honoured neighbour who has sacrificed self to duty, and has devoted all his

energies to the faithful performance of the business of his life.

  "He who is just, speaks the truth, and does what is his own business, him

the world will hold dear." Let a man attend to his own business, concentrating

all his energies upon the perfect accomplishment of the task of his life, not

stepping aside to condemn or interfere with the duties of others, and he will

find life simple, strong, and happy.

  The universe is girt with goodness and strength, and it protects the strong

and  the  good.  Evil  and  weakness  are  self-destructive.  Dissipation  is

annihilation.  All  nature  loves  strength.  I  see  no  inherent  cruelty  in  "the

survival of the fittest." It is a spiritual as well as a natural law. The stronger

qualities of the beast are the fittest to evolve a higher type. The nobler moral

qualities in man are his emancipators, and it is well that they should dominate

and ultimately crush out the ignoble tendencies.

  Most  certain  it  is  that  he  who  gives  dominion  to  the  lower,  courts

destruction, and does not survive, either in the struggle of life without or the

battle of Truth within. The life given to the lower is lost to the higher; yea, it

is  finally  lost  also  to  the  lower,  and  so  all  is  lost,  for  evil  is  ultimately

nothingness. But the life given to the higher is preserved, and is not lost toanything, for, while it sacrifices much that the world holds precious, it does

not sacrifice anything that is precious in reality.

  The untrue and worthless must perish, and he who consecrates himself to

the good and the true is content that they should perish, and so at last he

stands  where  sacrifice  ends,  and  all  is  gain—such  a  one  survives  in  the

struggle of life without, and he conquers in the battle of Truth within.

  First, then, be strong. Strength is the firm basis on which is built the

temple of the Triumphant Life.

  Without a central motive and fixed resolve, your life will be a poor, weak,

drifting, unstable thing. Let the act of the moment be governed by the deep

abiding purpose of the heart. You will act differently at different times, but

the act will not be wrong if the heart is right. You may fall and go astray at

times, especially under great stress, but you will quickly regain yourself, and

you will grow wiser and stronger, thereby, so long as you guide yourself by

the moral compass within, and do not throw it away to gratify indulgence and

give yourself up to uncertain drifting.

  Follow your conscience. Be true to your convictions. Do at the moment

what you regard as right, and put away all procrastination, vacillation, and

fear. If you are convinced that in the performance of your duty under certain

circumstances the severest measures are necessary, carry out those measures,

and let there be no uncertainty about it. Err on the side of strength rather than

weakness. The measures you adopt may not be the best, but if they are the

best you know, then your plain duty is to carry them out. By so doing you

will discover the better way, if you are anxious for progress, and are willing

to learn. Deliberate beforehand, but in the tune of action do not hesitate.

  Avoid anger and stubbornness, lust and greed. The angry man is the weak

man. The stubborn man, who refuses to learn or mend his ways, is the foolish

man. He grows old in folly, and grey hairs do not bring him reverence or

honour. The sensualist has energy for pleasure only, and reserves none for

manliness and self-respect. The greedy man is blind to the nobility of human

nature and the glory of a true life; he spends his energies in perpetuating the

miseries of hell, instead of enjoying the happiness of heaven.

  Your strength is with you, and you can spend it in burrowing downward

or in climbing upward. You can dissipate it in selfishness or conserve it in

goodness. The same energy will enable you to become a beast or a god. Thecourse along which you direct it will determine its effect. Do not think the

thought, "My mind is weak," but convert weakness into strength, and energy

into power by redirecting your mental forces. Turn your thoughts into noble

channels. Put away vain longings and foolish regrets; abolish complaint and

self-condolence, and have no dalliance with evil. Lift your face upward. Rise

up in your divine strength, and spurn from your mind and life all meanness

and weakness. Do not live the false life of a whining slave, but live the true

life of a conquering master.            4. SELF-CONTROL AND HAPPINESS


  WHEN  MENTAL  ENERGY  IS  allowed  to  follow  the  line  of  least

resistance, and to fall into easy channels, it is called weakness. When it is

gathered,  focused,  and  forced  into  upward  and  different  directions,  it

becomes power; and this concentration of energy and acquisition of power is

brought about by means of self-control.

  In speaking of self-control, one is easily misunderstood. It should not be

associated with a destructive repression, but with a constructive expression.

The  process  is  not  one  of  death,  but  of  life.  It  is  a  divine  and  masterly

transmutation in which the weak is converted into the strong, the coarse into

the fine, and the base into the noble; in which virtue takes the place of vice,

and dark passion is lost in bright intellectuality.

  The man who merely smothers up and hides away his real nature, without

any  higher  object  in  view  than  to  create  a  good  impression  upon  others

concerning his character, is practicing hypocrisy and not self-control. As the

mechanic  transmutes  coal  into  gas,  and  water  into  steam,  and  then

concentrates and utilizes the finer forces for the comfort and convenience of

others, so the man who intellectually practices self-control transmutes his

lower inclinations into the finer qualities of intelligence and mortality to the

increase of his own and the world’s happiness.

  A man is happy, wise, and great in the measure that he controls himself;

he is wretched, foolish, and mean in the measure that he allows his animal

nature to dominate his thoughts and actions.

  He who controls himself controls his life, his circumstances, his destiny,

and  wherever  he  goes  he  carries  his  happiness  with  him  as  an  abiding

possession. He who does not control himself, is controlled by passions, by his

circumstances, and his fate; and if he cannot gratify the desire of the moment,

he  is  disappointed  and  miserable.  He  depends  for  his  fitful  happiness  on

external things.

  There is no force in the universe which can be annihilated or lost. Energy

is transformed, but not destroyed. To shut the door on old and bad habits is to

open it to new and better ones. Renunciation precedes regeneration. Every

self-indulgence, every forbidden pleasure, every hateful thought renounced is

transformed into something more purely and permanently beautiful. Wheredebilitating excitements are cut off, there spring up rejuvenating joys. The

seed dies that the flower may appear; the grub perishes, but the dragonfly

comes forth.

  Truly,  the  transformation  is  not  instantaneous;  nor  is  the  transition  a

pleasant  and  painless  process.  Nature  demands  effort  and  patience  as  the

price of growth. In the march of progress, every victory is contested with

struggle and pain; but the victory is achieved, and it abides. The struggle

passes; the pain is temporary only. To demolish a firmly fixed habit, to break

up a mental tendency that has become automatic with long use, and to force

into birth and growth a fine characteristic or lofty virtue—to accomplish this

necessitates a painful metamorphosis, a transitional period of darkness, to

pass through which patience and endurance are required.

  This is where men fail. This is where they slip back into their old, easy,

animal ruts, and abandon self-control as too strenuous and severe. Thus they

fall short of permanent happiness, and the life of triumph over evil is hidden

from their eyes.

  The permanent happiness which men seek in dissipation, excitement, and

abandonment to unworthy pleasure is found only in the life which reverses all

this— the life of self-control. So far as a man deviates from perfect self-

command, just so far does he fall short of perfect happiness. He sinks into

misery and weakness, the lowest limit of which is madness, entire lack of

mental  control,  the  condition  of  irresponsibility.  In  so  far  as  a  man

approximates  to  perfect  self-command,  just  so  near  does  he  approach  to

perfect  happiness,  and  rise  into  joy  and  strength.  So  glorious  are  the

possibilities of such divine manhood, that no limit can be set to its grandeur

and bliss.

  If  a  man  will  understand  how  intimately,  yea,  how  inseparably,  self-

control and happiness are associated, he has but to look into his own heart,

and  upon  the  world  around,  to  find  there  the  joy  destroying  effects  of

uncontrolled tendencies. Looking upon the lives of men and women, he will

perceive how the hasty word, the bitter retort, the act of deception, the blind

prejudice and foolish resentment bring wretchedness and even ruin in their

train. Looking into his own life, what days of consuming remorse, of restless

anxiety, and of crushing sorrow rise up before his mind—periods of intense

suffering through which he has passed through lack of self-control.  But in the right life, the well-governed life, the victorious life, all these

things  pass  away.  New  conditions  obtain,  and  purer,  more  spiritual

instruments are employed for the achievements of happy ends. There is no

more  remorse,  because  there  is  no  more  wrong-doing.  There  is  no  more

anxiety,  because  there  is  no  more  selfishness.  There  is  no  more  sorrow,

because Truth is the source of action.

  The  much  desired  thing  which  self  pursues  with  breathless  and

uncontrolled eagerness, yet fails to overtake, comes unbidden, and begs to be

admitted,  to  him  who  works  and  waits  in  perfect  self-command.  Hatred,

impatience,  greed,  self-indulgence,  vain  ambitions,  and  blind  desires—the

instruments by which self shapes its ill finished existence, what clumsy tools

they are, and how ignorant and unskilful are they who employ them! Love,

patience,  kindness,  self-discipline,  transmuted  ambitions,  and  chastened

desires—instruments of Truth, by which is shaped a well finished existence,

what perfect tools they are, and how wise and skilful are they who use them!

    Whatsoever is gained by feverish haste and selfish desire is attained in

fuller measure by quietness and renunciation. Nature will not be hastened.

She brings all perfection in due season. Truth will not be commanded. He has

his conditions and must be obeyed. Nothing is more superfluous than haste

and anger.

  A man has to learn he cannot command things, but that he can command

himself; that he cannot coerce the wills of others, but that he can mould and

master  his  own  will:  and  things  serve  him  who  serve  Truth.  People  seek

guidance of him who is master of himself.

  It is a little understood, yet simple and profound truth, that the man who

cannot command himself under the severest external stress is unfit to guide

others or to control affairs. It is the fundamental principle in the moral and

political teachings of Confucius that, before attempting to govern affairs, a

man should learn to govern himself. Men who habitually give way, under

pressure, to hysterical suspicions, outbursts of resentment, and explosions of

anger, are unfit for weighty responsibilities and lofty duties, and usually fail,

sooner or later, even in the ordinary duties of life, such as the management of

their own family or business. Lack of self-control is foolishness, and folly

cannot take precedence over wisdom. He who is learning how to subdue and

control  his  turbulent,  wandering  thoughts  is  becoming  wiser  every  day.Though for a time the Temple of Joy will not be completed, he will gather

strength in laying its foundations and building its walls; and the day will

come when, like a wise master-builder, he will rest at peace in the beautiful

habitation which he has built. Wisdom inheres in self-control and in wisdom

is "pleasantness and peace."

  The  life  of  self-control  is  no  barren  deprivation,  no  wilderness  of

monotony. Renunciation there is, but it is a renunciation of the ephemeral and

false in order that the abiding and true may be realized. Enjoyment is not cut

off; it is intensified. Enjoyment is life; it is the slavish desire for it that kills.

Is there anywhere a more miserable man than he who is always longing for

some new sensation? Is there anywhere a more blessed being than he who, by

self-control, is satisfied, calm, and enlightened? Who has most of physical

life  and  joy—the  glutton,  the  drunkard,  and  the  sensualist  who  lives  for

pleasure  only,  or  the  temperate  man  who  holds  his  body  in  subjection,

considering its needs and obeying its uses?

  I was once eating a ripe, juicy apple as it came from the tree, and a man

near me said, "I would give anything if I could enjoy an apple like that." I

asked, "Why can’t you?" His answer was, "I have drunk whiskey and smoked

tobacco until I have lost all enjoyment in such things." In pursuit of elusive

enjoyments, men lose the abiding joys of life.

  And as he who controls his senses has most of physical life, joy, and

strength, so he who controls his thoughts has most of spiritual life, bliss, and

power. For not only happiness, but knowledge and wisdom also are revealed

by self-control. As the avenues of ignorance and selfishness are closed, the

open  gates  of  knowledge  and  enlightenment  appear.  Virtue  attained  is

knowledge gained. The pure mind is an enlightened mind. He has well-being

who controls himself well.

  I hear men speak of the "monotony of goodness." If looking for things in

the spirit which one has given up in the letter were "goodness," then indeed

would it be monotonous. The man of self-control does not merely give up his

base pleasures, he abandons all longing for them. He presses forward, and

does not look back; and fresh beauties, new glories, sublimer vistas await him

at every step.

  I am astonished at the revelations which lie hidden in self-control; I am

captivated by the infinite variety of Truth, I am filled with joy at the grandeurof the prospect; I am gladdened by its splendour and its peace.

  Along  the  way  of  self-control  there  is  the  joy  of  victory;  the

consciousness  of  expanding  and  increasing  power;  the  acquisition  of  the

imperishable riches of divine knowledge; and the abiding bliss of service to

humankind. Even he who travels only a portion of the way will develop a

strength,  achieve  a  success,  and  experience  a  joy  which  the  idle  and  the

thoughtless  cannot  know.  And  he  who  goes  all  the  way  will  become  a

spiritual conqueror; he will triumph over all evil, and will blot it out. He will

gaze with enrapt vision upon the majesty of the Cosmic Order, and will enjoy

the immortality of Truth.                  5. SIMPLICITY AND FREEDOM


  YOU HAVE KNOWN what it is to be physically encumbered by some

superfluous load. You have experienced the happy relief of dispensing with

such  a  load.  Your  experience  illustrates  the  difference  between  a  life

burdened with a complexity of desires, beliefs, and speculations, and one

rendered simple and free by the satisfaction of its natural needs, and a calm

contemplation  of  the  facts  of  existence,  eliminating  all  argument  and

speculation.

  There are those who cumber their drawers, cupboards, and rooms with

rubbish  and  clutter.  To  such  an  extent  is  this  carried  sometimes,  that  the

house cannot be properly cleaned, and vermin swarms. There is no use for the

rubbish, but they will not part with it, even though by so doing, they would

also get rid of the vermin. But they like to think that it is there; like to feel

that they have got it, especially if they are convinced that nobody else has its

like. They reason that it may be of some use someday; or it may become

valuable; or it brings up old associations which they occasionally resuscitate

and take a paradoxical pleasure in sorrowing over.

  In a sweet, methodical, well-managed house, such superfluities, bringing

with  them  dirt,  discomfort,  and  care,  are  not  allowed  to  accumulate.  Or

should they have accumulated, they are gathered up and consigned to the fire

and the trash bin, when it is decided to cleanse and restore the house, and

give it light, comfort, and freedom.

  In a like manner men hoard up in their minds mental rubbish and clutter,

cling tenaciously to it, and fear its loss. Insatiate desires; thirsty cravings for

unlawful and unnatural pleasures; conflicting beliefs about miracles, gods,

angels,  demons,  and  interminable  theological  complexities,  hypothesis  is

piled upon hypothesis, speculation is added to speculation, until the simple,

beautiful, all-sufficient facts of life are lost to sight and knowledge beneath

the metaphysical pile.

    Simplicity consists in being rid of this painful confusion of desires and

superfluity of opinions, and adhering only to that which is permanent and

essential. And what is permanent in life? What is essential? Virtue alone is

permanent; character is essential. So simple is life when it is freed from all

superfluities and rightly understood and lived that it can be reduced to a fewunmistakable, easy-to-understand, though hard-to-practice principles. And all

great minds have so simplified life.

  Buddha reduced it to eight virtues, in the practice of which he declared

that men would acquire perfect enlightenment. And these eight virtues he

reduced to one, which he called compassion.

  Confucius taught that the perfection of knowledge was contained in five

virtues,  and  these  he  expressed  in  one  which  he  called  Reciprocity,  or

Sympathy.

  Jesus reduced the whole of life to the principle of Love. Compassion,

Sympathy, Love, these three are identical. How simple they are, too! Yet I

cannot find a man who fully understands the depths and heights of these

virtues, for who so fully understood them would embody them in practice. He

would be complete, perfect, divine. There would be nothing lacking in him of

knowledge, virtue, and wisdom.

  It  is  only  when  a  man  sets  earnestly  to  work  to  order  his  life  in

accordance with the simple precepts of virtue, that he discovers what piles of

mental rubbish he has hoarded up, and which he is now compelled to throw

away. The exactions, too, which such a course of conduct make upon his

faith, endurance, patience, kindness, humility, reason, and strength of will,

are,  until  the  mind  approaches  the  necessary  condition  of  purity  and

simplicity,  painful  in  their  severity.  The  clearing-out  process,  whether  of

one’s mind, home, or place of business, is not a light and easy one, but it ends

in comfort and repose.

  All  complexities  of  detail,  whether  in  things  material  or  mental,  are

reducible to a few fundamental laws or principles by virtue of which they

exist and are regulated. Wise men govern their lives by a few simple rules. A

life governed by the central principle of love will be found to be divinely

consistent in all its details. Every thought, word, act, will fall into proper

place, and there will be no conflict and confusion.

    "What," asked the learned man of the Buddhist saint who had acquired a

wide  reputation  for  sanctity  and  wisdom—"what  is  the  most  fundamental

thing  in  Buddhism?"  The  saint  replied,  "The  most  fundamental  thing  in

Buddhism is to cease from evil and to learn to do good." "I did not ask you,"

said the learned man, "to tell me what every child of three knows. I want you

to tell me what is the most profound, the most subtle, and the most importantthing in Buddhism." "The most profound, the most subtle, the most important

thing in Buddhism," said the saint, "is to cease from evil and to learn to do

well. It is true that a child of three may know it, but grey-haired old men fail

to put it into practice."

  The commentator then goes on to say that the learned man did not want

facts; he did not want Truth. He wanted to be given some subtle metaphysical

speculation which would give rise to another speculation, and then to another

and  another,  and  so  afford  him  an  opportunity  of  bringing  into  play  the

wonderful intellect of which he was so proud.

  A  member  of  a  philosophical  school  once  proudly  said  to  me,  "Our

system of metaphysics is the most perfect and the most complicated in the

world." I discovered how complicated it was by becoming involved in it and

then  pursuing  the  process  of  disentanglement  back  to  the  facts  of  life,

simplicity, and freedom.

  I have since learned how better to utilize my energy and occupy my time

in the pursuit and practice of those virtues that are firm and sure, rather than

to  waste  it  in  the  spinning  of  the  pretty  but  unsubstantial  threads  of

metaphysical cobwebs.

  But while regarding with disfavour assumption and pride, and that vanity

which mistakes its own hypothesis for reality, I set no premium on ignorance

and stupidity. Learning is a good thing. As an end in itself, as a possession to

be proud of, it is a dead thing; but as a means to the high ends of human

progress and human good it becomes a living power. Accompanied with a

lowly mind, it is a powerful instrument for good.

  The Buddhist saint was no less learned than his proud questioner, but he

was more simple and wise. Even hypotheses will not lead us astray if they are

perceived as mere hypotheses and are not confounded with facts. Yet the

wisest men dispense with all hypotheses, and fall back on the simple practice

of virtue. They thus become divine, and arrive at the acme of simplicity,

enlightenment, and emancipation.

  To arrive at the freedom and joy of simplicity, one must not think less, he

must think more; only the thinking must be set to a high and useful purpose,

and  must  be  concentrated  upon  the  facts  and  duties  of  life,  instead  of

dissipated in unprofitable theorizing.

  A  life  of  simplicity  is  simple  in  all  its  parts  because  the  heart  whichgoverns it has become pure and strong; because it is centered and rested in

Truth. Harmful luxuries in food and vain superfluities in dress; exaggerations

of speech and insincerities of action; thoughts that tend to intellectual display

and empty speculation—all these are set aside in order that virtue may be

better  understood  and  more  earnestly  embraced.  The  duties  of  life  are

undertaken  in  a  spirit  from  which  self  is  eliminated,  and  they  become

transfigured with a new and glorious light, even the light of Truth. The great

fundamental  facts  of  life,  heretofore  hidden  from  knowledge,  are  plainly

revealed, and the Eternal Verities, about which the wordy theorizers can only

guess and argue, become substantial possessions.

  The simple-hearted, the true-hearted, the virtuous and wise, are no longer

troubled  with  doubts  and  fears  about  the  future  and  the  unknown  and

unknowable. They take their stand upon the duty of the hour, and on the

known  and  the  knowable.  They  do  not  barter  away  the  actual  for  the

hypothetical. They find in virtue an abiding security. They find in Truth an

illuminating light which, while it reveals to them the true order of the facts of

life, throws a halo of divine promise about the abyss of the unknown; and so

they are at rest.

    Simplicity  works  untrammelled,  and  becomes  greatness  and  power.

Suspicions,  deceptions,  impurities,  despondencies,  bewailings,  doubts,  and

fears—all these are cast away, left behind and ignored, and the freed man,

strong, self-possessed, calm, and pure, works in unclouded assurance, and

inhabits heavenly planes.              6. RIGHT THINKING AND REPOSE


  LIFE  IS  A  COMBINATION  OF  HABITS,  some  baneful,  some

beneficent,  all  of  which  take  their  rise  in  the  one  habit  of  thinking.  The

thought makes the man; therefore right-thinking is the most important thing

in life. The essential difference between a wise man and a fool is that the wise

man controls his thinking, the fool is controlled by it. A wise man determines

how and what he shall think, and does not allow external things to divert his

thought from the main purpose. But a fool is carried captive by every tyrant

thought as it is aroused within him by external things, and he goes through

life the helpless tool of impulse, whim, and passion.

  Careless,  slovenly  thinking,  commonly  called  thoughtlessness,  is  the

companion of failure, wrongdoing, and wretchedness. Nothing, no prayers,

no religious ceremonies, not even acts of charity, can make up for wrong-

thinking. Only right-thinking can rectify a wrong life. Only the right attitude

of mind towards men and things can bring repose and peace.

  The Triumphant Life is only for him whose heart and intellect are attuned

to lofty virtue. He must make his thought logical, sequential, harmonious,

symmetrical. He must mould and shape his thinking to fixed principles, and

thereby establish his life on the sure foundation of knowledge. He must not

merely be kind, he must be intelligently kind; must know why he is kind. His

kindness  must  be  an  invariable  quality,  and  not  an  intermittent  impulse

interspersed  with  fits  of  resentment  and  acts  of  harshness.  He  must  not

merely be virtuous under virtuous circumstances; his virtue must be of a kind

that  shall  continue  to  shine  with  unabated  light  when  he  is  assailed  with

vicious  circumstances.  He  must  not  allow  himself  to  be  hurled  from  the

throne of divine manhood by the shocks of fate or the praise and blame of

those around him. Virtue must be his abiding habitation; his refuge from the

whirlwind and the storm.

  And virtue is not only of the heart; it is of the intellect also; and without

this virtue of the intellect, the virtue of the heart is imperilled. Reason, like

passion, has its vices. Metaphysical speculations are the riot of the intellect,

as sensuality is the riot of the affections. The highest flights of speculation—

pleasing as they are—reveal no place of rest, and the strained mind must

return to facts and moral principles to find that truth which it seeks. As thesoaring bird returns for refuge and rest to its nest in the rock, so must the

speculative thinker return to the rock of virtue for surety and peace.

  The intellect must be trained to comprehend the principles of virtue, and

to  understand  all  that  is  involved  in  their  practice.  Its  energies  must  be

restrained from wasteful indulgence in vain subtleties, and be directed in the

path of righteousness and the way of wisdom. The thinker must distinguish,

in  his  own  mind,  between  reality  and  assumption.  He  must  discover  the

extent of his actual knowledge. He must know what he knows. He must also

know what he does not know. He must learn to discriminate between belief

and knowledge, error and Truth.

  In his search for the right attitude of mind which perceives truth, and

works out a wise and radiant life, he must be more logical than logic, more

merciless in exposing the errors of his own mind than the most sarcastic

logician is in exposing the errors of the minds of others. After pursuing this

course of discrimination for a short time, he will be astonished to find how

small is the extent of his actual knowledge; yet he will be gladdened by its

possession, for small as it is, it is the pure gold of knowledge. And what is

better, to have a few grains of gold hidden away in tons of ore, where it is

useless, or to extract the gold and throw away the ore?

  As  the  miner  sifts  away  bushels  of  dull  earth  to  find  the  sparkling

diamond, so the spiritual miner, the true thinker, sifts away from his mind the

accumulation of opinions, beliefs, speculations, and assumptions to find the

bright  jewel  of  Truth  which  bestows  upon  its  possessor  wisdom  and

enlightenment.

  And the concentrated knowledge which is ultimately brought to light by

this sifting process is found to be so closely akin to virtue that it cannot be

divided from it, cannot be set apart as something different.

  In  his  search  for  knowledge  Socrates  discovered  virtue.  The  divine

maxims of the Great Teachers are maxims of virtue. When knowledge is

separated from virtue, wisdom is lost. What a man practices, that he knows.

What he does not practice, that he does not know. A man may write treatises

or preach sermons on Love, but if he treats his family harshly, or thinks

spitefully of his enemy, what knowledge has he concerning Love?

  In the heart of the man of knowledge there dwells a silent and abiding

compassion that shames the fine words of the noisy theorist. He only knowswhat peace is whose heart is free from hatred, who lives in peace with all.

Cunning  definitions  of  virtue  only  serve  to  deepen  ignorance  when  they

proceed from vice-stained lips. Knowledge has a deeper source than the mere

memorizing of information. That knowledge is divine which proceeds from

acquaintance with virtue. The humility which purges the intellect of its empty

opinions and vain assumptions also fortifies it with a searching insight and

invincible power. There is a divine logic which is undistinguished from love.

The reply, "He that is without sin among you, let him cast the first stone," is

unanswerable logic. It is also perfect love.

  The wrong thinker is known by his vices; the right thinker is known by

his virtues. Troubles and unrest assail the mind of the wrong thinker, and he

experiences  no  abiding  repose.  He  imagines  that  others  can  injure,  snub,

cheat, degrade and ruin him. Knowing nothing of the protection of virtue, he

seeks the protection of self, and takes refuge in suspicion, spite, resentment,

and retaliation, and is burnt in the fire of his own vices.

  When slandered, he slanders in return; when accused, he recriminates;

when assailed, he turns upon his adversary with double fierceness. "I have

been  treated  unjustly!"  exclaims  the  wrong  thinker,  and  then  abandons

himself  to  resentment  and  misery.  Having  no  insight  and  unable  to

distinguish  evil  from  good,  he  cannot  see  that  his  own  evil,  and  not  his

neighbour’s, is the cause of all his trouble.

  The  right  thinker  is  not  concerned  with  thoughts  about  self  and  self-

protection, and the wrong actions of others towards him cannot cause him

trouble  or  unrest.  He  cannot  think—"This  man  has  wronged  me."  He

perceives  that  no  wrong  can  reach  him  but  by  his  own  evil  deeds.  He

understands that his welfare is at his own hands, and thus none but himself

can rob him of repose. Virtue is his protection, and retaliation is foreign to

him. He holds himself steadfastly in peace, and resentment cannot enter his

heart. Temptation does not find him unprepared, and it assails in vain the

strong citadel of his mind. Abiding in virtue, he abides in strength and peace.

  The right-thinker has discovered and acquired the right attitude of mind

toward men and things—the attitude of a profound and loving repose. And

this is not resignation, it is wisdom. It is not indifference, but watchful and

penetrating insight. He has comprehended the facts of life; he sees things as

they are. He does not overlook the particulars of life, but reads them in thelight  of  cosmic  law;  sees  them  in  their  right  relations  as  portions  of  the

universal scheme. He sees the universe is upheld by justice. He watches, but

does not engage in, the petty quarrels and fleeting strifes of men. He cannot

be partisan. His sympathy is with all. He cannot favour one portion more than

another. He knows that good will ultimately conquer in the world, as it has

conquered  in  individuals;  that  there  is  a  sense  in  which  good  already

conquers, for evil defeats itself.

  Good is not defeated; justice is not set aside. Whatever man may do,

justice reigns, and its eternal throne cannot be assailed and threatened, much

less  conquered  and  overthrown.  This  is  the  source  of  the  true  thinker’s

abiding repose. Having become righteous, he perceives the righteous law.

Having acquired Love, he understands the Eternal Love. Having conquered

evil, he knows that good is supreme.

  He is only the true thinker whose heart is free from hatred, lust, and pride;

who looks out upon the world through eyes washed free from evil; whose

bitterest enemy arouses no enmity, but only tender pity in his heart; who does

not talk vainly about things of which he has no knowledge, and whose heart

is always at peace.

  And by this a man may know that his thoughts are in accordance with the

Truth—that there is no more bitterness in his heart, that malice has departed

from him; that he loves where he formerly condemned.

  A man may be learned, but if he is not wise he will not be a true thinker.

Not by learning will a man triumph over evil; not by much study will he

overcome sin and sorrow. Only by conquering himself will he conquer evil;

only by practicing righteousness will he put an end to sorrow.

  Not  for  the  clever,  nor  the  learned,  nor  the  self-confident  is  the  Life

Triumphant, but for the pure, the virtuous, the wise. The former achieve their

particular success in life, but the latter alone achieve the Great Success, a

success so invincible and complete that even an apparent defeat shines with

added victory.

  Virtue cannot be shaken; virtue cannot be confounded; virtue cannot be

overthrown. He who thinks in accordance with virtue, who acts righteously,

whose mind is the servant of truth, he it is who conquers in life and in death.

For virtue must triumph, and Righteousness and Truth are the pillars of the

universe.                  7. CALMNESS AND RESOURCE


  HE WHO HAS TRUTH is always self-possessed. Hurry and excitement,

anxiety and fear have no place in the purified mind and the true life. Self-

conquest results in perpetual calm. Calmness is the radiant light which adds a

luster  to  all  the  virtues.  Like  the  nimbus  round  the  head  of  the  saint,  it

surrounds virtue with its shining halo. Without calmness a man’s greatest

strength is but a kind of exaggerated weakness. Where is a man’s spiritual

strength—where  indeed,  is  his  ordinary  manly  strength—  who  loses  his

balance  with  almost  every  petty  disturbance  from  without?  And  what

enduring  influence  can  a  man  have  who  forgets  himself  in  sinful

abandonment or unseemly rage in the hour of temptation and crisis?

  The virtuous put a check upon themselves, and set a watch upon their

passions and emotions. In this way they gain possession of the mind, and

gradually  acquire  calmness.  And  as  they  acquire  calmness,  they  acquire

influence, power, greatness, abiding joy, and fullness and completeness of

life.

  Those who do not put a check upon themselves, whose emotions and

passions  are  their  masters,  who  crave  excitement  and  race  after  unholy

pleasures— these are not yet fit for a life of joyful victory, and can neither

appreciate nor receive the beautiful jewel of calmness. Such may pray for

peace with their lips, but they do not desire it in their hearts; or the word

"peace" may only mean to them another kind of periodic pleasure which they

desire to enjoy.

  In the life of calm there are no fitful periods of sinful excitement followed

by reactionary hours of sorrow and remorse. There are no foolish elations

followed by equally foolish depressions; no degrading actions followed by

misery  and  loss  of  self-respect.  All  these  things  are  put  away,  and  what

remains is Truth, and Truth is forever encircled with peace. The calm life is

new unbroken bliss. Duties which are irksome to the ungoverned are things

of joy to the calm man. Indeed, in the calm life, the word "duty" receives a

new  meaning.  It  is  no  longer  opposed  to  happiness,  but  it  is  one  with

happiness. The calm man, the right-seeing man, cannot separate joy from

duty. Such separation belongs to the mind and life of the pleasure-hunter and

lover of excitement.    Calmness is difficult to attain because men cling blindly to the lower

disturbances of the mind for the passing pleasure which these disturbances

afford.  Even  sorrow  is  sometimes  selfishly  gloated  over  as  a  kind  of

occasional luxury. But though difficult to attain, the way which leads to its

attainment  is  simple.  It  consists  of  abandoning  all  those  excitements  and

disturbances  which  are  opposed  to  it,  and  fortifying  one’s  self  in  these

steadfast  virtues,  which  do  not  change  with  changing  events  and

circumstances, which have no violent reactions, and which therefore bestow

perpetual satisfaction and abiding peace.

  He only finds peace who conquers himself, who strives, day by day, after

self-possession, greater self-control, greater calmness of mind. One can only

be  a  joy  to  himself  and  a  blessing  to  others  in  the  measure  that  he  has

command of himself; and such self-command is gained only by persistent

practice.  A  man  must  conquer  his  weaknesses  by  daily  effort.  He  must

understand them and study how to eliminate them from his character. If he

continues  to  strive,  not  giving  way,  he  will  gradually  become  victorious.

Each little victory gained (though there is a sense in which no victory can be

called  little)  will  be  so  much  more  calmness  acquired  and  added  to  his

character as an eternal possession.

  He will thus make himself strong, capable, and blessed, fit to perform his

duties faultlessly, and to meet all events with an untroubled spirit. But even if

he does not, in this life, reach that supreme calm which no shock can disturb,

he will become sufficiently self-possessed and pure to enable him to fight the

battle of life fearlessly, and to leave the world a little richer for having known

the goodness of his presence.

  By constantly overcoming self, a man gains a knowledge of the subtle

intricacies of his mind; and it is this divine knowledge which enables him to

become  established  in  calmness.  Without  self-knowledge  there  can  be  no

abiding  peace  of  mind,  and  those  who  are  carried  away  by  tempestuous

passions cannot approach the holy place where calmness reigns. The weak

man is like one who, having mounted a fiery steed, allows it to run away with

him, and carry him whithersoever it wills. The strong man is like one who,

having mounted the steed, governs it with a masterly hand, and makes it go in

whatever direction, and at whatever speed he commands.

    Calmness is the crowning beauty of a character that has become, or isbecoming, divine, and is restful and peace-giving to all who come in contact

with it. Those who are still in their weakness and doubt, find the presence of

the calm mind restful to their troubled minds, inspiring to their faltering feet,

and rich with healing and comfort in the hour of sorrow. For he who is strong

to  overcome  self  is  strong  to  help  others.  He  who  has  conquered  soul-

weariness is strong to help the weary on the way. That calmness of mind,

which is not disturbed or overthrown by trials and emergencies, or by the

accusations,  slanders,  and  misrepresentations  of  others,  is  born  of  great

spiritual  strength.  It  is  the  true  indication  of  an  enlightened  and  wise

understanding.  The  calm  mind  is  the  exalted  mind.  Divinely  gentle  and

externally strong is that man who does not lose his serenity, nor forget his

peace when falsehoods and indignities are heaped upon him. Such calmness

is  the  perfect  flower  of  self-control.  It  has  been  slowly  and  laboriously

gained, by patiently passing through the fires of suffering, by subjecting the

mind to a long process of purification.

  The  calm  man  has  discovered  the  spring  of  both  happiness  and

knowledge within himself, and it is a spring than can never run dry. His

powers are at his full command, and there is no limit to his resources. In

whatever direction he employs his energies, he will manifest originality and

power. And this is so because he deals with things as they are, and not with

mere  opinions  about  things,  If  he  has  any  opinions  left,  he  is  no  longer

enamoured of them, but sees them as they are—mere opinions, and therefore

of no intrinsic value. He has abolished egotism, and, by obedience to law, has

become one with the power in nature and the universe. His resources are

untrammelled by selfishness; his energies unhindered by pride.

  There is a sense in which he has ceased to regard anything as his own.

Even his virtues belong to Truth, and not exclusively to his person. He has

become a conscious principle of Cosmic Power, and is no longer a mean,

dwarfed thing, seeking petty personal ends. And having put away self, he has

put away the greed, the misery, the troubles and fears which belong to self.

He acts calmly, and accepts all consequences with equal calmness. He is

efficient and accurate, and perceives all that is involved in any undertaking.

He does not work blindly; he knows that there is no chance of favour.

  The mind of the calm man is like the surface of a still lake; it reflects life

and the things of life truly. Whereas, the troubled mind, like the troubledsurface of the lake, gives back a distorted image of all things which fall upon

it. Gazing into the serene depths within him, the self-conquered man sees a

just reflection of the universe. He sees the Cosmic Perfection; sees the equity

in his own lot. Even those things which are regarded by the world as unjust

and grievous (and which formerly appeared so to him) are now known to be

the  effects  of  his  own  past  deeds,  and  are  therefore  joyfully  accepted  as

portions of the perfect whole. Thus his calmness remains with him with its

illimitable fund of resource in joy and enlightenment.

  The calm man succeeds where the disturbed man fails. He is fit to deal

with any external difficulty, who has successfully grappled with the most

intricate  difficulties  and  problems  within  his  own  heart.  He  who  has

succeeded in governing the within is best equipped to govern the without.

The calm mind perceives a difficulty in all its bearings and understands best

how to meet it. The disturbed mind is the lost mind. It has become blind,

seeing not whither to go, but only feeling its own unhappiness and fear.

  The resources of the calm man are superior to all incidents which may

befall him. Nothing can alarm him, nothing can find him unprepared, nothing

can shake his strong and steadfast mind. Wheresoever duty may call him,

there  will  his  strength  manifest  itself;  there  will  his  mind,  free  from  the

frictions of self, exhibit its silent and patient power. Whether he be engaged

in things worldly or things spiritual, he will do his work with concentrated

vigour and penetrating insight.

    Calmness means that the mind is harmoniously adjusted, perfectly poised.

All its extremes once so antagonistic and painful are reconciled, merged into

one grand central principle with which the mind has identified itself. It means

that the runaway passions are tamed and subjected, the intellect is purified,

and the will is merged into the Cosmic Will. That is, it is no longer centered

upon narrow personal ends, but is concerned with the good of all.

  A  man  is  not  wholly  victorious  until  he  is  perpetually  calm.  While

passing  things  disturb  him,  his  understanding  is  unripe,  his  heart  is  not

altogether pure. A man cannot advance in the triumph of life while he flatters

and deceives himself. He must awake, and be fully alive to the fact that his

sins, sorrows, and troubles are of his own making, and belong to his own

imperfect condition. He must understand that his miseries have their root in

his own sins, and not in the sins of others. He must strive after calmness asthe covetous man strives after riches; and he must not rest satisfied with any

partial attainment. He will thus grow in grace and wisdom, in strength and

peace,  and  calmness  will  descend  upon  his  spirit  as  the  refreshing  dew

descends upon the flowers.

  Where  the  calm  mind  is,  there  is  strength  and  rest,  there  is  love  and

wisdom.  There  is  one  who  has  fought  successfully  innumerable  battles

against  self,  who,  after  long  toil  in  secret  against  his  own  failings,  has

triumphed at last.                      8. INSIGHT AND NOBILITY


  IN THE PURSUIT AND PRACTICE OF VIRTUE, there at last comes a

time when a divine insight dawns upon the mind. It searches into the causes

and principles of things, which, once attained, establishes its possessor firmly

in  virtue.  It  renders  him  invulnerable  to  the  assaults  of  temptation,  and

invincible in his work for the world.

  When  the  understanding  is  ripened  by  the  culture  of  virtue,  vicious

inclinations  disappear,  and  wrong-doing  becomes  impossible.  When

individual conduct is perceived as an unbroken series of causes and effects,

the perceiving mind finally decides for virtue, and the lower selfish elements

are just cast away forever.

  Until a man perceives the just law which operates in human life, whatever

virtue he may manifest at any given time, he is not firmly established in

nobility of character, he is not fully armoured with righteousness, and is not

safely lodged in his final refuge. Not having acquired that perfect insight

which knows good and evil and which perceives the effects of all deeds both

good and bad, he breaks down when assailed by temptation at those points in

his character which are not well fortified. Those which have, so far, dimmed

his spiritual insight, and barred him from perfect vision. By thus breaking

down, he discovers that within which has hindered him. And by setting to

work to remove the hindrance, he ascends still higher in the scale of virtue,

and approaches nearer to the perfect insight into the true order of life which

makes a man divine.

  Under certain circumstances a man, held in restraint by the influence of

friends, by custom and environment, and not by his own inherent purity and

strength, will appear to have, and may believe he possesses, a virtue of which

he knows nothing in reality. And his lack of such virtue only appears when

all outward restraints are withdrawn, and, under temptation, the concealed

weakness and vice make themselves manifest.

  On the other hand, the man of superior virtue will seem, in a familiar

environment, to be much the same as his weaker fellows, and his virtue will

not  be  apparent  to  those  about  him.  But  when  he  is  suddenly  brought  in

contact  with  great  temptations  or  extraordinary  events,  his  latent  virtue

appears in all its beauty and strength.    Insight destroys the dominion of evil and reveals the faultless operation of

the  Good  Law.  The  man  of  perfect  insight  cannot  sin,  because  he  fully

understands the nature of good and evil. And it is impossible for one who

knows good and evil, in all their ramifications of cause and effect, to choose

the evil and reject the good. Just as the sane man would not choose ashes in

preference to food, so the spiritually awakened man would not choose evil in

preference to good. The presence of sin is an indication of self-delusion and

of  ignorance;  the  spiritual  vision  is  warped  or  undeveloped,  and  there  is

confusion of mind concerning the nature of good and evil.

  In the early stages of virtue, a man arrays himself against the forces of

evil which appear to him to be overpowering in their might, and almost, if not

entirely, unconquerable. But with the advent of insight, a new light is thrown

upon the nature of things, and evil appears as it actually is—a small, dark,

powerless thing, a mere negation, and not a formidable force or combination

of forces. The man of insight knows that the root of evil is ignorance—and

not an intelligent power—and that all sin and suffering proceed therefrom.

Thus, knowing evil to be merely a depravation of good, he cannot hate it, but

manifests compassion for all sinning and suffering beings.

  Indeed, he who has so far conquered the evil in his own heart, as to know

the nature and source of evil, cannot possibly hate, dislike, or despise any

being, no matter how far removed from virtue it may be. But, while fully

perceiving  the  degradation  of  character,  he  understands  the  dark  spiritual

condition from which such degradation springs, and so he pities and helps

where, without insight, he would hate and despise. Love ever attends upon

insight, and pity waits on knowledge.

  That insight which proceeds from self-purification and long acquaintance

with virtue makes itself manifest in the form of ripeness of character. There is

an unchanging strength and sweetness combined; a clearness of intellect, a

virile  strength  of  will  and  a  gentleness  of  heart—a  combination  which

denotes  a  cultured,  mellowed,  perfected  being;  one  who  has  acquired

sympathy,  compassion,  purity,  and  wisdom.  Thus,  while  "Goodness  gives

insight," insight renders goodness permanent, fixes the mind in the love and

practice of all that is pure and noble, and stamps upon man’s brow the seal of

divinity.

  The man whose goodness is of the kind that does not alter with alteredenvironment, or with the changing attitudes of those around him, has reached

the Divine Goodness; he understands the Supreme Good. He is no longer

concerned with evil as a thing that can harm, but he is concerned with good

only. And so he ignores evil and recognizes only good. He perceives that men

commit evil out of the mistaken idea of good, and, thus perceiving, no hatred

against any can enter his peaceful heart.

  The life of such a man is powerful, no matter how obscure it may be, for

goodness is the most powerful thing in the world. The fact of his living and

moving  among  men  confers  incalculable  benefit  upon  the  race,  although

during his lifetime this may not be perceived or understood. So powerful is

goodness that the destiny of the world was, is, and will be in the hands of the

good.

  Those who are good are the guides and emancipators of humanity. In the

present period of its development, they are taking the race rapidly along in its

evolutionary journey; and this, not in any mystical or miraculous sense, but in

a very practical and normal sense, by their exemplary lives, by the power of

their  deeds.  The  good  men  who  help  the  world  are  not  wonder-workers,

though  undeveloped  minds  have  ever  tried  to  make  them  such—but  the

workers of righteousness, servants of the Good Law.

  The world never was, is not, and will not be, under the dominion of evil,

for  such  a  condition  would  mean  non-existence,  evil  being  merely  the

negation of good, as darkness is the negation of light. It is light, and not

darkness  which  is  the  sustaining  power.  Evil  is  the  weakest  thing  in  the

world, and cannot accomplish anything. The universe not only makes for

good, the universe is good, and evil always falls short and fails.

    Insight is seeing in the Light of Truth, that Light which is the revealer of

all things. As the light of day reveals all objects in the world in their proper

forms, so when the Light of Truth enters the mind it reveals all the things of

life in their proper proportions. He who searches his own heart by the aid of

Truth,  searches  all  hearts.  He  who,  by  long  searching,  has  perceived  the

Perfect Law which is operative in his mind, has revealed the Divine Law

which is the stay and substance of the universe.

    Insight disperses error and puts an end to superstition. Sin is the only

error, Men attack each other’s beliefs and remain in ignorance. When they get

rid of their own sins they will become enlightened.    Superstition springs from sin. Looking through darkened eyes, men see

evil  things  which  are  delusions  of  ignorance;  conceiving  in  their  hearts

unlawful  things,  their  imagination  is  troubled  with  monsters  and  terrors

which have no existence in reality. Where there is pure insight there is no

fear. Devils, demons, wrathful and jealous gods, vampires and evil spirits,

and all the hideous host of the ideological monsters, have vanished from the

universe  along  with  the  feverish  nightmare  which  gave  them  birth.  And

before the rapt gaze of the purified one there spreads a universe of orderly

beauty and inviolate law.

  The  man  of  insight  lives  in  the  beatific  vision  of  the  saints,  not  as  a

fleeting  experience  in  a  moment  of  exceptional  purity,  but  as  a  constant,

normal condition of mind. He has completed his long journey through self

and sorrow, and is at peace. He has conquered, and is glad.

  He sees all the sin, misery, and pain that are in the world more plainly and

vividly than other men. But he now sees it as it is in its cause, inception,

growth, and fruitage, not as it appeared to him when he was blindly involved

in it, and his mind was distorted by impurities.

  He  watches  the  growth  of  beings,  from  the  immature  to  the  mature,

through periods of change and pain, with tender compassion and solicitude,

as the mother watches the growth of her child through the helpless period of

its infancy.

  He sees justice operating in all things. While men are waxing wrathful

over the triumph of wrong, he knows that wrong has not triumphed, but is

brought to naught. He sees the overruling Right which, though concealed

from worldly eyes, remains forever unshaken. He sees the littleness, the puny

weakness, the blind folly of evil as compared with the majesty, the invincible

power, and the all-seeing wisdom of Good. And thus, knowing and seeing,

his mind is finally fixed in that which is good. He is devoted to Truth, and his

delight is in the doing of righteousness.

  When  insight  is  born  in  the  mind,  Reality  stands  revealed;  not  a

metaphysical reality distinct from the universe; not a speculative reality other

than the things of life, but the Reality of the universe itself, the Reality of

"things-in-themselves." Insight is triumphant over change and decay, for it

perceives the abiding in change, the eternal in the transient, the immortal in

the things which pass away.  And herein is the meaning of that fixed nobility of character of the saints

and sages, and superlatively, of the Great Teachers of the Race—that they

perceive  and  abide  in  Reality.  They  know  life  in  its  completion;  they

understand and obey the Righteous Law. Having conquered self, they have

conquered all delusions; have triumphed over sin, they have triumphed over

sorrow; having purified themselves, they see the Perfect Cosmos.

  He who chooses the right, the pure, the good, and clings to them through

all  misunderstandings,  insults,  and  defeat,  reaches,  at  last,  the  place  of

insight, and his eyes open upon the world of truth. Then his painful discipline

is  ended;  the  lower  conditions  no  more  affect  him  or  cause  him  sorrow.

Purity and joy abide with him, and the universe again rejoices in the triumph

of good, and hails another conqueror.                            9. MAN THE MASTER


  BY  THE  MASTERY  OF  SELF,  a  distinct  form  of  consciousness  is

evolved which some would call divine. It is distinguished from that ordinary

human consciousness, which craves personal advantages and gratifications on

the one hand, and is involved in remorse and sorrow on the other. This divine

consciousness concerns itself with humanity and the universe, with eternal

verities,  with  righteousness,  wisdom,  and  truth,  and  not  with  pleasures,

protection, and preservation of the personality. Not that personal pleasure is

destroyed, but that it is no longer craved and sought, it no longer takes a

foremost place. It is purified, and it is received as the effect of right thought

and action, and is no longer an end in itself.

  In divine consciousness there is neither sin nor sorrow. Even the sense of

sin has passed away, and the true order and purpose of life being revealed, no

cause is found for lamentation. Jesus called this state of consciousness "The

Kingdom of Heaven"; Buddha named it "Nirvana"; Lao-Tze’s term for it was

"Tao";  Emerson  refers  to  it  as  "The  Over-Soul";  and  Dr.  Bucke  calls  it

"Cosmic Consciousness" in his valuable work bearing that title.

  The  ordinary  human  consciousness  is  self-consciousness.  Self,  the

personality, is placed before everything else. There are ceaseless anxieties

and  fears  concerning  the  self.  Its  possible  loss  is  thought  to  be  the  most

grievous calamity, and its eternal preservation the most important thing in the

universe.

  In divine consciousness all this has passed away. Self has disappeared.

Therefore, there can be no more fears and anxieties concerning the self, and

things are considered and known as they are, and not as they afford pleasure

or cause pain to self, not as self wishes them to be for its own temporal or

eternal happiness.

  The self-conscious man is subject to desire; the divinely conscious man is

master of desire. The former considers what is pleasant or unpleasant; the

latter acts from the righteous law without reference to pleasure or pain.

  The race is passing through self-consciousness to divine consciousness;

through the slavery of self, with its sense of sin and shame, to the freedom of

Truth, with its sense of purity and power. The Great Teachers and Saviours of

the race have already attained. In former existences they have already passedthrough all forms of self-consciousness, and  now, having subjugated self,

have become divinely conscious.

  They have reached the summit of evolution on this earth, and have no

further need to be reborn in the self-conscious form. They are Masters of

Life. Having conquered self, they have acquired the Supreme Knowledge.

Some of them are worshiped as God because they manifest a wisdom and a

consciousness which is quite distinct from the normal self-consciousness of

humanity,  and  which  is  therefore  regarded  with,  and  surrounded  by,

incomprehensible  mystery.  Yet,  in  this  divine  consciousness  there  is  no

mystery,  but,  on  the  contrary,  a  transparent  simplicity  which  becomes

apparent when the confusions of self are dispersed.

  The  abiding  gentleness,  the  sublime  wisdom,  the  perfect  calm  of  the

Great Teachers—qualities which appear supernatural when viewed from the

self-consciousness state—are seen to be simple and natural when the first

glimmering  of  divine  consciousness  dawns  in  the  mind.  And  such  divine

consciousness does not appear until a high degree of morality is attained by

self-conscious man.

  Man  becomes  divinely  conscious,  divinely  wise,  divinely  gentle  and

strong in the measure that he subdues and dominates within, those passions

by which humanity is subdued and dominated. The divine master is one who

has  attained  mastery  over  self.  The  abiding  nobility,  beneficent

characteristics,  and  unobtrusive  virtue  which  mark  off  the  spiritually

enlightened  man  from  others,  are  the  fruits  of  self-conquest,  the  logical

outcome of a long struggle to master and comprehend those mental forces

which the self-conscious man blindly obeys without understanding.

    Self-conscious man is a slave to self. Obeying self-centered inclinations,

he  is  in  submission  to  his  passions,  and  to  the  sorrows  and  pains  which

allegiance  to  those  passions  inflict  upon  him.  He  is  conscious  of  sin  and

sorrow, but sees no way out of these conditions. And so he invents theologies

which he substitutes for effort, and which, while affording him fitful comfort

through uncertain hope, leave him the easy victim of sin, and the willing prey

of sorrow.

  Divinely conscious man is the master of self. He obeys Truth and not self.

He curbs and directs his inclinations and is conscious of a growing power

over sin and sorrow. He sees that there is a way out of these conditions by thepath of self-mastery. He needs no theologies to aid him, but exerts himself in

right-doing, and is gladdened by a sense of victory and increasing purity and

power. When his mastery is complete, he has no inclinations but those which

accord with Truth. He has then become the conqueror of sin, and is no longer

subject to sorrow.

    Enlightened,  wise,  and  evermore  peaceful  and  happy  is  he  who  has

subjected, overcome, and cast out the turbulent self that reigned within. The

tempests of sorrow do not chill him. The cares and troubles which beset man

pass him by, and no evil thing overtakes him. Secure in divine virtue, no

enemy  can  overthrow  him;  no  foe  can  do  harm.  Kind  and  peaceful,  no

person, power, nor place can rob him of repose.

  There is no enemy but self, no darkness but ignorance, no suffering but

that which springs from the insubordinate elements of one’s own nature.

  No man is truly wise who is involved in likes and dislikes, wishes and

regrets, desires and disappointments, sins and sorrow. All these conditions

belong to the self-conscious state, and are indications of folly, weakness, and

subjection.

  He is truly wise who, in the midst of worldly duties, is always calm,

always gentle, always patient. He accepts things as they are, and does not

wish  nor  grieve,  desire  nor  regret.  These  things  belong  to  the  divinely

conscious state, the dominion of Truth, and are indications of enlightenment,

strength, and mastery.

  He who does not desire riches, fame, or pleasures; who enjoys what he

has, yet does not lament when it is taken from him, he is indeed wise.

  He who desires riches, fame, and pleasure; who is discontented with what

he has, yet laments when it is taken from him, he is indeed foolish.

  Man is fitted for conquest, but the conquest of territory will not avail; he

must resort to the conquest of self. The conquest of territory renders man a

temporal ruler, but the conquest of self makes him an eternal conqueror.

  Man is destined for mastery; not the mastery of his fellow men by force,

but the mastery of his own nature by self-control. The mastery of his fellow

men by force is the crown of egotism, but the mastery of self by self-control

is the crown of humility.

  He  is  man  the  master  who  has  shaken  off  the  service  of  self  for  theservice of Truth, who has established himself in the Eternal Verities. He is

crowned, not only with perfect manhood, but with divine wisdom. He has

overcome the disturbances of the mind and the shocks of life. He is superior

to all circumstances. He is the calm spectator, but no longer the helpless tool,

of  events.  No  more  a  sinning,  weeping,  repenting  mortal,  he  is  pure,

rejoicing, upright immortal. He perceives the course of things with a glad and

peaceful heart; a divine conqueror, master of life and death.                10. KNOWLEDGE AND VICTORY


    FAITH IS THE BEGINNING of the Triumphant Life, but knowledge is

its consummation. Faith reveals the way, but knowledge is the goal. Faith

suffers many afflictions; knowledge has transcended affliction. Faith endures;

knowledge loves. Faith walks in darkness, but believes; knowledge acts in

light,  and  knows.  Faith  inspires  to  effort;  knowledge  crowns  effort  with

success.  "Faith  is  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for";  knowledge  is  the

substance of those things possessed. Faith is the helpful staff of the pilgrim;

knowledge is the City of Refuge at the journey’s end. Without faith there will

be  no  knowledge,  but  when  knowledge  is  acquired,  the  work  of  faith  is

finished.

  The Life Triumphant is a life of knowledge; and by knowledge is meant,

not  book  learning,  but  life-learning;  not  superficial  facts  committed  to

memory, but the deep facts and truths of life, grasped and comprehended.

Apart from this knowledge there is no victory for man, no rest for his weary

feet, no refuge for His aching heart.

  There is no salvation for the foolish except by becoming wise. There is no

salvation for the sinful except by becoming pure. There is no liberation for

man  from  the  turmoil  and  troubles  of  life  but  through  divine  knowledge

reached  by  the  pathway  of  a  pure  and  blameless  life.  Nowhere  is  there

permanent peace except in an enlightened condition of mind; and a pure life

and an enlightened mind are identical.

  But there is salvation for the foolish because wisdom can be acquired.

There is salvation for the sinful because purity can be embraced. There is

liberation for all men from the troubles and turmoil of life because whosoever

wills to do so—whether rich or poor, learned or unlearned—can enter the

lowly way of blamelessness which leads to perfect knowledge. And because

of this—that there is deliverance for the captives and victory for the defeated

—there is rejoicing in the High Places, and the universe is glad.

  The man of knowledge, being victorious over himself, is victorious over

sin, over evil, over all the disharmonies of life. Out of the old mind marred by

sin and sorrow, he has framed a new mind glorified by purity and peace. He

has died out of the old world of evil, and is reborn in a new world where love

and faultless law prevail, where evil is not, and he has become deathless inimmortal Good.

  Anxiety  and  fear,  grief  and  lamentation,  disappointment  and  regret,

wretchedness and remorse—these things have no part in the world of the

wise. They are the shadowy inhabitants of the world of self, and cannot five,

nay, they are seen to have no substantiality—in the light of wisdom. The dark

things of life are the dark conditions of a mind not yet illuminated by the light

of  wisdom.  They  follow  self  as  the  shadow  of  substance.  Where  selfish

desires go, there they follow; where sin is, there they are. There is no rest in

self; there is no light in self. And where the flames of turbulent passions and

fires of consuming desires are rife, the cool airs of wisdom and peace are not

felt.

  Safety and assurance, happiness and repose, satisfaction and contentment,

joy and peace—these are the abiding possessions of the wise, earned by right

of self-conquest, the results of righteousness, the wages of a blameless life.

  The substance of a right life is enlightenment (knowledge), and the spirit

of knowledge is peace. To be victorious over self in all the issues of life is to

know life as it is in reality, and not as it appears in the nightmare of self. It is

to be in peace in all passages, and not to be stricken with trouble and grief in

the common happenings of life.

  As the ripe scholar is no more troubled by incorrect work and lessons

imperfectly done, and the painful reproof and punishment formerly inflicted

by his teachers are left behind forever, so the perfected scholar in virtue, the

wise  man  and  woman,  the  enlightened  doer  of  righteousness,  is  no  more

troubled  with  wrongdoing  and  folly  (which  are  merely  the  imperfectly

accomplished lessons of life), and the scourging of sorrow and remorse have

passed away forever.

  The skilled scholar has no more doubt or fear concerning his ability. He

has overcome and dispersed the ignorance of his intellect. He has attained to

learning,  and  he  knows  that  he  has  attained.  And  he  so  knows  because,

having  undergone  innumerable  tests  in  the  forms  of  lessons  and

examinations, he has at last proved his skill by passing successfully through

the severest tests of scholarship. And now he no longer fears, but rejoices

when severe tests are applied to prove his ability. He is capable, confident,

and glad.

  Even so the skilled doer of righteousness is no more troubled with doubtand  fear  concerning  his  destiny.  He  has  overcome  and  dispersed  the

ignorance of his heart. He has attained to wisdom, and he knows that he has

attained. And he so knows because where he formerly failed and fell when

tested by the wrong conduct of others, he now maintains his patience and

calmness under the severest tests of accusation and reproof.

  Herein is the glory and victory of divine knowledge, that understanding

the nature of deeds, both good and bad, the enlightened doer of good deeds

no longer suffers through the bad deeds of others. Their actions towards him

can never cause him pain and sorrow, nor rob him of his peace. Having taken

refuge in good, evil can no more reach nor harm him. He returns good for

evil, and overcomes the weakness of evil by the power of good.

  The man who is involved in bad deeds imagines that the bad deeds of

others are powerful to do him injury and are filled with grievous harm against

him. He is stung with pain and overwhelmed with sorrow, not for his own

bad deeds (for these he does not see) but for the wrong deeds of others.

Involved in ignorance, he has no spiritual strength, no refuge, and no abiding

peace.

  The man victorious over self is the true seer. He is not the seer of spirits

or supernatural phenomena, for such seeing is narrow and illusory. He is the

seer of life as it is, both in its particular aspects and in its divine principles;

the seer of the spiritual universe of cosmic law, cosmic love, and cosmic

liberty.

  The  man  of  knowledge  and  victory,  who  has  shaken  off  the  painful

dreams of self, has awakened with a new vision which beholds a new and

glorified universe, He is the seer of the Eternal, and is blessed with perfect

love and endless peace. He is lifted far above all sordid desires, narrow aims,

and selfish love and hate; and being so lifted up he perceives the lawful

course of things, and does not grieve when overtaken by the inevitable. He is

above the world of sorrow, not because he has become cold and cruel, but

because he abides in a love where no thought of self can enter, and where the

well-being of others is all-in-all. He is sorrowless because he is selfless. He is

serene because he knows that whatever he receives, it is good, and whatever

is taken from him, that also is good. He has transmuted sorrow into love, and

is filled with infinite tenderness and abounding compassion. His power is not

violent, ambitious, worldly, but pure, peaceful, heavenly, and he is possessedof a hidden strength which knows how to stand and when to bend for the

good of others and the world.

  He is a Teacher, though he speaks but little. He is a Master, yet he has no

desire to rule others. He is a Conqueror, but makes no attempt to subdue his

fellow men. He has become a conscious instrument for the outworking of

cosmic law, and is an intelligent, enlightened power directing the evolution of

the Race.

  At this, the beginning of a new epoch, let the Good News again go forth

throughout  the  world  that  there  is  purity  for  the  sinful,  comfort  for  the

afflicted, healing for the broken-hearted, and triumph for the defeated. In

your  heart,  O  man!  O  woman!  stained  as  it  is  with  sin,  and  torn  with

conflicting desires, there is a place of power, a citadel of strength. You are

the dwelling-place of the Supreme Good, and the Scepter of Victory awaits

you: deep in your consciousness is the High Seat of Empire. Arise, O stricken

one! Ascend your rightly throne!                          BOOK EIGHT


                      EIGHT PILLARS OF


                          PROSPERITY.                                    PREFACE


  It is popularly supposed that a greater prosperity for individuals

or  nations  can  only  come  through  a  political  and  social

reconstruction.  This  cannot  be  true  apart  from  the  practice  of  the

moral virtues in the individuals that comprise a nation. Better laws

and  social  conditions  will  always  follow  a  higher  realisation  of

morality  among  the  individuals  of  a  community,  but  no  legal

enactment can give prosperity to, nay it cannot prevent the ruin of, a

man or a nation that has become lax and decadent in the pursuit and

practice of virtue.

  The moral virtues are the foundation and support of prosperity as

they  are  the  soul  of  greatness.  They  endure  for  ever,  and  all  the

works of man which endure are built upon them. Without them there

is  neither  strength,  stability,  nor  substantial  reality,  but  only

ephemeral  dreams.  To  find  moral  principles  is  to  have  found

prosperity,  greatness,  truth,  and  is  therefore  to  be  strong,  valiant,

joyful and free.

  JAMES ALLEN

    “Bryngoleu,”

    Ilfracombe,

    England.                              1. EIGHT PILLARS


  Prosperity rests upon a moral foundation. It is popularly supposed to rest

upon an immoral foundation - that is, upon trickery, sharp practice, deception

and greed. One commonly hears even an otherwise intelligent man declare

that  “No  man  can  be  successful  in  business  unless  he  is  dishonest,”  thus

regarding business prosperity – a good thing – as the effect of dishonesty – a

bad thing. Such a statement is superficial and thoughtless, and reveals a total

lack of knowledge of moral causation, as well as a very limited grasp of the

facts of life. It is as though one should sow henbane and reap spinach, or

erect a brick house on a quagmire - things impossible in the natural order of

causation, and therefore not to be attempted. The spiritual or moral order of

causation  is  not  different  in  principle,  but  only  in  nature.  The  same  law

obtains in things unseen – in thoughts and deeds - as in things seen – in

natural phenomena. Man sees the processes in natural objects, and acts in

accordance with them, but not seeing the spiritual processes, he imagines that

they do not obtain, and so he does not act in harmony with them.

  Yet these spiritual processes are just as simple and just as sure as the

natural processes. They are indeed the same natural modes manifesting in

the world of mind. All the parables and a large number of the sayings of the

Great Teachers are designed to illustrate this fact. The natural world is the

mental world made visible. The seen is the mirror of the unseen. The upper

half of a circle is in no way different from the lower half, but its sphericity is

reversed.  The  material  and  the  mental  are  not  two  detached  arcs  in  the

universe, they are the two halves of a complete circle. The natural and the

spiritual are not at eternal enmity, but in the true order of the universe are

eternally at one. It is in the unnatural - in the abuse of function and faculty

–  where  division  arises,  and  where  main  is  wrested  back,  with  repeated

sufferings, from the perfect circle from which he has tried to depart. Every

process in matter is also a process in mind. Every natural law has its spiritual

counterpart.

  Take any natural object, and you will find its fundamental processes in

the  mental  sphere  if  you  rightly  search.  Consider,  for  instance,  the

germination of a seed and its growth into a plant with the final development

of a flower, and back to seed again. This also is a mental process. Thoughtsare seeds which, falling in the soil of the mind, germinate and develop until

they reach the completed stage, blossoming into deeds good or bad, brilliant

or stupid, according to their nature, and ending as seeds of thought to be

again  sown  in  other  minds.  A  teacher  is  a  sower  of  seed,  a  spiritual

agriculturist, while he who teaches himself is the wise farmer of his own

mental plot. The growth of a thought is as the growth of a plant. The seed

must be sown seasonably, and time is required for its full development into

the plant of knowledge and the flower of wisdom.

  While writing this, I pause, and turn to look through my study window,

and there, a hundred yards away, is a tall tree in the top of which some

enterprising rook from a rookery hard by, has, for the first time, built its nest.

A strong, north-east wind is blowing, so that the top of the tree is swayed

violently to and fro by the onset of the blast; yet there is no danger to that

frail thing of sticks and hair, and the mother bird, sitting upon her eggs, has

no fear of the storm. Why is this? It is because the bird has instinctively built

her nest in harmony with principles which ensure the maximum strength and

security. First, a fork is chosen as the foundation for the nest, and not a space

between two separate branches, so that, however great may be the swaying of

the tree top, the position of the nest is not altered, nor its structure disturbed;

then the nest is built on a circular plan so as to offer the greatest resistance to

any external pressure, as well as to obtain more perfect compactness within,

in accordance with its purpose; and so, however the tempest may rage, the

birds rest in comfort and security. This is a very simple and familiar object,

and  yet,  in  the  strict  obedience  of  its  structure  to  mathematical  law,  it

becomes, to the wise, a parable of enlightenment, teaching them that only by

ordering one’s deeds in accordance with fixed principles is perfect surety,

perfect security, and perfect peace obtained amid the uncertainty of events

and the turbulent tempests of life.

  A house or a temple built by man is a much more complicated structure

than a bird’s nest, yet it is erected in accordance with those mathematical

principles which are everywhere evidenced in nature. And here is seen how

man, in material things, obeys universal principles. He never attempts to put

up a building in defiance of geometrical proportions, for he knows that such a

building would be unsafe, and that the first storm would, in all probability,

level it to the ground, if, indeed, it did not fall about his ears during theprocess of erection. Man in his material building scrupulously obeys the fixed

principles  of  circle,  square  and  angle,  and,  aided  by  rule,  plumbline,  and

compasses, he raises a structure which will resist the fiercest storms, and

afford him a secure shelter and safe protection.

  All this is very simple, the reader may say. Yes, it is simple because it is

true and perfect; so true that it cannot admit the smallest compromise, and so

perfect that no man can improve upon it. Man, through long experience, has

learned  these  principles  of  the  material  world,  and  sees  the  wisdom  of

obeying  them,  and  I  have  thus  referred  to  them  in  order  to  lead  up  to  a

consideration of those fixed principles in the mental or spiritual world which

are just as simple, and just as eternally true and perfect, yet are at present so

little understood by man that he daily violates them, because ignorant of their

nature, and unconscious of the harm he is all the time inflicting upon himself.

  In  mind  as  in  matter,  in  thoughts  as  in  things,  in  deeds  as  in  natural

processes,  there  is  a  fixed  foundation  of  law  which,  if  consciously  or

ignorantly ignored leads to disaster, and defeat. It is, indeed, the ignorant

violation of this law which is the cause of the world’s pain and sorrow. In

matter, this law is presented as mathematical; in mind, it is perceived as

moral. But the mathematical and the moral are not separate and opposed;

they  are  but  two  aspects  of  a  united  whole.  The  fixed  principles  of

mathematics, to which all matter is subject, are the body of which the spirit is

ethical;  while  the  eternal  principles  of  morality  are  mathematical  truisms

operating in the universe of mind. It is as impossible to live successfully apart

from moral principles, as to build successfully while ignoring mathematical

principles.  Characters,  like  houses,  only  stand  firmly  when  built  on  a

foundation of moral law - and they are built up slowly and laboriously, deed

by deed, for in the building of character, the bricks are deeds. Business and

all human enterprises are not exempt from the eternal order, but can only

stand securely by the observance of fixed laws. Prosperity, to be stable and

enduring,  must  rest  on  a  solid  foundation  of  moral  principle,  and  be

supported by the adamantine pillars of sterling character and moral worth. In

the attempt to run a business in defiance of moral principles, disaster, of one

kind  or  another,  is  inevitable.  The  permanently  prosperous  men  in  any

community are not its tricksters and deceivers, but its reliable and upright

men.  The  Quakers  are  acknowledged  to  be  the  most  upright  men  in  theBritish community, and, although their numbers are small, they are the most

prosperous. The Jains in India are similar both in numbers and sterling worth,

and they are the most prosperous people in India.

  Men speak of “building up a business,” and, indeed, a business is as much

a building as is a brick house or a stone church, albeit the process of building

is  a  mental  one.  Prosperity,  like  a  house,  is  a  roof  over  a  man’s  head,

affording him protection and comfort. A roof presupposes a support, and a

support necessitates a foundation. The roof of prosperity, then, is supported

by the following eight pillars which are cemented in a foundation of moral

consistency:-

  1. Energy

  2. Economy

  3. Integrity

  4. System

  5. Sympathy

  6. Sincerity

  7. Impartiality

  8. Self-reliance

  A business built up on the faultless practice of all these principles would

be so firm and enduring as to be invincible. Nothing could injure it; nothing

could undermine its prosperity, nothing could interrupt its success, or bring it

to the ground; but that success would be assured with incessant increase so

long  as  the  principles  were  adhered  to.  On  the  other  hand,  where  these

principles were all absent, there could be no success of any kind; there could

not  even  be  a  business  at  all,  for  there  would  be  nothing  to  produce  the

adherence of one part with another; but there would be that lack of life, that

absence of fibre and consistency which animates and gives body and form to

anything whatsoever. Picture a man with all these principles absent from his

mind, his daily life, and even if your knowledge of these principles is but

slight and imperfect, yet you could not think of such a man as doing any

successful work. You could picture him as leading the confused life of a

shiftless tramp but to imagine him at the head of a business, as the centre of

an organisation, or as a responsible and controlling agent in any department

of life – this you could not do, because you realise its impossibility. The factthat no one of moderate morality and intelligence can think of such a man as

commanding any success, should, to all those who have not yet grasped the

import of these principles, and therefore declare that morality is not a factor,

but rather a hindrance, in prosperity, be a sound proof to them that their

conclusion is totally wrong, for if it was right, then the greater the lack of

these moral principles, the greater would be the success.

  These eight principles, then, in greater or lesser degree, are the causative

factors in all success of whatsoever kind. Underneath all prosperity they are

the  strong  supports,  and,  howsoever  appearances  may  be  against  such  a

conclusion, a measure of them informs and sustains every effort which is

crowned with that excellence which men name success.

  It is true that comparatively few successful men practice, in their entirety

and perfection, all these eight principles, but there are those who do, and they

are the leaders, teachers, and guides of men, the supports of human society,

and the strong pioneers in the van of human evolution.

  But while few achieve that moral perfection which ensures the acme of

success,  all  lesser  successes  come  from  the  partial  observance  of  these

principles which are so powerful in the production of good results that even

perfection  in  any  two  or  three  of  them  alone  is  sufficient  to  ensure  an

ordinary degree of prosperity, and maintain a measure of local influence at

least  for  a  time,  while  the  same  perfection  in  two  or  three  with  partial

excellence in all, or nearly all, the others, will render permanent that limited

success and influence which will, necessarily, grow and extend in exact ratio

with a more intimate knowledge and practice of those principles which, at

present, are only partially incorporated in the character.

  The boundary lines of a man’s morality mark the limits of his success. So

true  is  this  that  to  know  a  man’s  moral  status  would  be  to  know  –  to

mathematically  gauge  –  his  ultimate  success  or  failure.  The  temple  of

prosperity only stands in so far as it is supported by its moral pillars; as they

are  weakened,  it  becomes  insecure;  in  so  far  as  they  are  withdrawn,  it

crumbles away and totters to ruin.

  Ultimate  failure  and  defeat  are  inevitable  where  moral  principles  are

ignored or defied – inevitable in the nature of things as cause and effect. As a

stone thrown upward returns to the earth, so every deed, good or bad, returns

upon him that sent it forth. Every unmoral or immoral act frustrates the end atwhich it aims, and every such succeeding act puts it further and further away

as an achieved realisation. On the other hand, every moral act is another solid

brick in the temple of prosperity, another round of strength and sculptured

beauty in the pillars which support it.

  Individuals,  families,  nations  grow  and  prosper  in  harmony  with  their

growth in moral strength and knowledge; they fall and fail in accordance with

their moral decadence.

    Mentally, as physically, only that which has form and solidity can stand

and endure. The unmoral is nothingness, and from it nothing can be formed.

It is the negation of substance. The immoral is destruction. It is the negation

of  form.  It  is  a  process  of  spiritual  denudation.  While  it  undermines  and

disintegrates, it leaves the scattered material ready for the wise builder to put

it into form again; and the wise builder is Morality. The moral is substance,

form, and building power in one. Morality always builds up and preserves,

for that is its nature, being the opposite of immorality, which always breaks

down and destroys. Morality is the master–builder everywhere, whether in

individuals or nations.

  Morality is invincible, and he who stands upon it to the end, stands upon

an impregnable rock, so that his defeat is impossible, his triumph certain. He

will be tried, and that to the uttermost, for without fighting there can be no

victory, and so only can his moral powers be perfected, and it is in the nature

of fixed principles, as of everything finely and perfectly wrought, to have

their strength tested and proved. The steel bars which are to perform the

strongest and best uses in the world must be subjected to a severe strain by

the ironmaster, as a test of their texture and efficiency, before they are sent

from his foundry. The brickmaker throws aside the bricks which have given

way  under  the  severe  heat.  So  he  who  is  to  be  greatly  and  permanently

successful will pass through the strain of adverse circumstances and the fire

of  temptation  with  his  moral  nature  not  merely  not  undermined,  but

strengthened and beautified. He will be like a bar of well-wrought steel, fit

for the highest use, and the universe will see, as the ironmaster his finely-

wrought steel, that the use does not escape him.

  Immorality is assailable at every point, and he who tries to stand upon it,

sinks into the morass of desolation. Even while his efforts seem to stand, they

are crumbling away. The climax of failure is inevitable. While the immoralman is chuckling over his ill-gotten gains, there is already a hole in his pocket

through which his gold is falling. While he who begins with morality, yet

deserts it for gain in the hour of trial, is like the brick which breaks on the

first application of heat; he is not fit for use, and the universe casts him aside,

yet not finally, for he is a being, and not a brick; and he can live and learn,

can repent and be restored.

  Moral force is the life of all success, and the sustaining element in all

prosperity;  but  there  are  various  kinds  of  success,  and  it  is  frequently

necessary that a man should fail in one direction that he may reach up to a

greater and more far-reaching success. If, for instance, a literary, artistic, or

spiritual genius should begin by trying to make money, it may be, and often

is,  to  his  advantage  and  the  betterment  of  his  genius  that  he  should  fail

therein, so that he may achieve that more sublime success wherein lies his

real  power.  Many  a  millionaire  would  doubtless  be  willing  to  barter  his

millions for the literary success of a Shakespeare or the spiritual success of a

Buddha,  and  would  thereby  consider  that  he  had  made  a  good  bargain.

Exceptional spiritual success is rarely accompanied with riches, yet financial

success cannot in any way compare with it in greatness and grandeur. But I

am not, in this book, dealing with the success of the saint or spiritual genius

but with that success which concerns the welfare, well-being, and happiness

of the broadly average man and woman, in a word, with the prosperity which,

while being more or less connected with money – being present and temporal

–  yet  is  not  confined  thereto,  but  extends  to  and  embraces  all  human

activities, and which particularly relates to that harmony of the individual

with his circumstances which produces that satisfaction called happiness and

that  comfort  known  as  prosperity.  To  the  achievement  of  this  end,  so

desirable to the mass of mankind, let us now see how the eight principles

operate, how the roof of prosperity is raised and made secure upon the pillars

by which it is supported.                      2. FIRST PILLAR – ENERGY


  Energy is the working power in all achievement. Inert coal it converts

into fire, and water it transmutes into steam; it vivifies and intensifies the

commonest talent until it approaches to genius, and when it touches the mind

of the dullard, it turns into a living fire that which before was sleeping in

inertia.

  Energy is a moral virtue, its opposing vice being laziness. As a virtue, it

can  be  cultivated,  and  the  lazy  man  can  become  energetic  by  forcibly

arousing himself to exertion. Compared with the energetic man, the lazy man

is not half alive. Even while the latter is talking about the difficult of doing a

thing, the former is doing it. the active man has done a considerable amount

of work before the lazy man has roused himself from sleep. While the lazy

man is waiting for an opportunity, the active man has gone out, and met and

utilized half a dozen opportunities. He does things while the other is rubbing

his eyes.

  Energy  is  one  of  the  primary  forces:  without  it  nothing  can  be

accomplished.  It  is  the  basic  element  in  all  forms  of  action.  The  entire

universe is a manifestation of tireless, though inscrutable energy. Energy is,

indeed, life, and without it there would be no universe, no life. When a man

has ceased to act, when the body lies inert, and all the functions have ceased

to act, then we say he is dead; and in so far as a man fails to act, he is so far

dead. Man, mentally and physically, is framed for action, and not for swinish

ease. Every muscle of the body (being a lever for exertion) is a rebuke to the

lazy man. Every bone and nerve is fashioned for resistance; every function

and faculty is there for a legitimate use. All things have their end in action; all

things are perfected in use.

  This being so, there is no prosperity for the lazy man, no happiness, no

refuge and no rest; for him, there is not even the ease which he covets, for he

at last becomes a homeless outcast, a troubled, harried, despised man, so that

the proverb wisely puts it that “The lazy man does the hardest work”, in that,

avoiding the systematic labour of skill, he brings upon himself the hardest lot.

  Yet energy misapplied is better than no energy at all. This is powerfully

put by St. John in the words: “I would have you either hot or cold; if you are

lukewarm I will spew you out of my mouth”. The extremes of heat and coldhere  symbolize  the  transforming  agency  of  energy,  in  its  good  and  bad

aspects.

  The lukewarm stage is colourless, lifeless, useless; it can scarcely be said

to have either virtue or vice, and is merely barren empty, fruitless. The man

who applies his abounding energy to bad ends, has, at the very power with

which  the  strives  to  acquire  his  selfish  ends,  will  bring  upon  him  such

difficulties, pains, and sorrows, that will compel him to learn by experience,

and so at last to re-fashion his base of action. At the right moment, when his

mental eyes open to better purposes, he will turn round and cut new and

proper channels for the outflow of his power, and will then be just as strong

in good as he formerly was in evil. This truth is beautifully crystallized in the

old proverb, “The greater the sinner, the great the saint”.

  Energy is power, and without it there will be no accomplishment; there

will not even be virtue, for virtue does not only consist of not doing evil, but

also,  primarily,  of  doing  good.  There  are  those  who  try,  yet  fail  through

insufficient energy. Their efforts are too feeble to produce positive results.

Such are not vicious, and because they never do any deliberate harm, are

usually spoken of as good men that fail. But to lack the initiative to do harm

is not to be good; it is only to be weak and powerless. He is the truly good

man who, having the power to do evil, yet chooses to direct his energies in

ways that are good. Without a considerable degree of energy, therefore, there

will be no moral power. What good there is, will be latent and sleeping; there

will be no going forth of good, just as there can be no mechanical motion

without the motive power.

  Energy is the informing power in all doing in every department of life,

and whether it be along material or spiritual lines. The call to action, which

comes not only from the soldier but from the lips or pen of every teacher in

every grade of thought, is a call to men to rouse their sleeping energy, and to

do vigorously the task in hand. Even the men of contemplation and mediation

never cease to rouse their disciples to exertion in meditative thought, is a call

to men to rouse their sleeping energy, and to do vigorously the task in hand.

Even the men of contemplation and meditation never cease to rouse their

disciples  to  exertion  in  meditative  thought.  Energy  is  alike  needed  in  all

spheres of life, and not only are the rules of the soldier, the engineer and the

merchant rules of action, but nearly all the precepts of the saviours, sages,and saints are precepts of doing.

  The advice of one of the Great Teachers to his disciples – “Keep wide

awake”, tersely expresses the necessity for tireless energy if one’s purpose is

to be accomplished, and is equally good advice to the salesman as to the

saint. “Eternal vigilance is the price of liberty”, and liberty is the reaching of

one’s fixed end. It was the same Teacher that said: “If anything is to be done,

let a man do it at once; let him attack it vigorously!” The wisdom of this

advice is seen when it is remembered that action is creative, that increase and

development follow upon legitimate use. To get more energy we must use to

the full that which we already possess. Only to him that that is given. Only to

him  that  puts  his  hand  vigorously  to  some  task  does  power  and  freedom

come.

  But energy, to be productive, must not only be directed towards good

ends, it must be carefully controlled and conserved. “The conservation of

energy” is a modern term expressive of that principle in nature by which no

energy is wasted or lost, and the man whose energies are to be fruitful in

results must work intelligently upon this principle. Noise and hurry are so

much energy running to waste. “More haste, less speed”. The maximum of

noise usually accompanies the minimum of accomplishment. With much talk

there is little doing. Working steam is not heard. It is the escaping steam

which makes a great noise. It is the concentrated powder which drives the

bullet to its mark.

  In  so  far  as  a  man  intensifies  his  energies  by  conserving  them,  and

concentrating them upon the accomplishment of his purpose, just so far does

he gain quietness and silence, in response and calmness. It is great delusion

that noise means power. There is no great baby than the blustering boaster.

Physically a man, he is but an infant mentally, and having no strength to

anything,  and  no  work  to  show,  he  tries  to  make  up  for  it  by  loudly

proclaiming what he has done, or could do.

  “Still  waters  run  deep,”  and  the  great  universal  forces  are  inaudible.

Where  calmness  is,  there  is  the  greatest  power.  Calmness  is  the  sure

indication of a strong, well-trained, patiently disciplined mind. The calm man

knows  his  business,  be  sure  of  it.  His  words  are  few,  but  they  tell.  His

schemes are well planned, and they work true, like a well-balanced machine.

He sees a long way ahead, and makes straight for his object. The enemy,Difficulty, he converts into a friend, and makes profitable use of him, for he

has studied well how to “agree with his adversary while he is in the way with

him”, Like a wise general, he has anticipated all emergencies. Indeed, he is

the man who is prepared beforehand. In his meditations, in the counsels

of his judgement, he has conferred with causes, and has caught the bent of all

contingencies. He is never taken by surprise; is never in a hurry, is safe in the

keeping of his own steadfastness, and is sure of his ground. You may think

you have got him, only to find, the next moment, that you have tripped in

your haste, and that he has got you, or rather that you, wanting calmness,

have  hurried  yourself  into  the  dilemma  which  you  had  prepared  for  him.

Your impulse cannot do battle with his deliberation, but is foiled at the first

attack; your uncurbed energy cannot turn aside the wisely directed steam of

his concentrated power. He is “armed at all points”. By a mental Ju-Jitsu

acquired through self-discipline, he meets opposition in such a way that it

destroys itself. Upbraid him with angry words, and the reproof hidden in his

gentle reply searches to the very heart of your folly, and the fire of your anger

sinks into the ashes of remorse. Approach him with a vulgar familiarity, and

his look at once fill you with shame, and brings you back to your senses. As

he is prepared for all events, so he is ready for all men; though no men are

ready  for  him.  All  weaknesses  are  betrayed  in  his  presence,  and  he

commands by an inherent force which calmness has rendered habitual and

unconscious.

  Calmness,  as  distinguished  from  the  dead  placidity  of  languor,  is  the

acme  of  concentrated  energy.  There  is  a  focused  mentality  behind  it.  in

agitation and excitement the mentality is dispersed. It is irresponsible, and is

without force or weight. The fussy, peevish, irritable man has no influence.

He  repels,  and  not  attracts.  He  wonders  why  his  “easy  going”  neighbour

succeeds, and is sought after, while he, who is always hurrying, worrying and

troubling the miscalls it striving, falls and is avoided. His neighbour, being

a calmer man, not more easy going but more deliberate, gets through more

work, does it more skilfully, and is more self-possessed and manly. This is

the reason of his success and influence. His energy is controlled and used,

while the other man’s energy is dispersed and abused.

    Energy, then, is the first pillar in the temple of prosperity, and without it,

as the first and most essential equipment, there can be no prosperity. Noenergy means no capacity; there is no manly self-respect and independence.

Amongst the unemployed will be found many who are unemployable through

sheer lack of this first essential of work energy. The man that stands many

hours a day at a street corner with his hands in his pockets and a pipe in his

mouth, waiting for some one to treat him to a glass of beer, is little likely to

find employment, or to accept it should it come to him. Physically flabby and

mentally inert, he is every day becoming more some, is making himself more

unfit to work, and therefore unfit to live. The energetic man may pass through

temporary periods of unemployment and suffering, but it is impossible for

him to become one of the permanently unemployed. He will either find work

or make it, for inertia is painful to him, and work is a delight; and he who

delights in work will not long remain unemployed.

  The lazy man does not wish to be employed. He is in his element when

doing nothing. His chief study is how to avoid exertion. To vegetate in semi

torpor  is  his  idea  of  happiness.  He  is  unfit  and  unemployable.  Even  the

extreme  Socialist,  who  places  all  unemployment,  at  the  door  of  the  rich,

would discharge a lazy, neglectful and unprofitable servant, and so add one

more to the arm of the unemployed; for laziness is one of the lowest vices

repulsive to all active, right minded men.

  But energy is a composite power. It does not stand alone. Involved in it

are qualities which go to the making of vigorous character and the production

of  prosperity.  Mainly,  these  qualities  are  contained  in  the  four  following

characteristics:-

  1. Promptitude

  2. Vigilance

  3. Industry

  4. Earnestness

  The pillar of energy is therefore a concrete mass composed of these four

tenacious  elements.  They  are  through,  enduring,  and  are  calculated  to

withstanding the wildest weather of adversity. They all make for life, power,

capacity, and progress.

    Promptitude is valuable possession. It begets reliability. People who are

alert, prompt, and punctual are relied upon. They can be trusted to do their

duty, and to do it vigorously and well. Masters who are prompt are a tonic to

their employees, and a whip to those who are inclined to shirk. They are ameans of wholesome discipline to those who would not otherwise discipline

themselves.  Thus  while  aiding  their  own  usefulness  and  success,  they

contribute to the usefulness and success of others. The perfunctory worker,

who is ever procrastinating, and is always behind time, becomes a nuisance,

if not go himself, to others, and his services come to be regarded as of little

economic value. Deliberation and dispatch, handmaids of promptitude, are

valuable aids in the achievement of prosperity. In ordinary business channels,

alacrity is a saving power, and promptness spells profit. It is doubtful whether

a confirmed procrastinator ever succeeded in business. I have not yet met one

such, though I have known many who have failed.

  Vigilance is the guard of all the faculties and powers of the mind. It is

the  detective  that  prevents  the  entrance  of  any  violent  and  destructive

element. It is the close companion and protector of all success, liberty, and

wisdom. Without this watchful attitude of mind, a man is a fool, and there is

no prosperity for a fool. The fool allows his mind to be ransacked and robbed

of its gravity, serenity, and judgement by mean thoughts and violent passions

as they come along to molest him. He is never on his guard, but leaves open

the doors of his mind to every nefarious intruder. He is so weak and unsteady

as to be swept off his balance by every gust of impulse that overtakes him.

He is an example to others of what they should not be. He is always a failure,

for the fool is an offence to all men, and there is no society that can receive

him with respect. As wisdom is the acme of strength, so folly is the other

extreme of weakness.

  The  lack  of  vigilance  is  shown  in  thoughtlessness  and  in  a  general

looseness  in  the  common  details  of  life.  Thoughtlessness  is  built  another

name for folly. It lies at the root of a great deal of failure and misery. No one

who aims at any kind of usefulness and prosperity (for usefulness in the body

politic and prosperity to one’s self cannot be served)’ can afford to be asleep

with  regard  to  his  actions  and  the  effect  of  those  actions  on  other  and

reactively on himself. He must, at the outset of his career, wake up to a sense

of his personnel responsibility. He must know that wherever he is – in the

home, the counting- house, the pulpit, the store, in the schoolroom or behind

the  counter,  in  company  or  alone,  at  work  or  at  play-  his  conduct  will

materially affect his career for good or bad; for there is a subtle influence in

behaviour which leaves its impression every man, woman, and child that ittouches, and that impress is the determining factor in the attitude of persons

towards one another. It is for the reason that the cultivation of good manners

plays such an important part in all coherent society. If you carry about with

you a disturbing or disagreeable mental defect, it needs not to be named and

known to work its poison upon your affairs. Its corrosive influence will eat

into all your efforts, and disfigure your happiness and prosperity, as powerful

acid eats into and disfigures the finest steel. On the other hand, if you carry

about an assuring and harmonious mental excellence, it needs no that those

about you understand it to be influenced by it. They will be drawn towards

you in good –will, often without knowing why, and that good quality will be

the  most  powerful  sport  in  all  your  affairs,  bringing  you  friends  and

opportunities, and greatly aiding in the success of all your enterprises. It will

even right your minor incapacities; covering a multitude of faults.

  Thus we receive at the hands of the world according to the measure of our

giving.  For  bad,  bad;  for  good,  good.  For  defective  conduct,  indifferent

influence  and  imperfect  success;  for  superior  conduct  lasting  power  and

consummate achievement. We act, and the world responds. When the foolish

man fails, he blames other, and sees no error in himself; but the wise man

watches and corrects himself, and so is assured of success.

  The  man  whose  mind  is  vigilant  and  alert,  has  thereby  a  valuable

equipment in the achievement of his aims; and if he be fully alive and wide-

awake on all occasions, to all opportunities, and against all marring defects of

character, what event, what circumstance, what enemy shall overtake him and

find him unprepared? What shall prevent him from achieving the legitimate

and at which he aims?

  Industry brings cheerfulness and plenty. Vigorously industrious people

are the happiest members of the community. They are not always the richest,

if by riches is meant a superfluity of money; but they are always the most

light-hearted and joyful, and the most satisfied with what they do and have,

and are therefore the richer, if by richer we mean more abundantly blessed.

Active  people  have  no  time  for  moping  and  brooding,  or  for  dwelling

selfishly upon their ailments and troubles. Things most used are kept the

brightest,  and  people  most  employed  best  retain  their  brightness  and

buoyancy  of  spirit.  Things  unused  tarnish  quickest;  and  the  time  killer  is

attacked with ennui and morbid fancies. To talk of having to “kill time” isalmost  like  a  confession  of  imbecility;  for  who,  in  the  short  life  at  his

disposal, and in a world so flooded with resources of knowledge with sound

heads and good hearts can fill up every moment of every day usefully and

happily, and if they refer to time at all, it is to the effect that it is all too short

to enable them to do all that they would like to do.

    Industry, too, promoted health and well-being. The active man goes to

bed tired every night; his rest is sound and sweet, and he wakes up early in

the morning, fresh and strong for another day’s delightful toil. His appetite

and digestion are good. He has an excellent sauce in recreation, and a good

tonic in toil. What companionship can such a man have with moping and

melancholy? Such morbid spirits hang around those who do little and dine

excessively. People who make themselves useful to the community, receive

back from the community their full share of health, happiness, and prosperity.

They brighten the daily task, and keep the world moving. They are the gold

of the nation and the salt of the earth.

    “Earnestness”, said a Great Teacher, “is the path of immortality. They

who are in earnest do not die; they who are not in earnest are as if dead

already”. Earnestness is the dedication of the entire mind to its task. We live

only in what we do. Earnest people are dissatisfied with anything short of the

highest  excellence  in  whatever  they  do,  and  they  always  reach  that

excellence. They are so many that are careless and half hearted, so satisfied

with a poor performance, that the earnest ones shine apart as it were, in their

excellence. They are always plenty of “vacancies” in the ranks of usefulness

and service for earnest people. There never was, and never will be, a deeply

earnest man or woman who did not fill successfully some suitable sphere.

Such people are scrupulous, conscientious, and painstaking, and cannot rest

in ease until the very best is done, and the whole world is always on the

lookout  to  reward  the  best.  It  always  stands  ready  to  pay  the  full  price,

whether in money, fame, friends, influence, happiness, scope or life, for that

which  is  of  surpassing  excellence,  whether  it  be  in  things  material,

intellectual, or spiritual. What ever you are – whether shopkeeper or saintly

teacher you can safely give the very best to the world without any doubt or

misgiving. If the indelible impress of your earnestness be on your goods in

the one case, or on your words in the other, your business will flourish, or

your precepts will live.  Earnest people make rapid progress both in their work and their character.

It is thus that they live, and “do not die”, for stagnation only is death, and

where there is incessant progress and ever ascending excellence, stagnation

and health are swallowed up in activity and life.

  Thus is the making and masonry of the First pillar explained. He who

builds it well, and sets it firm and straight, will have a powerful and enduring

support in the business of his life.                3. SECOND PILLAR – ECONOMY


  It is said of Nature that she knows on vacuum. She also knows no waste.

In the divine economy my Nature everything is conserved and turned to good

account. Even excreta are chemically transmitted, and utilized in the building

up of new forms. Nature destroys every foulness, not by annihilation, but by

transmutation, by sweetening and purifying it, and making it serve the ends

of things beautiful, useful and good.

  That economy which, in nature is a universal principle, is in man a moral

quality and it is that quality by which he preserves his energies, and sustains

his place as a working unit in the scheme of things.

    Financial economy is merely a fragment of this principle, or rather it is a

material  symbol  of  that  economy  which  is  purely  mental,  and  its

transmutations  spiritual.  The  financial  economist  exchanges  coppers  for

silver,  silver  for  gold,  gold  for  notes,  and  the  notes  he  converts  into  the

figures of a bank account. By these conversions of money into more readily

transmissible  forms  he  is  the  gainer  in  the  financial  management  of  his

affairs.  The  spiritual  economist  transmutes  passions  into  intelligence,

intelligence  into  principles,  principles  into  wisdom,  and  wisdom  is

manifested  in  actions  which  are  few  but  of  powerful  effect.  By  all  these

transmutations he is the gainer in character and in the management of his life.

  True economy is the middle way in all things, whether material or mental,

between waste and undue retention. That which is wasted, whether money or

mental energy, is rendered powerless; that which is selfishly retained and

hoarded up, is equally powerless. To secure power, whether of capital or

mentality, there must be concentration, but concentration must be followed

by legitimate use. The gathering up of money or energy is only a means; the

end is use; and it is use only that produces power.

  An all-round economy consists in finding the middle way in the following

seven  things:- Money,  Food,  Clothing,  Recreation,  Rest,  Time and

Energy.

  Money is the symbol of exchange, and represents purchasing power. He

who is anxious to acquire financial wealth as well as he who wishes to avoid

debt – must study how to apportion, his expenditure in accordance with his

income, so as to leave a margin of ever increasing working capital, or to havea little store ready in hand for any emergency. Money spent in thoughtless

expenditure – in worthless pleasures or harmful luxuries – is money wasted

and  power  destroyed;  for,  although  a  limited  and  subordinate  power,  the

means and capacity for legitimate and virtuous purchase is, nevertheless, a

power, and one that enters largely into the details of our everyday life. The

spendthrift can never become rich, but if he begin with riches, must soon

become poor. The miser, with all his stored-away gold, cannot be said to be

rich, for he is in want, and his gold, lying idle, is deprived of its power of

purchase. The thrifty and prudent are on the way to riches, for while they

spend wisely they save carefully, and gradually enlarge their spheres as their

growing means allow.

  The poor man who is to become rich must begin at the bottom, and must

not wish, nor try to appear affluent by attempting something far beyond his

means. There is always plenty of room and scope at the bottom, and it is a

safe place from which to begin, as there is nothing below, and everything

above. Many a young business man comes at once to grief by swagger and

display  which  he  foolishly  imagines  are  necessary  to  success,  but  which,

deceiving  no  one  but  himself,  lead  quickly  to  ruin.  A  modest  and  true

beginning,  in  any  sphere,  will  better  ensure  success  than  an  exaggerated

advertisement of one’s standing and importance. The smaller the capital, the

smaller should be the sphere of operations. Capital and scope are hand and

glove, and they should fit. Concentrate your capital within the circle of its

working  power,  and  however  circumscribed  that  circle  may  be  it  will

continue to widen and extend as the gathering momentum of power presses

for expression.

  Above all take care always to avoid the two extremes of parsimony and

prodigality.

  Food represents  life,  vitality,  and  both  physical  and  mental  strength.

There is a middle way in eating and drinking, as in all else. The man who is

to achieve prosperity must be well nourished, but not overfed. The man that

starves his body, whether through miserliness or asceticism (both forms of

false  economy),  diminishes  his  mental  energy,  and  renders  his  body  too

enfeebled to be the instrument for any strong achievement. Such a man courts

sickly mindedness, a condition conducive only to failure.

  The glutton, however, destroys himself by excess. His bestialized bodybecomes  a  stored  up  reservoir  of  poisons,  which  attract  disease  and

corruption, while his mind becomes more and more brutalized and confused,

and therefore more incapable. Gluttony is one of the lowest and most animal

vices, and is obnoxious to all who pursue a moderate course.

  The  best  workers  and  most  successful  men  are  they  who  are  most

moderate in eating and drinking. By taking enough nourishment, but not too

much,  they  attain  the  maximum  physical  and  mental  fitness.  Beings  thus

well-equipped by moderation, they are enabled to vigorously and joyfully

fight the battle of life.

  Clothing is covering and protection for the body, though it is frequently

wrested from this economic purpose, and made a means of vain display. The

two extremes to be avoided here are negligence and vanity. Custom cannot,

and need not, be ignored; and cleanliness is all important. The ill-dressed,

unkempt man or woman invites failure and loneliness. A man’s dress should

harmonize with his station in life, and it should be of good quality, and be

well  made  and  appropriate.  Clothing  should  not  be  cast  aside  while

comparatively new, but should be well worn. If a man be poor, he will not

lose  in  either  self-respect  or  the  respect  of  others  by  wearing  threadbare

clothing if it be clean and his whole body be clean and neat. But vanity,

leading to excessive luxury in clothing, is a vice which should be studiously

avoided  by  virtuous  people.  I  know  a  lady  who  had  forty  dresses  in  her

wardrobe; also a man who had twenty walking-sticks, about the same number

of hats, and some dozen mackintoshes; while another had some twenty or

thirty  pairs  of  boots.  Rich  people  who  thus  squander  money  on  piles  of

superfluous clothing, are courting poverty, for it is waste, and waste leads to

want.  The  money  so  heedlessly  spent  could  be  better  used,  for  suffering

abounds and charity is noble.

  An  obtrusive  display  in  clothing  and  jewellery  bespeaks  a  vulgar  and

empty mind. Modest and cultured people are modest and becoming in their

dress, and their spare money is wisely used in further enhancing their culture

and virtue. Education and progress are of more importance to them than vain

and needless apparel; and literature, art, and science are encouraged thereby.

A true refinement is in the mind and behaviour, and a mind adorned with

virtue and intelligence cannot add to its attractiveness though it may detract

from  it)  by  an  ostentatious  display  of  the  body.  Time  spent  in  uselesslyadorning the body could be more fruitfully employed. Simplicity in dress, as

in other things, is the best. It touches the point of excellence in usefulness,

comfort, and bodily grace, and bespeaks true taste and cultivated refinement.

    Recreation is  one  of  the  necessities  of  life.  Every  man  and  women

should have some definitive work as the main object of life, and to which a

considerable amount of time should be devoted, and he should only turn from

it at given and limited periods for recreation and rest. The object of recreation

is greater buoyancy of both body and mind, with an increase of power in

one’s serious work. It is, therefore, a means, not an end; and this should ever

be born in mind, for, to many, some forms of recreation innocent and good in

themselves – become so fascinating that they are in danger of making them

the end of life, and of thus abandoning duty for pleasure. To make of life a

ceaseless round of games and pleasures, with no other object in life, is to turn

living upside down, as it were, and it produces monotony and enervation.

People who do it are the most unhappy of mortals, and suffer from languor,

ennui, and peevishness. As sauce is an aid to digestion, and can only lead to

misery when made the work of life. When a man has done his day’s duty he

can turn to his recreation with a free mind and a light heart, and both his work

and his pleasure will be to him a source of happiness.

  It is a true economy in this particular neither to devote the whole of one’s

time to work nor to recreation, but to apportion to each its time and place;

and so fill out life with those changes which are necessary to a long life and a

fruitful existence.

  All agreeable changes is recreation and the mental worker will gain both

in  the  quality  and,  quantity  of  his  work  by  laying  it  down  at  the  time

appointed for restful and refreshing recreation; while the physical worker will

improve in every way by turning to some form of study as a hobby or means

of education.

  As we do not spend all our time in eating or sleeping or resting, neither

should we spend it in exercise or pleasure, but should give recreation its

proper place as a natural tonic in the economic scheme of our life.

  Rest is  for  recuperation  after  toil.  Every  self-respecting  human  being

should do sufficient work every day to make his sleep restful and sweet, and

his rising up fresh and bright.

  Enough sleep should be taken, but not too much, over indulgence on theone hand, or deprivation on the other, are both harmful. It is an easy matter to

find out how much sleep one requires. By going to bed early, and getting up

early (rising a little earlier every morning if one has been in the habit of

spending long hours in bed), one can very soon accurately gauge and adjust

the number of hours he or she requires for complete recuperation. It will be

found as the sleeping hours are shortened that the sleep becomes more and

more sound and sweet, and the waking up more and more alert and bright.

People who are to prosper in their work must not give way to ignoble ease

and over indulgence in sleep. Fruitful labour, and not ease, is the true end of

life, and ease is only good in so far as it sub-serves the ends of work. Sloth

and prosperity can never be companions can never even approach each other.

The sluggard will never overtake success, but failure will speedily catch up

with him, and leave him defeated. Rest is to fit us for greater labour, and not

to pamper us in indolence. When the bodily vigour is restored, the end of rest

is  accomplished.  A  perfect  balance  between  labour  and  rest  contributes

considerably to health, happiness, and prosperity.

  Time is  that  which  we  all  possess  in  equal  measure.  The  day  is  not

lengthened  for  any  man.  We  should  therefore  see  to  it  that  we  do  not

squander its precious minutes in unprofitable waste. He who spends his time

in self-indulgence and the pursuit of pleasure, presently finds himself old, and

nothing has been accomplished. He who fills full with useful pursuits the

minutes  as  they  come  and  go,  grows  old  in  honour  and  wisdom,  and

prosperity abides with him. Money wasted can be restored; health wasted can

be restored; but time wasted can never be restored.

  It is an old saying that “time is money”. It is, in the same way, health, and

strength, and talent, and genius, and wisdom, in accordance with the manner

in which it is used; and to properly use it, the minutes must be seized upon as

they come, for once they are past they can never be recalled. The day should

be divided into portions, and everything – work, leisure, meals, recreation –

should be attend to in its proper time; and the time of preparation should

not be overlooked or ignored. Whatever a man does, he will do it better and

more successfully by utilizing some small portion of the day in preparing his

mind for his work. The man who gets up early in order to think and plan, that

he may weigh and consider and forecast, will always manifest greater skill

and success in his particular pursuit, than the man who lives in bed till thelast moment, and only gets up just in time to begin breakfast. An hour spend

in this way before breakfast will prove of the greatest value in making one’s

efforts  fruitful.  It  is  a  means  of  calming  and  clarifying  the  mind,  and  of

focussing one’s energies so as to render them more powerful and effective.

The best and most abiding success is that which is made before eight o’clock

in the morning. He who is at his business at six o’clock, will always other

conditions being equal be a long way ahead of the man who is in bed at eight.

The lie a bed heavily handicaps himself in the race of life. He gives his early-

rising competitor two or three hours start every day. How can he ever hope to

win with such a self-imposed tax upon his time? At the end of a year that two

or three hours start every day is shown in a success which is the synthesis of

accumulated results. What, then, must be the difference between the efforts of

these two men at the end, say, of twenty years! The lie-a-bed, too, after he

gets up is always in a hurry trying to regain lost time, which results in more

loss of time, for hurry always defeats its own end. The early rise, who thus

economies his time, has no need to hurry, for he is always ahead of the hour,

is always well up with his work; he can well afford to be calm and deliberate,

and to do carefully and well whatever is in hand, for his good habit shows

itself at the end of the day in the form of a happy frame of mind, and in

bigger results in the shape of work skilfully and successfully done.

  In the economizing of time, too, there will be many things which a man

will have to eliminate from his life; some of things and pursuits which he

loves, and desires to retain, will have to be sacrifice to the main purpose of

his life. The studied elimination of non-essentials from one’s daily life is a

vital factor in all great achievement. All great men are adepts in this branch

of economy, and it plays an important part in the making of their greatness. It

is a form of economy which also enters into the mind, the actions, and the

speech, eliminating from them all that is superfluous, and that impedes, and

does not sub-serve, the end aimed at. Foolish and unsuccessful people talk

carelessly and aimlessly, act carelessly and aimlessly, and allow everything

that comes along good, bad, and different to lodge in their mind.

  The  mind  of  the  true  economist  is  a  sieve  which  lets  everything  fall

through except that which is of use to him in the business of his life. He also

employs only necessary words, and does only necessary actions, thus vastly

minimizing friction and waste of power.  To go to bed betime and to get up betime, to fill in every working minute

with purposeful thought and effective action, this is the true economy of time.

  Energy is economized by the formation of good habits. All vices are a

reckless expenditure of energy. Sufficient energy is thoughtlessly wasted in

bad habits to enable men to accomplish the greatest success, if conserved and

used in right directions. If economy be practiced in the six points already

considered, much will be done in the conservation of one’s energies, but a

man must go still further, and carefully husband his vitality by the avoidance

of all forms of physical self-indulgences and impurities, but also all those

mental  vices  such  as  hurry,  worry,  excitement,  despondency,  anger,

complaining and envy – which deplete the mind and render it unfit for any

important  work  or  admirable  achievement.  They  are  common  forms  of

mental dissipation which a man of character should study how to avoid and

overcome.  The  energy  wasted  in  frequent  fits  of  bad  temper  would,  if

controlled  and  properly  directed,  give  a  man  strength  of  mind,  force  of

character, and much power to achieve. The angry man is a strong man made

weak  by  the  dissipation  of  his  mental  energy.  He  needs  self-control  to

manifest his strength. The calm man is always his superior in any department

of life, and will always take precedence of him, both in his success, and in the

estimation of others. No man can afford to disperse his energies in fostering

bad  habits  and  bad  tendencies  of  mind.  Every  vice,  however,  apparently

small will tell against him in the battle of life. Every harmful self-indulgence

will  come  back  to  him  in  the  form  of  some  trouble  or  weakness.  Every

moment  of  riot  or  of  pandering  to  his  lower  inclinations  will  make  his

progress  more  laborious,  and  will  hold  him  back  from  scaling  the  high

heaven of his wishes for achievement. On the other hand, he who economizes

his energies, and bends them towards the main task of his life, will make

rapid progress, and nothing will prevent him from reaching the golden city of

success.

  It will be seen that economy is something far more profound and far

reaching than the mere saving of money. It touches every part of our nature

and every phase of our life. The old saying, “Take care of the pence, and the

pounds will take care of themselves”, may be regarded as a parable, for the

lower passions as native energy; it is the abuse of that energy that is bad, and

if this personal energy be taken care of and stored up and transmuted, itreappears as force of character. To waste this valuable energy in the pursuit

of vice is like wasting the pence, and so losing the pounds, but to take care of

it for good uses is to store up the pence of passions, and so gain the golden

pounds of good. Take care, therefore, of the lower energies, and the higher

achievements will take care of themselves.

  The Pillar of Economy, when soundly built, will be found to be composed

largely of these four qualities:-

  1. Moderation

  2. Efficiency

  3. Resourcefulness

  4. Originality

    Moderation is the strong core of economy. It avoids extremes, finding

the  middle  way  in  all  things.  It  also  consists  in  abstaining  from  the

unnecessary and the harmful. There can be no such things as moderation in

that which is evil, for that would be excess. A true moderation abstains from

evil. It is not a moderate use of fire to put our hands into it, but to warm them

by it at a safe distance. Evil is a fire that will burn a man though he but touch

it.  a  harmful  luxury  is  best  left  severely  alone.  Smoking,  snuff  taking,

alcoholic drinking, gambling, and other such common vices, although they

have dragged thousands down to ill health, misery, and failure, have never

helped one towards health, happiness and success. The man who eschews

them will always be head of the man that pursues them, their talents and

opportunities being equal. Healthy, happy, and long lived people are always

moderate and abstemious in their habits. By moderation the life forces are

preserved; by excess they are destroyed. Men, also, who carry moderation

into  their  thoughts,  allaying  their  passions  and  feelings,  avoiding  all

unwholesome  extremes  and  morbid  sensations  and  sentiments,  add

knowledge and wisdom to happiness and health, and thereby attain to the

highest felicity and power. The immoderate destroy themselves by their own

folly. They weaken their energies and stultify their capabilities, and instead of

achieving  an  abiding  success,  reach  only,  at  best,  a  fitful  and  precarious

prosperity.

  Efficiency  proceeds  from  the  right  conservation  of  one’s  forces  and

powers. All skill is the use of concentrated energy. Superior skill, as talent

and genius, is a higher degree of concentrated force. Men are always skilfulin that which they love, because the mind is almost ceaselessly centered upon

it. Skill is the result of that mental economy which transmutes thought into

invention and action. There will be no prosperity without skill, and one’s

prosperity  will  be  in  the  measure  of  one’s  skill.  By  a  process  of  natural

selection, the inefficient fall in to their right places. Among the badly paid or

unemployed; for who will employ a man who cannot, or will not, do his work

properly? An employer may occasionally keep such a man out of charity; but

this will be exceptional; as places of business, offices, households, and all

centers  of  organized  activity,  are  not  charitable  institutions,  but  industrial

bodies which stand or fall but the fitness and efficiency of their individual

members.

  Skill is gained by thoughtfulness and attention. Aimless and inattentive

people  are  usually  out  of  employment  –  to  wit,  the  lounger  at  the  street

corner. They cannot do the simplest thing properly, because they will not

rouse up the mind to thought and attention. Recently an acquaintance of mine

employed a tramp to clean his windows, but the man had refrained from work

and systematic thought for so long that he had become incapable of both, and

could not even clean a window. Even when shown how to do it, he could not

follow the simple instructions given. This is an instance, too, of the fact that

the simplest thing requires a measure of skill in the doing. Efficiency largely

determines a man’s place among his fellows, and leads one on by steps to

higher  and  higher  positions  as  greater  powers  are  developed.  The  good

workman is skilful, with his tools, while the good man is skilful with his

thoughts. Wisdom is the highest form of skill. Aptitude in incipient wisdom.

There  is o n e right  way  of  doing  everything,  even  the  smallest,  and  a

thousand  wrong  ways.  Skill  consists  in  finding  the  one  right  way,  and

adhering to it. The inefficient bungle confusedly about among the thousand

wrong ways, and do not adopt the right even when it is pointed out to them.

They do this in some cases because they think, in their ignorance, that they

know  best,  thereby  placing  themselves  in  a  position  where  it  becomes

impossible to learn, even though it be only to learn how to clean a window or

sweep a floor. Thoughtlessness and inefficiency are all too common. There is

plenty of room in the world for common. There is plenty of room in the

world for thoughtful and efficient people. Employers of labour know how

difficult it is to get the best workmanship. The good workman, whether withtools or brain, whether with speech or thought, will always find a place for

the exercise of his skill.

    Resourcefulness is the outcome of efficiency. It is an important element

in prosperity, for the resourceful man is never confounded. He may have

many falls, but he will always be equal to the occasion, and will be on his

feet  again  immediately.  Resourcefulness  has  its  fundamental  cause  in  the

conservation of energy. It is energy transmuted. When a man cuts off certain

mental or bodily vices which have been depleting him of his energy, what

becomes of the energy so conserved? It is not destroyed or lost, for energy

can never be destroyed or lost. It becomes productive energy. It reappears in

the form of fruitful thought. The virtuous man is always more successful than

the vicious man because he is teeming with resources. His entire mentality is

alive and vigorous, abounding with stored up energy. What the vicious man

wastes in barren indulgence, the virtuous man uses in fruitful industry. A new

life  and  a  new  world,  abounding  with  all  fascinating  pursuits  and  pure

delights, open up to the man who shuts himself off from the old world of

animal vice, and his place will be assured by the resources which will well up

within him. Barren seed perishes in the earth; there is no place for it in the

fruitful economy of nature. Barren minds sink in the struggle of life. Human

society  makes  for  good,  and  there  is  no  room  in  it  for  the  emptiness

engendered by vice. But the barren mind will not sink for ever. When it wills,

it can become fruitful and regain itself. By the very nature of existence, by

the eternal law of progress, the vicious man must fall; but having fallen, he

can rise again. He can turn from vice to virtue, and stand, self-respecting and

secure, upon his own resources.

  The resourceful men invent, discover, initiate. They cannot fail, for they

are in the stream of progress. They are full of new schemes, new methods,

new hopes, and their life is so much fuller and richer thereby. They are men

of supple minds. When a man fails to improve his business, his work, his

methods, he falls out of the line of progress, and has begun to fail. His mind

has become stiff and inert like the body of an aged man, and so fails to keep

pace  with  the  rapidly  moving  ideas  and  plans  of  resourceful  minds.  A

resourceful  mind  is  like  a  river  which  never  runs  dry,  and  which  affords

refreshment, and supplies new vigour, in times of drought. Men of resources

are men of new ideas, and men of new ideas flourish where others fade anddecay.

    Originality is  resourcefulness  ripened  and  perfected.  Where  there  is

originality there is genius, and men of genius are the lights of the world.

Whatever work a man does, he should fall back upon his own resources in the

doing it. While learning from others, he should not slavishly imitate them, but

should put himself into his work, and so make it new and original. Original

men get the ear of the world. They may be neglected at first, but they are

always ultimately accepted, and become patterns for mankind. Once a man

has acquired the knack of originality, he takes his place as a leader among

men  in  his  particular  department  of  knowledge  and  skill.  But  originality

cannot be forced; it can only be developed; and it is developed by proceeding

from excellence to excellence, by ascending in the scale of skill by the full

and right use of one’s mental powers. Let a man consecrate himself to his

work, let him, so consecrated, concentrate all his energies upon it, and the

day will come when the world will hail him as one of its strong sons; and he,

too, like Balzac who, after many years of strenuous toil, one day exclaimed,

“I am about to become a genius!, “I am about to become a genius” will at

least discover, to his joy, that he has joined the company of original minds,

the gods who lead mankind into newer, higher, and more beneficent ways.

  The composition of the Second Pillar is thus revealed. Its building awaits

the ready work man who will skilfully apply his mental energies.                  4. THIRD PILLAR – INTEGRITY


  There  is  no  striking  a  cheap  bargain  with  prosperity.  It  must  be

purchased,  not  only  with  intelligent  labour,  but  with  moral  force  as  the

bubble cannot endure, so the fraud cannot prosper. He makes a feverish spurt

in the acquirement of money, and then collapses. Nothing is ever gained, ever

can be gained, by fraud. It is but wrested for a time, to be again returned with

heavy interest. But fraud is not confined to the unscrupulous swindler. All

who are getting, or trying to get, money without giving an equivalent are

practicing  fraud,  whether  they  know  it  or  not.  Men  who  are  anxiously

scheming how to get money without working for it, are frauds, and mentally

they are closely allied to the thief and swindler under whose influence they

come, sooner or later, and who deprives them of their capital. What is a thief

but a man who carries to its logical or later, and who deprives them of their

capital. What is a thief but a man who carries to its logical extreme the desire

to possess without giving a just return – that is, unlawfully? The man that

courts prosperity must, in all his transactions, whether material or mental,

study how to give a just return for that which he receives. This is the great

fundamental  principle  in  all  sound  commerce,  while  in  spiritual  things  it

becomes the doing to others that which we would have them do to us, and

applied to the forces of the universe, it is scientifically stated in the formula,

“Action and Reaction are equal.”

    Human  life  is  reciprocal,  not  rapacious,  and  the  man  who  regards  all

others as his legitimate prey will soon find himself stranded in the desert of

ruin, far away from the path of prosperity. He is too far behind in the process

of  evolution  to  cope  successfully  with  honest  man.  The  fittest,  the  best,

always survive, and he being the worst, cannot therefore continue. His end,

unless the change in time, is sure it is the goal, the filthy hovel, or the place

of the deserted outcast. His efforts are destructive, and not constructive, and

he thereby destroys himself.

  It  was  Carlyle  who,  referring  to  Mohammed  being  then  universally

regarded  by  Christians  as  an  impostor,  exclaimed,  “An  impostor  found  a

religion! An impostor couldn’t built a brick house” an impostor, a liar a cheat

the man of dishonesty cannot build as he has neither tools or material with

which to build. He can no more build up a business, a character, a career, asuccess, than he can found a religion or build a brick house. He not only does

not build, but all his energies are bent on undermining what others have built,

but his being impossible, he undermines himself.

  Without  integrity,  energy  and  economy  will  at  last  fail,  but  aided  by

integrity, their strength will be greatly augmented. There is not an occasion in

life  in  which  the  moral  factor  does  not  play  an  important  part.  Sterling

integrity tell wherever it is, and stamps it hall mark on all transactions; and it

does  this  because  of  its  wonderful  coherence  and  consistency,  and  its

invincible strength. For the man of integrity is in line with the fixed laws of

things – not only with the fundamental principles on which human society

rests, but with the laws which hold the vast universe together. Who shall set

these  at  naught?  Who,  then,  shall  undermine  the  man  of  unblemished

integrity? He is like a strong tree whose roots are fed by perennial springs,

and which no tempest can law low.

  To be complete and strong, integrity must embrace the whole man, and

extend to all the details of his life; and it must be so through and permanent

as to withstand all temptations to swerve into compromise. To fail in one

point is to fail in all, and to admit, under stress, a compromise with falsehood,

howsoever necessary and insignificant it may appear, is to throw down the

shield of integrity, and to stand exposed to the onslaughts of evil.

  The man who works as carefully and conscientiously when his employer

is away as when his eye is upon him, will not long remain in an inferior

position. Such integrity in duty, in performing the details of his work, will

quickly lead him into the fertile regions of prosperity.

  The shirker, on the other hand – he who does not scruple to neglect his

work when his employer is not about, thereby robbing his employer of the

time and labour for which he is paid – will quickly come to the barren region

of unemployment, and will look in vain for needful labour.

  There will come a time, too, to the man who is not deeply rooted in

integrity, when it will seem necessary to his prospects and prosperity that he

should tell a lie or do a dishonest thing – I say, to the man who is not deeply

rooted in this principle, for a man of fixed and enlightened integrity knows

that lying and dishonesty can never under any circumstance be necessary, and

therefore he neither needs to be tempted in this particular, nor can he possibly

be  tempted  but  the  one  so  tempted  must  be  able  to  cast  aside  the  subtleinsinuation of falsehood which, in a time of indecision and perplexity, arises

within him, and he must stand firmly by the principle, being willing to lose

and suffer rather than sink into obliquity. In this way only can he become

enlightened concerning this moral principle, and discover the glad truth that

integrity does not lead to loss and suffering, but to gain and joy; that honesty

and deprivation are not, and cannot be, related as cause and effect.

  It  is  this  willingness  to  sacrifice  rather  than  be  untrue  that  leads  to

enlightenment in all spheres of life; and the man who, rather than sacrifice

some  selfish  aim,  will  lie  or  deceive,  has  forfeited  his  right  to  moral

enlightenment, and takes his place lower down among the devotees of deceit,

among  the  doers  of  shady  transactions,  than  men  of  no  character  and  no

reputation.

  A man is not truly armoured with integrity until he has become incapable

of lying or deceiving either by gesture, word, or act; until he sees, clearly,

openly, and freed from all doubt, the deadly effects of such moral turpitude.

The man so enlightened is protect from all quarters, and can no more be

undermined by dishonest men than the sun can be pulled down from heaven

by madmen, and the arrows of selfishness and treachery that may be poured

upon him will rebound from the strong armour of his integrity and the bright

shield of his righteousness, leaving him unharmed and untouched.

  A lying tradesman will tell you that no man can thrive and be honest in

these days of keen competition. How can such a man know this, seeing that

he  has  never  tried  honest?  Moreover,  such  a  man  has  no  knowledge  of

honesty,  and  his  statement  is  therefore,  a  statement  of  ignorance,  and

ignorance and falsehood so blind a man that he foolishly imagines all are as

ignorant and false as himself. I have known such tradesmen, and have seen

them come to ruin. I once heard a businessman make the following statement

in a public meeting:-“No man can be entirely honest in business; he can only

be  approximately  honest.”  He  imagined  that  his  statement  revealed  the

condition of the business world; it did not, it revealed his own condition.

He was merely telling his audience that he was a dishonest man, but his

ignorance, moral ignorance, prevented him from seeing this. Approximate

honesty is only another term for dishonesty. The man who deviated a little

from the straight path, will deviate more. He has no fixed principle of right

and is only thinking of his own advantage. That he persuades himself that hisparticular dishonesty is of a white and harmless kind, and that he is not so

bad  as  his  neighbour,  is  only  of  the  many  forms  of  self-delusion  which

ignorance of moral principles creates.

  Right  doing  between  man  and  main  in  the  varied  relations  and

transactions of life is the very soul of integrity. It includes, but is more than,

honesty.  It  is  the  backbone  of  human  society,  and  the  support  of  human

institutions. Without it there would be no trust, no confidence between men,

and the business world would topple to its fall.

  As the liar thinks all men are liars, and treats them as such, so the man of

integrity treats all men with confidence. He trusts them, and they trust him.

His clear eye and open hand shame the creeping fraud so that he cannot

practice his fraud on him. As Emerson has so finely put it – “Trust men and

they will be true to you, even though they make an exception in your favour

to all their rules of trade.”

  The upright man by his very presence commands the morality of those

about him making them better than they were. Men are powerfully influenced

by one another, and, as good is more powerful than evil, the strong and good

man both shames and elevates, by his contact, the weak and bad.

  The  man  of  integrity  carries  about  with  him  an  unconscious  grandeur

which  both  awes  and  inspires.  Having  lifted  himself  above  the  petty,  the

mean, and the false, those coward vices slink from his presence in confusion.

The highest intellectual gift cannot compare with this lofty moral grandeur. In

the memory of men and the estimation of the world the man of integrity

occupies  a  higher  place  than  the  man  of  genius.  Buckminster  says,  “The

moral grandeur of an independent integrity is the sublimest thing in nature.”

It  is  the  quality  in  man  which  produces  heroes.  The  man  of  unswerving

rectitude is, intrinsically, always a hero. It only needs the occasion to bring

out the heroic element. He is always, too, possessed a permanent happiness.

The man of genius may be very unhappy, but not to the man of integrity.

Nothing  nor  sickness,  nor  calamity,  nor  death  –  can  deprive  him  of  that

permanent satisfaction which inheres in uprightness.

  Rectitude leads straight to prosperity by four successive steps. First, the

upright  man  wins  the  confidence  of  others.  Second,  having  gained  their

confidence,  they  put  trust  in  him.  Third,  this  trust,  never  being  violated,

produces a good reputation; and fourth, a good reputation spreads further andfurther, and so bring about success.

    Dishonesty has the reverse effect. By destroying the confidence of others,

it  produces  in  them  suspicion  and  mistrust,  and  these  bring  about  a  bad

reputation, which culminates in failure.

  The Pillar of Integrity is held together by these four virile elements:

  1. Honesty

  2. Fearlessness

  3. Purposefulness

  4. Invincibility

  Honesty is the surest way to success. The day at last comes when the

dishonest man repents in sorrow and suffering: but not man ever needs to

repent of having been honest. Even when the honest man fails – as he does

sometimes, through lacking other of these pillars, such as energy, economy,

or system his failure is not the grievous thing it is to the dishonest man, for he

can always rejoice in the fact that he has never defrauded a fellow being.

Even in his darkest hour he finds repose in a clear conscience.

  Ignorant men imagine that dishonesty is a short cut to prosperity. This is

why they practice it. The dishonest man is morally short sighted. Like the

drunkard who sees the immediate pleasure of his habit, but not the ultimate

degradation, he sees the immediate effect of a dishonest act – a larger profit

but not its ultimate outcome; he does not see that an accumulated number of

such acts must inevitably undermine his character, and bring his business

toppling about his ears in ruin. While pocketing his gains, and thinking how

cleverly and successfully he is imposing on others, he is all the time imposing

on  himself,  and  every  coin  thus  gained must be  paid  back  with  added

interest, and from this just retribution there is no possible loophole of escape.

This moral gravitation is as sure and unvarying as the physical gravitation of

a stone to the earth.

  The  tradesman  who  demands  of  his  assistants  that  they  shall  be,  and

misrepresents his goods to customers, is surrounding himself on all hands

with suspicion, mistrust, and hatred. Even the moral weaklings who carry out

his  instructions,  despise  him  while  defiling  themselves  with  his  unclean

work. How can success thrive in such a poisonous atmosphere? The spirit of

ruin is already in such a business, and the day of his fall is ordained.  An honest man may fail, but not because he is honest, and his failure will

be honourable, and will not injure his character and reputation. His failure,

too, resulting doubtless from his incapacity in the particular direction of his

failure, will be a means of leading him into something more suited to his

talents, and thus to ultimate success.

    Fearlessness accompanies honesty. The honest man has a clear eye and

an unflinching gaze. He looks his fellowmen in the face, and his speech is

direct and convincing. The liar and cheat hangs his head; his eye is muddy

and his gaze oblique. He cannot look another man in the eye, and his speech

arouses mistrust, for it is ambiguous and unconvincing.

  When a man has fulfilled his obligations, he has nothing to fear. All his

business relations are safe and secure. His methods and actions will endure

the light of day. Should he pass through a difficult time, and, get into debt,

everybody will trust him and be willing to wait for payment, and all his debts

will be paid. Dishonest people try to avoid paying their debts, and they live in

fear;  but  the  honest  man  tries  to  avoid  getting  into  debt,  but  when  debt

overtakes him, he does not fear, but, redoubling his exertions, his debts are

paid.

  The dishonest are always in fear. They do not fear debt, but fear that they

will have to pay their debts. They fear their fellow-men, fear the established

authorities, fear the results of all that they do, and they are in constant fear of

their misdeeds being revealed, and of the consequences which may at any

moment overtake them.

  The honest man is rid of all this burden of fear. He is light hearted, and

walks  erect  among  his  fellows;  not  assuming  a  part,  and  skulking  and

cringing, but being himself, and meeting eye to eye. Not deceiving or injuring

any, there are none to fear, and anything and against him can only rebound to

his advantage.

  And this fearlessness is, in itself, a tower to strength in a man’s life,

supporting him through all emergencies, enabling him to battle manfully with

difficulties, and in the end securing for him that success of which he cannot

be dispossessed.

    Purposefulness is the direct outcome of that strength of character which

integrity fosters. The man of integrity is the man of direct aims and strong

and intelligent purposes. He does not guess, and work in the dark. All hisplans  have  in  them  some  of  that  moral  fiber  of  which  his  character  is

wrought. A man’s work will always in some way reflect himself, and the man

of sound integrity is the man of sound plan. He weights and considers and

looks ahead, and so is less likely to make serious mistakes, or to bungle into a

dilemma from which it is difficult to escape. Taking a moral view of all

things, and always considering moral consequences, he stands on a firmer

and more exalted ground than the man of mere policy and expedience; and

while commanding a more extended view of any situation, he wields the

greater  power  which  a  more  comprehensive  grasp  of  details  with  the

principles involved, confers upon him. Morality always has the advantage of

expediency. Its purposes always reach down far below the surface, and are

therefore more firm and secure, more strong and lasting. There is a native

directness, too, about integrity, which enables the man to get straight to the

mark in whatever he does, and which makes failure almost impossible.

  Strong  men  have  strong  purposes,  and  strong  purposes  lead  to  strong

achievements. The man of integrity is above all men strong, and his strength

is manifested in that thoroughness with which he does the business of his life;

thoroughness which commands respect, admiration, and success.

    Invincibility is  a  glorious  protector,  but  it  only  envelopes  the  man

whose integrity is perfectly pure and unassailable. Never to violate, even in

the most insignificant particular, the principle of integrity, is to be invincible

against all the assaults of innuendo, slander, and misrepresentation. The man

who has failed in one point is vulnerable, and the shaft of evil, entering that

point,  will  lay  him  low,  like  the  arrow  in  the  heel  of  Achilles.  Pure  and

perfect integrity is proof against all attack and injury, enabling its possessor

to meet all opposition and persecution with dauntless courage and sublime

equanimity. No amount of talent, intellect, or business acumen can give a

man that power of mind and peace of heart which come from an enlightened

acceptance  and  observance  of  lofty  moral  principles.  Moral  force  is  the

greatest power. Let the seeker for a true prosperity discover this force, let him

foster and develop it in his mind and in his deeds, and as he succeeds he will

take his place among the strong leaders of the earth.

  Such  is  the  strong  and  adamantine  Pillar  of  integrity.  Blessed  and

prosperous above all men will be he who builds its incorruptible masonry

into the temple of his life.                  5. FOURTH PILLAR – SYSTEM


    System  is  that  principle  of  order  by  which  confusion  is  rendered

impossible. In the natural and universal order everything is in its place, so

that the vast universe runs more perfectly than the most perfect machine.

Disorder in space would mean the destruction of the universe; and disorder in

a man’s affairs destroys his work and his prosperity.

  All complex organizations are built up by system. No business or society

can develop into large dimensions apart from system, and this principle is

pre-eminently  the  instrument  of  the  merchant,  the  business  man,  and  the

organizer of institutions.

  There are many departments in which a disorderly man may succeed –

although attention to order would increase his success but he will not succeed

in  business  unless  he  can  place  the  business  entirely  in  the  hands  of  a

systematic manager, who will thereby remedy his own defect.

  All large business concerns have been evolved along definitely drawn

systematic lines, any violation of which would be disastrous to the efficiency

and welfare of the business. Complex business or other organizations are

built up like complex bodies in nature, by scrupulous attention to details. The

disorderly man thinks he can be careless about every thing but the main end,

but by ignoring the means he frustrates the end. By the disarrangement of

details, organisms perish, and by the careless neglect of details, the growth of

any work or concern is prevented.

    Disorderly people waste an enormous amount of time and energy. The

time frittered away in hunting for things is sufficient, were if conserved by

order, to enable them to achieve any success, for slovenly people never have

a place for anything, and have to hunt, frequently for a long time, for any

article which they require. In the irritation, bad humour, and chagrin which

this daily hunting for things brings about, as much energy is dissipated as

would be required to build up a big business, or scale the highest heights of

achievement in any direction.

  Orderly  people  conserve  both  their  time  and  energy.  They  never  lose

anything,  and  therefore  never  have  to  find  anything.  Everything  is  in  its

place, and the hand can be at once placed upon it, though it be in the dark.

They  can  well  afford  to  be  cool  and  deliberate  and  so  use  their  mentalenergies  in  something  more  profitable  than  irritation,  bad  temper  and

accusing others for their own lack of order.

  There is a kind of genius in system which can perform apparent wonders

with ease. A systematic man can get through so great a quantity of work in

such a short time, and with such freedom from such exhaustion, as to appear

almost  miraculous.  He  scale  the  heights  of  success  while  his  slovenly

competitor  is  wallowing  hopelessly  in  the  bogs  of  confusion.  His  strict

observance of the law of order enables him to reach his ends, swiftly and

smoothly, without friction or loss of time.

  The demands of system, in all departments of the business world, are as

rigid and exacting as the holy vows of a saint, and cannot be violated in the

smallest particular but at the risk of one’s financial prospects. In the financial

world, the law of order is an iron necessity, and he who faultlessly observes

it, saves time, temper, and money.

  Every  enduring  achievement  in  human  society  rests  upon  a  basis  of

system; so true is this, that were system withdrawn, progress would cease.

Think, for instance, of the vast achievements of literature the works of classic

authors and of great geniuses; the great poems, the innumerable prose works,

the monumental histories, the soul – stirring orations; think also the social

intercourse of human society, of it religions, its legal statutes, and its vast

fund  of  book  knowledge  think  of  all  these  wonderful  resources  and

achievements  of  language,  and  then  reflect  that  they  all  depend  for  their

origin, growth, and continuance on the systematic arrangements of twenty six

letters, an arrangement having inexhaustible and illimitable results by the fact

of its rigid limitation within certain fixed rules.

  Again; all the wonderful achievements of mathematics have come from

the systematic arrangement of ten figures; while the most complex piece of

machinery, with its thousands of parts working together smoothly and almost

noiselessly to the achievement of the end for which it was designed, was

brought forth by the systematic observance of a few mechanical laws.

  Herein we see how system simplifies that is complex: how it makes easy

that which was difficult; how it relates an infinite variety of details of the one

central law or order, and so enables them to be dealt with and accounted for

with perfect regularity, and with an entire absence of confusion.

  The scientist names and classifies the myriad details of the universe, fromthe  microscopic  rotifer  to  the  telescopic  star,  by  his  observance  of  the

principle of system, so that out of many millions of objects, reference can be

made to any one object in, at most, a few minutes. It is this faculty of speedy

references and swift dispatch which is of such overwhelming importance in

every department of knowledge and industry, and the amount of time and

labour thus saved to humanity is so vast as to be incompatible. We speak of

religious, political, and business systems; and so on, indicating that all things

in human society are welded together by the adhesive qualities of order.

    System is, indeed, one of the great fundamental principles in progress,

and in the binding together, in one complete whole, of the world’s millions of

human beings while they are at the same time each striving for a place and

are competing with one another in opposing aims and interest.

  We see here how system is allied with greatness, for the many separate

units whose minds are untrained to the discipline of system, are kept in their

places by the organizing power of the comparatively few who perceive the

urgent,  the  inescapable,  necessity  for  the  establishment  of  fixed  and

inviolable rules, whether in business, law, religion, science, or politics in fact,

in every sphere of human activity for immediately two human beings meet

together, they need some common ground of understanding for the avoidance

of confusion; in a word, some system to regulate their actions.

  Life  is  too  short  for  confusion;  and  knowledge  grows  and  progress

proceeds  along  avenues  of  system  which  prevent  retardation  and

retrogression,  so  that  he  who  systematizes  his  knowledge  or  business,

simplifies and enhances it for his successor, enabling him to begin, with a

free mind, where he left off.

  Every  large  business  has  its  system  which  renders  its  vast  machinery

workable, enabling it to run like a well-balanced and well-oiled machine. A

remarkable business man, a friend of mine, once told me that he could have

his huge business for twelve months, and it would run on without hitch till his

return; and he does occasionally leave it for several months, while travelling,

and on his return, every man, boy and girl; every tool, book, and machine;

every detail down to the smallest, is in its place doing its work as when he

left; and no trouble, no difficulty, no confusion has arisen.

  There  can  be  no  marked  success  part  from  a  love  of  regularity  and

discipline,  and  the  avoidance  of  friction,  along  with  the  restfulness  andefficiency  of  mind  which  spring  from  such  regularity.  People  who  abhor

discipline, whose minds are ungoverned and anarchic, and who are careless

and  irregular  in  their  thinking,  their  habits  and  the  management  of  their

affairs, cannot be highly successful and prosperous, and they fill their lives

with numerous worries, troubles, difficulties, and petty annoyances, all of

which would disappear under a proper regulation of their lives.

  An unsystematic mind is an untrained mind and it can no more cope with

well-disciplined  minds  in  the  race  of  life  than  an  untrained  athlete  can

successfully  complete  with  a  carefully  trained  competitor  in  athletic

competitor in athletic races. The ill-disciplined mind, that thinks anything

will do, rapidly falls behind the well-disciplined minds who are convinced

that only the best will do in the strenuous race for the prizes of life, whether

they be material, mental, or moral prizes. The man who, when he comes to do

his work, is unable to find his tools, or to balance his figures, or to find the

key of his desk, or the key to his thoughtless, will be struggling in his self-

made toils while his methodical neighbour will be freely and joyfully scaling

the invigorating heights of successful achievement. The business man whose

method is slovenly, or cumbersome, or behind the most recent developments

of skilled minds, should only blame himself as his prospects are decadent,

and should wake up to the necessity for more highly specialized and effective

methods in his concern. He should seize upon every thing – every invention

and idea – that will enable him to economize time and labour, and aid him in

thoroughness, deliberation and dispatch.

    System  is  the  law  by  which  everything  –  every  organism,  business,

character, nation, empire – is built. By adding cell to cell, department to

department, thought to thought, law to law, and colony to colony in orderly

sequence  and  classification,  all  things,  concerns  and  institutions  grow  in

magnitude,  and  evolve  to  completeness.  The  man  who  is  continually

improving his methods, is gaining in building power; it therefore behoves the

business  man  to  be  resourceful  and  inventive  in  the  improvement  of  his

methods, for the builders – whether of cathedrals or characters, business or

religions – are the strong ones of the earth, and the protectors and pioneers of

humanity. The systematic builder is a creator and preserver, while the man of

disorder demolishes and destroys, and no limit can be set to the growth of a

man’s  powers,  the  completeness  of  his  character,  the  influence  of  hisorganization,  or  the  extent  of  his  business,  if  he  but  preserve  intact  the

discipline of order, and have every detail in its place, keep every department

to  its  special  task,  and  tabulate  and  classify  with  such  efficiency  and

perfection as to enable him at any moment to bring under examination or into

requisition to the remotest detail in connection with his special work.

  In system is contained these four ingredients:

  1. Readiness

  2. Reccuracy

  3. Utility

  4. Comprehensiveness

    Readiness is aliveness. It is that spirit of alertness by which a situation

is immediately grasped and dealt with. The observance of system fosters and

develops this spirit. The successful General must have the power of readily

meeting any new and unlooked for move on the part of the enemy; so every

business  man  must  have  the  readiness  to  deal  with  any  unexpected

development affecting his line of trade; and so also must the man of thought

be  able  to  deal  with  the  details  of  any  new  problems  which  may  arise.

Dilatoriness is a vice that is fatal to prosperity, for it leads to incapability and

stupidity. The men of ready hands, ready hearts, and ready brains, who know

what they are doing, and do it methodically, skilfully, and with smooth yet

consummate despatch are the men who need to think little of prosperity as an

end, for it comes to them whether they seek it or not; success runs after them,

and knocks at their door; and they unconsciously command it by the superb

excellence of their faculties and methods.

    Accuracy is  of  supreme  importance  in  all  commercial  concerns  and

enterprises, but there can be no accuracy apart from system, and a system

which is more or less imperfect will involve its originator in mistakes more or

less disastrous until he improves it.

    Inaccuracy is one of the commonest failings, because accuracy is closely

allied to self-discipline, and self-discipline, along with that glad subjection to

external discipline which it involves, is an indication of high moral culture to

which  the  majority  have  not  yet  attained.  If  the  inaccurate  man  will  not

willingly subject himself to the discipline of his employer or instructor, but

thinks he knows better, his failing can never be remedied, and he will thereby

bind himself down to an inferior position, if in the business world; or toimperfect knowledge, if in the world of thought.

  The prevalence of the vice of inaccuracy (and in view of its disastrous

effect it must be regarded as a vice, though perhaps one of the lesser vices) is

patent to every observer in the way in which the majority of people relate a

circumstance or repeat a simple statement of fact. It is nearly always made

untrue  by  more  or  less  marked  inaccuracies.  Few  people,  perhaps  (not

reckoning those who deliberately lie), have trained themselves to be accurate

in what they say, or are so careful as to admit and state their liability to error,

and  from  this  common  form  of  inaccuracy  many  untruths  and

misunderstandings arise.

  More people take pains to be accurate in what they do than in what they

say, but even here inaccuracy is very common, rendering many inefficient

and incompetent, and unfitting them for any strenuous and well sustained

endeavour.  The  man  who  habitually  uses  up  a  portion  of  his  own  or  his

employer’s time in trying to correct his errors, or for the correction of whose

mistakes another has to be employed, is not the man to maintain any position

in the work a day world; much less to reach a place among the ranks of the

prosperous.

  There never yet lived a man who did not make some mistakes on his way

to his particular success, but he is the capable and right minded man who

perceives his mistakes and quickly remedies them, and who is glad when they

are pointed out to him. It is habitual and persistent; inaccuracy which is a

vice; and he is the incapable and wrong minded man who will not see or

admit his mistakes, and who takes offence when they are pointed out to him.

  The  progressive  man  learns  by  his  own  mistakes  as  well  as  by  the

mistakes of others. He is always ready to test good advice by practice, and

aims at greater and ever greater accuracy in his methods, which means higher

and higher perfection, for accuracy is perfect, and the measure of a man’s

accuracy will be the measure of his uniqueness and perfection.

  Utility or usefulness, is the direct result of method in one’s work. Labour

arrives at fruitful and profitable ends when it is systematically pursued. If the

gardener is to gather in the best produce, he must not only sow and plant, but

he must sow and plant at the right time; and if any work is to be fruitful in

results, it must be done seasonably, and the time for doing a thing must not be

allowed to pass by.  Utility considers the practical end; and employs the best means to reach

that end. It avoids side issues, dispenses with theories, and retains its hold

only on those things which can appropriated to good uses in the economy of

life.

    Unpractical  people  burden  their  minds  with  useless  and  unverifiable

theories, and court failure by entertaining speculations which, by their very

nature, cannot be applied in practice. The man whose powers are shown in

what  he  does,  and  not  in  mere  talking  are  arguing,  avoids  metaphysical

quibbling and quandaries, and applies himself to the accomplishment of some

good and useful end.

  That  which  cannot  be  reduced  to  practice  should  not  be  allowed  to

hamper the mind. It should be thrown aside, abandoned, and ignored. A man

recently told me that if his theory should be proved to have no useful end, he

should still retain his hold upon it as a beautiful theory. If a man chooses to

cling to so-called “beautiful” theories which are proved to have no use in life,

and no substantial basis of reality, he must not be surprised if he fails in his

wordly undertakings, for he is an unpractical man.

  When the powers of the mind are diverted from speculative theorizing to

practical  doing,  whether  in  material  or  moral  directions,  skill,  power,

knowledge, and prosperity increase. A man’s prosperity is measured by his

usefulness to the community, and a man is useful in accordance with that he

does, and not because of the theories which he entertains.

  The carpenter fashions a chair; the builder erects a house; the mechanic

produces a machine; and the wise man moulds a perfect character. Not the

schismatic,  the  theorists  and  the  controversialists,  but  the  workers,  the

makers, and the doers are the salt of the earth.

  Let a man turn away from the mirages of intellectual speculation, and

begin to do something, and to do it with all his might, and he will thereby

gain a special knowledge, wield a special power, and reach his own unique

position and prosperity among his fellows.

    Comprehensiveness is that quality of mind which enables a man to deal

with a large number of related details, to grasp them in their entirety, along

with the single principle which governs them and binds them together. It is a

masterly quality, giving organizing and governing power, and is developed

by systematic attention to details. The successful merchant holds in his mind,as it were, all the details of his business, and regulates them by a system

adapted to his particular form of trade. The inventor has in his mind all the

details  of  his  machine,  along  with  their  relation  to  a  central  mechanical

principle, and so perfects his invention. The author of a great poem or story

relates all his characters and incidents to a central plot, and so produces a

composite and enduring literary work. Comprehensiveness is analytic and

synthetic capacity combined in the same individual. A capacious and well-

ordered mind, which holds within its silent depths an army of details in their

proper arrangement and true working order, is the mind that is near to genius,

even if it has not already arrived. Every man cannot be a genius nor does he

need to be, but he can be gradually evolving his mental capacity by careful

attention to system in his thoughts and business, and as his intellect depends

and broadens his powers will be intensified and his prosperity accentuated.

  Such, then, are four corner pillars in the Temple of Prosperity, and of

themselves they are sufficient to permanently sustain it without the addition

of the remaining four. The man who perfects himself in Energy, Economy,

Integrity, and System will achieve an enduring success in the work of his life,

no matter what the nature of that work may be. It is impossible for one to fail

who is full of energy, who carefully economizes his time and money, and

virtuously husbands his vitality, who practices unswerving integrity, and who

systematizes his work by first systematizing his mind.

  Such  a  man’s  efforts  will  be  rightly  directed,  and  that,  too,  with

concentrated power, so that they will be effective and fruitful. In addition he

will reach a manliness and an independent dignity which will unconsciously

command respect and success, and will strengthen weaker ones by its very

presence in their midst. “Seest thou a man diligent in business; he shall stand

before kings, he shall not stand before mean men,” says Scripture of such a

one. He will not beg, or whimper, or complain, or cynically blame others, but

will be too strong and pure and upright a man to sink himself so low. And so

standing high in the nobility and integrity of his character, he will fill a high

place in the world and in the estimation of men. His success will be certain

and his prosperity will endure. “He will stand and not fall in the battle of

life.”                  6. FIFTH PILLAR – SYMPATHY


  The  remaining  pillars  are  the  four  central  pillars  in  the  Temple  of

Prosperity. They gave it greater strength and stability, and add both to its

beauty  and  utility.  They  contribute  greatly  to  its  attractiveness,  for  they

belong to the highest moral sphere, and therefore to great beauty and nobility

of  character.  They,  indeed,  make  a  man  great,  and  place  him  among  the

comparatively few whose minds are rare, and that shine apart in sparkling

purity and bright intelligence.

    Sympathy should not be confounded with that maudlin and superficial

sentiment which, like a pretty flower without root, presently perishes and

leaves behind neither seed nor fruit. To fall into hysterical some suffering

abroad, is not sympathy. Neither are bursts of violent indignation against the

cruelties and injustices of others nor any indication of a sympathetic mind. If

one is cruel at home – if he badgers his wife, or beats his children, or abuses

his  servants,  or  stabs  his  neighbours  with  shafts  of  bitter  sarcasm  what

hypocrisy is in his profession of love for suffering people who are outside the

immediate range of his influence! What shallow sentiment informs his bursts

of indignation against the injustice and hard heartedness in the world around

him.

  Says Emerson of such – “Go, love they infant; love thy wood chopper; be

good  natured  and  modest;  have  that  grace;  and  never  varnish  your  hard

uncharitable  ambition  with  this  incredible  tenderness  for  black  folk  a

thousand miles off. They love afar is spite at home”. The test of a man is in

his  immediate  acts,  and  not  in  ultra  sentiments;  and  if  those  acts  are

consistently informed with selfishness and bitterness, if those at home hear

his steps with dread, and feel a joyful relief on his departure, how empty are

his expressions of sympathy for the suffering or down trodden how futile his

membership of a philanthropic society.

  Though the well of sympathy may feed the spring of tears, that spring

more  often  draws  its  supply  from  the  dark  pool  of  selfishness,  for  when

selfishness is thwarted it spends itself in tears.

    Sympathy is a deep, silent, inexpressible tenderness which is shown in a

consistently  self  forgetful  gentle  character.  Sympathetic  people  are  not

gushing  and  spasmodic,  but  are  permanently  self  restrained,  firm,  quiet,unassuming and gracious. Their undisturbed demeanour, where the suffering

of others is concerned, is frequently mistaken for indifference by shallow

minds,  but  the  sympathetic  and  discerning  eye  recognizes,  in  their  quiet

strength and their swiftness to aid while others are sweeping, and wronging

their hands, the deepest, soundest sympathy.

  Lack  of  sympathy  is  shown  in  cynicism,  ill-natured  sarcasm,  bitter

ridicule, taunting and mockery, and anger and condemnation, as well as in

that morbid and false sentiment which is a theoretical and assumed sympathy,

having no basis in practice.

  Lack of sympathy arises in egotism; sympathy arises in love. Egotism is

involved in ignorance; love is allied to knowledge. It is common with men to

imagine themselves as separate from their fellows, with separate aims and

interests;  and  to  regard  themselves  as  right  and  others  wrong  in  their

respective ways. Sympathy lifts a man above this separate and self-centred

life and enables him to live in the hearts of his fellows, and to think and feel

with them. He puts himself in their place, and becomes, for the time being, as

they are. As Whitman, the hospital hero, expresses it – “I do not ask the

wounded  person.”  It  is  a  kind  of  impertinence  to  question  a  suffering

creature. Suffering calls for aid and tenderness, and not for curiosity; and the

sympathetic  man  or  woman  feels  the  suffering,  and  ministers  to  its

alleviation.

  Nor can sympathy boast, and wherever self-praise enters in, sympathy

passes out. If one speaks of his many deeds of kindness, and complains of the

ill treatment he has received in return, he has not done kindly deeds, but has

yet to reach that self forgetful modest which is the sweetness of sympathy.

  Sympathy, in its real and profound sense, is oneness with others in their

strivings and sufferings, so that the man of sympathy is a composite being; he

is, as it were, a number of men, and he views a thing from a number of

different sides, and not from one side only, and that his own particular side.

He sees with the others men’s eyes, hears with their ears, thinks with their

minds, and feels with their hearts. He is thus able to understand men who are

vastly different from himself; the meaning of their lives is revealed to him,

and he is united to them in the spirit of goodwill. Said Balzac – “The poor

fascinate me; their hunger is my hunger; I am with them in their homes; their

privations I suffer; I feel the beggar’s rags upon my back; I for the time beingbecome the poor and despised man.” It reminds us of the saying of One

greater than Balzac, that a deed done for a suffering little one was done for

him.

  And  so  it  is;  sympathy  leads  us  to  the  hearts  of  all  men,  so  that  we

become spiritually united to them, and when they suffer we feel the pain;

when  they  are  glad  we  rejoice  with  them;  when  they  are  despised  and

persecuted, we spiritually descend with them into the depths, and take into

our hearts their humiliation and distress; and he who has this binding, uniting

spirit of sympathy, can never be cynical and condemnatory can never pass

thoughtless and cruel judgements upon his fellows; because in his tenderness

of heart he is ever with them in their pain.

  But to have reached this ripened sympathy, it must needs be that one has

loved much, suffered much and sounded the dark depths of sorrow. It springs

from acquaintance with the profoundest experiences, so that a man has ad

conceit, thoughtlessness, and selfishness burnt out of his heart. No man can

have true sympathy who has not been, in some measure at least, “a man of

sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief,”  but  the  sorrow  and  grief  must  have

passed, must have ripened into a fixed kindness and habitual calm.

  To  have  suffered  so  much  in  a  certain  direction  that  the  suffering  is

finished, and only its particular wisdom remains, enables one, wherever that

suffering presents itself, to understand and deal with it by pure sympathy; and

when one has been “perfected by suffering” in many directions, he becomes a

centre  of  rest  and  healing  for  the  sorrowing  and  broken  hearted  who  are

afflicted with the affections which he has experienced and conquered. As a

mother feels the anguish of her suffering child, so the man of sympathy feels

the anguish of suffering men.

  Such  is  the  highest  and  holiest  sympathy,  but  a  sympathy  much  less

perfect  is  a  great  power  for  good  in  human  life  and  a  measure  of  it  is

everywhere and every day needed. While rejoicing in the fact that in every

walk  in  life  there  are  truly  sympathetic  people,  one  also  perceives  that

harshness, resentment, and cruelty are all too common. These hard qualities

bring their own sufferings, and there are those who fail in their business, or

particular work, entirely because of the harshness of their disposition. A man

who is fiery and resentful, or who is hard, cold and calculating, with the

springs of sympathy dried up within him, even though he be otherwise anable man, will, in the end scarcely avoid disaster in his affairs. His heated

folly in the one case, or cold cruelty in the other, will gradually isolate him

from his fellows and from those who are immediately related to him in his

particular avocation, so that the elements of prosperity will be eliminated

from  his  life,  leaving  him  with  a  lonely  failure,  and  perhaps  a  hopeless

despair.

  Even in ordinary business transactions, sympathy is an important factor,

for people will always be attracted to those who are of a kindly and genial

nature, preferring to deal with them rather than with those who are hard and

forbidding. In all spheres where direct personal contact plays an important

part, the sympathetic man with average ability will always take precedence of

the man of greater ability but who is unsympathetic.

  If a man be a minister or a clergyman, a cruel laugh or an unkind sentence

from him will seriously injure his reputation and influence, but particularly

his influence, for even they who admire his good qualities will, through his

unkindness,  unconsciously  have  a  lower  regard  for  him  in  their  personal

esteem.

  If a business man profess religion, people will expect to see the good

influence of that religion on his business transactions. To profess to be a

worshipper of the gentle Jesus on Sunday, and all the rest of the wee be a

hard,  grasping  worshipper  of  mammon,  will  injure  his  trade,  and  detract

considerably from his prosperity.

    Sympathy is a universal spiritual language which all, even the animals,

instinctively  understand  and  appreciate,  for  all  beings  and  creatures  are

subject to suffering, and this sameness of painful experience leads to that

unity of feeling which we call sympathy.

    Selfishness impels men to protect themselves at the expense of others; but

sympathy impels them to protect others by the sacrifice of self; and in this

sacrifice of self there is no real and ultimate loss, for while the pleasure of

selfishness  are  small  and  few,  the  blessings  of  sympathy  are  great  and

manifold.

  It may be asked, “How can a business man; whose object is to develop his

own trade, practice self-sacrifice?” Even man can practice self-sacrifice

just  where  he  is,  and  in  the  measure  that  he  is  capable  of

understand  it. If one contends that he cannot practice a virtue it, for werehis circumstances different, he would still have the same excuse. Diligence in

business is not incompatible with self-sacrifice, for devotion to duty, even

though  that  duty  be  trade,  is  not  selfishness,  but  may  be  an  unselfish

devotion. I know a business man who, when a competitor who had tried to

‘cut him out’ in business, cut himself out and failed, set that same competitor

up in business again. Truly a beautiful act of self-sacrifice; and the man that

did it is, today, one of the most successful and prosperous of business men.

  The  most  prosperous  commercial  traveller  I  have  ever  known,  was

overflowing with exuberant kindness and geniality. He was as innocent of all

“tricks  of  trade”  as  a  new  born  infant,  but  his  great  heart  and  manly

uprightness won for him fast friends wherever he went. Men were glad to see

him come into their office or shop or mill, and not alone for the good and

bracing influence he brought with him, but also because his business was

sound and trustworthy. This man was successful through sheer sympathy, but

sympathy so pure and free from policy, that he himself would probably have

denied that his success could be attributed to it. Sympathy can never hinder

success. It is selfishness that blights and destroys. As goodwill increases,

man’s  prosperity  will  increase.  All  interests  are  mutual,  and  stand  or  fall

together,  and  as  sympathy  expands  the  heart,  it  extends  the  circle  of

influence,  making  blessings,  both  spiritual  and  material,  to  more  greatly

abound.

    Fourfold are the qualities which make up the great virtue of sympathy,

namely:-

  1. Kindness

  2. Generosity

  3. Gentleness

  4. Insight

    Kindness, when  fully  developed,  is  not  a  passing  impulse  but  a

permanent quality. An intermittent and unreliable impulse is not kindness,

though it often goes under that name. There is no kindness in praise if it be

followed by abuse. The love which seems to prompt the spontaneous kiss will

be of little account if it be associated with a spontaneous spite. The gift which

seemed so gracious will lose its value should the giver afterwards wish its

value in return. To have one’s feelings aroused to do a kind action towards

another  by  some  external  stimulus  pleasing  to  one’s  self,  and  shortlyafterwards to be swayed to the other extreme towards the same person by an

external event unpleasing to one’s self, should be regarded as weakness of

character; and it is also a selfish condition, us, and when he pleases us, to be

thinking of one’s self only. A true kindness is unchangeable, and needs no

external stimulus to force it into action. It is a well from which thirsty souls

can always drink, and it never runs dry. Kindness, when it is a strong virtue,

is bestowed not only on those who please us, but also upon those whose

actions go contrary to our wish and will, and it is a constant and never –

varying glow of genial warmth.

  There are some actions of which men repent; such are all unkind actions.

There are other actions of which men do not repent, and such are all kind

actions. The day comes when men are sorry for the cruel things they said and

did; but the day of gladness is always with them for the kindly things they

have said and done.

    Unkindness mars a man’s character, it mars his face as time goes on, and

it mars that perfection of success which he would otherwise reach.

    Kindness beautifies the character, it beautifies the face with the growth of

the years, and it enables a man to reach that perfection of success to which

his  intellectual  abilities  entitle  him.  A  man’s  prosperity  is  mellowed  and

enriched by the kindness of his disposition.

    Generosity goes with a larger hearted kindness. If kindness be the gentle

sister,  Generosity  is  the  strong  brother.  A  free,  open  handed,  and

magnanimous character is always attractive and influential. Stringiness and

meanness always repel; they are dark, cramped, narrow, and cold. Kindness

and generosity always attack; they are sunny, genial, open, and warm. That

which repels makes for isolation and failure; that which attracts makes for

union and success.

    Giving is as important a duty as getting; and he who gets all he can, and

refuses to give, will at last be unable to get; for it is as much a spiritual law

that we cannot get unless we give, as that we cannot give unless we get.

    Giving has always been taught as a great and important duty by all the

religious teachers. This is because giving is one of the highways of personal

growth and progress. It is a means by which we attain to greater and greater

unselfishness, and by which we prevent the falling back into selfishness. It

implies that we recognize our spiritual and social kinship with our fellow-men, and are willing to part with a portion of that we have earned or possess,

for man who, the more he gets, hungers for more still, and refuses to loosen

his  grasp  upon  his  accumulating  store,  like  a  wild  beast  with  its  prey,  is

retrogressing; he is shutting himself out from all the higher and joy giving

qualities, and from free and life giving communion with unselfish, happy

human  hearts.  Dickens’s  Scrooge  in  “A  Christmas  Carol”  represents  the

condition of such a man with graphic vividness and dramatic force.

  Our public men in England to-day (probably also in America) are nearly

all (I think I might say all, for I have not yet met an exception) great givers.

These men – Lord Mayors, Mayors, Magistrates, Town and City Councillors,

and all men filling responsible public offices – being men who have been

singularly  successful  in  the  management  of  their  own  private  affairs,  are

considered the best men for the management of public affairs, and numerous

noble  institutions  throughout  the  land  are  perpetual  witnesses  to  the

munificence of their gifts. Nor have I been able to find any substantial truth

in  the  accusation,  so  often  hurled  against  such  men  by  the  envious  and

unsuccessful, that their riches are made unjustly. Without being perfect men,

they are an honourable class of manly, vigorous, generous, and successful

men, who have acquired riches and honour by sheer industry, ability and

uprightness.

  Let  a  man  beware  of  greed,  of  meanness,  of  envy,  of  jealousy,  of

suspicion, for these things, if harboured, will rob him of all that is best in life,

aye, even all that is best in material things, as well as all that is best in

character and happiness. Let him be liberal of heart and generous of hand,

magnanimous  and  trusting,  not  only  giving  cheerfully  and  often  of  his

substance, but allowing his friends and fellow-men freedom of thought and

action  –  let  him  be  thus,  and  honour,  plenty,  and  prosperity  will  come

knocking at the door for admittance as his friends and guests.

    Gentleness is akin to divinity. Perhaps no quality is so far removed from

all  that  is  coarse,  brutal  and  selfish  as  gentleness,  so  that  when  one  is

becoming gentle, he is becoming divine. It can only be acquired after much

experience and through great self-discipline. It only becomes established in a

man’s heart when he has controlled and brought into subjection his animal

voice, a distinct, firm, but quiet enunciation, and freedom from excitement,

vehemence, or resentment in peculiarly aggravating circumstances.  If  there  is  one  quality  which,  above  all  others,  should  distinguish  the

religious man, it is the quality of gentleness, for it is the hall mark of spiritual

culture.  The  rudely  aggressive  man  is  an  affront  to  cultivated  minds  and

unselfish hearts. Our word gentlemen has not altogether departed from its

original meaning. It is still applied to one who is modest and self-restrained,

and is considerate for the feelings and welfare of others. A gentle man one

whose  good  behaviour  is  prompted  by  thoughtfulness  and  kindliness  is

always  loved,  whatever  may  be  his  origin.  Quarrelsome  people  make  a

display in their bickering and recriminations – of their ignorance and lack of

culture. The man who has perfected himself in gentleness never quarrels. He

never returns the hard word; he leaves it alone, or meets it with a gentle word

which is far more powerful than wrath. Gentleness is wedded to wisdom, and

the wise man has overcome all anger in himself, and so understands how to

overcome it in others. The gentleman is saved from most of the disturbances

and turmoil’s with which uncontrolled men afflict themselves. While they are

wearing themselves out with wasteful and needless strain, he is quiet and

composed, and such quietness and composure are strong to win in the battle

of life.

    Insight is the gift of sympathy. The sympathetic mind is the profoundly

perceiving mind. We understand by experience, and not by argument. Before

we can know a thing or being, our life must touch its or his life. Argument

analyzes the outer skin, but sympathy reaches to the heart. The cynic sees the

hat and coat, and thinks he sees the man. The sympathetic seer sees the man,

and is not concerned with the hat and coat. In all kinds of hatred there is a

separation by which each misjudges the other. In all kinds of love there is a

mystic union by which each knows the other. Sympathy, being the purest

form of this the greatest poet because he has the largest heart. No other figure

in all literature has shown such a profound knowledge of the human heart,

and of nature both animate and inanimate. The personal Shakespeare is not

to be found in his works; he is merged, by sympathy, into his characters. The

wise man and the philosopher; the madman and the fool; the drunkard and the

harlot – these he, for the time into their particular experiences and knew them

better  than  they  knew  themselves.  Shakespeare  has  no  partiality,  no

prejudice; his sympathy embraces all, from the lowest to the highest.

    Prejudice is the great barrier to sympathy and knowledge. It is impossible