 


                        JAMES ALLEN


 


                21 BOOK COMPLETE


            PREMIUM COLLECTION

 

                                1. As A Man Thinketh

    2. From Poverty To Power; Or, The Realization Of Prosperity

                      And Peace. The Path Of Prosperity

                                3. The Way Of Peace

                            4. All These Things Added.

                            5. Byways Of Blessedness.

                            6. The Mastery Of Destiny.

                              7. The Life Triumphant:

                          Mastering The Heart And Mind.

                          8. Eight Pillars Of Prosperity.

              9. Foundation Stones To Happiness And Success.

                              10. Above Life’s Turmoil.

                            11. From Passion To Peace.

            12. Man: King Of Mind, Body, And Circumstance.

                          13. Light On Life’s Difficulties

                                14. Men And Systems.

                              15. The Shining Gateway

                              16. Out From The Heart.

        17. Through The Gates Of Good, Or Christ And Conduct.                            18. The Divine Companion.

                      19. Morning And Evening Thoughts.

    20. James Allen’s Book Of Meditations For Every Day In The

                                          Year.

                                  21. Poems Of Peace

 

V. 10-2015

 

®Copyright to the TIMELESS WISDOM COLLECTION:

  ® 2014 Business and Leadership Publishing,

  All rights Reserved

  No part of this book could be condensed or reproduced without the permit

of the author.

  Published by Business and Leadership Publishing.

      BANDLPUBLISHERS@GMAIL.COM

  This book is a product of its time and do not necessarily reflect the same

views on race, gender, sexuality, ethnicity, and interpersonal relations as it

would if it was written today.

  We strive to produce high quality books, free of typos. However, please let

us know if you find problems in this book, so we can correct them and keep

producing  better  and  better  books.  Please  remember  that,  in  the  case  of

British authors, there are words that are spelled differently (humor-humour;

realize-realise, etc.).            THE TIMELESS WISDOM


                            COLLECTION

  Ralph Waldo Emerson once said:

    “Consider what you have in the smallest chosen library. A company of

the wisest and wittiest men that could be picked out of all civil countries in a

thousand  years,  have  set  in  best  order  the  results  of  their  learning  and

wisdom.

  The  men  themselves  were  hid  and  inaccessible,  solitary,  impatient  of

interruptions, fenced by etiquette; but the thought which they did not uncover

to  their  bosom  friend  is  here  written  out  in  transparent  words  to  us,  the

strangers of another age.”

  TWC is YOUR small library.  An amazing collection of thousands of

individual books and anthologies, covering the best of the best in fiction and

non-fiction: the greatest works of the 19th and 20th Century, written by men

and  women  whose  lives  were  committed  to  enlighten  the  world  with  the

wisdom of the ages.

  It  features  the  best  self-development  and  positive-thinking  authors,

powerful  names  as  Napoleon  Hill,  Dale  Carnegie,  Charles  A.  Haanel,

William  Walker  Atkinson,  Orison  Swett  Marden,  Wallace  Wattles,  James

Allen,  Christian  D  Larson,  Ernest  Holmes,  Ralph  Waldo  Trine,  Elizabeth

Towne, Florence Scovell-Shinn, Charles Fillmore, and many more.

  Also, the greatest classic and modern literature represented by names as

Ernest Hemingway, William Faulkner, H. G. Wells, Arthur Conan Doyle,

George Orwell, Edgar Rice Burroughs, Aldous Huxley, C. S. Lewis, Charles

Williams, E. Phillips Oppenheim, E. M. Delafield, Louisa May Alcott, Mark

Twain, J. M. Barrie, Rafael Sabatini, H. Rider Haggard, G. K. Chesterton,

Edgar Wallace, Lucy Maud Montgomery and dozens more… Authors who

have enriched our lives and forever enlarged our capacity to dream, to get

enamoured by the characters, to suffer their pain and their tragedies, and to

enjoy their triumphs as if they were ours; as if they were true…

  The  collection  is  rounded  with  the  work  of  leading  psychologists  asSigmund  Freud,  Carl  Jung,  Emile  Coué,  Isador  Coriat  and  Alfred  Adler;

prominent  modern  philosophers  as  Bertrand  Russell  and  Alfred  North

Whitehead; authors of theosophy and eastern philosophies as Annie Besant,

William Judge, Charles Leadbeater, A. P. Sinnet, and Stewart Edward White;

extraordinary  scientist  as  Charles  Galton  Darwin,  Sir  Arthur  Stanley

Eddington and J.W.Dunne; successful industrialists that changed our modern

world as Henry Ford, Andrew Carnegie and Charles Schwab; and brilliant

Economists that shaped our future as John Maynard Keynes.

  In thousands of masterpieces these writers brilliantly captured the essence

of life and success in its different manifestations.

    Carefully selected, TWC is placing in your hands the best collection in

personal and mind-development in existence. The results of the learning and

wisdom of the greatest minds, set in best order, as Emerson would say.

  These books are for enlightenment, for learning, for illumination. They

will provide the seeker –the one who is ready and is paying attention–, some

of the deepest answers to life.

                                                              Mauricio Chaves-Mesén

                                                                  Best Selling author of

                                                    12 Laws of Great Entrepreneurs;

                                                    Think Success (Yes! To Success)

                                                                and the series of novels

                                                        The Knights of Nostradamus          A FEW OF OUR MANY GREAT PREMIUM


                                  COLLECTIONS:


                        George Orwell 48 works collection

                        Aldous Huxley 7 book Collection

                C.S.Lewis Chronicles of Narnia 7 book Collection

                      Ernest Hemingway 7 book Collection

        E.M.Delafield. Complete Provincial Lady Collection (5 novels)

F.Scott Fitzgerald. Premium 9 Book collection (His 5 novels plus dozens of

                                      short stories)

                  William Faulkner Premium 7 novel collection

                    James Joyce Complete 8 Book Collection

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle: The Complete Sherlock Holmes novels and stories.

L. M. Montgomery: Anne Of Green Gables Premium Collection: 8 Novels

                  Charles Williams Premium 7 novel collection

            Maurice Le Blanc: Arsene Lupin Collection: 9 novels

                  Jack London Premium 10 Novel collection

                  Dorothy Sayers Premium 7 novel collection

                Theodore Dreiser Premium Non Fiction (5 books)

                  Stephen Leacock 12 Book Humor Collection

                            Sinclair Lewis Novels 1 to 7

                  Sinclair Lewis Novels 8 to 12 + 4 short stories

                Sinclair Lewis Novels 13 to 18 + 8 short stories

                Sherwood Anderson Premium Collection 8 Books

                          E. H. Young 5 novel Collection

    Robert E. Howard The Complete Conan The Barbarian (18 Books)

                    Willa Cather Premium 7-Book Collection.

    John Carter Mars Stories: Premium 11 Novel Collection (Edgar Rice

                                      Burroughs)Tarzan of the Apes: Premium 8 Novel Collection (Edgar Rice Burroughs)

      (and hundreds of individual titles from these and other authors)

 

                                    NON FICTION

                  Wallace D. Wattles Premium 9 book collection

                    Charles Haanel Premium 5 book collection

                      C.S.Lewis Christian 9 book Collection

  Mysticism and Practical Mysticism: Evelyn Underhill 7 book Collection

The Dale Carnegie Trilogy: How to Win Friends, How to Stop Worrying; Art

                                of Public Speaking

                    James Allen 21 book Complete Collection

 

For titles available in your country please search for “TIMELESS WISDOM

COLLECTION” in your AMAZON site; or check the list at the end of this

volume.                                  CONTENTS


        INTRODUCTION TO THE TIMELESS WISDOM COLLECTION

 

                                        BOOK ONE

                                AS A MAN THINKETH

                                        FOREWORD

                                1. Thought And Character

                      2. Effect Of Thought On Circumstances

                  3. Effect Of Thought On Health And The Body

                                4. Thought And Purpose

                        5. The Thought-Factor In Achievement

                                  6. Visions And Ideals

                                        7. Serenity

 

                                        BOOK TWO

      FROM POVERTY TO POWER; OR, THE REALIZATION OF

                            PROSPERITY AND PEACE.

                            THE PATH OF PROSPERITY

                                          Foreword

                                  The path of prosperity

                                  1. The lesson of evil

                        2. The world a reflex of mental states

                      3. The way out of undesirable conditions

      4. The silent power of thought: controlling and directing one’s forces

                      5. The secret of health, success and power

                        6. The secret of abounding happiness

                            7. The realization of prosperity

 

                                      BOOK THREE                                THE WAY OF PEACE

                              1. The Power Of Meditation

                                    2. Star Of Wisdom

                        3. The Two Masters, Self And Truth

                      4. The Acquirement Of Spiritual Power

                          5. The Realization Of Selfless Love

                              6. Entering Into The Infinite

              7. Saints, Sages, And SAVIOURS: The Law Of Service

                          8. The Realization Of Perfect Peace

 

                                      BOOK FOUR

                                All These Things Added.

                                          Foreword

                            Part I: Entering the Kingdom

                                1. The Soul’s Great Need

                  2. The Competitive Laws and the Law of Love

                              3. The Finding of a Principle

                  4. At Rest in the Kingdom and All Things Added

                              Part II: The Heavenly Life

                                  1. The Divine Centre

                                  2. The Eternal Now

                              3. The "Original Simplicity"

                                4. The Unfailing Wisdom

                              5. The Might Of Meekness

                                  6. The Righteous Man

                                      7. Perfect Love

                                    8. Perfect Freedom

                              9. Greatness And Goodness

                                10. Heaven In The Heart

 

 

                                        BOOK FIVE                            BYWAYS OF BLESSEDNESS.

                                          Foreword

                                  1. Right Beginnings

                                2. Small Tasks and Duties

                    3. Transcending Difficulties and Perplexities

                                  4. Burden-Dropping

                                  5. Hidden Sacrifices

                                        6. Sympathy

                                      7. Forgiveness

                                    8. Seeing No Evil

                                      9. Abiding Joy

                                      10. Silentness

                                        11. Solitude

                                    12. Standing Alone

                    13. Understanding the Simple Laws of Life

                                    14. Happy Endings

 

 

                                        BOOK SIX

                                The Mastery of Destiny.

                    1. DEEDS, CHARACTER, AND DESTINY

                      2. THE SCIENCE OF SELF-CONTROL

                        3. Cause and Effect in Human Conduct

                                  4. Training of the Will

                                  5. THOROUGHNESS

                  6. MIND-BUILDING AND LIFE-BUILDING

                    7. CULTIVATION OF CONCENTRATION

                                8. Practice of Meditation

                                9. The Power of Purpose

                            10. The Joy of Accomplishment

 

                                       BOOK SEVEN

                              THE LIFE TRIUMPHANT:

                      MASTERING THE HEART AND MIND.

                                          Foreword

                                  1. Faith And Courage

                      2. Manliness, Womanliness And Sincerity

                                  3. Energy And Power

                            4. Self-Control And Happiness

                              5. Simplicity And Freedom

                            6. Right Thinking And Repose

                              7. Calmness And Resource

                                8. Insight And Nobility

                                    9. Man The Master

                              10. Knowledge And Victory

 

 

                                      BOOK EIGHT

                              Eight pillars of prosperity.

                                          Preface

                                      1. Eight Pillars

                                2. First Pillar – Energy

                              3. Second Pillar – Economy

                                4. Third Pillar – Integrity

                                5. Fourth Pillar – System

                                6. Fifth Pillar – Sympathy

                                7. Sixth Pillar – Sincerity

                            8. Seventh Pillar – Impartiality

                            9. Eighth Pillar – Self-Reliance

                            10. The Temple Of Prosperity

 

 

                                        BOOK NINE          FOUNDATION STONES TO HAPPINESS AND SUCCESS.

                                      Editor’s preface

                                        FOREWORD

                                    1. Right Principles

                                    2. Sound Methods

                                      3. True actions

                                      4. True Speech

                                  5. Equal-Mindedness

                                      6. Good Results

 

 

                                        BOOK TEN

                                  Above Life’s Turmoil.

                                          Foreword

                                    1. True Happiness

                                  2. The Immortal Man

                              3. The Overcoming of Self

                              4. The Uses of Temptation

                                5. The Man of Integrity

                                    6. Discrimination

                              7. Belief, the Basis of Action

                                8. The Belief that Saves

                                  9. Thought and Action

                                10. Your Mental Attitude

                                11. Sowing and Reaping

                                  12. The Reign of Law

                                13. The Supreme Justice

                                  14. The Use of Reason

                                    15. Self-Discipline

                                      16. Resolution

                              17. The Glorious Conquest

                              18. Contentment in Activity                            19. The Temple of Brotherhood

                            20. Pleasant Pastures of Peace

 

 

                                      BOOK ELEVEN

                                  From Passion to Peace.

                                          Foreword

                                        1. Passion

                                      2. Aspiration

                                      3. Temptation

                                    4. Transmutation

                                    5. Transcendence

                                        6. Beatitude

                                          7. Peace

 

 

                                    BOOK TWELVE

          MAN: KING OF MIND, BODY, AND CIRCUMSTANCE.

                                          Foreword

                            1. The inner world of thoughts

                              2. The outer world of things

                          3. Habit: its slavery and its freedom

                                  4. Bodily conditions

                                        5. Poverty

                              6. Man’s spiritual dominion

                              7. Conquest: not resignation

 

 

                                    BOOK THIRTEEN

                        LIGHT ON LIFE’S DIFFICULTIES

                                          Foreword

                      1. The Light That Leads to Perfect Peace                          2. Light on Facts and Hypotheses

              3. Light on the Law of Cause and Effect in Human Life

                    4. Light on Values— Spiritual and Material

                          5. Light on the Sense of Proportion

                          6. Light on Adherence to Principle

                          7. Light on the Sacrifice of the Self

                      8. Light on the Management of the Mind

                    9. Light on Self-Control: The Door of Heaven

                      10. Light on Acts and Their Consequences

                            11. Light on the Way of Wisdom

                                12. Light on Disposition

                            13. Light on Individual Liberty

                  14. Light on the Blessing and Dignity of Work

                    15. Light on Good Manners and Refinement

                          16. Light on Diversities of Creeds

                            17. Light on Law and Miracle

                              18. Light on War and Peace

                        19. Light on the Brotherhood of Man

                              20. Light on Life’s Sorrows

                              21. Light on Life’s Changes

                        22. Light on the Truth of Transitoriness

                          23. The Light That Never Goes Out

 

 

                                  BOOK FOURTEEN

                                MEN AND SYSTEMS.

                                        Introduction

                                  1. Men and systems

                        Their correlations and combined results

                            2. Work, wages, and well-being

                    3. The survival of the fittest as a divine law

                                      4. Justice in evil                                    5. Justice and love

                    6. Self-protection: animal, human, and divine

                        7. Aviation and the new consciousness

                                  8. The new courage

 

 

                                    BOOK FIFTEEN

                              THE SHINING GATEWAY

                                    Editor’s foreword

                        1. The shining gateway of meditation

                                      2. Temptation

                                      3. Regeneration

                                4. Actions and motives

                                5. Morality and religion

                            6. Memory, repetition, and habit

                                  7. Words and wisdom

                                8. Truth made manifest

                                  9. Spiritual humility

                                  10. Spiritual strength

 

 

                                    BOOK SIXTEEN

                              OUT FROM THE HEART.

                                1. The Heart and The Life

                          2. The Nature and Power of Mind

                                  3. Formation of Habit

                                4. Doing and Knowing

                            5. First Steps in The Higher Life

                        6. Mental Conditions and Their Effects

                                      7. Exhortation

 

                                   BOOK SEVENTEEN

            THROUGH THE GATES OF GOOD, OR CHRIST AND

                                      CONDUCT.

                                        Introduction

                              1. The Gate And The Way

                            2. The Law And The Prophets

                            3. The Yoke And The Burden

                              4. The Word And The Doer

                            5. The Vine And The Branches

                                  6. Salvation This Day

 

 

                                      SECOND PART

          BOOKS OF POEMS, MEDITATIONS AND THOUGHTS

 

 

                                    BOOK EIGHTEEN

                            THE DIVINE COMPANION.

                                          Foreword

                            Part I: The Divine Companion

                                    Truth as Awakener

                                    Truth as Consoler

                                    Truth as Redeemer

                                    Truth as Reconciler

                                    Truth as Protector

                              Part II: The Divine Dialogue

                                          Salutation

                              1. Of Seeking and Finding

                                2. Of Entering the Way

                            3. Of Discipline and Purification

                                    4. Of Renunciation

                                  5. Of Purity of Heart                                  6. Of Righteousness

                              7. Of Knowledge of the Law

                                        Benediction

                            Part III: The Divine Messages

                      The First Prophecy, called the Awakening

                      The Second Prophecy, called the Messiah

                      The Third prophecy, called the All - One

                          The Fourth Prophecy, called Unrest

                        The Fifth Prophecy, called Transition

                          The Sixth Prophecy, called Peace

                      The First Exhortation, concerning Purity

                    The Second Exhortation, concerning Humility

                      The Third Exhortation, concerning Love

                          Instruction, concerning the Master

                            Instruction, concerning the Law

                      Instruction, concerning The Great Reality

                      Discourse Concerning The Way of Truth

                                    1. Self - Restraint

                                  2. Self-Examination

                                    3. Self - Surrender

 

 

                                    BOOK NINETEEN

                            Morning and evening thoughts.

                                      First Morning

                                      First Evening

                                      Second Morning

                                      Second Evening

                                      Third Morning

                                      Third Evening

                                      Fourth Morning

                                      Fourth Evening                                      Fifth Morning

                                      Fifth Evening

                                      Sixth Morning

                                      Sixth Evening

                                      Seventh Morning

                                      Seventh Evening

                                      Eighth Morning

                                      Eighth Evening

                                      Ninth Morning

                                      Ninth Evening

                                      Tenth Morning

                                      Tenth Evening

                                    Eleventh Morning

                                      Eleventh Evening

                                    Twelfth Morning

                                      Twelfth Evening

                                    Thirteenth Morning

                                    Thirteenth Evening

                                    Fourteenth Morning

                                    Fourteenth Evening

                                    Fifteenth Morning

                                    Fifteenth Evening

                                    Sixteenth Morning

                                    Sixteenth Evening

                                  Seventeenth Morning

                                  Seventeenth Evening

                                    Eighteenth Morning

                                    Eighteenth Evening

                                    Nineteenth Morning

                                    Nineteenth Evening

                                    Twentieth Morning

                                    Twentieth Evening                                  Twenty-First Morning

                                    Twenty-First Evening

                                  Twenty-Second Evening

                                  Twenty-Third Morning

                                  Twenty-Third Evening

                                  Twenty-Fourth Morning

                                  Twenty-Fourth Evening

                                  Twenty-Fifth Morning

                                  Twenty-Fifth Evening

                                  Twenty-Sixth Morning

                                  Twenty-Sixth Evening

                                  Twenty-Seventh Morning

                                  Twenty-Seventh Evening

                                  Twenty-Eighth Morning

                                  Twenty-Eighth Evening

                                  Twenty-Ninth Morning

                                  Twenty-Ninth Evening

                                    Thirtieth Morning

                                    Thirtieth Evening

                                    Thirty-First Morning

                                    Thirty-First Evening

 

 

                                    BOOK TWENTY

    JAMES ALLEN’S BOOK OF MEDITATIONS FOR EVERY DAY

                                  IN THE YEAR.

                                      Editor’s preface

                                        JANUARY

                                        FEBRUARY

                                          MARCH

                                            APRIL

                                            MAY                                            JUNE

                                            JULY

                                          AUGUST

                                        SEPTEMBER

                                        OCTOBER

                                        NOVEMBER

                                        DECEMBER

 

 

                                BOOK TWENTY ONE

                                  POEMS OF PEACE

                            Eolaus. A lyrical dramatic poem

                                    Miscellaneous poems

                                          Buddha

                                If men only understood

                                  Practice and perception

                                            Liberty

                                    Long I sought thee

                                            Reality

                                  To-morrow and to-day

                                      Star of wisdom

                          Would you scale the highest heaven

                          To them that seek the highest good

                                    One thing lacking

                                            Yashas

                                      The lowly way

                                  The music of the sea

                                      Love’s conquest

                    To my daughter Nora on her tenth birthday

                                    The inward purity

                                        Self-sacrifice

                                  I take refuge in truth                                I, truth, am thy redeemer

                                      The white robe

                                    The righteous man

                                            Choice

                                    Truth triumphant

                              O thou who would’st teach!

                            If thou would’st right the world

                                    What of the night?

                                          Knowledge

                                      The end of evil

                                        Man divine

                                          Patience

                                          Restored

                              On releasing a captive bird

                                  Art thou in sorrow?

                                      When I am pure

                                        Immortality

                                    Are you searching?

 

 

                        TIMELESS WISDOM COLLECTION                                BOOK ONE


                  AS A MAN THINKETH

             Mind is the Master power that moulds and makes,

            And Man is Mind, and evermore he takes

            The tool of Thought, and, shaping what he wills,

            Brings forth a thousand joys, a thousand ills:—

            He thinks in secret, and it comes to pass:

            Environment is but his looking-glass.                                      FOREWORD


  THIS  little  volume  (the  result  of  meditation  and  experience)  is  not

intended as an exhaustive treatise on the much-written-upon subject of the

power of thought. It is suggestive rather than explanatory, its object being to

stimulate men and women to the discovery and perception of the truth that—

  "They themselves are makers of themselves."

  by virtue of the thoughts, which they choose and encourage; that mind is

the  master-weaver,  both  of  the  inner  garment  of  character  and  the  outer

garment  of  circumstance,  and  that,  as  they  may  have  hitherto  woven  in

ignorance and pain they may now weave in enlightenment and happiness.

  JAMES ALLEN. 

    BROAD PARK AVENUE, 

    ILFRACOMBE, ENGLAND            1. THOUGHT AND CHARACTER


  THE  aphorism,  "As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart  so  is  he,"  not  only

embraces the whole of a man's being, but is so comprehensive as to reach out

to every condition and circumstance of his life. A man is literally what he

thinks, his character being the complete sum of all his thoughts.

  As the plant springs from, and could not be without, the seed, so every act

of  a  man  springs  from  the  hidden  seeds  of  thought,  and  could  not  have

appeared  without  them.  This  applies  equally  to  those  acts  called

"spontaneous"  and  "unpremeditated"  as  to  those,  which  are  deliberately

executed.

  Act is the blossom of thought, and joy and suffering are its fruits; thus

does a man garner in the sweet and bitter fruitage of his own husbandry.

            "Thought in the mind hath made us, What we are

            By thought was wrought and built. If a man's mind

            Hath evil thoughts, pain comes on him as comes

            The wheel the ox behind....

            ..If one endure

            In purity of thought, joy follows him

            As his own shadow—sure."

  Man is a growth by law, and not a creation by artifice, and cause and

effect is as absolute and undeviating in the hidden realm of thought as in the

world of visible and material things. A noble and Godlike character is not a

thing of favour or chance, but is the natural result of continued effort in right

thinking, the effect of long-cherished association with Godlike thoughts. An

ignoble  and  bestial  character,  by  the  same  process,  is  the  result  of  the

continued harbouring of grovelling thoughts.

  Man is made or unmade by himself; in the armoury of thought he forges

the weapons by which he destroys himself; he also fashions the tools with

which he builds for himself heavenly mansions of joy and strength and peace.

By  the  right  choice  and  true  application  of  thought,  man  ascends  to  the

Divine  Perfection;  by  the  abuse  and  wrong  application  of  thought,  hedescends below the level of the beast. Between these two extremes are all the

grades of character, and man is their maker and master.

  Of all the beautiful truths pertaining to the soul which have been restored

and brought to light in this age, none is more gladdening or fruitful of divine

promise and confidence than this—that man is the master of thought, the

moulder of character, and the maker and shaper of condition, environment,

and destiny.

  As a being of Power, Intelligence, and Love, and the lord of his own

thoughts, man holds the key to every situation, and contains within himself

that transforming and regenerative agency by which he may make himself

what he wills.

  Man is always the master, even in his weaker and most abandoned state;

but in his weakness and degradation he is the foolish master who misgoverns

his "household." When he begins to reflect upon his condition, and to search

diligently for the Law upon which his being is established, he then becomes

the wise master, directing his energies with intelligence, and fashioning his

thoughts to fruitful issues. Such is the conscious master, and man can only

thus  become  by  discovering within  himself  the  laws  of  thought;  which

discovery is totally a matter of application, self-analysis, and experience.

  Only by much searching and mining, are gold and diamonds obtained,

and man can find every truth connected with his being, if he will dig deep

into  the  mine  of  his  soul;  and  that  he  is  the  maker  of  his  character,  the

moulder of his life, and the builder of his destiny, he may unerringly prove, if

he  will  watch,  control,  and  alter  his  thoughts,  tracing  their  effects  upon

himself, upon others, and upon his life and circumstances, linking cause and

effect  by  patient  practice  and  investigation,  and  utilizing  his  every

experience,  even  to  the  most  trivial,  everyday  occurrence,  as  a  means  of

obtaining  that  knowledge  of  himself  which  is  Understanding,  Wisdom,

Power. In this direction, as in no other, is the law absolute that "He that

seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened;" for only by

patience, practice, and ceaseless importunity can a man enter the Door of the

Temple of Knowledge.                    2. EFFECT OF THOUGHT ON


                            CIRCUMSTANCES


  MAN'S mind may be likened to a garden, which may be intelligently

cultivated or allowed to run wild; but whether cultivated or neglected, it must,

and will, bring forth. If no useful seeds are put into it, then an abundance of

useless weed-seeds will fall therein, and will continue to produce their kind.

  Just as a gardener cultivates his plot, keeping it free from weeds, and

growing the flowers and fruits which he requires, so may a man tend the

garden of his mind, weeding out all the wrong, useless, and impure thoughts,

and cultivating toward perfection the flowers and fruits of right, useful, and

pure thoughts. By pursuing this process, a man sooner or later discovers that

he is the master-gardener of his soul, the director of his life. He also reveals,

within himself, the laws of thought, and understands, with ever-increasing

accuracy, how the thought-forces and mind elements operate in the shaping

of his character, circumstances, and destiny.

  Thought and character are one, and as character can only manifest and

discover itself through environment and circumstance, the outer conditions of

a person's life will always be found to be harmoniously related to his inner

state. This does not mean that a man's circumstances at any given time are an

indication  of  his entire  character,  but  that  those  circumstances  are  so

intimately connected with some vital thought-element within himself that, for

the time being, they are indispensable to his development.

  Every man is where he is by the law of his being; the thoughts which he

has built into his character have brought him there, and in the arrangement of

his life there is no element of chance, but all is the result of a law which

cannot err. This is just as true of those who feel "out of harmony" with their

surroundings as of those who are contented with them.

  As a progressive and evolving being, man is where he is that he may learn

that  he  may  grow;  and  as  he  learns  the  spiritual  lesson  which  any

circumstance  contains  for  him,  it  passes  away  and  gives  place  to  other

circumstances.

  Man is buffeted by circumstances so long as he believes himself to be the

creature  of  outside  conditions,  but  when  he  realizes  that  he  is  a  creativepower, and that he may command the hidden soil and seeds of his being out

of which circumstances grow, he then becomes the rightful master of himself.

  That circumstances grow out of thought every man knows who has for

any length of time practised self-control and self-purification, for he will have

noticed that the alteration in his circumstances has been in exact ratio with his

altered mental condition. So true is this that when a man earnestly applies

himself to remedy the defects in his character, and makes swift and marked

progress, he passes rapidly through a succession of vicissitudes.

  The soul attracts that which it secretly harbours; that which it loves, and

also that which it fears; it reaches the height of its cherished aspirations; it

falls  to  the  level  of  its  unchastened  desires,—and  circumstances  are  the

means by which the soul receives its own.

  Every thought-seed sown or allowed to fall into the mind, and to take root

there, produces its own, blossoming sooner or later into act, and bearing its

own fruitage of opportunity and circumstance. Good thoughts bear good fruit,

bad thoughts bad fruit.

  The  outer  world  of  circumstance  shapes  itself  to  the  inner  world  of

thought,  and  both  pleasant  and  unpleasant  external  conditions  are  factors,

which make for the ultimate good of the individual. As the reaper of his own

harvest, man learns both by suffering and bliss.

  Following the inmost desires, aspirations, thoughts, by which he allows

himself  to  be  dominated,  (pursuing  the  will-o'-the-wisps  of  impure

imaginings  or  steadfastly  walking  the  highway  of  strong  and  high

endeavour), a man at last arrives at their fruition and fulfilment in the outer

conditions of his life. The laws of growth and adjustment everywhere obtains.

  A man does not come to the alms-house or the jail by the tyranny of fate

or circumstance, but by the pathway of grovelling thoughts and base desires.

Nor does a pure-minded man fall suddenly into crime by stress of any mere

external force; the criminal thought had long been secretly fostered in the

heart, and the hour of opportunity revealed its gathered power. Circumstance

does not make the man; it reveals him to himself No such conditions can

exist as descending into vice and its attendant sufferings apart from vicious

inclinations,  or  ascending  into  virtue  and  its  pure  happiness  without  the

continued cultivation of virtuous aspirations; and man, therefore, as the lord

and  master  of  thought,  is  the  maker  of  himself  the  shaper  and  author  ofenvironment. Even at birth the soul comes to its own and through every step

of its earthly pilgrimage it attracts those combinations of conditions which

reveal itself, which are the reflections of its own purity and, impurity, its

strength and weakness.

  Men do not attract that which they want, but that which they are. Their

whims, fancies, and ambitions are thwarted at every step, but their inmost

thoughts and desires are fed with their own food, be it foul or clean. The

"divinity  that  shapes  our  ends"  is  in  ourselves;  it  is  our  very  self.  Only

himself  manacles  man:  thought  and  action  are  the  gaolers  of  Fate—they

imprison, being base; they are also the angels of Freedom—they liberate,

being noble. Not what he wishes and prays for does a man get, but what he

justly earns. His wishes and prayers are only gratified and answered when

they harmonize with his thoughts and actions.

  In the light of this truth, what, then, is the meaning of "fighting against

circumstances?"  It  means  that  a  man  is  continually  revolting  against

an effect  without,  while  all  the  time  he  is  nourishing  and  preserving

its cause in his heart. That cause may take the form of a conscious vice or an

unconscious weakness; but whatever it is, it stubbornly retards the efforts of

its possessor, and thus calls aloud for remedy.

  Men  are  anxious  to  improve  their  circumstances,  but  are  unwilling  to

improve themselves; they therefore remain bound. The man who does not

shrink  from  self-crucifixion  can  never  fail  to  accomplish  the  object  upon

which his heart is set. This is as true of earthly as of heavenly things. Even

the man whose sole object is to acquire wealth must be prepared to make

great personal sacrifices before he can accomplish his object; and how much

more so he who would realize a strong and well-poised life?

  Here is a man who is wretchedly poor. He is extremely anxious that his

surroundings and home comforts should be improved, yet all the time he

shirks his work, and considers he is justified in trying to deceive his employer

on  the  ground  of  the  insufficiency  of  his  wages.  Such  a  man  does  not

understand the simplest rudiments of those principles which are the basis of

true prosperity, and is not only totally unfitted to rise out of his wretchedness,

but is actually attracting to himself a still deeper wretchedness by dwelling in,

and acting out, indolent, deceptive, and unmanly thoughts.

  Here is a rich man who is the victim of a painful and persistent disease asthe result of gluttony. He is willing to give large sums of money to get rid of

it, but he will not sacrifice his gluttonous desires. He wants to gratify his taste

for rich and unnatural viands and have his health as well. Such a man is

totally unfit to have health, because he has not yet learned the first principles

of a healthy life.

  Here is an employer of labour who adopts crooked measures to avoid

paying the regulation wage, and, in the hope of making larger profits, reduces

the wages of his workpeople. Such a man is altogether unfitted for prosperity,

and when he finds himself bankrupt, both as regards reputation and riches, he

blames circumstances, not knowing that he is the sole author of his condition.

  I have introduced these three cases merely as illustrative of the truth that

man  is  the  causer  (though  nearly  always  is  unconsciously)  of  his

circumstances,  and  that,  whilst  aiming  at  a  good  end,  he  is  continually

frustrating its accomplishment by encouraging thoughts and desires which

cannot possibly harmonize with that end. Such cases could be multiplied and

varied almost indefinitely, but this is not necessary, as the reader can, if he so

resolves, trace the action of the laws of thought in his own mind and life, and

until this is done, mere external facts cannot serve as a ground of reasoning.

    Circumstances, however, are so complicated, thought is so deeply rooted,

and the conditions of happiness vary so, vastly with individuals, that a man's

entire soul-condition (although it may be known to himself) cannot be judged

by another from the external aspect of his life alone. A man may be honest in

certain directions, yet suffer privations; a man may be dishonest in certain

directions, yet acquire wealth; but the conclusion usually formed that the one

man  fails because  of  his  particular  honesty,  and  that  the  other prospers

because of his particular dishonesty, is the result of a superficial judgment,

which  assumes  that  the  dishonest  man  is  almost  totally  corrupt,  and  the

honest man almost entirely virtuous. In the light of a deeper knowledge and

wider experience such judgment is found to be erroneous. The dishonest man

may have some admirable virtues, which the other does, not possess; and the

honest man obnoxious vices which are absent in the other. The honest man

reaps the good results of his honest thoughts and acts; he also brings upon

himself the sufferings, which his vices produce. The dishonest man likewise

garners his own suffering and happiness.

  It is pleasing to human vanity to believe that one suffers because of one'svirtue; but not until a man has extirpated every sickly, bitter, and impure

thought from his mind, and washed every sinful stain from his soul, can he be

in a position to know and declare that his sufferings are the result of his good,

and  not  of  his  bad  qualities;  and  on  the  way  to,  yet  long  before  he  has

reached, that supreme perfection, he will have found, working in his mind

and life, the Great Law which is absolutely just, and which cannot, therefore,

give good for evil, evil for good. Possessed of such knowledge, he will then

know, looking back upon his past ignorance and blindness, that his life is,

and always was, justly ordered, and that all his past experiences, good and

bad, were the equitable outworking of his evolving, yet unevolved self.

  Good thoughts and actions can never produce bad results; bad thoughts

and actions can never produce good results. This is but saying that nothing

can  come  from  corn  but  corn,  nothing  from  nettles  but  nettles.  Men

understand this law in the natural world, and work with it; but few understand

it in the mental and moral world (though its operation there is just as simple

and undeviating), and they, therefore, do not co-operate with it.

    Suffering is always the effect of wrong thought in some direction. It is an

indication that the individual is out of harmony with himself, with the Law of

his being. The sole and supreme use of suffering is to purify, to burn out all

that is useless and impure. Suffering ceases for him who is pure. There could

be  no  object  in  burning  gold  after  the  dross  had  been  removed,  and  a

perfectly pure and enlightened being could not suffer.

  The circumstances, which a man encounters with suffering, are the result

of his own mental inharmony. The circumstances, which a man encounters

with blessedness, are the result of his own mental harmony. Blessedness, not

material possessions, is the measure of right thought; wretchedness, not lack

of material possessions, is the measure of wrong thought. A man may be

cursed and rich; he may be blessed and poor. Blessedness and riches are only

joined together when the riches are rightly and wisely used; and the poor man

only descends into wretchedness when he regards his lot as a burden unjustly

imposed.

  Indigence and indulgence are the two extremes of wretchedness. They are

both equally unnatural and the result of mental disorder. A man is not rightly

conditioned  until  he  is  a  happy,  healthy,  and  prosperous  being;  and

happiness, health, and prosperity are the result of a harmonious adjustment ofthe inner with the outer, of the man with his surroundings.

  A man only begins to be a man when he ceases to whine and revile, and

commences to search for the hidden justice which regulates his life. And as

he adapts his mind to that regulating factor, he ceases to accuse others as the

cause of his condition, and builds himself up in strong and noble thoughts;

ceases to kick against circumstances, but begins to use them as aids to his

more rapid progress, and as a means of discovering the hidden powers and

possibilities within himself.

  Law, not confusion, is the dominating principle in the universe; justice,

not  injustice,  is  the  soul  and  substance  of  life;  and  righteousness,  not

corruption, is the moulding and moving force in the spiritual government of

the world. This being so, man has but to right himself to find that the universe

is right; and during the process of putting himself right he will find that as he

alters his thoughts towards things and other people, things and other people

will alter towards him.

  The proof of this truth is in every person, and it therefore admits of easy

investigation  by  systematic  introspection  and  self-analysis.  Let  a  man

radically  alter  his  thoughts,  and  he  will  be  astonished  at  the  rapid

transformation  it  will  effect  in  the  material  conditions  of  his  life.  Men

imagine that thought can be kept secret, but it cannot; it rapidly crystallizes

into habit, and habit solidifies into circumstance. Bestial thoughts crystallize

into habits of drunkenness and sensuality, which solidify into circumstances

of  destitution  and  disease:  impure  thoughts  of  every  kind  crystallize  into

enervating and confusing habits, which solidify into distracting and adverse

circumstances: thoughts of fear, doubt, and indecision crystallize into weak,

unmanly, and irresolute habits, which solidify into circumstances of failure,

indigence, and slavish dependence: lazy thoughts crystallize into habits of

uncleanliness and dishonesty, which solidify into circumstances of foulness

and beggary: hateful and condemnatory thoughts crystallize into habits of

accusation  and  violence,  which  solidify  into  circumstances  of  injury  and

persecution:  selfish  thoughts  of  all  kinds  crystallize  into  habits  of  self-

seeking, which solidify into circumstances more or less distressing. On the

other hand, beautiful thoughts of all kinds crystallize into habits of grace and

kindliness, which solidify into genial and sunny circumstances: pure thoughts

crystallize  into  habits  of  temperance  and  self-control,  which  solidify  intocircumstances of repose and peace: thoughts of courage, self-reliance, and

decision crystallize into manly habits, which solidify into circumstances of

success,  plenty,  and  freedom:  energetic  thoughts  crystallize  into  habits  of

cleanliness and industry, which solidify into circumstances of pleasantness:

gentle  and  forgiving  thoughts  crystallize  into  habits  of  gentleness,  which

solidify into protective and preservative circumstances: loving and unselfish

thoughts crystallize into habits of self-forgetfulness for others, which solidify

into circumstances of sure and abiding prosperity and true riches.

  A particular train of thought persisted in, be it good or bad, cannot fail to

produce  its  results  on  the  character  and  circumstances.  A  man

cannot directly choose his circumstances, but he can choose his thoughts, and

so indirectly, yet surely, shape his circumstances.

  Nature helps every man to the gratification of the thoughts, which he

most encourages, and opportunities are presented which will most speedily

bring to the surface both the good and evil thoughts.

  Let a man cease from his sinful thoughts, and all the world will soften

towards him, and be ready to help him; let him put away his weakly and

sickly thoughts, and lo, opportunities will spring up on every hand to aid his

strong resolves; let him encourage good thoughts, and no hard fate shall bind

him down to wretchedness and shame. The world is your kaleidoscope, and

the varying combinations of colours, which at every succeeding moment it

presents  to  you  are  the  exquisitely  adjusted  pictures  of  your  ever-moving

thoughts.

            "So You will be what you will to be;

            Let failure find its false content

            In that poor word, 'environment,'

            But spirit scorns it, and is free.

            "It masters time, it conquers space;

            It cowes that boastful trickster, Chance,

            And bids the tyrant Circumstance

              Uncrown, and fill a servant's place.

            "The human Will, that force unseen,

            The offspring of a deathless Soul,

            Can hew a way to any goal,            Though walls of granite intervene.

            "Be not impatient in delays

            But wait as one who understands;

            When spirit rises and commands

            The gods are ready to obey."          3. EFFECT OF THOUGHT ON HEALTH


                            AND THE BODY


  THE body is the servant of the mind. It obeys the operations of the mind,

whether  they  be  deliberately  chosen  or  automatically  expressed.  At  the

bidding of unlawful thoughts the body sinks rapidly into disease and decay;

at  the  command  of  glad  and  beautiful  thoughts  it  becomes  clothed  with

youthfulness and beauty.

  Disease  and  health,  like  circumstances,  are  rooted  in  thought.  Sickly

thoughts will express themselves through a sickly body. Thoughts of fear

have  been  known  to  kill  a  man  as  speedily  as  a  bullet,  and  they  are

continually killing thousands of people just as surely though less rapidly. The

people who live in fear of disease are the people who get it. Anxiety quickly

demoralizes the whole body, and lays it open to the entrance of disease; while

impure  thoughts,  even  if  not  physically  indulged,  will  soon  shatter  the

nervous system.

  Strong, pure, and happy thoughts build up the body in vigour and grace.

The body is a delicate and plastic instrument, which responds readily to the

thoughts by which it is impressed, and habits of thought will produce their

own effects, good or bad, upon it.

  Men will continue to have impure and poisoned blood, so long as they

propagate unclean thoughts. Out of a clean heart comes a clean life and a

clean body. Out of a defiled mind proceeds a defiled life and a corrupt body.

Thought is the fount of action, life, and manifestation; make the fountain

pure, and all will be pure.

  Change of diet will not help a man who will not change his thoughts.

When a man makes his thoughts pure, he no longer desires impure food.

  Clean thoughts make clean habits. The so-called saint who does not wash

his body is not a saint. He who has strengthened and purified his thoughts

does not need to consider the malevolent microbe.

  If you would protect your body, guard your mind. If you would renew

your body, beautify your mind. Thoughts of malice, envy, disappointment,

despondency, rob the body of its health and grace. A sour face does not come

by chance; it is made by sour thoughts. Wrinkles that mar are drawn by folly,passion, and pride.

  I know a woman of ninety-six who has the bright, innocent face of a girl.

I know a man well under middle age whose face is drawn into inharmonious

contours. The one is the result of a sweet and sunny disposition; the other is

the outcome of passion and discontent.

  As you cannot have a sweet and wholesome abode unless you admit the

air and sunshine freely into your rooms, so a strong body and a bright, happy,

or serene countenance can only result from the free admittance into the mind

of thoughts of joy and goodwill and serenity.

  On the faces of the aged there are wrinkles made by sympathy, others by

strong  and  pure  thought,  and  others  are  carved  by  passion:  who  cannot

distinguish  them?  With  those  who  have  lived  righteously,  age  is  calm,

peaceful, and softly mellowed, like the setting sun. I have recently seen a

philosopher on his deathbed. He was not old except in years. He died as

sweetly and peacefully as he had lived.

  There is no physician like cheerful thought for dissipating the ills of the

body;  there  is  no  comforter  to  compare  with  goodwill  for  dispersing  the

shadows  of  grief  and  sorrow.  To  live  continually  in  thoughts  of  ill  will,

cynicism, suspicion, and envy, is to be confined in a self-made prison-hole.

But to think well of all, to be cheerful with all, to patiently learn to find the

good in all—such unselfish thoughts are the very portals of heaven; and to

dwell  day  by  day  in  thoughts  of  peace  toward  every  creature  will  bring

abounding peace to their possessor.                    4. THOUGHT AND PURPOSE


  UNTIL  thought  is  linked  with  purpose  there  is  no  intelligent

accomplishment. With the majority the bark of thought is allowed to "drift"

upon the ocean of life. Aimlessness is a vice, and such drifting must not

continue for him who would steer clear of catastrophe and destruction.

  They who have no central purpose in their life fall an easy prey to petty

worries,  fears,  troubles,  and  self-pityings,  all  of  which  are  indications  of

weakness, which lead, just as surely as deliberately planned sins (though by a

different route), to failure, unhappiness, and loss, for weakness cannot persist

in a power evolving universe.

  A man should conceive of a legitimate purpose in his heart, and set out to

accomplish  it.  He  should  make  this  purpose  the  centralizing  point  of  his

thoughts. It may take the form of a spiritual ideal, or it may be a worldly

object,  according  to  his  nature  at  the  time  being;  but  whichever  it  is,  he

should steadily focus his thought-forces upon the object, which he has set

before  him.  He  should  make  this  purpose  his  supreme  duty,  and  should

devote himself to its attainment, not allowing his thoughts to wander away

into ephemeral fancies, longings, and imaginings. This is the royal road to

self-control  and  true  concentration  of  thought.  Even  if  he  fails  again  and

again to accomplish his purpose (as he necessarily must until weakness is

overcome),  the strength  of  character  gained  will  be  the  measure  of his

true success, and this will form a new starting-point for future power and

triumph.

  Those  who  are  not  prepared  for  the  apprehension  of  a great  purpose

should  fix  the  thoughts  upon  the  faultless  performance  of  their  duty,  no

matter how insignificant their task may appear. Only in this way can the

thoughts be gathered and focussed, and resolution and energy be developed,

which being done, there is nothing which may not be accomplished.

  The  weakest  soul,  knowing  its  own  weakness,  and  believing  this

truth that strength can only be developed by effort and practice, will, thus

believing, at once begin to exert itself, and, adding effort to effort, patience to

patience, and strength to strength, will never cease to develop, and will at last

grow divinely strong.

  As  the  physically  weak  man  can  make  himself  strong  by  careful  andpatient  training,  so  the  man  of  weak  thoughts  can  make  them  strong  by

exercising himself in right thinking.

  To  put  away  aimlessness  and  weakness,  and  to  begin  to  think  with

purpose, is to enter the ranks of those strong ones who only recognize failure

as one of the pathways to attainment; who make all conditions serve them,

and who think strongly, attempt fearlessly, and accomplish masterfully.

    Having  conceived  of  his  purpose,  a  man  should  mentally  mark  out

a straight pathway to its achievement, looking neither to the right nor the left.

Doubts  and  fears  should  be  rigorously  excluded;  they  are  disintegrating

elements, which break up the straight line of effort, rendering it crooked,

ineffectual,  useless.  Thoughts  of  doubt  and  fear  never  accomplished

anything, and never can. They always lead to failure. Purpose, energy, power

to do, and all strong thoughts cease when doubt and fear creep in.

  The will to do springs from the knowledge that we can do. Doubt and fear

are the great enemies of knowledge, and he who encourages them, who does

not slay them, thwarts himself at every step.

  He who has conquered doubt and fear has conquered failure. His every

thought is allied with power, and all difficulties are bravely met and wisely

overcome. His purposes are seasonably planted, and they bloom and bring

forth fruit, which does not fall prematurely to the ground.

  Thought  allied  fearlessly  to  purpose  becomes  creative  force:  he

who knows this is ready to become something higher and stronger than a

mere  bundle  of  wavering  thoughts  and  fluctuating  sensations;  he

who does this has become the conscious and intelligent wielder of his mental

powers.                  5. THE THOUGHT-FACTOR IN


                              ACHIEVEMENT


  ALL that a man achieves and all that he fails to achieve is the direct result

of his own thoughts. In a justly ordered universe, where loss of equipoise

would mean total destruction, individual responsibility must be absolute. A

man's  weakness  and  strength,  purity  and  impurity,  are  his  own,  and  not

another man's; they are brought about by himself, and not by another; and

they can only be altered by himself, never by another. His condition is also

his own, and not another man's. His suffering and his happiness are evolved

from within. As he thinks, so he is; as he continues to think, so he remains.

  A strong man cannot help a weaker unless that weaker is willing to be

helped, and even then the weak man must become strong of himself; he must,

by his own efforts, develop the strength which he admires in another. None

but himself can alter his condition.

  It has been usual for men to think and to say, "Many men are slaves

because one is an oppressor; let us hate the oppressor." Now, however, there

is amongst an increasing few a tendency to reverse this judgment, and to say,

"One man is an oppressor because many are slaves; let us despise the slaves."

  The truth is that oppressor and slave are co-operators in ignorance, and,

while seeming to afflict each other, are in reality afflicting themselves. A

perfect  Knowledge  perceives  the  action  of  law  in  the  weakness  of  the

oppressed and the misapplied power of the oppressor; a perfect Love, seeing

the  suffering,  which  both  states  entail,  condemns  neither;  a  perfect

Compassion embraces both oppressor and oppressed.

  He who has conquered weakness, and has put away all selfish thoughts,

belongs neither to oppressor nor oppressed. He is free.

  A man can only rise, conquer, and achieve by lifting up his thoughts. He

can only remain weak, and abject, and miserable by refusing to lift up his

thoughts.

  Before a man can achieve anything, even in worldly things, he must lift

his  thoughts  above  slavish  animal  indulgence.  He  may  not,  in  order  to

succeed, give up all animality and selfishness, by any means; but a portion of

it  must,  at  least,  be  sacrificed.  A  man  whose  first  thought  is  bestialindulgence could neither think clearly nor plan methodically; he could not

find and develop his latent resources, and would fail in any undertaking. Not

having commenced to manfully control his thoughts, he is not in a position to

control  affairs  and  to  adopt  serious  responsibilities.  He  is  not  fit  to  act

independently and stand alone. But he is limited only by the thoughts, which

he chooses.

  There can be no progress, no achievement without sacrifice, and a man's

worldly success will be in the measure that he sacrifices his confused animal

thoughts,  and  fixes  his  mind  on  the  development  of  his  plans,  and  the

strengthening of his resolution and self-reliance. And the higher he lifts his

thoughts, the more manly, upright, and righteous he becomes, the greater will

be his success, the more blessed and enduring will be his achievements.

  The  universe  does  not  favour  the  greedy,  the  dishonest,  the  vicious,

although on the mere surface it may sometimes appear to do so; it helps the

honest, the magnanimous, the virtuous. All the great Teachers of the ages

have declared this in varying forms, and to prove and know it a man has but

to  persist  in  making  himself  more  and  more  virtuous  by  lifting  up  his

thoughts.

    Intellectual  achievements  are  the  result  of  thought  consecrated  to  the

search for knowledge, or for the beautiful and true in life and nature. Such

achievements may be sometimes connected with vanity and ambition, but

they  are  not  the  outcome  of  those  characteristics;  they  are  the  natural

outgrowth of long and arduous effort, and of pure and unselfish thoughts.

  Spiritual achievements are the consummation of holy aspirations. He who

lives constantly in the conception of noble and lofty thoughts, who dwells

upon all that is pure and unselfish, will, as surely as the sun reaches its zenith

and the moon its full, become wise and noble in character, and rise into a

position of influence and blessedness.

    Achievement, of whatever kind, is the crown of effort, the diadem of

thought. By the aid of self-control, resolution, purity, righteousness, and well-

directed thought a man ascends; by the aid of animality, indolence, impurity,

corruption, and confusion of thought a man descends.

  A man may rise to high success in the world, and even to lofty altitudes in

the spiritual realm, and again descend into weakness and wretchedness by

allowing arrogant, selfish, and corrupt thoughts to take possession of him.  Victories  attained  by  right  thought  can  only  be  maintained  by

watchfulness. Many give way when success is assured, and rapidly fall back

into failure.

  All achievements, whether in the business, intellectual, or spiritual world,

are the result of definitely directed thought, are governed by the same law and

are of the same method; the only difference lies in the object of attainment.

  He  who  would  accomplish  little  must  sacrifice  little;  he  who  would

achieve much must sacrifice much; he who would attain highly must sacrifice

greatly.                        6. VISIONS AND IDEALS


  THE  dreamers  are  the  saviours  of  the  world.  As  the  visible  world  is

sustained by the invisible, so men, through all their trials and sins and sordid

vocations, are nourished by the beautiful visions of their solitary dreamers.

Humanity cannot forget its dreamers; it cannot let their ideals fade and die; it

lives in them; it knows them as they realities which it shall one day see and

know.

    Composer, sculptor, painter, poet, prophet, sage, these are the makers of

the after-world, the architects of heaven. The world is beautiful because they

have lived; without them, labouring humanity would perish.

  He who cherishes a beautiful vision, a lofty ideal in his heart, will one

day  realize  it.  Columbus  cherished  a  vision  of  another  world,  and  he

discovered it; Copernicus fostered the vision of a multiplicity of worlds and a

wider universe, and he revealed it; Buddha beheld the vision of a spiritual

world of stainless beauty and perfect peace, and he entered into it.

  Cherish your visions; cherish your ideals; cherish the music that stirs in

your heart, the beauty that forms in your mind, the loveliness that drapes your

purest  thoughts,  for  out  of  them  will  grow  all  delightful  conditions,  all,

heavenly environment; of these, if you but remain true to them, your world

will at last be built.

  To desire is to obtain; to aspire is to, achieve. Shall man's basest desires

receive the fullest measure of gratification, and his purest aspirations starve

for lack of sustenance? Such is not the Law: such a condition of things can

never obtain: "ask and receive."

  Dream lofty dreams, and as you dream, so shall you become. Your Vision

is the promise of what you shall one day be; your Ideal is the prophecy of

what you shall at last unveil.

  The greatest achievement was at first and for a time a dream. The oak

sleeps in the acorn; the bird waits in the egg; and in the highest vision of the

soul a waking angel stirs. Dreams are the seedlings of realities.

  Your circumstances may be uncongenial, but they shall not long remain

so if you but perceive an Ideal and strive to reach it. You cannot travel within

and stand still without. Here is a youth hard pressed by poverty and labour;confined long hours in an unhealthy workshop; unschooled, and lacking all

the  arts  of  refinement.  But  he  dreams  of  better  things;  he  thinks  of

intelligence, of refinement, of grace and beauty. He conceives of, mentally

builds up, an ideal condition of life; the vision of a wider liberty and a larger

scope takes possession of him; unrest urges him to action, and he utilizes all

his spare time and means, small though they are, to the development of his

latent powers and resources. Very soon so altered has his mind become that

the workshop can no longer hold him. It has become so out of harmony with

his mentality that it falls out of his life as a garment is cast aside, and, with

the growth of opportunities, which fit the scope of his expanding powers, he

passes out of it forever. Years later we see this youth as a full-grown man.

We find him a master of certain forces of the mind, which he wields with

worldwide influence and almost unequalled power. In his hands he holds the

cords of gigantic responsibilities; he speaks, and lo, lives are changed; men

and women hang upon his words and remould their characters, and, sunlike,

he becomes the fixed and luminous centre round which innumerable destinies

revolve. He has realized the Vision of his youth. He has become one with his

Ideal.

  And you, too, youthful reader, will realize the Vision (not the idle wish)

of your heart, be it base or beautiful, or a mixture of both, for you will always

gravitate toward that which you, secretly, most love. Into your hands will be

placed the exact results of your own thoughts; you will receive that which

you earn; no more, no less. Whatever your present environment may be, you

will fall, remain, or rise with your thoughts, your Vision, your Ideal. You will

become  as  small  as  your  controlling  desire;  as  great  as  your  dominant

aspiration: in the beautiful words of Stanton Kirkham Davis, "You may be

keeping accounts, and presently you shall walk out of the door that for so

long has seemed to you the barrier of your ideals, and shall find yourself

before an audience—the pen still behind your ear, the ink stains on your

fingers and then and there shall pour out the torrent of your inspiration. You

may be driving sheep, and you shall wander to the city-bucolic and open-

mouthed; shall wander under the intrepid guidance of the spirit into the studio

of the master, and after a time he shall say, 'I have nothing more to teach you.'

And now you have become the master, who did so recently dream of great

things while driving sheep. You shall lay down the saw and the plane to takeupon yourself the regeneration of the world."

  The thoughtless, the ignorant, and the indolent, seeing only the apparent

effects of things and not the things themselves, talk of luck, of fortune, and

chance. Seeing a man grow rich, they say, "How lucky he is!" Observing

another become intellectual, they exclaim, "How highly favoured he is!" And

noting the saintly character and wide influence of another, they remark, "How

chance aids him at every turn!" They do not see the trials and failures and

struggles which these men have voluntarily encountered in order to gain their

experience;  have  no  knowledge  of  the  sacrifices  they  have  made,  of  the

undaunted efforts they have put forth, of the faith they have exercised, that

they might overcome the apparently insurmountable, and realize the Vision

of their heart. They do not know the darkness and the heartaches; they only

see the light and joy, and call it "luck". They do not see the long and arduous

journey, but only behold the pleasant goal, and call it "good fortune," do not

understand the process, but only perceive the result, and call it chance.

  In  all  human  affairs  there  are efforts, and  there  are results, and  the

strength  of  the  effort  is  the  measure  of  the  result.  Chance  is  not.  Gifts,

powers, material, intellectual, and spiritual possessions are the fruits of effort;

they are thoughts completed, objects accomplished, visions realized.

  The Vision that you glorify in your mind, the Ideal that you enthrone in

your heart—this you will build your life by, this you will become.                                    7. SERENITY


    CALMNESS of mind is one of the beautiful jewels of wisdom. It is the

result of long and patient effort in self-control. Its presence is an indication of

ripened experience, and of a more than ordinary knowledge of the laws and

operations of thought.

  A man becomes calm in the measure that he understands himself as a

thought evolved being, for such knowledge necessitates the understanding of

others as the result of thought, and as he develops a right understanding, and

sees more and more clearly the internal relations of things by the action of

cause  and  effect  he  ceases  to  fuss  and  fume  and  worry  and  grieve,  and

remains poised, steadfast, serene.

  The calm man, having learned how to govern himself, knows how to

adapt himself to others; and they, in turn, reverence his spiritual strength, and

feel that they can learn of him and rely upon him. The more tranquil a man

becomes, the greater is his success, his influence, his power for good. Even

the ordinary trader will find his business prosperity increase as he develops a

greater self-control and equanimity, for people will always prefer to deal with

a man whose demeanour is strongly equable.

  The strong, calm man is always loved and revered. He is like a shade-

giving tree in a thirsty land, or a sheltering rock in a storm. "Who does not

love  a  tranquil  heart,  a  sweet-tempered,  balanced  life?  It  does  not  matter

whether it rains or shines, or what changes come to those possessing these

blessings, for they are always sweet, serene, and calm. That exquisite poise of

character, which we call serenity is the last lesson of culture, the fruitage of

the soul. It is precious as wisdom, more to be desired than gold—yea, than

even fine gold. How insignificant mere money seeking looks in comparison

with a serene life—a life that dwells in the ocean of Truth, beneath the waves,

beyond the reach of tempests, in the Eternal Calm!

  "How many people we know who sour their lives, who ruin all that is

sweet  and  beautiful  by  explosive  tempers,  who  destroy  their  poise  of

character, and make bad blood! It is a question whether the great majority of

people do not ruin their lives and mar their happiness by lack of self-control.

How  few  people  we  meet  in  life  who  are  well  balanced,  who  have  that

exquisite poise which is characteristic of the finished character!  Yes,  humanity  surges  with  uncontrolled  passion,  is  tumultuous  with

ungoverned grief, is blown about by anxiety and doubt only the wise man,

only he whose thoughts are controlled and purified, makes the winds and the

storms of the soul obey him.

    Tempest-tossed souls, wherever ye may be, under whatsoever conditions

ye  may  live,  know  this  in  the  ocean  of  life  the  isles  of  Blessedness  are

smiling, and the sunny shore of your ideal awaits your coming. Keep your

hand firmly upon the helm of thought. In the bark of your soul reclines the

commanding Master; He does but sleep: wake Him. Self-control is strength;

Right Thought is mastery; Calmness is power. Say unto your heart, "Peace,

be still!"

  The End.                            BOOK TWO


        FROM POVERTY TO POWER;


        OR, THE REALIZATION OF


          PROSPERITY AND PEACE.


          THE PATH OF PROSPERITY                                      FOREWORD


  I looked around upon the world, and saw that it was shadowed by sorrow

and scorched by the fierce fires of suffering. And I looked for the cause. I

looked around, but could not find it; I looked in books, but could not find it; I

looked within, and found there both the cause and the self-made nature of

that cause. I looked again, and deeper, and found the remedy.

  I found one Law, the Law of Love; one Life, the Life of adjustment to

that Law; one Truth, the truth of a conquered mind and a quiet and obedient

heart. And I dreamed of writing a book which should help men and women,

whether rich or poor, learned or unlearned, worldly or unworldly, to find

within  themselves  the  source  of  all  success,  all  happiness,  all

accomplishment,  all  truth.  And  the  dream  remained  with  me,  and  at  last

became substantial; and now I send it forth into the world on its mission of

healing and blessedness, knowing that it cannot fail to reach the homes and

hearts of those who are waiting and ready to receive it.

  James Allen.          THE PATH OF PROSPERITY


                        1. THE LESSON OF EVIL


  Unrest and pain and sorrow are the shadows of life. There is no heart in

all the world that has not felt the sting of pain, no mind has not been tossed

upon the dark waters of trouble, no eye that has not wept the hot blinding

tears of unspeakable anguish.

  There is no household where the Great Destroyers, disease and death,

have not entered, severing heart from heart, and casting over all the dark pall

of sorrow. In the strong, and apparently indestructible meshes of evil all are

more or less fast caught, and pain, unhappiness, and misfortune wait upon

mankind.

  With  the  object  of  escaping,  or  in  some  way  mitigating  this

overshadowing  gloom,  men  and  women  rush  blindly  into  innumerable

devices, pathways by which they fondly hope to enter into a happiness which

will not pass away.

  Such are the drunkard and the harlot, who revel in sensual excitements;

such is the exclusive aesthete, who shuts himself out from the sorrows of the

world, and surrounds himself with enervating luxuries; such is he who thirsts

for wealth or fame, and subordinates all things to the achievement of that

object;  and  such  are  they  who  seek  consolation  in  the  performance  of

religious rites.

  And to all the happiness sought seems to come, and the soul, for a time, is

lulled into a sweet security, and an intoxicating forgetfulness of the existence

of evil; but the day of disease comes at last, or some great sorrow, temptation,

or misfortune breaks suddenly in on the unfortified soul, and the fabric of its

fancied happiness is torn to shreds.

  So over the head of every personal joy hangs the Damocletian sword of

pain,  ready,  at  any  moment,  to  fall  and  crush  the  soul  of  him  who  is

unprotected by knowledge.

  The child cries to be a man or woman; the man and woman sigh for the

lost felicity of childhood. The poor man chafes under the chains of poverty

by which he is bound, and the rich man often lives in fear of poverty, orscours the world in search of an elusive shadow he calls happiness.

    Sometimes the soul feels that it has found a secure peace and happiness in

adopting a certain religion, in embracing an intellectual philosophy, or in

building up an intellectual or artistic ideal; but some overpowering temptation

proves the religion to be inadequate or insufficient; the theoretical philosophy

is found to be a useless prop; or in a moment, the idealistic statue upon which

the devotee has for years been labouring, is shattered into fragments at his

feet.

  Is there, then, no way of escape from pain and sorrow? Are there no

means  by  which  bonds  of  evil  may  be  broken?  Is  permanent  happiness,

secure prosperity, and abiding peace a foolish dream?

  No, there is a way, and I speak it with gladness, by which evil can be

slain for ever; there is a process by which disease, poverty, or any adverse

condition or circumstance can be put on one side never to return; there is a

method by which a permanent prosperity can be secured, free from all fear of

the  return  of  adversity,  and  there  is  a  practice  by  which  unbroken  and

unending peace and bliss can be partaken of and realized.

  And the beginning of the way which leads to this glorious realization is

the acquirement of a right understanding of the nature of evil.

  It is not sufficient to deny or ignore evil; it must be understood. It is not

enough to pray to God to remove the evil; you must find out why it is there,

and what lesson it has for you.

  It is of no avail to fret and fume and chafe at the chains which bind you;

you must know why and how you are bound. Therefore, reader, you must get

outside yourself, and must begin to examine and understand yourself.

  You must cease to be a disobedient child in the school of experience and

must begin to learn, with humility and patience, the lessons that are set for

your edification and ultimate perfection; for evil, when rightly understood, is

found to be, not an unlimited power or principle in the universe, but a passing

phase of human experience, and it therefore becomes a teacher to those who

are willing to learn.

  Evil is not an abstract some thing outside yourself; it is an experience in

your own heart, and by patiently examining and rectifying your heart you will

be gradually led into the discovery of the origin and nature of evil, which will

necessarily be followed by its complete eradication.  All evil is corrective and remedial, and is therefore not permanent. It is

rooted in ignorance, ignorance of the true nature and relation of things, and so

long as we remain in that state of ignorance, we remain subject to evil.

  There is no evil in the universe which is not the result of ignorance, and

which would not, if we were ready and willing to learn its lesson, lead us to

higher wisdom, and then vanish away. But men remain in evil, and it does not

pass away because men are not willing or prepared to learn the lesson which

it came to teach them.

  I knew a child who, every night when its mother took it to bed, cried to be

allowed to play with the candle; and one night, when the mother was off

guard for a moment, the child took hold of the candle; the inevitable result

followed, and the child never wished to play with the candle again.

  By  its  one  foolish  act  it  learned,  and  learned  perfectly  the  lesson  of

obedience, and entered into the knowledge that fire burns. And, this incident

is a complete illustration of the nature, meaning, and ultimate result of all sin

and evil.

  As the child suffered through its own ignorance of the real nature of fire,

so  older  children  suffer  through  their  ignorance  of  the  real  nature  of  the

things which they weep for and strive after, and which harm them when they

are secured; the only difference being that in the latter case the ignorance and

evil are more deeply rooted and obscure.

  Evil has always been symbolized by darkness, and Good by light, and

hidden within the symbol is contained the perfect interpretation, the reality;

for, just as light always floods the universe, and darkness is only a mere

speck  or  shadow  cast  by  a  small  body  intercepting  a  few  rays  of  the

illimitable light, so the Light of the Supreme Good is the positive and life-

giving power which floods the universe, and evil the insignificant shadow

cast by the self that intercepts and shuts off the illuminating rays which strive

for entrance.

  When night folds the world in its black impenetrable mantle, no matter

how dense the darkness, it covers but the small space of half our little planet,

while the whole universe is ablaze with living light, and every soul knows

that it will awake in the light in the morning.

  Know,  then,  that  when  the  dark  night  of  sorrow,  pain,  or  misfortune

settles down upon your soul, and you stumble along with weary and uncertainsteps, that you are merely intercepting your own personal desires between

yourself and the boundless light of joy and bliss, and the dark shadow that

covers you is cast by none and nothing but yourself.

  And just as the darkness without is but a negative shadow, an unreality

which comes from nowhere, goes to nowhere, and has no abiding dwelling

place, so the darkness within is equally a negative shadow passing over the

evolving and Lightborn soul.

  “But,” I fancy I hear someone say, “why pass through the darkness of evil

at all?” Because, by ignorance, you have chosen to do so, and because, by

doing  so,  you  may  understand  both  good  and  evil,  and  may  the  more

appreciate the light by having passed through the darkness.

  As evil is the direct outcome of ignorance, so, when the lessons of evil

are fully learned, ignorance passes away, and wisdom takes its place. But as a

disobedient child refuses to learn its lessons at school, so it is possible to

refuse to learn the lessons of experience, and thus to remain in continual

darkness,  and  to  suffer  continually  recurring  punishments  in  the  form  of

disease, disappointment, and sorrow.

  He,  therefore,  who  would  shake  himself  free  of  the  evil  which

encompasses him, must be willing and ready to learn, and must be prepared

to undergo that disciplinary process without which no grain of wisdom or

abiding happiness and peace can be secured.

  A man may shut himself up in a dark room, and deny that the light exists,

but it is everywhere without, and darkness exists only in his own little room.

  So you may shut out the light of Truth, or you may begin to pull down the

walls  of  prejudice,  self-seeking  and  error  which  you  have  built  around

yourself, and so let in the glorious and omnipresent Light.

  By earnest self-examination strive to realize, and not merely hold as a

theory, that evil is a passing phase, a self-created shadow; that all your pains,

sorrows and misfortunes have come to you by a process of undeviating and

absolutely perfect law; have come to you because you deserve and require

them, and that by first enduring, and then understanding them, you may be

made stronger, wiser, nobler.

  When  you  have  fully  entered  into  this  realization,  you  will  be  in  a

position to mould your own circumstances, to transmute all evil into good

and to weave, with a master hand, the fabric of your destiny.  What of the night, O Watchman! see’st thou yet

  The glimmering dawn upon the mountain heights,

  The golden Herald of the Light of lights,

  Are his fair feet upon the hilltops set?

  Cometh he yet to chase away the gloom,

  And with it all the demons of the Night?

  Strike yet his darting rays upon thy sight?

  Hear’st thou his voice, the sound of error’s doom?

  The Morning cometh, lover of the Light;

  Even now He gilds with gold the mountain’s brow,

  Dimly I see the path whereon even now

  His shining feet are set toward the Night.

    Darkness shall pass away, and all the things

  That love the darkness, and that hate the Light

  Shall disappear for ever with the Night:

  Rejoice! for thus the speeding Herald sings.    2. THE WORLD A REFLEX OF MENTAL


                                      STATES


  What you are, so is your world. Everything in the universe is resolved

into your own inward experience. It matters little what is without, for it is all

a reflection of your own state of consciousness.

  It matters everything what you are within, for everything without will be

mirrored and colored accordingly.

  All that you positively know is contained in your own experience; all that

you ever will know must pass through the gateway of experience, and so

become part of yourself.

  Your own thoughts, desires, and aspirations comprise your world, and, to

you, all that there is in the universe of beauty and joy and bliss, or of ugliness

and sorrow and pain, is contained within yourself.

  By  your  own  thoughts  you  make  or  mar  your  life,  your  world,  your

universe. As you build within by the power of thought, so will your outward

life and circumstances shape themselves accordingly.

    Whatsoever  you  harbour  in  the  inmost  chambers  of  your  heart  will,

sooner or later by the inevitable law of reaction, shape itself in your outward

life.

  The soul that is impure, sordid and selfish, is gravitating with unerring

precision toward misfortune and catastrophe; the soul that is pure, unselfish,

and  noble  is  gravitating  with  equal  precision  toward  happiness  and

prosperity.

  Every soul attracts its own, and nothing can possibly come to it that does

not belong to it. To realize this is to recognize the universality of Divine Law.

  The incidents of every human life, which both make and mar, are drawn

to it by the quality and power of its own inner thought-life. Every soul is a

complex combination of gathered experiences and thoughts, and the body is

but an improvised vehicle for its manifestation.

  What, therefore, your thoughts are, that is your real self; and the worldaround,  both  animate  and  inanimate,  wears  the  aspect  with  which  your

thoughts clothe it.

  “All that we are is the result of what we have thought. It is founded on

our  thoughts;  it  is  made  up  of  our  thoughts.”  Thus  said  Buddha,  and  it

therefore follows that if a man is happy, it is because he dwells in happy

thoughts;  if  miserable,  because  he  dwells  in  despondent  and  debilitating

thoughts,

  Whether one be fearful or fearless, foolish or wise, troubled or serene,

within that soul lies the cause of its own state or states, and never without.

And now I seem to hear a chorus of voices exclaim, “But do you really mean

to say that outward circumstances do not affect our minds?” I do not say that,

but I say this, and know it to be an infallible truth, that circumstances can

only affect you in so far as you allow them to do so.

  You  are  swayed  by  circumstances  because  you  have  not  a  right

understanding of the nature, use, and power of thought.

  You believe (and upon this little word belief hang all our sorrows and

joys) that outward things have the power to make or mar your life; by so

doing you submit to those outward things, confess that you are their slave,

and they your unconditional master; by so doing, you invest them with a

power  which  they  do  not,  of  themselves,  possess,  and  you  succumb,  in

reality, not to the mere circumstances, but to the gloom or gladness, the fear

or hope, the strength or weakness, which your thought-sphere has thrown

around them.

  I knew two men who, at an early age, lost the hard-earned savings of

years. One was very deeply troubled, and gave way to chagrin, worry, and

despondency.

  The other, on reading in his morning paper that the bank in which his

money was deposited had hopelessly failed, and that he had lost all, quietly

and firmly remarked, ‘’Well, it’s gone, and trouble and worry won’t bring it

back, but hard work will.”

  He went to work with renewed vigor, and rapidly became prosperous,

while the former man, continuing to mourn the loss of his money, and to

grumble  at  his  ‘’bad  luck,”  remained  the  sport  and  tool  of  adverse

circumstances, in reality of his own weak and slavish thoughts.

  The loss of money was a curse to the one because he clothed the eventwith dark and dreary thoughts; it was a blessing to the other, because he

threw around it thoughts of strength, of hope, and renewed endeavor.

  If circumstances had the power to bless or harm, they would bless and

harm all men alike, but the fact that the same circumstances will be alike

good and bad to different souls proves that the good or bad is not in the

circumstance, but only in the mind of him that encounters it.

  When you begin to realize this you will begin to control your thoughts, to

regulate and discipline your mind, and to rebuild the inward temple of your

soul, eliminating all useless and superfluous material, and incorporating into

your  being  thoughts  alone  of  joy  and  serenity,  of  strength  and  life,  of

compassion and love, of beauty and immortality; and as you do this you will

become joyful and serene, strong and healthy, compassionate and loving, and

beautiful with the beauty of immortality.

  And  as  we  clothe  events  with  the  drapery  of  our  own  thoughts,  so

likewise do we clothe the objects of the visible world around us, and where

one sees harmony and beauty, another sees revolting ugliness.

  An  enthusiastic  naturalist  was  one  day  roaming  the  country  lanes  in

pursuit of his hobby, and during his rambles came upon a pool of brackish

water near a farmyard.

  As he proceeded to fill a small bottle with the water for the purpose of

examination under the microscope, he dilated, with more enthusiasm than

discretion, to an uncultivated son of the plough who stood close by, upon the

hidden and innumerable wonders contained in the pool, and concluded by

saying,  ‘’Yes,  my  friend,  within  this  pool  is  contained  a  hundred,  nay,  a

million universes, had we but the sense or the instrument by which we could

apprehend  them.”  And  the  unsophisticated  one  ponderously  remarked,  "I

know the water be full o’ tadpoles, but they be easy to catch.”

  Where the naturalist, his mind stored with the knowledge of natural facts,

saw beauty, harmony, and hidden glory, the mind unenlightened upon those

things saw only an offensive mud-puddle.

  The wild flower which the casual wayfarer thoughtlessly tramples upon

is, to the spiritual eye of the poet, an angelic messenger from the invisible.

  To the many, the ocean is but a dreary expanse of water on which ships

sail and are sometimes wrecked; to the soul of the musician it is a living

thing, and he hears, in all its changing moods, divine harmonies.  Where the ordinary mind sees disaster and confusion, the mind of the

philosopher sees the most perfect sequence of cause and effect, and where the

materialist  sees  nothing  but  endless  death,  the  mystic  sees  pulsating  and

eternal life.

  And  as  we  clothe  both  events  and  objects  with  our  own  thoughts,  so

likewise do we clothe the souls of others in the garments of our thoughts.

  The suspicious believe everybody to be suspicious; the Liar feels secure

in the thought that he is not so foolish as to believe that there is such a

phenomenon as a strictly truthful person; the envious see envy in every soul;

the  miser  thinks  everybody  is  eager  to  get  his  money;  he  who  has

subordinated conscience in the making of his wealth, sleeps with a revolver

under  his  pillow,  wrapped  in  the  delusion  that  the  world  is  full  of

conscienceless  people  who  are  eager  to  rob  him,  and  the  abandoned

sensualist looks upon the saint as a hypocrite.

  On the other hand, those who dwell in loving thoughts, see that in all

which calls forth their love and sympathy; the trusting and honest are not

troubled by suspicions; the good-natured and charitable who rejoice at the

good fortune of others, scarcely know what envy means; and he who has

realized the Divine within himself recognizes it in all beings, even in the

beasts.

  And men and women are confirmed in their mental outlook because of

the fact that, by the law of cause and effect, they attract to themselves that

which  they  send  forth,  and  so  come  in  contact  with  people  similar  to

themselves.

  The  old  adage,  “Birds  of  a  feather  flock  together,”  has  a  deeper

significance than is generally attached to it, for in the thought-world as in the

world of matter, each clings to its kind.

  Do you wish for kindness? Be kind.

  Do you ask for truth? Be true.

  What you give of yourself you find;

  Your world is a reflex of you.

  If you are one of those who are praying for, and looking forward to, a

happier world beyond the grave, here is a message of gladness for you, you

may enter into and realize that happy world now; it fills the whole universe,and it is within you, waiting for you to find, acknowledge, and possess. Said

one who knew the inner laws of Being,”

  When men shall say Io here, or Io there, go not after them; the kingdom

of God is within you.”

  What you have to do is to believe this, simply believe it with a mind

unshadowed by doubt, and then meditate upon it till you understand it.

  You will then begin to purify and to build your inner world, and as you

proceed, passing from revelation to revelation, from realization to realization,

you will discover the utter powerlessness of outward things beside the magic

potency of a self-governed soul.

  If thou would’st right the world,

  And banish all its evils and its woes,

  Make its wild places bloom,

  And its drear deserts blossom as the rose,-

  Then right thyself.

  If thou would’st turn the world

  From its long, lone captivity in sin,

  Restore all broken hearts,

  Slay grief, and let sweet consolation in,-

  Turn thou thyself.

  If thou would’st cure the world

  Of its long sickness, end its grief and pain;

  Bring in all-healing joy,

  And give to the afflicted rest again,-

  Then cure thyself.

  If thou would’st wake the world

  Out of its dream of death and dark’ning strife,

  Bring it to Love and Peace,

  And Light and brightness of immortal Life,-

  Wake thou thyself.            3. THE WAY OUT OF UNDESIRABLE


                                CONDITIONS


    Having seen and realized that evil is but a passing shadow thrown, by the

intercepting self, across the transcendent Form of the Eternal Good, and that

the world is a mirror in which each sees a reflection of himself, we now

ascend, by firm and easy steps, to that plane of perception whereon is seen

and realized the Vision of the Law.

  With this realization comes the knowledge that everything is included in a

ceaseless interaction of cause and effect, and that nothing can possibly be

divorced from law.

  From the most trivial thought, word, or act of man, up to the groupings of

the celestial bodies, law reigns supreme. No arbitrary condition can, even for

one moment, exist, for such a condition would be a denial and an annihilation

of law.

  Every  condition  of  life  is,  therefore,  bound  up  in  an  orderly  and

harmonious  sequence,  and  the  secret  and  cause  of  every  condition  is

contained within itself, The law, “Whatsoever a man sows that shall he also

reap,” is inscribed in flaming letters upon the portal of Eternity, and none can

deny it, none can cheat it, none can escape it.

  He who puts his hand in the fire must suffer the burning until such time as

it has worked itself out, and neither curses nor prayers can avail to alter it.

  And precisely the same law governs the realm of mind. Hatred, anger,

jealousy,  envy,  lust,  covetousness,  all  these  are  fires  which  burn,  and

whoever even so much as touches them must suffer the torments of burning.

  All these conditions of mind are rightly called “evil,” for they are the

efforts of the soul to subvert, in its ignorance, the law, an they, therefore, lead

to  chaos  and  confusion  within,  and  are  sooner  or  later  actualized  in  the

outward circumstances as disease, failure, and misfortune, coupled with grief,

pain, and despair.

    Whereas  love,  gentleness,  good-will,  purity,  are  cooling  airs  which

breathe peace upon the soul that woes them, and, being in harmony with the

Eternal  Law,  they  become  actualized  in  the  form  of  health,  peacefulsurroundings, and undeviating success and good fortune.

  A  thorough  understanding  of  this  Great  Law  which  permeates  the

universe leads to the acquirement of that state of mind known as obedience.

  To know that justice, harmony, and love are supreme in the universe is

likewise to know that all adverse and painful conditions are the result of our

own disobedience to that Law.

  Such  knowledge  leads  to  strength  and  power,  and  it  is  upon  such

knowledge alone that a true life and an enduring success and happiness can

be built.

  To be patient under all circumstances, and to accept all conditions as

necessary factors in your training, is to rise superior to all painful conditions,

and to overcome them with an overcoming which is sure, and which leaves

no fear of their return, for by the power of obedience to law they are utterly

slain.

  Such an obedient one is working in harmony with the law, has in fact,

identified himself with the law, and whatsoever he conquers he conquers for

ever, whatsoever he builds can never be destroyed.

  The cause of all power, as of all weakness, is within; the secret of all

happiness as of all misery is likewise within.

  There is no progress apart from unfoldment within, and no sure foothold

of prosperity or peace except by orderly advancement in knowledge.

  You  say  you  are  chained  by  circumstances;  you  cry  out  for  better

opportunities,  for  a  wider  scope,  for  improved  physical  conditions,  and

perhaps you inwardly curse the fate that binds you hand and foot.

  It is for you that I write; it is to you that I speak. Listen, and let my words

burn themselves into your heart, for that which I say to you is truth:

  You may bring about that improved condition in your outward life which

you desire, if you will unswervingly resolve to improve your inner life.

  I  know  this  pathway  looks  barren  at  its  commencement  (truth  always

does, it is only error and delusion which are at first inviting and fascinating,)

but if you undertake to walk it; if you perseveringly discipline your mind,

eradicating  your  weaknesses,  and  allowing  your  soul-forces  and  spiritual

powers to unfold themselves, you will be astonished at the magical changes

which will be brought about in your outward life.  As you proceed, golden opportunities will be strewn across your path, and

the power and judgment to properly utilize them will spring up within you.

Genial friends will come unbidden to you; sympathetic souls will be drawn to

you as the needle is to the magnet; and books and all outward aids that you

require will come to you unsought.

  Perhaps  the  chains  of  poverty  hang  heavily  upon  you,  and  you  are

friendless and alone, and you long with an intense longing that your load may

be lightened; but the load continues, and you seem to be enveloped in an

ever-increasing darkness.

  Perhaps you complain, you bewail your lot; you blame your birth, your

parents, your employer, or the unjust Powers who have bestowed upon you

so undeservedly poverty and hardship, and upon another affluence and ease.

  Cease  your  complaining  and  fretting;  none  of  these  things  which  you

blame are the cause of your poverty; the cause is within yourself, and where

the cause is, there is the remedy.

  The very fact that you are a complainer, shows that you deserve your lot;

shows that you lack that faith which is the ground of all effort and progress.

  There is no room for a complainer in a universe of law, and worry is soul-

suicide. By your very attitude of mind you are strengthening the chains which

bind  you,  and  are  drawing  about  you  the  darkness  by  which  you  are

enveloped, Alter your outlook upon life, and your outward life will alter.

  Build yourself up in the faith and knowledge, and make yourself worthy

of better surroundings and wider opportunities. Be sure, first of all, that you

are making the best of what you have.

  Do  not  delude  yourself  into  supposing  that  you  can  step  into  greater

advantages whilst overlooking smaller ones, for if you could, the advantage

would be impermanent and you would quickly fall back again in order to

learn the lesson which you had neglected.

  As the child at school must master one standard before passing onto the

next, so, before you can have that greater good which you so desire, must you

faithfully employ that which you already possess.

  The parable of the talents is a beautiful story illustrative of this truth, for

does it not plainly show that if we misuse, neglect, or degrade that which we

possess, be it ever so mean and insignificant, even that little will be takenfrom us, for, by our conduct we show that we are unworthy of it.

  Perhaps  you  are  living  in  a  small  cottage,  and  are  surrounded  by

unhealthy and vicious influences.

  You  desire  a  larger  and  more  sanitary  residence.  Then  you  must  fit

yourself for such a residence by first of all making your cottage as far as

possible a little paradise. Keep it spotlessly clean. Make it look as pretty and

sweet as your limited means will allow. Cook your plain food with all care,

and arrange your humble table as tastefully as you possibly can.

  If you cannot afford a carpet, let your rooms be carpeted with smiles and

welcomes, fastened down with the nails of kind words driven in with the

hammer of patience. Such a carpet will not fade in the sun, and constant use

will never wear it away.

  By so ennobling your present surroundings you will rise above them, and

above the need of them, and at the right time you will pass on into the better

house  and  surroundings  which  have  all  along  been  waiting  for  you,  and

which you have fitted yourself to occupy.

  Perhaps you desire more time for thought and effort, and feel that your

hours of labour are too hard and long. Then see to it that you are utilizing to

the fullest possible extent what little spare time you have.

  It is useless to desire more time, if you are already wasting what little you

have; for you would only grow more indolent and indifferent.

  Even  poverty  and  lack  of  time  and  leisure  are  not  the  evils  that  you

imagine they are, and if they hinder you in your progress, it is because you

have clothed them in your own weaknesses, and the evil that you see in them

is really in yourself. Endeavour to fully and completely realize that in so far

as you shape and mould your mind, you are the maker of your destiny, and

as,  by  the  transmuting  power  of  self-discipline  you  realize  this  more  and

more, you will come to see that these so-called evils may be converted into

blessings.

  You will then utilize your poverty for the cultivation of patience, hope

and courage; and your lack of time in the gaining of promptness of action and

decision  of  mind,  by  seizing  the  precious  moments  as  they  present

themselves for your acceptance.

  As in the rankest soil the most beautiful flowers are grown, so in the darksoil  of  poverty  the  choicest  flowers  of  humanity  have  developed  and

bloomed.

  Where there are difficulties to cope with, and unsatisfactory conditions to

overcome, there virtue most flourishes and manifests its glory.

  It may be that you are in the employ of a tyrannous master or mistress,

and you feel that you are harshly treated. Look upon this also as necessary to

your  training.  Return  your  employer’s  unkindness  with  gentleness  and

forgiveness.

  Practice unceasingly patience and self-control. Turn the disadvantage to

account by utilizing it for the gaining of mental and spiritual strength, and by

your silent example and influence you will thus be teaching your employer,

will be helping him to grow ashamed of his conduct, and will, at the same

time, be lifting yourself up to that height of spiritual attainment by which you

will be enabled to step into new and more congenial surroundings at the time

when they are presented to you.

  Do  not  complain  that  you  are  a  slave,  but  lift  yourself  up,  by  noble

conduct, above the plane of slavery. Before complaining that you are a slave

to another, be sure that you are not a slave to self.

  Look within; look searchingly, and have no mercy upon yourself. You

will find there, perchance, slavish thoughts, slavish desires, and in your daily

life and conduct slavish habits.

  Conquer these; cease to be a slave to self, and no man will have the

power to enslave you. As you overcome self, you will overcome all adverse

conditions, and every difficulty will fall before you.

  Do not complain that you are oppressed by the rich. Are you sure that if

you gained riches you would not be an oppressor yourself?

    Remember that there is the Eternal Law which is absolutely just, and that

he who oppresses today must himself be oppressed tomorrow; and from this

there is no way of escape.

  And perhaps you, yesterday (in some former existence) were rich and an

oppressor, and that you are now merely paying off the debt which you owe to

the Great Law. Practice, therefore, fortitude and faith.

  Dwell  constantly  in  mind  upon  the  Eternal  justice,  the  Eternal  Good.

Endeavour  to  lift  yourself  above  the  personal  and  the  transitory  into  theimpersonal and permanent.

  Shake off the delusion that you are being injured or oppressed by another,

and try to realize, by a profounder comprehension of your inner life, and the

laws which govern that life, that you are only really injured by what is within

you. There is no practice more degrading, debasing, and soul-destroying than

that of self-pity.

  Cast it out from you. While such a canker is feeding upon your heart you

can never expect to grow into a fuller life.

  Cease from the condemnation of others, and begin to condemn yourself.

Condone none of your acts, desires or thoughts that will not bear comparison

with spotless purity, or endure the light of sinless good.

  By so doing you will be building your house upon the rock of the Eternal,

and all that is required for your happiness and well-being will come to you in

its own time.

  There is positively no way of permanently rising above poverty, or any

undesirable  condition,  except  by  eradicating  those  selfish  and  negative

conditions within, of which these are the reflection, and by virtue of which

they continue.

  The way to true riches is to enrich the soul by the acquisition of virtue.

Outside of real heart-virtue there is neither prosperity nor power, but only the

appearances of these. I am aware that men make money who have acquired

no measure of virtue, and have little desire to do so; but such money does not

constitute true riches, and its possession is transitory and feverish.

  Here is David’s testimony:- For I was envious at the foolish when I saw

the prosperity of the wicked...... Their eyes stand out with fatness; they have

more than heart could wish. -Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and

washed my hands in innocence... When I thought to know this it was too

painful for me; until I went into the sanctuary of God, then understood I their

end.”

  The prosperity of the wicked was a great trial to David until he went into

the sanctuary of God, and then he knew their end.

  You likewise may go into that sanctuary. It is within you. It is that state of

consciousness  which  remains  when  all  that  is  sordid,  and  personal,  and

impermanent is risen above, and universal and eternal principles are realized.  That is the God state of consciousness; it is the sanctuary of the Most

High. When by long strife and self-discipline, you have succeeded in entering

the door of that holy Temple, you will perceive, with unobstructed vision, the

end and fruit of all human thought and endeavour, both good and evil.

  You will then no longer relax your faith when you see the immoral man

accumulating outward riches, for you will know, that he must come again to

poverty and degradation.

  The rich man who is barren of virtue is, in reality, poor, and as surely, as

the waters of the river are drifting to the ocean, so surely is he, in the midst of

all his riches, drifting towards poverty and misfortune; and though he die

rich, yet must he return to reap the bitter fruit of all of his immorality.

  And though he become rich many times, yet as many times must he be

thrown back into poverty, until, by long experience and suffering he conquers

the poverty within.

  But the man who is outwardly poor, yet rich in virtue, is truly rich, and, in

the midst of all his poverty he is surely traveling towards prosperity; and

abounding joy and bliss await his coming. If you would become truly and

permanently prosperous, you must first become virtuous.

  It is therefore unwise to aim directly at prosperity, to make it the one

object of life, to reach out greedily for it, To do this is to ultimately defeat

yourself.

  But rather aim at self-perfection, make useful and unselfish service the

object of your life, and ever reach out hands of faith towards the supreme and

unalterable Good.

  You say you desire wealth, not for your own sake, but in order to do good

with it, and to bless others. If this is your real motive in desiring wealth, then

wealth will come to you; for you are strong and unselfish indeed if, in the

midst of riches, you are willing to look upon yourself as steward and not as

owner.

  But examine well your motive, for in the majority of instances where

money  is  desired  for  the  admitted  object  of  blessing  others,  the  real

underlying  motive  is  a  love  of  popularity,  and  a  desire  to  pose  as  a

philanthropist or reformer.

  If you are not doing good with what little you have, depend upon it themore money you got the more selfish you would become, and all the good

you appeared to do with your money, if you attempted to do any, would be so

much insinuating self-laudation.

  If your real desire is to do good, there is no need to wait for money before

you do it; you can do it now, this very moment, and just where you are. If

you are really so unselfish as you believe yourself to be, you will show it by

sacrificing yourself for others now.

  No matter how poor you are, there is room for self-sacrifice, for did not

the widow put her all into the treasury?

  The heart that truly desires to do good does not wait for money before

doing it, but comes to the altar of sacrifice and, leaving there the unworthy

elements of self, goes out and breathes upon neighbour and stranger, friend

and enemy alike the breath of blessedness.

  As the effect is related to the cause, so is prosperity and power related to

the inward good and poverty and weakness to the inward evil.

  Money does not constitute true wealth, nor position, nor power, and to

rely upon it alone is to stand upon a slippery place.

  Your true wealth is your stock of virtue, and your true power the uses to

which you put it. Rectify your heart, and you will rectify your life. Lust,

hatred,  anger,  vanity,  pride,  covetousness,  self-indulgence,  self-seeking,

obstinacy,-  all  these  are  poverty  and  weakness;  whereas  love,  purity,

gentleness,  meekness,  compassion,  generosity,  self-forgetfulness,  and  self-

renunciation,- all these are wealth and power.

  As the elements of poverty and weakness are overcome, an irresistible

and all-conquering power is evolved from within, and he who succeeds in

establishing himself in the highest virtue, brings the whole world to his feet.

  But the rich, as well as the poor, have their undesirable conditions, and

are frequently farther removed from happiness than the poor. And here we

see how happiness depends, not upon outward aids or possessions, but upon

the inward life.

  Perhaps you are an employer, and you have endless trouble with those

whom you employ, and when you do get good and faithful servants they

quickly leave you. As a result you are beginning to lose, or have completely

lost, your faith in human nature.  You  try  to  remedy  matters  by  giving  better  wages,  and  by  allowing

certain liberties, yet matters remain unaltered. Let me advise you.

  The secret of all your trouble is not in your servants, it is in yourself; and

if you look within, with a humble and sincere desire to discover and eradicate

your error, you will, sooner or later, find the origin of all your unhappiness.

  It may be some selfish desire, or lurking suspicion, or unkind attitude of

mind  which  sends  out  its  poison  upon  those  about  you,  and  reacts  upon

yourself, even though you may not show it in your manner or speech.

  Think of your servants with kindness, consider of them that extremity of

service which you yourself would not care to perform were you in their place.

  Rare and beautiful is that humility of soul by which a servant entirely

forgets himself in his master’s good; but far rarer, and beautiful with a divine

beauty, is that nobility of soul by which a man, forgetting his own happiness,

seeks the happiness of those who are under his authority, and who depend

upon him for their bodily sustenance.

  And such a man’s happiness is increased tenfold, nor does he need to

complain  of  those  whom  he  employs.  Said  a  well-known  and  extensive

employer of labour, who never needs to dismiss an employee: “I have always

had the happiest relations with my workpeople.

  If you ask me how it is to be accounted for, I can only say that it has been

my aim from the first to do to them as I would wish to be done by.” Herein

lies the secret by which all desirable conditions are secured, and all that are

undesirable are overcome.

  Do you say that you are lonely and unloved, and have “not a friend in the

world”? Then, I pray you, for the sake of your own happiness, blame nobody

but yourself.

  Be friendly towards others, and friends will soon flock round you. Make

yourself pure and lovable, and you will be loved by all.

    Whatever conditions are rendering your life burdensome, you may pass

out  of  and  beyond  them  by  developing  and  utilizing  within  you  the

transforming power of self-purification and self-conquest.

  Be it the poverty which galls (and remember that the poverty upon which

I have been dilating is that poverty which is a source of misery, and not that

voluntary poverty which is the glory of emancipated souls), or the richeswhich burden, or the many misfortunes, griefs, and annoyances which form

the  dark  background  in  the  web  of  life,  you  may  overcome  them  by

overcoming the selfish elements within which give them life.

  It matters not that by the unfailing Law, there are past thoughts and acts

to work out and to atone for, as, by the same law, we are setting in motion,

during every moment of our life, fresh thoughts and acts, and we have the

power to make them good or ill.

  Nor does it follow that if a man (reaping what he has sown) must lose

money or forfeit position, that he must also lose his fortitude or forfeit his

uprightness, and it is in these that his wealth and power and happiness are to

be  found.  He  who  clings  to  self  is  his  own  enemy  and  is  surrounded  by

enemies.

  He who relinquishes self is his own saviour, and is surrounded by friends

like a protecting belt. Before the divine radiance of a pure heart all darkness

vanishes  and  all  clouds  melt  away,  and  he  who  has  conquered  self  has

conquered the universe.

  Come, then, out of your poverty; come out of your pain; come out of your

troubles, and sighings, and complainings, and heartaches, and loneliness by

coming out of yourself.

  Let the old tattered garment of your petty selfishness fall from you, and

put on the new garment of universal Love. You will then realize the inward

heaven, and it will be reflected in all your outward life.

  He who sets his foot firmly upon the path of self-conquest, who walks,

aided  by  the  staff  of  Faith,  the  highway  of  self-sacrifice,  will  assuredly

achieve the highest prosperity, and will reap abounding and enduring joy and

bliss.

  To them that seek the highest good

  All things subserve the wisest ends;

    Nought comes as ill, and wisdom lends

  Wings to all shapes of evil brood.

  The dark’ning sorrow veils a Star

  That waits to shine with gladsome light;

  Hell waits on heaven; and after night

  Comes golden glory from afar.  Defeats are steps by which we climb

  With purer aim to nobler ends;

  Loss leads to gain, and joy attends

  True footsteps up the hills of time.

  Pain leads to paths of holy bliss,

  To thoughts and words and deeds divine-,

  And clouds that gloom and rays that shine,

  Along life’s upward highway kiss.

    Misfortune does but cloud the way

  Whose end and summit in the sky

  Of bright success, sunkiss’d and high,

  Awaits our seeking and our stay.

  The heavy pall of doubts and fears

  That clouds the Valley of our hopes,

  The shades with which the spirit copes,

  The bitter harvesting of tears,

  The heartaches, miseries, and griefs,

  The bruisings born of broken ties,

  All these are steps by which we rise

  To living ways of sound beliefs.

  Love, pitying, watchful, runs to meet

  The Pilgrim from the Land of Fate;

  All glory and all good await

  The coming of obedient feet.          4. THE SILENT POWER OF THOUGHT:


      CONTROLLING AND DIRECTING ONE’S


                                    FORCES


  The most powerful forces in the universe are the silent forces; and in

accordance with the intensity of its power does a force become beneficent

when rightly directed, and destructive when wrongly employed.

  This is a common knowledge in regard to the mechanical forces, such as

steam, electricity, etc., but few have yet learned to apply this knowledge to

the  realm  of  mind,  where  the  thought-forces  (most  powerful  of  all)  are

continually  being  generated  and  sent  forth  as  currents  of  salvation  or

destruction.

  At this stage of his evolution, man has entered into the possession of

these  forces,  and  the  whole  trend  of  his  present  advancement  is  their

complete subjugation. All the wisdom possible to man on this material earth

is to be found only in complete self-mastery, and the command, “Love your

enemies,” resolves itself into an exhortation to enter here and now, into the

possession  of  that  sublime  wisdom  by  taking  hold  of,  mastering  and

transmuting, those mind forces to which man is now slavishly subject, and by

which he is helplessly borne, like a straw on the stream, upon the currents of

selfishness.

  The Hebrew prophets, with their perfect knowledge of the Supreme Law,

always  related  outward  events  to  inward  thought,  and  associated  national

disaster or success with the thoughts and desires that dominated the nation at

the time.

  The knowledge of the causal power of thought is the basis of all their

prophecies, as it is the basis of all real wisdom and power. National events

are simply the working out of the psychic forces of the nation.

  Wars, plagues, and famines are the meeting and clashing of wrongly-

directed thought-forces, the culminating points at which destruction steps in

as the agent of the Law.

  It is foolish to ascribe war to the influence of one man, or to one body of

men. It is the crowning horror of national selfishness. It is the silent andconquering thought-forces which bring all things into manifestation.

  The universe grew out of thought. Matter in its last analysis is found to be

merely objectivized thought. All men’s accomplishments were first wrought

out in thought, and then objectivized.

  The author, the inventor, the architect, first builds up his work in thought,

and having perfected it in all its parts as a complete and harmonious whole

upon the thought-plane. he then commences to materialize it, to bring it down

to the material or sense-plane.

  When the thought-forces are directed in harmony with the over-ruling

Law, they are up-building and preservative, but when subverted they become

disintegrating and self-destructive.

  To  adjust  all  your  thoughts  to  a  perfect  and  unswerving  faith  in  the

omnipotence and supremacy of Good, is to co-operate with that Good, and to

realize within yourself the solution and destruction of all evil. Believe and ye

shall live.

  And  here  we  have  the  true  meaning  of  salvation;  salvation  from  the

darkness and negation of evil, by entering into, and realizing the living light

of the Eternal Good.

  Where  there  is  fear,  worry,  anxiety,  doubt,  trouble,  chagrin,  or

disappointment, there is ignorance and lack of faith.

  All these conditions of mind are the direct outcome of selfishness, and are

based  upon  an  inherent  belief  in  the  power  and  supremacy  of  evil;  they

therefore constitute practical atheism; and to live in, and become subject to,

these  negative  and  soul-destroying  conditions  of  mind  is  the  only  real

atheism.

  It is salvation from such conditions that the race needs, and let no man

boast of salvation whilst he is their helpless and obedient slave.

  To fear or to worry is as sinful as to curse, for how can one fear or worry

if he intrinsically believes in the Eternal justice, the Omnipotent Good, the

Boundless Love? To fear, to worry, to doubt, is to deny, to dis-believe.

  It is from such states of mind that all weakness and failure proceed, for

they represent the annulling and disintegrating of the positive thought-forces

which would otherwise speed to their object with power, and bring about

their own beneficent results.  To overcome these negative conditions is to enter into a life of power, is

to cease to be a slave, and to become a master, and there is only one way by

which they can be overcome, and that is by steady and persistent growth in

inward knowledge.

  To mentally deny evil is not sufficient; it must, by daily practice, be risen

above and understood. To mentally affirm the good is inadequate; it must, by

unswerving endeavour, be entered into and comprehended.

  The intelligent practice of self-control, quickly leads to a knowledge of

one’s interior thought-forces, and, later on, to the acquisition of that power by

which they are rightly employed and directed.

  In the measure that you master self, that you control your mental forces

instead of being controlled by them, in just such measure will you master

affairs and outward circumstances.

  Show me a man under whose touch everything crumbles away, and who

cannot retain success even when it is placed in his hands, and I will show you

a man who dwells continually in those conditions of mind which are the very

negation of power.

  To be for ever wallowing in the bogs of doubt, to be drawn continually

into  the  quicksands  of  fear,  or  blown  ceaselessly  about  by  the  winds  of

anxiety, is to be a slave, and to live the life of a slave, even though success

and influence be for ever knocking at your door seeking for admittance.

  Such  a  man,  being  without  faith  and  without  self-government,  is

incapable  of  the  right  government  of  his  affairs,  and  is  a  slave  to

circumstances; in reality a slave to himself. Such are taught by affliction, and

ultimately pass from weakness to strength by the stress of bitter experience.

Faith and purpose constitute the motive- power of life.

  There is nothing that a strong faith and an unflinching purpose may not

accomplish.  By  the  daily  exercise  of  silent  faith,  the  thought-forces  are

gathered  together,  and  by  the  daily  strengthening  of  silent  purpose,  those

forces are directed toward the object of accomplishment.

    Whatever your position in life may be, before you can hope to enter into

any measure of success, usefulness, and power, you must learn how to focus

your thought-forces by cultivating calmness and repose. It may be that you

are  a  business  man,  and  you  are  suddenly  confronted  with  some

overwhelming difficulty or probable disaster. You grow fearful and anxious,and are at your wit’s end.

  To persist in such a state of mind would be fatal, for when anxiety steps

in, correct judgment passes out. Now if you will take advantage of a quiet

hour or two in the early morning or at night, and go away to some solitary

spot, or to some room in your house where you know you will be absolutely

free  from  intrusion,  and,  having  seated  yourself  in  an  easy  attitude,  you

forcibly direct your mind right away from the object of anxiety by dwelling

upon  something  in  your  life  that  is  pleasing  and  bliss-giving,  a  calm,

reposeful strength will gradually steal into your mind, and your anxiety will

pass away.

  Upon the instant that you find your mind reverting to the lower plane of

worry  bring  it  back  again,  and  re-establish  it  on  the  plane  of  peace  and

strength.

  When this is fully accomplished, you may then concentrate your whole

mind  upon  the  solution  of  your  difficulty,  and  what  was  intricate  and

insurmountable to you in your hour of anxiety will be made plain and easy,

and you will see, with that clear vision and perfect judgment which belong

only to a calm and untroubled mind, the right course to pursue and the proper

end to be brought about.

  It may be that you will have to try day after day before you will be able to

perfectly calm your mind, but if you persevere you will certainly accomplish

it. And the course which is presented to you in that hour of calmness must be

carried out.

    Doubtless when you are again involved in the business of the day, and

worries again creep in and begin to dominate you, you will begin to think that

the course is a wrong or foolish one, but do not heed such suggestions.

  Be guided absolutely and entirely by the vision of calmness, and not by

the shadows of anxiety. The hour of calmness is the hour of illumination and

correct judgment.

  By such a course of mental discipline the scattered thought-forces are re-

united, and directed, like the rays of the search-light, upon the problem at

issue, with the result that it gives way before them.

  There is no difficulty, however great, but will yield before a calm and

powerful  concentration  of  thought,  and  no  legitimate  object  but  may  be

speedily actualized by the intelligent use and direction of one’s soul-forces.  Not until you have gone deeply and searchingly into your inner nature,

and  have  overcome  many  enemies  that  lurk  there,  can  you  have  any

approximate conception of the subtle power of thought, of its inseparable

relation  to  outward  and  material  things,  or  of  its  magical  potency,  when

rightly  poised  and  directed,  in  readjusting  and  transforming  the  life-

conditions.

  Every thought you think is a force sent out, and in accordance with its

nature and intensity will it go out to seek a lodgment in minds receptive to it,

and will react upon yourself for good or evil. There is ceaseless reciprocity

between mind and mind, and a continual interchange of thought-forces.

    Selfish and disturbing thoughts are so many malignant and destructive

forces, messengers of evil, sent out to stimulate and augment the evil in other

minds, which in turn send them back upon you with added power.

  While thoughts that are calm, pure, and unselfish are so many angelic

messengers sent out into the world with health, healing, and blessedness upon

their wings, counteracting the evil forces; pouring the oil of joy upon the

troubled waters of anxiety and sorrow, and restoring to broken hearts their

heritage of immortality.

  Think good thoughts, and they will quickly become actualized in your

outward life in the form of good conditions. Control your soul-forces, and

you will be able to shape your outward life as you will.

  The difference between a saviour and a sinner is this, that the one has a

perfect  control  of  all  the  forces  within  him;  the  other  is  dominated  and

controlled by them.

  There is absolutely no other way to true power and abiding peace, but by

self-control, self-government, self-purification. To be at the mercy of your

disposition is to be impotent, unhappy, and of little real use in the world.

  The conquest of your petty likes and dislikes, your capricious loves and

hates, your fits of anger, suspicion, jealousy, and all the changing moods to

which you are more or less helplessly subject, this is the task you have before

you if you would weave into the web of life the golden threads of happiness

and prosperity.

  In so far as you are enslaved by the changing moods within you, will you

need to depend upon others and upon outward aids as you walk through life.  If  you  would  walk  firmly  and  securely,  and  would  accomplish  any

achievement, you must learn to rise above and control all such disturbing and

retarding vibrations.

  You must daily practice the habit of putting your mind at rest, “going into

the  silence,”  as  it  is  commonly  called.  This  is  a  method  of  replacing  a

troubled  thought  with  one  of  peace,  a  thought  of  weakness  with  one  of

strength.

  Until you succeed in doing this you cannot hope to direct your mental

forces upon the problems and pursuits of life with any appreciable measure of

success. It is a process of diverting one’s scattered forces into one powerful

channel.

  Just as a useless marsh may be converted into a field of golden corn or a

fruitful garden by draining and directing the scattered and harmful streams

into one well-cut channel, so, he who acquires calmness, and subdues and

directs the thought-currents within himself, saves his soul, and fructifies his

heart and life.

  As you succeed in gaining mastery over your impulses and thoughts you

will begin to feel, growing up within you, a new and silent power, and a

settled feeling of composure and strength will remain with you.

  Your  latent  powers  will  begin  to  unfold  themselves,  and  whereas

formerly your efforts were weak and ineffectual, you will now be able to

work with that calm confidence which commands success.

  And along with this new power and strength, there will be awakened

within you that interior Illumination known as “intuition,” and you will walk

no longer in darkness and speculation, but in light and certainty.

  With  the  development  of  this  soul-vision,  judgment  and  mental

penetration will be incalculably increased, and there will evolve within you

that prophetic vision by the aid of which you will be able to sense coming

events, and to forecast, with remarkable accuracy, the result of your efforts.

  And in just the measure that you alter from within will your outlook upon

life alter; and as you alter your mental attitude towards others they will alter

in their attitude and conduct toward you.

  As you rise above the lower, debilitating, and destructive thought-forces,

you will come in contact with the positive, strengthening, and up-buildingcurrents generated by strong, pure, and noble minds, your happiness will be

immeasurably intensified, and you will begin to realize the joy, strength, and

power, which are born only of self-mastery.

  And this joy, strength, and power will be continually radiating from you,

and without any effort on your part, nay, though you are utterly unconscious

of it, strong people will be drawn toward you, influence will be put into your

hands,  and  in  accordance  with  your  altered  thought-world  will  outward

events shape themselves.

  “A man’s foes are they of his own household,” and he who would be

useful,  strong,  and  happy,  must  cease  to  be  a  passive  receptacle  for  the

negative,  beggardly,  and  impure  streams  of  thought;  and  as  a  wise

householder commands his servants and invites his guests, so must he learn

to command his desires, and to say, with authority, what thoughts he shall

admit into the mansion of his soul.

  Even a very partial success in self-mastery adds greatly to one’s power,

and he who succeeds in perfecting this divine accomplishment, enters into

possession  of  undreamed-of  wisdom  and  inward  strength  and  peace,  and

realizes that all the forces of the universe aid and protect his footsteps who is

master of his soul.

  Would you scale the highest heaven,

  Would you pierce the lowest hell,

  Live in dreams of constant beauty,

  Or in basest thinkings dwell.

  For your thoughts are heaven above you,

  And your thoughts are hell below,

  Bliss is not, except in thinking,

  Torment nought but thought can know.

  Worlds would vanish but for thinking;

  Glory is not but in dreams;

  And the Drama of the ages

  From the Thought Eternal streams.

  Dignity and shame and sorrow,

  Pain and anguish, love and hate  Are but maskings of the mighty

  Pulsing Thought that governs Fate.

  As the colors of the rainbow

  Makes the one uncolored beam,

  So the universal changes

  Make the One Eternal Dream.

  And the Dream is all within you,

  And the Dreamer waiteth long

  For the Morning to awake him

  To the living thought and strong.

  That shall make the ideal real,

  Make to vanish dreams of hell

  In the highest, holiest heaven

  Where the pure and perfect dwell.

  Evil is the thought that thinks it;

  Good, the thought that makes it so

  Light and darkness, sin and pureness

  Likewise out of thinking grow.

  Dwell in thought upon the Grandest,

  And the Grandest you shall see;

  Fix your mind upon the Highest,

  And the Highest you shall be.          5. THE SECRET OF HEALTH, SUCCESS


                                AND POWER


  We all remember with what intense delight, as children, we listened to the

never tiring fairy-tale. How eagerly we followed the fluctuating fortunes of

the  good  boy  or  girl,  ever  protected,  in  the  hour  of  crisis,  from  the  evil

machinations of the scheming witch, the cruel giant, or the wicked king.

  And our little hearts never faltered for the fate of the hero or heroine, nor

did we doubt their ultimate triumph over all their enemies, for we knew that

the fairies were infallible, and that they would never desert those who had

consecrated themselves to the good and the true.

  And  what  unspeakable  joy  pulsated  within  us  when  the  Fairy-Queen,

bringing  all  her  magic  to  bear  at  the  critical  moment,  scattered  all  the

darkness and trouble, and granted them the complete satisfaction of all their

hopes, and they were “happy ever after.”

  With the accumulating years, and an ever-increasing intimacy with the

so-called “realities” of life, our beautiful fairy-world became obliterated, and

its wonderful inhabitants were relegated, in the archives of memory, to the

shadowy and unreal.

  And we thought we were wise and strong in thus leaving for ever the land

of childish dreams, but as we re-become little children in the wondrous world

of wisdom, we shall return again to the inspiring dreams of childhood and

find that they are, after all, realities.

  The fairy-folk, so small and nearly always invisible, yet possessed of an

all-conquering  and  magical  power,  who  bestow  upon  the  good,  health,

wealth, and happiness, along with all the gifts of nature in lavish profusion,

start again into reality and become immortalized in the soul-realm of him

who, by growth in wisdom, has entered into a knowledge of the power of

thought, and the laws which govern the inner world of being.

  To  him  the  fairies  live  again  as  thought-people,  thought-messengers,

thought-powers working in harmony with the over-ruling Good. And they

who, day by day, endeavour to harmonize their hearts with the heart of the

Supreme Good, do in reality acquire true health, wealth, and happiness.  There is no protection to compare with goodness, and by “goodness” I do

not mean a mere outward conformity to the rules of morality; I mean pure

thought, noble aspiration, unselfish love, and freedom from vainglory.

  To  dwell  continually  in  good  thoughts,  is  to  throw  around  oneself  a

psychic atmosphere of sweetness and power which leaves its impress upon all

who come in contact with it.

  As the rising sun puts to rout the helpless shadows, so are all the impotent

forces of evil put to flight by the searching rays of positive thought which

shine forth from a heart made strong in purity and faith.

  Where there is sterling faith and uncompromising purity there is health,

there is success, there is power. In such a one, disease, failure, and disaster

can find no lodgment, for there is nothing on which they can feed.

  Even physical conditions are largely determined by mental states, and to

this truth the scientific world is rapidly being drawn.

  The old, materialistic belief that a man is what his body makes him, is

rapidly passing away, and is being replaced by the inspiring belief that man is

superior to his body, and that his body is what he makes it by the power of

thought.

  Men everywhere are ceasing to believe that a man is despairing because

he is dyspeptic, and are coming to understand that he is dyspeptic because he

is despairing, and in the near future, the fact that all disease has its origin in

the mind will become common knowledge.

  There is no evil in the universe but has its root and origin in the mind, and

sin, sickness, sorrow, and affliction do not, in reality, belong to the universal

order, are not inherent in the nature of things, but are the direct outcome of

our ignorance of the right relations of things.

    According to tradition, there once lived, in India, a school of philosophers

who led a life of such absolute purity and simplicity that they commonly

reached the age of one hundred and fifty years, and to fall sick was looked

upon by them as an unpardonable disgrace, for it was considered to indicate a

violation of law.

  The sooner we realize and acknowledge that sickness, far from being the

arbitrary visitation of an offended God, or the test of an unwise Providence, is

the result of our own error or sin, the sooner shall we enter upon the highwayof health.

  Disease comes to those who attract it, to those whose minds and bodies

are receptive to it, and flees from those whose strong, pure, and positive

thought-sphere generates healing and life-giving currents.

  If  you  are  given  to  anger,  worry,  jealousy,  greed,  or  any  other

inharmonious  state  of  mind,  and  expect  perfect  physical  health,  you  are

expecting the impossible, for you are continually sowing the seeds of disease

in your mind.

  Such conditions of mind are carefully shunned by the wise man, for he

knows them to be far more dangerous than a bad drain or an infected house.

  If you would be free from all physical aches and pains, and would enjoy

perfect physical harmony, then put your mind in order, and harmonize your

thoughts.  Think  joyful  thoughts;  think  loving  thoughts;  let  the  elixir  of

goodwill course through your veins, and you will need no other medicine. Put

away  your  jealousies,  your  suspicions,  your  worries,  your  hatreds,  your

selfish indulgences, and you will put away your dyspepsia, your biliousness,

your nervousness and aching joints.

  If you will persist in clinging to these debilitating and demoralizing habits

of mind, then do not complain when your body is laid low with sickness. The

following  story  illustrates  the  close  relation  that  exists  between  habits  of

mind and bodily conditions.

  A  certain  man  was  afflicted  with  a  painful  disease,  and  he  tried  one

physician after another, but all to no purpose. He then visited towns which

were famous for their curative waters, and after having bathed in them all, his

disease was more painful than ever.

  One night he dreamed that a Presence came to him and said, “Brother,

hast thou tried all the means of cure?” and he replied, “I have tried all.”

“Nay,” said the Presence, “Come with me, and I will show thee a healing

bath which has escaped thy notice.”

  The afflicted man followed, and the Presence led him to a clear pool of

water, and said, “Plunge thyself in this water and thou shalt surely recover,”

and thereupon vanished.

  The man plunged into the water, and on coming out, Io! his disease had

left him, and at the same moment he saw written above the pool the word“Renounce.” Upon waking, the fall meaning of his dream flashed across his

mind, and looking within he discovered that he had, all along, been a victim

to a sinful indulgence, and he vowed that he would renounce it for ever.

  He carried out his vow, and from that day his affliction began to leave

him, and in a short time he was completely restored to health. Many people

complain that they have broken down through over-work. In the majority of

such cases the breakdown is more frequently the result of foolishly wasted

energy.

  If you would secure health you must learn to work without friction. To

become anxious or excited, or to worry over needless details is to invite a

breakdown.

  Work, whether of brain or body, is beneficial and health-giving, and the

man who can work with a steady and calm persistency, freed from all anxiety

and worry, and with his mind utterly oblivious to all but the work he has in

hand, will not only accomplish far more than the man who is always hurried

and anxious, but he will retain his health, a boon which the other quickly

forfeits.

  True  health  and  true  success  go  together,  for  they  are  inseparably

intertwined in the thought-realm. As mental harmony produces bodily health,

so it also leads to a harmonious sequence in the actual working out of one’s

plans.

  Order  your  thoughts  and  you  will  order  your  life.  Pour  the  oil  of

tranquility upon the turbulent waters of the passions and prejudices, and the

tempests of misfortune, howsoever they may threaten, will be powerless to

wreck the barque of your soul, as it threads its way across the ocean of life.

  And if that barque be piloted by a cheerful and never-failing faith its

course will be doubly sure, and many perils will pass it by which would

other-wise attack it.

  By the power of faith every enduring work is accomplished. Faith in the

Supreme; faith in the over-ruling Law; faith in your work, and in your power

to accomplish that work, -here is the rock upon which you must build if you

would achieve, if you would stand and not fall.

  To follow, under all circumstances, the highest promptings within you; to

be always true to the divine self; to rely upon the inward Light, the inward

Voice, and to pursue your purpose with a fearless and restful heart, believingthat the future will yield unto you the meed of every thought and effort;

knowing that the laws of the universe can never fail, and that your own will

come back to you with mathematical exactitude, this is faith and the living of

faith.

  By the power of such a faith the dark waters of uncertainty are divided,

every mountain of difficulty crumbles away, and the believing soul passes on

unharmed.

  Strive, O reader! to acquire, above everything, the priceless possession of

this dauntless faith, for it is the talisman of happiness, of success, of peace, of

power, of all that makes life great and superior to suffering.

  Build upon such a faith, and you build upon the Rock of the Eternal, and

with the materials of the Eternal, and the structure that you erect will never be

dissolved, for it will transcend all the accumulations of material luxuries and

riches, the end of which is dust.

  Whether  you  are  hurled  into  the  depths  of  sorrow  or  lifted  upon  the

heights of joy, ever retain your hold upon this faith, ever return to it as your

rock  of  refuge,  and  keep  your  feet  firmly  planted  upon  its  immortal  and

immovable base.

    Centered in such a faith, you will become possessed of such a spiritual

strength as will shatter, like so many toys of glass, all the forces of evil that

are  hurled  against  you,  and  you  will  achieve  a  success  such  as  the  mere

striver after worldly gain can never know or even dream of. “If ye have faith,

and  doubt  not,  ye  shall  not  only  do  this,  ...  but  if  ye  shall  say  unto  this

mountain, be thou removed and be thou cast into the sea, it shall be done.”

  There are those today, men and women tabernacled in flesh and blood,

who have realized this faith, who live in it and by it day by day, and who,

having put it to the uttermost test, have entered into the possession of its

glory and peace.

  Such have sent out the word of command, and the mountains of sorrow

and disappointment, of mental weariness and physical pain have passed from

them, and have been cast into the sea of oblivion.

  If you will become possessed of this faith you will not need to trouble

about your success or failure, and success will come.

  You will not need to become anxious about results, but will work joyfullyand peacefully, knowing that right thoughts and right efforts will inevitably

bring about right results.

  I  know  a  lady  who  has  entered  into  many  blissful  satisfactions,  and

recently a friend remarked to her, “Oh, how fortunate you are! You only have

to wish for a thing, and it comes to you.”

  And  it  did,  indeed,  appear  so  on  the  surface;  but  in  reality  all  the

blessedness that has entered into this woman’s life is the direct outcome of

the  inward  state  of  blessedness  which  she  has,  throughout  life,  been

cultivating and training toward perfection.

  Mere wishing brings nothing but disappointment; it is living that tells.

  The foolish wish and grumble; the wise, work and wait. And this woman

had worked; worked without and within, but especially within upon heart and

soul; and with the invisible hands of the spirit she had built up, with the

precious stones of faith, hope, joy, devotion, and love, a fair temple of light,

whose glorifying radiance was ever round about her.

  It beamed in her eye; it shone through her countenance; it vibrated in her

voice; and all who came into her presence felt its captivating spell.

  And as with her, so with you. Your success, your failure, your influence,

your  whole  life  you  carry  about  with  you,  for  your  dominant  trends  of

thought are the determining factors in your destiny.

  Send forth loving, stainless, and happy thoughts, and blessings will fall

into your hands, and your table will be spread with the cloth of peace.

  Send forth hateful, impure, and unhappy thoughts, and curses will rain

down upon you, and fear and unrest will wait upon your pillow. You are the

unconditional maker of your fate, be that fate what it may. Every moment

you are sending forth from you the influences which will make or mar your

life.

  Let your heart grow large and loving and unselfish, and great and lasting

will be your influence and success, even though you make little money.

  Confine it within the narrow limits of self-interest, and even though you

become a millionaire your influence and success, at the final reckoning will

be found to be utterly insignificant. Cultivate, then, this pure and unselfish

spirit, and combine with purity and faith, singleness of purpose, and you are

evolving  from  within  the  elements,  not  only  of  abounding  health  andenduring success, but of greatness and power.

  If your present position is distasteful to you, and your heart is not in your

work, nevertheless perform your duties with scrupulous diligence, and whilst

resting your mind in the idea that the better position and greater opportunities

are  waiting  for  you,  ever  keep  an  active  mental  outlook  for  budding

possibilities, so that when the critical moment arrives, and the new channel

presents itself, you will step into it with your mind fully prepared for the

undertaking, and with that intelligence and foresight which is born of mental

discipline.

    Whatever your task may be, concentrate your whole mind upon it, throw

into it all the energy of which you are capable. The faultless completion of

small tasks leads inevitably to larger tasks. See to it that you rise by steady

climbing, and you will never fall. And herein lies the secret of true power.

  Learn,  by  constant  practice,  how  to  husband  your  resources,  and  to

concentrate them, at any moment, upon a given point. The foolish waste all

their  mental  and  spiritual  energy  in  frivolity,  foolish  chatter,  or  selfish

argument, not to mention wasteful physical excesses.

  If you would acquire overcoming power you must cultivate poise and

passivity.  You  must  be  able  to  stand  alone.  All  power  is  associated  with

immovability. The mountain, the massive rock, the storm-tried oak, all speak

to  us  of  power,  because  of  their  combined  solitary  grandeur  and  defiant

fixity; while the shifting sand, the yielding twig, and the waving reed speak to

us of weakness, because they are movable and non-resistant, and are utterly

useless when detached from their fellows.

  He is the man of power who, when all his fellows are swayed by some

emotion  or  passion,  remains  calm  and  unmoved.  He  only  is  fitted  to

command and control who has succeeded in commanding and controlling

himself.

  The hysterical, the fearful, the thoughtless and frivolous, let such seek

company, or they will fall for lack of support; but the calm, the fearless, the

thoughtful, and let such seek the solitude of the forest, the desert, and the

mountain-top, and to their power more power will be added, and they will

more and more successfully stem the psychic currents and whirlpools which

engulf mankind.

  Passion is not power; it is the abuse of power, the dispersion of power.Passion  is  like  a  furious  storm  which  beats  fiercely  and  wildly  upon  the

embattled rock whilst power is like the rock itself, which remains silent and

unmoved through it all.

  That was a manifestation of true power when Martin Luther, wearied with

the persuasions of his fearful friends, who were doubtful as to his safety

should he go to Worms, replied, “If there were as many devils in Worms as

there are tiles on the housetops I would go.”

  And  when  Benjamin  Disraeli  broke  down  in  his  first  Parliamentary

speech, and brought upon himself the derision of the House, that was an

exhibition of germinal power when he exclaimed, “The day will come when

you will consider it an honour to listen to me.”

  When that young man, whom I knew, passing through continual reverses

and misfortunes, was mocked by his friends and told to desist from further

effort, and he replied, “The time is not far distant when you will marvel at my

good fortune and success,” he showed that he was possessed of that silent and

irresistible  power  which  has  taken  him  over  innumerable  difficulties,  and

crowned his life with success.

  If  you  have  not  this  power,  you  may  acquire  it  by  practice,  and  the

beginning  of  power  is  likewise  the  beginning  of  wisdom.  You  must

commence by overcoming those purposeless trivialities to which you have

hitherto been a willing victim.

    Boisterous and uncontrolled laughter, slander and idle talk, and joking

merely to raise a laugh, all these things must be put on one side as so much

waste of valuable energy.

  St.  Paul  never  showed  his  wonderful  insight  into  the  hidden  laws  of

human progress to greater advantage than when he warned the Ephesians

against “Foolish talking and jesting which is not convenient,” for to dwell

habitually in such practices is to destroy all spiritual power and life.

  As  you  succeed  in  rendering  yourself  impervious  to  such  mental

dissipations you will begin to understand what true power is, and you will

then  commence  to  grapple  with  the  more  powerful  desires  and  appetites

which hold your soul in bondage, and bar the way to power, and your further

progress will then be made clear.

  Above all be of single aim; have a legitimate and useful purpose, and

devote yourself unreservedly to it. Let nothing draw you aside; rememberthat the double-minded man is unstable in all his ways.

  Be eager to learn, but slow to beg. Have a thorough understanding of your

work, and let it be your own; and as you proceed, ever following the inward

Guide, the infallible Voice, you will pass on from victory to victory, and will

rise step by step to higher resting-places, and your ever-broadening outlook

will gradually reveal to you the essential beauty and purpose of life.

    Self-purified, health will be yours; faith-protected, success will be yours;

self-governed, power will be yours, and all that you do will prosper, for,

ceasing to be a disjointed unit, self-enslaved, you will be in harmony with the

Great  Law,  working  no  longer  against,  but  with,  the  Universal  Life,  the

Eternal Good.

  And  what  health  you  gain  it  will  remain  with  you;  what  success  you

achieve will be beyond all human computation, and will never pass away;

and what influence and power you wield will continue to increase throughout

the ages, for it will be a part of that unchangeable Principle which supports

the universe.

  This, then, is the secret of health, -a pure heart and a well-ordered mind;

this  is  the  secret  of  success,  -an  unfaltering  faith,  and  a  wisely-directed

purpose; and to rein in, with unfaltering will, the dark steed of desire, this is

the secret of power.

  All ways are waiting for my feet to tread,

  The light and dark, the living and the dead,

  The broad and narrow way, the high and low,

  The good and bad, and with quick step or slow,

  I now may enter any way I will,

  And find, by walking, which is good, which ill.

  And all good things my wandering feet await,

  If I but come, with vow inviolate,

  Unto the narrow, high and holy way

  Of heart-born purity, and therein stay;

    Walking, secure from him who taunts and scorns,

  To flowery meads, across the path of thorns.

  And I may stand where health, success, and power  Await my coming, if, each fleeting hour,

  I cling to love and patience; and abide

  With stainlessness; and never step aside

  From high integrity; so shall I see

  At last the land of immortality.

  And I may seek and find; I may achieve,

  I may not claim, but, losing, may retrieve.

  The law bends not for me, but I must bend

  Unto the law, if I would reach the end

  Of my afflictions, if I would restore

  My soul to Light and Life, and weep no more.

  Not mine the arrogant and selfish claim

  To all good things; be mine the lowly aim

  To seek and find, to know and comprehend,

  And wisdom-ward all holy footsteps wend,

  Nothing is mine to claim or to command,

  But all is mine to know and understand.                6. THE SECRET OF ABOUNDING


                                  HAPPINESS


  Great  is  the  thirst  for  happiness,  and  equally  great  is  the  lack  of

happiness.  The  majority  of  the  poor  long  for  riches,  believing  that  their

possession would bring them supreme and lasting happiness.

  Many who are rich, having gratified every desire and whim, suffer from

ennui and repletion, and are farther from the possession of happiness even

than the very poor.

  If  we  reflect  upon  this  state  of  things  it  will  ultimately  lead  us  to  a

knowledge of the all-important truth that happiness is not derived from mere

outward possessions, nor misery from the lack of them; for if this were so, we

should find the poor always miserable, and the rich always happy, whereas

the reverse is frequently the case.

  Some of the most wretched people whom I have known were those who

were surrounded with riches and luxury, whilst some of the brightest and

happiest people I have met were possessed of only the barest necessities of

life.

  Many men who have accumulated riches have confessed that the selfish

gratification which followed the acquisition of riches has robbed life of its

sweetness, and that they were never so happy as when they were poor.

  What, then, is happiness, and how is it to be secured? Is it a figment, a

delusion,  and  is  suffering  alone  perennial?  We  shall  find,  after  earnest

observation and reflection, that all, except those who have entered the way of

wisdom, believe that happiness is only to be obtained by the gratification of

desire.

  It is this belief, rooted in the soil of ignorance, and continually watered by

selfish cravings, that is the cause of all the misery in the world.

  And  I  do  not  limit  the  word  desire  to  the  grosser  animal  cravings;  it

extends to the higher psychic realm, where far more powerful, subtle, and

insidious  cravings  hold  in  bondage  the  intellectual  and  refined,  depriving

them of all that beauty, harmony, and purity of soul whose expression is

happiness.  Most people will admit that selfishness is the cause of all the unhappiness

in  the  world,  but  they  fall  under  the  soul-destroying  delusion  that  it  is

somebody else’s selfishness, and not their own.

  When you are willing to admit that all your unhappiness is the result of

your own selfishness you will not be far from the gates of Paradise; but so

long as you are convinced that it is the selfishness of others that is robbing

you of joy, so long will you remain a prisoner in your self-created purgatory.

  Happiness is that inward state of perfect satisfaction which is joy and

peace, and from which all desire is eliminated. The satisfaction which results

from gratified desire is brief and illusionary, and is always followed by an

increased demand for gratification.

  Desire is as insatiable as the ocean, and clamors louder and louder as its

demands are attended to.

  It claims ever-increasing service from its deluded devotees, until at last

they are struck down with physical or mental anguish, and are hurled into the

purifying fires of suffering. Desire is the region of hell, and all torments are

centered there.

  The giving up of desire is the realization of heaven, and all delights await

the pilgrim there,

  I sent my soul through the invisible,

  Some letter of that after life to spell,

  And by-and-by my soul returned to me,

  And whispered, I myself am heaven and hell,”

  Heaven and hell are inward states. Sink into self and all its gratifications,

and you sink into hell; rise above self into that state of consciousness which

is the utter denial and forgetfulness of self, and you enter heaven.

  Self is blind, without judgment, not possessed of true knowledge, and

always leads to suffering. Correct perception, unbiased judgment, and true

knowledge belong only to the divine state, and only in so far as you realize

this divine consciousness can you know what real happiness is.

  So  long  as  you  persist  in  selfishly  seeking  for  your  own  personal

happiness, so long will happiness elude you, and you will be sowing the

seeds of wretchedness.

  In so far as you succeed in losing yourself in the service of others, in thatmeasure will happiness come to you, and you will reap a harvest of bliss.

  It is in loving, not in being loved,

  The heart is blessed;

  It is in giving, not in seeking gifts,

  We find our quest.

  Whatever be thy longing or thy need,

  That do thou give;

  So shall thy soul be fed, and thou indeed

  Shalt truly live.

  Cling to self, and you cling to sorrow, relinquish self, and you enter into

peace. To seek selfishly is not only to lose happiness, but even that which we

believe to be the source of happiness.

  See  how  the  glutton  is  continually  looking  about  for  a  new  delicacy

wherewith to stimulate his deadened appetite; and how, bloated, burdened,

and diseased, scarcely any food at last is eaten with pleasure.

    Whereas, he who has mastered his appetite, and not only does not seek,

but never thinks of gustatory pleasure, finds delight in the most frugal meal.

The angel-form of happiness, which men, looking through the eyes of self,

imagine they see in gratified desire, when clasped is always found to be the

skeleton of misery. Truly, “He that seeketh his life shall lose it, and he that

loseth his life shall find it.”

  Abiding happiness will come to you when, ceasing to selfishly cling, you

are  willing  to  give  up.  When  you  are  willing  to  lose,  unreservedly,  that

impermanent thing which is so dear to you, and which, whether you cling to

it or not, will one day be snatched from you, then you will find that that

which seemed to you like a painful loss, turns out to be a supreme gain.

  To give up in order to gain, than this there is no greater delusion, nor no

more prolific source of misery; but to be willing to yield up and to suffer loss,

this is indeed the Way of Life.

  How is it possible to find real happiness by centering ourselves in those

things  which,  by  their  very  nature,  must  pass  away?  Abiding  and  real

happiness  can  only  be  found  by  centering  ourselves  in  that  which  is

permanent.

  Rise, therefore, above the clinging to and the craving for impermanentthings, and you will then enter into a consciousness of the Eternal, and as,

rising above self, and by growing more and more into the spirit of purity,

self-sacrifice and universal Love, you become centered in that consciousness,

you will realize that happiness which has no reaction, and which can never be

taken from you.

  The heart that has reached utter self-forgetfulness in its love for others has

not  only  become  possessed  of  the  highest  happiness  but  has  entered  into

immortality, for it has realized the Divine.

  Look  back  upon  your  life,  and  you  will  find  that  the  moments  of

supremest  happiness  were  those  in  which  you  uttered  some  word,  or

performed  some  act,  of  compassion  or  self-denying  love.  Spiritually,

happiness and harmony are, synonymous.

    Harmony is one phase of the Great Law whose spiritual expression is

love. All selfishness is discord, and to be selfish is to be out of harmony with

the Divine order.

  As we realize that all-embracing love which is the negation of self, we put

ourselves in harmony with the divine music, the universal song, and that

ineffable melody which is true happiness becomes our own.

  Men and women are rushing hither and thither in the blind search for

happiness,  and  cannot  find  it;  nor  ever  will  until  they  recognize  that

happiness is already within them and round about them, filling the universe,

and that they, in their selfish searching are shutting themselves out from it.

  I followed happiness to make her mine,

  Past towering oak and swinging ivy vine.

  She fled, I chased, o’er slanting hill and dale,

  O’er fields and meadows, in the purpling vale;

  Pursuing rapidly o’er dashing stream.

  I scaled the dizzy cliffs where eagles scream;

  I traversed swiftly every land and M.

  But always happiness eluded me.

    Exhausted, fainting, I pursued no more,

  But sank to rest upon a barren shore.

  One came and asked for food, and one for alms  I placed the bread and gold in bony palms.

  One came for sympathy, and one for rest;

  I shared with every needy one my best;

  When, Io! sweet Happiness, with form divine,

  Stood by me, whispering softly, ‘I am thine’.

  These beautiful lines of Burleigh’s express the secret of all abounding

happiness. Sacrifice the personal and transient, and you rise at once into the

impersonal and permanent.

  Give  up  that  narrow  cramped  self  that  seeks  to  render  all  things

subservient to its own petty interests, and you will enter into the company of

the angels, into the very heart and essence of universal Love.

  Forget yourself entirely in the sorrows of others and in ministering to

others,  and  divine  happiness  will  emancipate  you  from  all  sorrow  and

suffering.

  “Taking the first step with a good thought, the second with a good word,

and the third with a good deed, I entered Paradise.” And you also may enter

into Paradise by pursuing the same course. It is not beyond, it is here. It is

realized only by the unselfish.

  It  is  known  in  its  fullness  only  to  the  pure  in  heart.  If  you  have  not

realized  this  unbounded  happiness  you  may  begin  to  actualize  it  by  ever

holding before you the lofty ideal of unselfish love, and aspiring towards it.

    Aspiration or prayer is desire turned upward. It is the soul turning toward

its  Divine  source,  where  alone  permanent  satisfaction  can  be  found.  By

aspiration the destructive forces of desire are transmuted into divine and all-

preserving energy.

  To aspire is to make an effort to shake off the trammels of desire; it is the

prodigal  made  wise  by  loneliness  and  suffering,  returning  to  his  Father’s

Mansion.

  As you rise above the sordid self; as you break, one after another, the

chains that bind you, will you realize the joy of giving, as distinguished from

the misery of grasping - giving of your substance; giving of your intellect;

giving of the love and light that is growing within you.

  You will then understand that it is indeed “more blessed to give than to

receive.” But the giving must be of the heart without any taint of self, withoutdesire for reward. The gift of pure love is always attended with bliss. If, after

you have given, you are wounded because you are not thanked or flattered, or

your name put in the paper, know then that your gift was prompted by vanity

and not by love, and you were merely giving in order to get; were not really

giving, but grasping.

  Lose yourself in the welfare of others; forget yourself in all that you do;

this is the secret of abounding happiness.

  Ever be on the watch to guard against selfishness, and learn faithfully the

divine lessons of inward sacrifice; so shall you climb the highest heights of

happiness, and shall remain in the never-clouded sunshine of universal joy,

clothed in the shining garment of immortality.

  Are you searching for the happiness that does not fade away?

  Are you looking for the joy that lives, and leaves no grievous day?

  Are you panting for the waterbrooks of Love, and Life, and Peace?

  Then let all dark desires depart, and selfish seeking cease.

  Are you ling’ring in the paths of pain, grief-haunted, stricken sore?

  Are you wand’ring in the ways that wound your weary feet the more?

  Are you sighing for the Resting-Place where tears and sorrows cease?

  Then sacrifice your selfish heart and find the Heart of Peace.          7. THE REALIZATION OF PROSPERITY


  It is granted only to the heart that abounds with integrity, trust, generosity

and love to realize true prosperity. The heart that is not possessed of these

qualities  cannot  know  prosperity,  for  prosperity,  like  happiness,  is  not  an

outward possession, but an inward realization.

  The  greedy  man  may  become  a  millionaire,  but  he  will  always  be

wretched,  and  mean,  and  poor,  and  will  even  consider  himself  outwardly

poor so long as there is a man in the world who is richer than himself, whilst

the upright, the open-handed and loving will realize a full and rich prosperity,

even though their outward possessions may be small.

  He is poor who is dissatisfied; he is rich who is contented with what he

has, and he is richer who is generous with what he has.

  When we contemplate the fact that the universe is abounding in all good

things,  material  as  well  as  spiritual,  and  compare  it  with  man’s  blind

eagerness to secure a few gold coins, or a few acres of dirt, it is then that we

realize how dark and ignorant selfishness is; it is then that we know that self-

seeking is self-destruction.

  Nature gives all, without reservation, and loses nothing; man, grasping

all, loses everything.

  If you would realize true prosperity do not settle down, as many have

done, into the belief that if you do right everything will go wrong. Do not

allow  the  word  “competition”  to  shake  your  faith  in  the  supremacy  of

righteousness.

  I care not what men may say about the “laws of competition,” for do I not

know the unchangeable Law, which shall one day put them all to rout, and

which puts them to rout even now in the heart and life of the righteous man?

  And knowing this Law I can contemplate all dishonesty with undisturbed

repose,  for  I  know  where  certain  destruction  awaits  it.  Under  all

circumstances do that which you believe to be right, and trust the Law; trust

the Divine Power that is imminent in the universe, and it will never desert

you, and you will always be protected.

  By such a trust all your losses will be converted into gains, and all curses

which threaten will be transmuted into blessings. Never let go of integrity,generosity, and love, for these, coupled with energy, will lift you into the

truly prosperous state.

  Do not believe the world when it tells you that you must always attend to

“number one” first, and to others afterwards. To do this is not to think of

others at all, but only of one’s own comforts.

  To those who practice this the day will come when they will be deserted

by all, and when they cry out in their loneliness and anguish there will be no

one to hear and help them. To consider one’s self before all others is to cramp

and warp and hinder every noble and divine impulse.

  Let your soul expand, let your heart reach out to others in loving and

generous warmth, and great and lasting will be your joy, and all prosperity

will  come  to  you.  Those  who  have  wandered  from  the  highway  of

righteousness  guard  themselves  against  competition;  those  who  always

pursue the right need not to trouble about such defense.

  This is no empty statement, There are men today who, by the power of

integrity and faith, have defied all competition, and who, without swerving in

the least from their methods, when competed with, have risen steadily into

prosperity,  whilst  those  who  tried  to  undermine  them  have  fallen  back

defeated.

  To  possess  those  inward  qualities  which  constitute  goodness  is  to  be

armored against all the powers of evil, and to be doubly protected in every

time  of  trial;  and  to  build’  oneself  up  in  those  qualities  is  to  build  up  a

success which cannot be shaken, and to enter into a prosperity which will

endure forever.

  The White Robe of the Heart Invisible

  Is stained with sin and sorrow, grief and pain,

  And all repentant pools and springs of prayer

  Shall not avail to wash it white again.

  While in the path of ignorance I walk,

  The stains of error will not cease to cling

    Defilements mark the crooked path of self,

  Where anguish lurks and disappointments sting.

  Knowledge and wisdom only can avail

  To purify and make my garment clean,  For therein lie love’s waters; therein rests

  Peace undisturbed, eternal, and serene.

  Sin and repentance is the path of pain,

  Knowledge and wisdom is the path of Peace

  By the near way of practice I will find

  Where bliss begins, how pains and sorrows cease.

  Self shall depart, and Truth shall take its place

  The Changeless One, the Indivisible

  Shall take up His abode in me, and cleanse

  The White Robe of the Heart Invisible.                              BOOK THREE


                    THE WAY OF PEACE                1. THE POWER OF MEDITATION


  Spiritual meditation is the pathway to Divinity. It is the mystic ladder

which reaches from earth to heaven, from error to Truth, from pain to peace.

Every saint has climbed it; every sinner must sooner or later come to it, and

every weary pilgrim that turns his back upon self and the world, and sets his

face resolutely toward the Father's Home, must plant his feet upon its golden

rounds.  Without  its  aid  you  cannot  grow  into  the  divine  state,  the  divine

likeness, the divine peace, and the fadeless glories and unpolluting joys of

Truth will remain hidden from you.

    Meditation is the intense dwelling, in thought, upon an idea or theme,

with  the  object  of  thoroughly  comprehending  it,  and  whatsoever  you

constantly meditate upon you will not only come to understand, but will grow

more and more into its likeness, for it will become incorporated into your

very being, will become, in fact, your very self. If, therefore, you constantly

dwell upon that which is selfish and debasing, you will ultimately become

selfish and debased; if you ceaselessly think upon that which is pure and

unselfish you will surely become pure and unselfish.

  Tell me what that is upon which you most frequently and intensely think,

that to which, in your silent hours, your soul most naturally turns, and I will

tell you to what place of pain or peace you are traveling, and whether you are

growing into the likeness of the divine or the bestial.

  There is an unavoidable tendency to become literally the embodiment of

that quality upon which one most constantly thinks. Let, therefore, the object

of your meditation be above and not below, so that every time you revert to it

in thought you will be lifted up; let it be pure and unmixed with any selfish

element; so shall your heart become purified and drawn nearer to Truth, and

not defiled and dragged more hopelessly into error.

    Meditation, in the spiritual sense in which I am now using it, is the secret

of  all  growth  in  spiritual  life  and  knowledge.  Every  prophet,  sage,  and

saviour became such by the power of meditation. Buddha meditated upon the

Truth until he could say, "I am the Truth." Jesus brooded upon the Divine

immanence until at last he could declare, "I and my Father are One."

    Meditation centered upon divine realities is the very essence and soul of

prayer.  It  is  the  silent  reaching  of  the  soul  toward  the  Eternal.  Merepetitionary  prayer  without  meditation  is  a  body  without  a  soul,  and  is

powerless to lift the mind and heart above sin and affliction. If you are daily

praying for wisdom, for peace, for loftier purity and a fuller realization of

Truth, and that for which you pray is still far from you, it means that you are

praying for one thing while living out in thought and act another. If you will

cease from such waywardness, taking your mind off those things the selfish

clinging to which debars you from the possession of the stainless realities for

which you pray: if you will no longer ask God to grant you that which you do

not deserve, or to bestow upon you that love and compassion which you

refuse to bestow upon others, but will commence to think and act in the spirit

of  Truth,  you  will  day  by  day  be  growing  into  those  realities,  so  that

ultimately you will become one with them.

  He who would secure any worldly advantage must be willing to work

vigorously for it, and he would be foolish indeed who, waiting with folded

hands, expected it to come to him for the mere asking. Do not then vainly

imagine  that  you  can  obtain  the  heavenly  possessions  without  making  an

effort. Only when you commence to work earnestly in the Kingdom of Truth

will you be allowed to partake of the Bread of Life, and when you have, by

patient and uncomplaining effort, earned the spiritual wages for which you

ask, they will not be withheld from you.

  If you really seek Truth, and not merely your own gratification; if you

love it above all worldly pleasures and gains; more, even, than happiness

itself, you will be willing to make the effort necessary for its achievement.

  If you would be freed from sin and sorrow; if you would taste of that

spotless purity for which you sigh and pray; if you would realize wisdom and

knowledge,  and  would  enter  into  the  possession  of  profound  and  abiding

peace, come now and enter the path of meditation, and let the supreme object

of your meditation be Truth.

  At the outset, meditation must be distinguished from idle reverie. There is

nothing dreamy and unpractical about it. It is a process of searching and

uncompromising thought which allows nothing to remain but the simple and

naked truth. Thus meditating you will no longer strive to build yourself up in

your prejudices, but, forgetting self, you will remember only that you are

seeking the Truth. And so you will remove, one by one, the errors which you

have  built  around  yourself  in  the  past,  and  will  patiently  wait  for  therevelation of Truth which will come when your errors have been sufficiently

removed. In the silent humility of your heart you will realize that

    "There is an inmost centre in us all

    Where Truth abides in fulness; and around,

    Wall upon wall, the gross flesh hems it in;

    This perfect, clear perception, which is Truth,

    A baffling and perverting carnal mesh

    Blinds it, and makes all error; and to know,

    Rather consists in opening out a way

    Whence the imprisoned splendour may escape,

    Than in effecting entry for a light

    Supposed to be without."

  Select some portion of the day in which to meditate, and keep that period

sacred to your purpose. The best time is the very early morning when the

spirit of repose is upon everything. All natural conditions will then be in your

favor; the passions, after the long bodily fast of the night, will be subdued,

the excitements and worries of the previous day will have died away, and the

mind, strong and yet restful, will be receptive to spiritual instruction. Indeed,

one of the first efforts you will be called upon to make will be to shake off

lethargy and indulgence, and if you refuse you will be unable to advance, for

the demands of the spirit are imperative.

  To  be  spiritually  awakened  is  also  to  be  mentally  and  physically

awakened. The sluggard and the self-indulgent can have no knowledge of

Truth. He who, possessed of health and strength, wastes the calm, precious

hours of the silent morning in drowsy indulgence is totally unfit to climb the

heavenly heights.

  He  whose  awakening  consciousness  has  become  alive  to  its  lofty

possibilities,  who  is  beginning  to  shake  off  the  darkness  of  ignorance  in

which the world is enveloped, rises before the stars have ceased their vigil,

and, grappling with the darkness within his soul, strives, by holy aspiration,

to perceive the light of Truth while the unawakened world dreams on.

    "The heights by great men reached and kept,

      Were not attained by sudden flight,

    But they, while their companions slept,      Were toiling upward in the night."

  No saint, no holy man, no teacher of Truth ever lived who did not rise

early in the morning. Jesus habitually rose early, and climbed the solitary

mountains to engage in holy communion. Buddha always rose an hour before

sunrise and engaged in meditation, and all his disciples were enjoined to do

the same.

  If you have to commence your daily duties at a very early hour, and are

thus debarred from giving the early morning to systematic meditation, try to

give an hour at night, and should this, by the length and laboriousness of your

daily  task  be  denied  you,  you  need  not  despair,  for  you  may  turn  your

thoughts upward in holy meditation in the intervals of your work, or in those

few idle minutes which you now waste in aimlessness; and should your work

be  of  that  kind  which  becomes  by  practice  automatic,  you  may  meditate

while engaged upon it. That eminent Christian saint and philosopher, Jacob

Boehme, realized his vast knowledge of divine things whilst working long

hours as a shoemaker. In every life there is time to think, and the busiest, the

most laborious is not shut out from aspiration and meditation.

  Spiritual  meditation  and  self-discipline  are  inseparable;  you  will,

therefore, commence to meditate upon yourself so as to try and understand

yourself, for, remember, the great object you will have in view will be the

complete removal of all your errors in order that you may realize Truth. You

will begin to question your motives, thoughts, and acts, comparing them with

your ideal, and endeavoring to look upon them with a calm and impartial eye.

In  this  manner  you  will  be  continually  gaining  more  of  that  mental  and

spiritual  equilibrium  without  which  men  are  but  helpless  straws  upon  the

ocean of life. If you are given to hatred or anger you will meditate upon

gentleness and forgiveness, so as to become acutely alive to a sense of your

harsh and foolish conduct. You will then begin to dwell in thoughts of love,

of gentleness, of abounding forgiveness; and as you overcome the lower by

the higher, there will gradually, silently steal into your heart a knowledge of

the divine Law of Love with an understanding of its bearing upon all the

intricacies of life and conduct. And in applying this knowledge to your every

thought, word, and act, you will grow more and more gentle, more and more

loving, more and more divine. And thus with every error, every selfish desire,

every human weakness; by the power of meditation is it overcome, and aseach sin, each error is thrust out, a fuller and clearer measure of the Light of

Truth illumines the pilgrim soul.

  Thus meditating, you will be ceaselessly fortifying yourself against your

only real  enemy,  your  selfish,  perishable  self,  and  will  be  establishing

yourself more and more firmly in the divine and imperishable self that is

inseparable from Truth. The direct outcome of your meditations will be a

calm,  spiritual  strength  which  will  be  your  stay  and  resting-place  in  the

struggle  of  life.  Great  is  the  overcoming  power  of  holy  thought,  and  the

strength and knowledge gained in the hour of silent meditation will enrich the

soul  with  saving  remembrance  in  the  hour  of  strife,  of  sorrow,  or  of

temptation.

  As, by the power of meditation, you grow in wisdom, you will relinquish,

more  and  more,  your  selfish  desires  which  are  fickle,  impermanent,  and

productive  of  sorrow  and  pain;  and  will  take  your  stand,  with  increasing

steadfastness  and  trust,  upon  unchangeable  principles,  and  will  realize

heavenly rest.

  The  use  of  meditation  is  the  acquirement  of  a  knowledge  of  eternal

principles, and the power which results from meditation is the ability to rest

upon and trust those principles, and so become one with the Eternal. The end

of  meditation  is,  therefore,  direct  knowledge  of  Truth,  God,  and  the

realization of divine and profound peace.

  Let your meditations take their rise from the ethical ground which you

now  occupy.  Remember  that  you  are  to grow  into  Truth  by  steady

perseverance. If you are an orthodox Christian, meditate ceaselessly upon the

spotless purity and divine excellence of the character of Jesus, and apply his

every precept to your inner life and outward conduct, so as to approximate

more and more toward his perfection. Do not be as those religious ones, who,

refusing  to  meditate  upon  the  Law  of  Truth,  and  to  put  into  practice  the

precepts given to them by their Master, are content to formally worship, to

cling to their particular creeds, and to continue in the ceaseless round of sin

and suffering. Strive to rise, by the power of meditation, above all selfish

clinging to partial gods or party creeds; above dead formalities and lifeless

ignorance. Thus walking the high way of wisdom, with mind fixed upon the

spotless Truth, you shall know no halting-place short of the realization of

Truth.  He who earnestly meditates first perceives a truth, as it were, afar off, and

then realizes it by daily practice. It is only the doer of the Word of Truth that

can know of the doctrine of Truth, for though by pure thought the Truth is

perceived, it is only actualized by practice.

  Said  the  divine  Gautama,  the  Buddha,  "He  who  gives  himself  up  to

vanity, and does not give himself up to meditation, forgetting the real aim of

life and grasping at pleasure, will in time envy him who has exerted himself

in meditation," and he instructed his disciples in the following "Five Great

Meditations":—

  "The first meditation is the meditation of love, in which you so adjust

your heart that you long for the weal and welfare of all beings, including the

happiness of your enemies.

  "The second meditation is the meditation of pity, in which you think of all

beings in distress, vividly representing in your imagination their sorrows and

anxieties so as to arouse a deep compassion for them in your soul.

  "The third meditation is the meditation of joy, in which you think of the

prosperity of others, and rejoice with their rejoicings.

  "The  fourth  meditation  is  the  meditation  of  impurity,  in  which  you

consider the evil consequences of corruption, the effects of sin and diseases.

How trivial often the pleasure of the moment, and how fatal its consequences.

  "The  fifth  meditation  is  the  meditation  on  serenity,  in  which  you  rise

above love and hate, tyranny and oppression, wealth and want, and regard

your own fate with impartial calmness and perfect tranquillity."

  By engaging in these meditations the disciples of the Buddha arrived at a

knowledge  of  the  Truth.  But  whether  you  engage  in  these  particular

meditations or not matters little so long as your object is Truth, so long as

you  hunger  and  thirst  for  that  righteousness  which  is  a  holy  heart  and  a

blameless life. In your meditations, therefore, let your heart grow and expand

with  ever-broadening  love,  until,  freed  from  all  hatred,  and  passion,  and

condemnation, it embraces the whole universe with thoughtful tenderness. As

the flower opens its petals to receive the morning light, so open your soul

more and more to the glorious light of Truth. Soar upward upon the wings of

aspiration; be fearless, and believe in the loftiest possibilities. Believe that a

life of absolute meekness is possible; believe that a life of stainless purity is

possible; believe that a life of perfect holiness is possible; believe that therealization of the highest truth is possible. He who so believes, climbs rapidly

the  heavenly  hills,  whilst  the  unbelievers  continue  to  grope  darkly  and

painfully in the fog-bound valleys.

  So believing, so aspiring, so meditating, divinely sweet and beautiful will

be your spiritual experiences, and glorious the revelations that will enrapture

your inward vision. As you realize the divine Love, the divine Justice, the

divine Purity, the Perfect Law of Good, or God, great will be your bliss and

deep your peace. Old things will pass away, and all things will become new.

The veil of the material universe, so dense and impenetrable to the eye of

error, so thin and gauzy to the eye of Truth, will be lifted and the spiritual

universe will be revealed. Time will cease, and you will live only in Eternity.

Change and mortality will no more cause you anxiety and sorrow, for you

will become established in the unchangeable, and will dwell in the very heart

of immortality.                            2. STAR OF WISDOM


    Star that of the birth of Vishnu,

    Birth of Krishna, Buddha, Jesus,

    Told the wise ones, Heavenward looking,

    Waiting, watching for thy gleaming

    In the darkness of the night-time,

    In the starless gloom of midnight;

    Shining Herald of the coming

    Of the kingdom of the righteous;

    Teller of the Mystic story

    Of the lowly birth of Godhead

    In the stable of the passions,

    In the manger of the mind-soul;

    Silent singer of the secret

    Of compassion deep and holy

    To the heart with sorrow burdened,

    To the soul with waiting weary:—

    Star of all-surpassing brightness,

    Thou again dost deck the midnight;

    Thou again dost cheer the wise ones

    Watching in the creedal darkness,

    Weary of the endless battle

    With the grinding blades of error;

    Tired of lifeless, useless idols,

    Of the dead forms of religions;

    Spent with watching for thy shining;

    Thou hast ended their despairing;

    Thou hast lighted up their pathway;

    Thou hast brought again the old Truths

    To the hearts of all thy Watchers;

    To the souls of them that love thee    Thou dost speak of Joy and Gladness,

    Of the peace that comes of Sorrow.

    Blessed are they that can see thee,

    Weary wanderers in the Night-time;

    Blessed they who feel the throbbing,

    In their bosoms feel the pulsing

    Of a deep Love stirred within them

    By the great power of thy shining.

    Let us learn thy lesson truly;

    Learn it faithfully and humbly;

    Learn it meekly, wisely, gladly,

    Ancient Star of holy Vishnu,

    Light of Krishna, Buddha, Jesus.      3. THE TWO MASTERS, SELF AND TRUTH


  Upon the battlefield of the human soul two masters are ever contending

for the crown of supremacy, for the kingship and dominion of the heart; the

master of self, called also the "Prince of this world," and the master of Truth,

called  also  the  Father  God.  The  master  self  is  that  rebellious  one  whose

weapons  are  passion,  pride,  avarice,  vanity,  self-will,  implements  of

darkness; the master Truth is that meek and lowly one whose weapons are

gentleness, patience, purity, sacrifice, humility, love, instruments of Light.

  In every soul the battle is waged, and as a soldier cannot engage at once

in two opposing armies, so every heart is enlisted either in the ranks of self or

of Truth. There is no half-and-half course; "There is self and there is Truth;

where self is, Truth is not, where Truth is, self is not." Thus spake Buddha,

the teacher of Truth, and Jesus, the manifested Christ, declared that "No man

can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other; or

else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and

Mammon."

  Truth is so simple, so absolutely undeviating and uncompromising that it

admits  of  no  complexity,  no  turning,  no  qualification.  Self  is  ingenious,

crooked, and, governed by subtle and snaky desire, admits of endless turnings

and qualifications, and the deluded worshipers of self vainly imagine that

they can gratify every worldly desire, and at the same time possess the Truth.

But  the  lovers  of  Truth  worship  Truth  with  the  sacrifice  of  self,  and

ceaselessly guard themselves against worldliness and self-seeking.

  Do you seek to know and to realize Truth? Then you must be prepared to

sacrifice, to renounce to the uttermost, for Truth in all its glory can only be

perceived and known when the last vestige of self has disappeared.

  The eternal Christ declared that he who would be His disciple must "deny

himself daily." Are you willing to deny yourself, to give up your lusts, your

prejudices, your opinions? If so, you may enter the narrow way of Truth, and

find that peace from which the world is shut out. The absolute denial, the

utter extinction, of self is the perfect state of Truth, and all religions and

philosophies are but so many aids to this supreme attainment.

  Self is the denial of Truth. Truth is the denial of self. As you let self die,

you will be reborn in Truth. As you cling to self, Truth will be hidden fromyou.

  Whilst you cling to self, your path will be beset with difficulties, and

repeated pains, sorrows, and disappointments will be your lot. There are no

difficulties in Truth, and coming to Truth, you will be freed from all sorrow

and disappointment.

  Truth  in  itself  is  not  hidden  and  dark.  It  is  always  revealed  and  is

perfectly transparent. But the blind and wayward self cannot perceive it. The

light of day is not hidden except to the blind, and the Light of Truth is not

hidden except to those who are blinded by self.

  Truth is the one Reality in the universe, the inward Harmony, the perfect

Justice, the eternal Love. Nothing can be added to it, nor taken from it. It

does not depend upon any man, but all men depend upon it. You cannot

perceive the beauty of Truth while you are looking out through the eyes of

self. If you are vain, you will color everything with your own vanities. If

lustful, your heart and mind will be so clouded with the smoke and flames of

passion,  that  everything  will  appear  distorted  through  them.  If  proud  and

opinionative,  you  will  see  nothing  in  the  whole  universe  except  the

magnitude and importance of your own opinions.

  There is one quality which pre-eminently distinguishes the man of Truth

from the man of self, and that is humility. To be not only free from vanity,

stubbornness and egotism, but to regard one's own opinions as of no value,

this indeed is true humility.

  He who is immersed in self regards his own opinions as Truth, and the

opinions of other men as error. But that humble Truth-lover who has learned

to distinguish between opinion and Truth, regards all men with the eye of

charity, and does not seek to defend his opinions against theirs, but sacrifices

those opinions that he may love the more, that he may manifest the spirit of

Truth, for Truth in its very nature is ineffable and can only be lived. He who

has most of charity has most of Truth.

  Men  engage  in  heated  controversies,  and  foolishly  imagine  they  are

defending the Truth, when in reality they are merely defending their own

petty interests and perishable opinions. The follower of self takes up arms

against others. The follower of Truth takes up arms against himself. Truth,

being unchangeable and eternal, is independent of your opinion and of mine.

We may enter into it, or we may stay outside; but both our defense and ourattack are superfluous, and are hurled back upon ourselves.

  Men, enslaved by self, passionate, proud, and condemnatory, believe their

particular creed or religion to be the Truth, and all other religions to be error;

and they proselytize with passionate ardour. There is but one religion, the

religion of Truth. There is but one error, the error of self. Truth is not a

formal belief; it is an unselfish, holy, and aspiring heart, and he who has

Truth is at peace with all, and cherishes all with thoughts of love.

  You may easily know whether you are a child of Truth or a worshiper of

self,  if  you  will  silently  examine  your  mind,  heart,  and  conduct.  Do  you

harbour  thoughts  of  suspicion,  enmity,  envy,  lust,  pride,  or  do  you

strenuously fight against these? If the former, you are chained to self, no

matter what religion you may profess; if the latter, you are a candidate for

Truth,  even  though  outwardly  you  may  profess  no  religion.  Are  you

passionate, self-willed, ever seeking to gain your own ends, self-indulgent,

and self-centered; or are you gentle, mild, unselfish, quit of every form of

self-indulgence, and are ever ready to give up your own? If the former, self is

your master; if the latter, Truth is the object of your affection. Do you strive

for riches? Do you fight, with passion, for your party? Do you lust for power

and leadership? Are you given to ostentation and self-praise? Or have you

given up the love of riches? Have you relinquished all strife? Are you content

to take the lowest place, and to be passed by unnoticed? And have you ceased

to talk about yourself and to regard yourself with self-complacent pride? If

the former, even though you may imagine you worship God, the god of your

heart  is  self.  If  the  latter,  even  though  you  may  withhold  your  lips  from

worship, you are dwelling with the Most High.

  The signs by which the Truth-lover is known are unmistakable. Hear the

Holy Krishna declare them, in Sir Edwin Arnold's beautiful rendering of the

"Bhagavad Gita":—

    "Fearlessness, singleness of soul, the will

    Always to strive for wisdom; opened hand

    And governed appetites; and piety,

    And love of lonely study; humbleness,

    Uprightness, heed to injure nought which lives

    Truthfulness, slowness unto wrath, a mind    That lightly letteth go what others prize;

    And equanimity, and charity

    Which spieth no man's faults; and tenderness

    Towards all that suffer; a contented heart,

    Fluttered by no desires; a bearing mild,

    Modest and grave, with manhood nobly mixed,

    With patience, fortitude and purity;

    An unrevengeful spirit, never given

    To rate itself too high—such be the signs,

    O Indian Prince! of him whose feet are set

    On that fair path which leads to heavenly birth!"

  When men, lost in the devious ways of error and self, have forgotten the

"heavenly  birth,"  the  state  of  holiness  and  Truth,  they  set  up  artificial

standards  by  which  to  judge  one  another,  and  make  acceptance  of,  and

adherence to, their own particular theology, the test of Truth; and so men are

divided one against another, and there is ceaseless enmity and strife, and

unending sorrow and suffering.

  Reader, do you seek to realize the birth into Truth? There is only one

way: Let  self  die.  All  those  lusts,  appetites,  desires,  opinions,  limited

conceptions and prejudices to which you have hitherto so tenaciously clung,

let them fall from you. Let them no longer hold you in bondage, and Truth

will be yours. Cease to look upon your own religion as superior to all others,

and strive humbly to learn the supreme lesson of charity. No longer cling to

the  idea,  so  productive  of  strife  and  sorrow,  that  the  Saviour  whom  you

worship  is  the  only  Saviour,  and  that  the  Saviour  whom  your  brother

worships with equal sincerity and ardour, is an impostor; but seek diligently

the  path  of  holiness,  and  then  you  will  realize  that  every  holy  man  is  a

saviour of mankind.

  The giving up of self is not merely the renunciation of outward things. It

consists of the renunciation of the inward sin, the inward error. Not by giving

up vain clothing; not by relinquishing riches; not by abstaining from certain

foods; not by speaking smooth words; not by merely doing these things is the

Truth found; but by giving up the spirit of vanity; by relinquishing the desire

for riches; by abstaining from the lust of self-indulgence; by giving up allhatred, strife, condemnation, and self-seeking, and becoming gentle and pure

at heart; by doing these things is the Truth found. To do the former, and not

to do the latter, is pharisaism and hypocrisy, whereas the latter includes the

former. You may renounce the outward world, and isolate yourself in a cave

or in the depths of a forest, but you will take all your selfishness with you,

and unless you renounce that, great indeed will be your wretchedness and

deep your delusion. You may remain just where you are, performing all your

duties, and yet renounce the world, the inward enemy. To be in the world and

yet not of the world is the highest perfection, the most blessed peace, is to

achieve the greatest victory. The renunciation of self is the way of Truth,

therefore,

    "Enter the Path; there is no grief like hate,

      No pain like passion, no deceit like sense;

    Enter the Path; far hath he gone whose foot

      Treads down one fond offense."

  As you succeed in overcoming self you will begin to see things in their

right relations. He who is swayed by any passion, prejudice, like or dislike,

adjusts everything to that particular bias, and sees only his own delusions. He

who is absolutely free from all passion, prejudice, preference, and partiality,

sees himself as he is; sees others as they are; sees all things in their proper

proportions and right relations. Having nothing to attack, nothing to defend,

nothing to conceal, and no interests to guard, he is at peace. He has realized

the profound simplicity of Truth, for this unbiased, tranquil, blessed state of

mind and heart is the state of Truth. He who attains to it dwells with the

angels, and sits at the footstool of the Supreme. Knowing the Great Law;

knowing the origin of sorrow; knowing the secret of suffering; knowing the

way  of  emancipation  in  Truth,  how  can  such  a  one  engage  in  strife  or

condemnation;  for  though  he  knows  that  the  blind,  self-seeking  world,

surrounded  with  the  clouds  of  its  own  illusions,  and  enveloped  in  the

darkness of error and self, cannot perceive the steadfast Light of Truth, and is

utterly incapable of comprehending the profound simplicity of the heart that

has died, or is dying, to self, yet he also knows that when the suffering ages

have piled up mountains of sorrow, the crushed and burdened soul of the

world will fly to its final refuge, and that when the ages are completed, every

prodigal will come back to the fold of Truth. And so he dwells in goodwilltoward  all,  and  regards  all  with  that  tender  compassion  which  a  father

bestows upon his wayward children.

  Men cannot understand Truth because they cling to self, because they

believe  in  and  love  self,  because  they  believe  self  to  be  the  only  reality,

whereas it is the one delusion.

  When you cease to believe in and love self you will desert it, and will fly

to Truth, and will find the eternal Reality.

  When men are intoxicated with the wines of luxury, and pleasure, and

vanity, the thirst of life grows and deepens within them, and they delude

themselves with dreams of fleshly immortality, but when they come to reap

the  harvest  of  their  own  sowing,  and  pain  and  sorrow  supervene,  then,

crushed and humiliated, relinquishing self and all the intoxications of self,

they come, with aching hearts to the one immortality, the immortality that

destroys all delusions, the spiritual immortality in Truth.

  Men pass from evil to good, from self to Truth, through the dark gate of

sorrow, for sorrow and self are inseparable. Only in the peace and bliss of

Truth is all sorrow vanquished. If you suffer disappointment because your

cherished plans have been thwarted, or because someone has not come up to

your anticipations, it is because you are clinging to self. If you suffer remorse

for  your  conduct,  it  is  because  you  have  given  way  to  self.  If  you  are

overwhelmed with chagrin and regret because of the attitude of someone else

toward you, it is because you have been cherishing self. If you are wounded

on account of what has been done to you or said of you, it is because you are

walking in the painful way of self. All suffering is of self. All suffering ends

in Truth. When you have entered into and realized Truth, you will no longer

suffer disappointment, remorse, and regret, and sorrow will flee from you.

    "Self is the only prison that can ever bind the soul;

    Truth is the only angel that can bid the gates unroll;

    And when he comes to call thee, arise and follow fast;

    His way may lie through darkness, but it leads to light at last."

  The woe of the world is of its own making. Sorrow purifies and deepens

the soul, and the extremity of sorrow is the prelude to Truth.

  Have  you  suffered  much?  Have  you  sorrowed  deeply?  Have  you

pondered seriously upon the problem of life? If so, you are prepared to wagewar against self, and to become a disciple of Truth.

  The intellectual who do not see the necessity for giving up self, frame

endless theories about the universe, and call them Truth; but do thou pursue

that direct line of conduct which is the practice of righteousness, and thou

wilt realize the Truth which has no place in theory, and which never changes.

Cultivate your heart. Water it continually with unselfish love and deep-felt

pity, and strive to shut out from it all thoughts and feelings which are not in

accordance with Love. Return good for evil, love for hatred, gentleness for

ill-treatment, and remain silent when attacked. So shall you transmute all

your selfish desires into the pure gold of Love, and self will disappear in

Truth. So will you walk blamelessly among men, yoked with the easy yoke of

lowliness, and clothed with the divine garment of humility.

    O come, weary brother! thy struggling and striving

      End thou in the heart of the Master of Truth;

    Across self's drear desert why wilt thou be driving,

      Athirst for the quickening waters of Truth

    When here, by the path of thy searching and sinning,

      Flows Life's gladsome stream, lies Love's oasis green?

    Come, turn thou and rest; know the end and beginning,

      The sought and the searcher, the seer and seen.

    Thy Master sits not in the unapproached mountains,

      Nor dwells in the mirage which floats on the air,

    Nor shalt thou discover His magical fountains

      In pathways of sand that encircle despair.

    In selfhood's dark desert cease wearily seeking

      The odorous tracks of the feet of thy King;

    And if thou wouldst hear the sweet sound of His speaking,

      Be deaf to all voices that emptily sing.

    Flee the vanishing places; renounce all thou hast;

      Leave all that thou lovest, and, naked and bare,

    Thyself at the shrine of the Innermost cast;

      The Highest, the Holiest, the Changeless is there.

    Within, in the heart of the Silence He dwelleth;      Leave sorrow and sin, leave thy wanderings sore;

    Come bathe in His Joy, whilst He, whispering, telleth

      Thy soul what it seeketh, and wander no more.

    Then cease, weary brother, thy struggling and striving;

      Find peace in the heart of the Master of Truth.

    Across self's dark desert cease wearily driving;

      Come; drink at the beautiful waters of Truth.          4. THE ACQUIREMENT OF SPIRITUAL


                                      POWER


  The world is filled with men and women seeking pleasure, excitement,

novelty; seeking ever to be moved to laughter or tears; not seeking strength,

stability,  and  power;  but  courting  weakness,  and  eagerly  engaged  in

dispersing what power they have.

  Men and women of real power and influence are few, because few are

prepared to make the sacrifice necessary to the acquirement of power, and

fewer still are ready to patiently build up character.

  To be swayed by your fluctuating thoughts and impulses is to be weak

and powerless; to rightly control and direct those forces is to be strong and

powerful. Men of strong animal passions have much of the ferocity of the

beast, but this is not power. The elements of power are there; but it is only

when this ferocity is tamed and subdued by the higher intelligence that real

power begins; and men can only grow in power by awakening themselves to

higher and ever higher states of intelligence and consciousness.

  The difference between a man of weakness and one of power lies not in

the strength of the personal will (for the stubborn man is usually weak and

foolish), but in that focus of consciousness which represents their states of

knowledge.

  The pleasure-seekers, the lovers of excitement, the hunters after novelty,

and the victims of impulse and hysterical emotion lack that knowledge of

principles which gives balance, stability, and influence.

  A man commences to develop power when, checking his impulses and

selfish inclinations, he falls back upon the higher and calmer consciousness

within him, and begins to steady himself upon a principle. The realization of

unchanging principles in consciousness is at once the source and secret of the

highest power.

  When, after much searching, and suffering, and sacrificing, the light of an

eternal  principle  dawns  upon  the  soul,  a  divine  calm  ensues  and  joy

unspeakable gladdens the heart.

  He  who  has  realized  such  a  principle  ceases  to  wander,  and  remainspoised and self-possessed. He ceases to be "passion's slave," and becomes a

master-builder in the Temple of Destiny.

  The man that is governed by self, and not by a principle, changes his front

when his selfish comforts are threatened. Deeply intent upon defending and

guarding his own interests, he regards all means as lawful that will subserve

that  end.  He  is  continually  scheming  as  to  how  he  may  protect  himself

against his enemies, being too self-centered to perceive that he is his own

enemy. Such a man's work crumbles away, for it is divorced from Truth and

power. All effort that is grounded upon self, perishes; only that work endures

that is built upon an indestructible principle.

  The man that stands upon a principle is the same calm, dauntless, self-

possessed man under all circumstances. When the hour of trial comes, and he

has  to  decide  between  his  personal  comforts  and  Truth,  he  gives  up  his

comforts and remains firm. Even the prospect of torture and death cannot

alter  or  deter  him.  The  man  of  self  regards  the  loss  of  his  wealth,  his

comforts, or his life as the greatest calamities which can befall him. The man

of principle looks upon these incidents as comparatively insignificant, and

not to be weighed with loss of character, loss of Truth. To desert Truth is, to

him, the only happening which can really be called a calamity.

  It is the hour of crisis which decides who are the minions of darkness, and

who the children of Light. It is the epoch of threatening disaster, ruin, and

persecution  which  divides  the  sheep  from  the  goats,  and  reveals  to  the

reverential gaze of succeeding ages the men and women of power.

  It  is  easy  for  a  man,  so  long  as  he  is  left  in  the  enjoyment  of  his

possessions,  to  persuade  himself  that  he  believes  in  and  adheres  to  the

principles  of  Peace,  Brotherhood,  and  Universal  Love;  but  if,  when  his

enjoyments are threatened, or he imagines they are threatened, he begins to

clamour loudly for war, he shows that he believes in and stands upon, not

Peace, Brotherhood, and Love, but strife, selfishness, and hatred.

  He who does not desert his principles when threatened with the loss of

every earthly thing, even to the loss of reputation and life, is the man of

power; is the man whose every word and work endures; is the man whom the

afterworld honours, reveres, and worships. Rather than desert that principle

of Divine Love on which he rested, and in which all his trust was placed,

Jesus endured the utmost extremity of agony and deprivation; and today theworld prostrates itself at his pierced feet in rapt adoration.

  There is no way to the acquirement of spiritual power except by that

inward illumination and enlightenment which is the realization of spiritual

principles; and those principles can only be realized by constant practice and

application.

  Take the principle of divine Love, and quietly and diligently meditate

upon it with the object of arriving at a thorough understanding of it. Bring its

searching light to bear upon all your habits, your actions, your speech and

intercourse  with  others,  your  every  secret  thought  and  desire.  As  you

persevere  in  this  course,  the  divine  Love  will  become  more  and  more

perfectly revealed to you, and your own shortcomings will stand out in more

and more vivid contrast, spurring you on to renewed endeavour; and having

once  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  incomparable  majesty  of  that  imperishable

principle, you will never again rest in your weakness, your selfishness, your

imperfection, but will pursue that Love until you have relinquished every

discordant element, and have brought yourself into perfect harmony with it.

And that state of inward harmony is spiritual power. Take also other spiritual

principles, such as Purity and Compassion, and apply them in the same way,

and, so exacting is Truth, you will be able to make no stay, no resting-place

until the inmost garment of your soul is bereft of every stain, and your heart

has become incapable of any hard, condemnatory, and pitiless impulse.

  Only in so far as you understand, realize, and rely upon, these principles,

will you acquire spiritual power, and that power will be manifested in and

through you in the form of increasing dispassion, patience and equanimity.

    Dispassion argues superior self-control; sublime patience is the very hall-

mark of divine knowledge, and to retain an unbroken calm amid all the duties

and distractions of life, marks off the man of power. "It is easy in the world to

live after the world's opinion; it is easy in solitude to live after our own; but

the  great  man  is  he  who  in  the  midst  of  the  crowd  keeps  with  perfect

sweetness the independence of solitude."

  Some  mystics  hold  that  perfection  in  dispassion  is  the  source  of  that

power by which miracles (so-called) are performed, and truly he who has

gained such perfect control of all his interior forces that no shock, however

great, can for one moment unbalance him, must be capable of guiding and

directing those forces with a master-hand.  To grow in self-control, in patience, in equanimity, is to grow in strength

and power; and you can only thus grow by focusing your consciousness upon

a principle. As a child, after making many and vigorous attempts to walk

unaided, at last succeeds, after numerous falls, in accomplishing this, so you

must enter the way of power by first attempting to stand alone. Break away

from the tyranny of custom, tradition, conventionality, and the opinions of

others, until you succeed in walking lonely and erect among men. Rely upon

your own judgment; be true to your own conscience; follow the Light that is

within you; all outward lights are so many will-o'-the-wisps. There will be

those who will tell you that you are foolish; that your judgment is faulty; that

your conscience is all awry, and that the Light within you is darkness; but

heed them not. If what they say is true the sooner you, as a searcher for

wisdom,  find  it  out  the  better,  and  you  can  only  make  the  discovery  by

bringing your powers to the test. Therefore, pursue your course bravely. Your

conscience is at least your own, and to follow it is to be a man; to follow the

conscience of another is to be a slave. You will have many falls, will suffer

many wounds, will endure many buffetings for a time, but press on in faith,

believing  that  sure  and  certain  victory  lies  ahead.  Search  for  a  rock,  a

principle, and having found it cling to it; get it under your feet and stand erect

upon it, until at last, immovably fixed upon it, you succeed in defying the

fury of the waves and storms of selfishness.

  For selfishness in any and every form is dissipation, weakness, death;

unselfishness in its spiritual aspect is conservation, power, life. As you grow

in spiritual life, and become established upon principles, you will become as

beautiful and as unchangeable as those principles, will taste of the sweetness

of  their  immortal  essence,  and  will  realize  the  eternal  and  indestructible

nature of the God within.

    No harmful shaft can reach the righteous man,

      Standing erect amid the storms of hate,

    Defying hurt and injury and ban,

      Surrounded by the trembling slaves of Fate.

    Majestic in the strength of silent power,

      Serene he stands, nor changes not nor turns;

    Patient and firm in suffering's darkest hour,      Time bends to him, and death and doom he spurns.

    Wrath's lurid lightnings round about him play,

      And hell's deep thunders roll about his head;

    Yet heeds he not, for him they cannot slay

      Who stands whence earth and time and space are fled.

    Sheltered by deathless love, what fear hath he?

      Armored in changeless Truth, what can he know

    Of loss and gain? Knowing eternity,

      He moves not whilst the shadows come and go.

    Call him immortal, call him Truth and Light

      And splendor of prophetic majesty

    Who bideth thus amid the powers of night,

      Clothed with the glory of divinity.            5. THE REALIZATION OF SELFLESS


                                        LOVE


  It is said that Michael Angelo saw in every rough block of stone a thing

of beauty awaiting the master-hand to bring it into reality. Even so, within

each there reposes the Divine Image awaiting the master-hand of Faith and

the chisel of Patience to bring it into manifestation. And that Divine Image is

revealed and realized as stainless, selfless Love.

    Hidden deep in every human heart, though frequently covered up with a

mass of hard and almost impenetrable accretions, is the spirit of Divine Love,

whose holy and spotless essence is undying and eternal. It is the Truth in

man; it is that which belongs to the Supreme: that which is real and immortal.

All else changes and passes away; this alone is permanent and imperishable;

and to realize this Love by ceaseless diligence in the practice of the highest

righteousness, to live in it and to become fully conscious in it, is to enter into

immortality here and now, is to become one with Truth, one with God, one

with the central Heart of all things, and to know our own divine and eternal

nature.

  To reach this Love, to understand and experience it, one must work with

great persistency and diligence upon his heart and mind, must ever renew his

patience and keep strong his faith, for there will be much to remove, much to

accomplish before the Divine Image is revealed in all its glorious beauty.

  He who strives to reach and to accomplish the divine will be tried to the

very  uttermost;  and  this  is  absolutely  necessary,  for  how  else  could  one

acquire  that  sublime  patience  without  which  there  is  no  real  wisdom,  no

divinity? Ever and anon, as he proceeds, all his work will seem to be futile,

and his efforts appear to be thrown away. Now and then a hasty touch will

mar his image, and perhaps when he imagines his work is almost completed

he will find what he imagined to be the beautiful form of Divine Love utterly

destroyed, and he must begin again with his past bitter experience to guide

and help him. But he who has resolutely set himself to realize the Highest

recognizes no such thing as defeat. All failures are apparent, not real. Every

slip, every fall, every return to selfishness is a lesson learned, an experience

gained, from which a golden grain of wisdom is extracted, helping the strivertoward the accomplishment of his lofty object. To recognize

    "That of our vices we can frame

      A ladder if we will but tread

    Beneath our feet each deed of shame,"

  is to enter the way that leads unmistakably toward the Divine, and the

failings of one who thus recognizes are so many dead selves, upon which he

rises, as upon stepping-stones, to higher things.

  Once come to regard your failings, your sorrows and sufferings as so

many voices telling you plainly where you are weak and faulty, where you

fall below the true and the divine, you will then begin to ceaselessly watch

yourself, and every slip, every pang of pain will show you where you are to

set to work, and what you have to remove out of your heart in order to bring

it nearer to the likeness of the Divine, nearer to the Perfect Love. And as you

proceed,  day  by  day  detaching  yourself  more  and  more  from  the  inward

selfishness the Love that is selfless will gradually become revealed to you.

And when you are growing patient and calm, when your petulances, tempers,

and irritabilities are passing away from you, and the more powerful lusts and

prejudices cease to dominate and enslave you, then you will know that the

divine  is  awakening  within  you,  that  you  are  drawing  near  to  the  eternal

Heart, that you are not far from that selfless Love, the possession of which is

peace and immortality.

  Divine  Love  is  distinguished  from  human  loves  in  this  supremely

important  particular, it  is  free  from  partiality.  Human  loves  cling  to  a

particular object to the exclusion of all else, and when that object is removed,

great and deep is the resultant suffering to the one who loves. Divine Love

embraces the whole universe, and, without clinging to any part, yet contains

within itself the whole, and he who comes to it by gradually purifying and

broadening his human loves until all the selfish and impure elements are

burnt  out  of  them,  ceases  from  suffering.  It  is  because  human  loves  are

narrow and confined and mingled with selfishness that they cause suffering.

No suffering can result from that Love which is so absolutely pure that it

seeks nothing for itself. Nevertheless, human loves are absolutely necessary

as steps toward the Divine, and no soul is prepared to partake of Divine Love

until it has become capable of the deepest and most intense human love. It is

only by passing through human loves and human sufferings that Divine Loveis reached and realized.

  All human loves are perishable like the forms to which they cling; but

there is a Love that is imperishable, and that does not cling to appearances.

  All human loves are counterbalanced by human hates; but there is a Love

that admits of no opposite or reaction; divine and free from all taint of self,

that sheds its fragrance on all alike.

    Human loves are reflections of the Divine Love, and draw the soul nearer

to the reality, the Love that knows neither sorrow nor change.

  It is well that the mother, clinging with passionate tenderness to the little

helpless form of flesh that lies on her bosom, should be overwhelmed with

the dark waters of sorrow when she sees it laid in the cold earth. It is well that

her tears should flow and her heart ache, for only thus can she be reminded of

the evanescent nature of the joys and objects of sense, and be drawn nearer to

the eternal and imperishable Reality.

  It  is  well  that  lover,  brother,  sister,  husband,  wife  should  suffer  deep

anguish,  and  be  enveloped  in  gloom  when  the  visible  object  of  their

affections is torn from them, so that they may learn to turn their affections

toward the invisible Source of all, where alone abiding satisfaction is to be

found.

  It is well that the proud, the ambitious, the self-seeking, should suffer

defeat,  humiliation,  and  misfortune;  that  they  should  pass  through  the

scorching fires of affliction; for only thus can the wayward soul be brought to

reflect  upon  the  enigma  of  life;  only  thus  can  the  heart  be  softened  and

purified, and prepared to receive the Truth.

  When  the  sting  of  anguish  penetrates  the  heart  of  human  love;  when

gloom and loneliness and desertion cloud the soul of friendship and trust,

then it is that the heart turns toward the sheltering love of the Eternal, and

finds rest in its silent peace. And whosoever comes to this Love is not turned

away comfortless, is not pierced with anguish nor surrounded with gloom;

and is never deserted in the dark hour of trial.

  The  glory  of  Divine  Love  can  only  be  revealed  in  the  heart  that  is

chastened  by  sorrow,  and  the  image  of  the  heavenly  state  can  only  be

perceived and realized when the lifeless, formless accretions of ignorance and

self are hewn away.  Only that Love that seeks no personal gratification or reward, that does

not make distinctions, and that leaves behind no heartaches, can be called

divine.

  Men, clinging to self and to the comfortless shadows of evil, are in the

habit of thinking of divine Love as something belonging to a God who is out

of reach; as something outside themselves, and that must for ever remain

outside. Truly, the Love of God is ever beyond the reach of self, but when the

heart and mind are emptied of self then the selfless Love, the supreme Love,

the Love that is of God or Good becomes an inward and abiding reality.

  And this inward realization of holy Love is none other than the Love of

Christ that is so much talked about and so little comprehended. The Love that

not  only  saves  the  soul  from  sin,  but  lifts  it  also  above  the  power  of

temptation.

  But how may one attain to this sublime realization? The answer which

Truth  has  always  given,  and  will  ever  give  to  this  question  is,—"Empty

thyself, and I will fill thee." Divine Love cannot be known until self is dead,

for self is the denial of Love, and how can that which is known be also

denied? Not until the stone of self is rolled away from the sepulcher of the

soul does the immortal Christ, the pure Spirit of Love, hitherto crucified,

dead and buried, cast off the bands of ignorance, and come forth in all the

majesty of His resurrection.

  You believe that the Christ of Nazareth was put to death and rose again. I

do not say you err in that belief; but if you refuse to believe that the gentle

spirit of Love is crucified daily upon the dark cross of your selfish desires,

then, I say, you err in this unbelief, and have not yet perceived, even afar off,

the Love of Christ.

  You say that you have tasted of salvation in the Love of Christ. Are you

saved from your temper, your irritability, your vanity, your personal dislikes,

your judgment and condemnation of others? If not, from what are you saved,

and wherein have you realized the transforming Love of Christ?

  He who has realized the Love that is divine has become a new man, and

has ceased to be swayed and dominated by the old elements of self. He is

known for his patience, his purity, his self-control, his deep charity of heart,

and his unalterable sweetness.

  Divine or selfless Love is not a mere sentiment or emotion; it is a state ofknowledge which destroys the dominion of evil and the belief in evil, and

lifts the soul into the joyful realization of the supreme Good. To the divinely

wise, knowledge and Love are one and inseparable.

  It is toward the complete realization of this divine Love that the whole

world  is  moving;  it  was  for  this  purpose  that  the  universe  came  into

existence, and every grasping at happiness, every reaching out of the soul

toward objects, ideas and ideals, is an effort to realize it. But the world does

not realize this Love at present because it is grasping at the fleeting shadow

and ignoring, in its blindness, the substance. And so suffering and sorrow

continue, and must continue until the world, taught by its self-inflicted pains,

discovers the Love that is selfless, the wisdom that is calm and full of peace.

  And this Love, this Wisdom, this Peace, this tranquil state of mind and

heart may be attained to, may be realized by all who are willing and ready to

yield up self, and who are prepared to humbly enter into a comprehension of

all that the giving up of self involves. There is no arbitrary power in the

universe, and the strongest chains of fate by which men are bound are self-

forged. Men are chained to that which causes suffering because they desire to

be  so,  because  they  love  their  chains,  because  they  think  their  little  dark

prison of self is sweet and beautiful, and they are afraid that if they desert that

prison they will lose all that is real and worth having.

    "Ye suffer from yourselves, none else compels,

      None other holds ye that ye live and die."

  And the indwelling power which forged the chains and built around itself

the dark and narrow prison, can break away when it desires and wills to do

so, and the soul does will to do so when it has discovered the worthlessness

of its prison, when long suffering has prepared it for the reception of the

boundless Light and Love.

  As the shadow follows the form, and as smoke comes after fire, so effect

follows cause, and suffering and bliss follow the thoughts and deeds of men.

There is no effect in the world around us but has its hidden or revealed cause,

and that cause is in accordance with absolute justice. Men reap a harvest of

suffering because in the near or distant past they have sown the seeds of evil;

they reap a harvest of bliss also as a result of their own sowing of the seeds of

good. Let a man meditate upon this, let him strive to understand it, and he

will then begin to sow only seeds of good, and will burn up the tares andweeds which he has formerly grown in the garden of his heart.

  The  world  does  not  understand  the  Love  that  is  selfless  because  it  is

engrossed in the pursuit of its own pleasures, and cramped within the narrow

limits of perishable interests mistaking, in its ignorance, those pleasures and

interests for real and abiding things. Caught in the flames of fleshly lusts, and

burning  with  anguish,  it  sees  not  the  pure  and  peaceful  beauty  of  Truth.

Feeding upon the swinish husks of error and self-delusion, it is shut out from

the mansion of all-seeing Love.

  Not having this Love, not understanding it, men institute innumerable

reforms which involve no inward sacrifice, and each imagines that his reform

is going to right the world for ever, while he himself continues to propagate

evil by engaging it in his own heart. That only can be called reform which

tends to reform the human heart, for all evil has its rise there, and not until

the world, ceasing from selfishness and party strife, has learned the lesson of

divine Love, will it realize the Golden Age of universal blessedness.

  Let the rich cease to despise the poor, and the poor to condemn the rich;

let the greedy learn how to give, and the lustful how to grow pure; let the

partisan  cease  from  strife,  and  the  uncharitable  begin  to  forgive;  let  the

envious endeavour to rejoice with others, and the slanderers grow ashamed of

their conduct. Let men and women take this course, and, lo! the Golden Age

is at hand. He, therefore, who purifies his own heart is the world's greatest

benefactor.

  Yet, though the world is, and will be for many ages to come, shut out

from that Age of Gold, which is the realization of selfless Love, you, if you

are willing, may enter it now, by rising above your selfish self; if you will

pass from prejudice, hatred, and condemnation, to gentle and forgiving love.

  Where  hatred,  dislike,  and  condemnation  are,  selfless  Love  does  not

abide.

  It resides only in the heart that has ceased from all condemnation.

  You say, "How can I love the drunkard, the hypocrite, the sneak, the

murderer? I am compelled to dislike and condemn such men." It is true you

cannot love such men emotionally, but when you say that you must perforce

dislike and condemn them you show that you are not acquainted with the

Great over-ruling Love; for it is possible to attain to such a state of interior

enlightenment as will enable you to perceive the train of causes by whichthese men have become as they are, to enter into their intense sufferings, and

to  know  the  certainty  of  their  ultimate  purification.  Possessed  of  such

knowledge  it  will  be  utterly  impossible  for  you  any  longer  to  dislike  or

condemn them, and you will always think of them with perfect calmness and

deep compassion.

  If you love people and speak of them with praise until they in some way

thwart you, or do something of which you disapprove, and then you dislike

them and speak of them with dispraise, you are not governed by the Love

which  is  of  God.  If,  in  your  heart,  you  are  continually  arraigning  and

condemning others, selfless Love is hidden from you.

  He who knows that Love is at the heart of all things, and has realized the

all-sufficing power of that Love, has no room in his heart for condemnation.

  Men, not knowing this Love, constitute themselves judge and executioner

of their fellows, forgetting that there is the Eternal Judge and Executioner,

and in so far as men deviate from them in their own views, their particular

reforms  and  methods,  they  brand  them  as  fanatical,  unbalanced,  lacking

judgment, sincerity, and honesty; in so far as others approximate to their own

standard do they look upon them as being everything that is admirable. Such

are the men who are centered in self. But he whose heart is centered in the

supreme Love does not so brand and classify men; does not seek to convert

men to his own views, not to convince them of the superiority of his methods.

Knowing the Law of Love, he lives it, and maintains the same calm attitude

of mind and sweetness of heart toward all. The debased and the virtuous, the

foolish  and  the  wise,  the  learned  and  the  unlearned,  the  selfish  and  the

unselfish receive alike the benediction of his tranquil thought.

  You  can  only  attain  to  this  supreme  knowledge,  this  divine  Love  by

unremitting endeavour in self-discipline, and by gaining victory after victory

over  yourself.  Only  the  pure  in  heart  see  God,  and  when  your  heart  is

sufficiently purified you will enter into the New Birth, and the Love that does

not die, nor change, nor end in pain and sorrow will be awakened within you,

and you will be at peace.

  He  who  strives  for  the  attainment  of  divine  Love  is  ever  seeking  to

overcome  the  spirit  of  condemnation,  for  where  there  is  pure  spiritual

knowledge, condemnation cannot exist, and only in the heart that has become

incapable of condemnation is Love perfected and fully realized.  The Christian condemns the Atheist; the Atheist satirizes the Christian;

the Catholic and Protestant are ceaselessly engaged in wordy warfare, and the

spirit of strife and hatred rules where peace and love should be.

  "He that hateth his brother is a murderer," a crucifier of the divine Spirit

of Love; and until you can regard men of all religions and of no religion with

the  same  impartial  spirit,  with  all  freedom  from  dislike,  and  with  perfect

equanimity,  you  have  yet  to  strive  for  that  Love  which  bestows  upon  its

possessor freedom and salvation.

  The realization of divine knowledge, selfless Love, utterly destroys the

spirit of condemnation, disperses all evil, and lifts the consciousness to that

height of pure vision where Love, Goodness, Justice are seen to be universal,

supreme, all-conquering, indestructible.

  Train your mind in strong, impartial, and gentle thought; train your heart

in  purity  and  compassion;  train  your  tongue  to  silence  and  to  true  and

stainless speech; so shall you enter the way of holiness and peace, and shall

ultimately realize the immortal Love. So living, without seeking to convert,

you will convince; without arguing, you will teach; not cherishing ambition,

the wise will find you out; and without striving to gain men's opinions, you

will subdue their hearts. For Love is all-conquering, all-powerful; and the

thoughts, and deeds, and words of Love can never perish.

  To know that Love is universal, supreme, all-sufficing; to be freed from

the trammels of evil; to be quit of the inward unrest; to know that all men are

striving to realize the Truth each in his own way; to be satisfied, sorrowless,

serene; this is peace; this is gladness; this is immortality; this is Divinity; this

is the realization of selfless Love.

    I stood upon the shore, and saw the rocks

      Resist the onslaught of the mighty sea,

    And when I thought how all the countless shocks

      They had withstood through an eternity,

    I said, "To wear away this solid main

    The ceaseless efforts of the waves are vain."

    But when I thought how they the rocks had rent,

      And saw the sand and shingles at my feet

    (Poor passive remnants of resistance spent)      Tumbled and tossed where they the waters meet,

    Then saw I ancient landmarks 'neath the waves,

    And knew the waters held the stones their slaves.

    I saw the mighty work the waters wrought

      By patient softness and unceasing flow;

    How they the proudest promontory brought

      Unto their feet, and massy hills laid low;

    How the soft drops the adamantine wall

    Conquered at last, and brought it to its fall.

    And then I knew that hard, resisting sin

      Should yield at last to Love's soft ceaseless roll

    Coming and going, ever flowing in

      Upon the proud rocks of the human soul;

    That all resistance should be spent and past,

    And every heart yield unto it at last.              6. ENTERING INTO THE INFINITE


  From the beginning of time, man, in spite of his bodily appetites and

desires, in the midst of all his clinging to earthly and impermanent things, has

ever  been  intuitively  conscious  of  the  limited,  transient,  and  illusionary

nature of his material existence, and in his sane and silent moments has tried

to reach out into a comprehension of the Infinite, and has turned with tearful

aspiration toward the restful Reality of the Eternal Heart.

  While vainly imagining that the pleasures of earth are real and satisfying,

pain  and  sorrow  continually  remind  him  of  their  unreal  and  unsatisfying

nature. Ever striving to believe that complete satisfaction is to be found in

material things, he is conscious of an inward and persistent revolt against this

belief, which revolt is at once a refutation of his essential mortality, and an

inherent and imperishable proof that only in the immortal, the eternal, the

infinite can he find abiding satisfaction and unbroken peace.

  And here is the common ground of faith; here the root and spring of all

religion; here the soul of Brotherhood and the heart of Love,—that man is

essentially and spiritually divine and eternal, and that, immersed in mortality

and troubled with unrest, he is ever striving to enter into a consciousness of

his real nature.

  The spirit of man is inseparable from the Infinite, and can be satisfied

with nothing short of the Infinite, and the burden of pain will continue to

weigh upon man's heart, and the shadows of sorrow to darken his pathway

until, ceasing from his wanderings in the dream-world of matter, he comes

back to his home in the reality of the Eternal.

  As the smallest drop of water detached from the ocean contains all the

qualities of the ocean, so man, detached in consciousness from the Infinite,

contains within him its likeness; and as the drop of water must, by the law of

its nature, ultimately find its way back to the ocean and lose itself in its silent

depths, so must man, by the unfailing law of his nature, at last return to his

source, and lose himself in the great ocean of the Infinite.

  To  re-become  one  with  the  Infinite  is  the  goal  of  man.  To  enter  into

perfect harmony with the Eternal Law is Wisdom, Love and Peace. But this

divine state is, and must ever be, incomprehensible to the merely personal.

Personality,  separateness,  selfishness  are  one  and  the  same,  and  are  theantithesis  of  wisdom  and  divinity.  By  the  unqualified  surrender  of  the

personality,  separateness  and  selfishness  cease,  and  man  enters  into  the

possession of his divine heritage of immortality and infinity.

  Such surrender of the personality is regarded by the worldly and selfish

mind as the most grievous of all calamities, the most irreparable loss, yet it is

the one supreme and incomparable blessing, the only real and lasting gain.

The mind unenlightened upon the inner laws of being, and upon the nature

and destiny of its own life, clings to transient appearances, things which have

in them no enduring substantiality, and so clinging, perishes, for the time

being, amid the shattered wreckage of its own illusions.

  Men cling to and gratify the flesh as though it were going to last for ever,

and though they try to forget the nearness and inevitability of its dissolution,

the dread of death and of the loss of all that they cling to clouds their happiest

hours, and the chilling shadow of their own selfishness follows them like a

remorseless specter.

  And  with  the  accumulation  of  temporal  comforts  and  luxuries,  the

divinity  within  men  is  drugged,  and  they  sink  deeper  and  deeper  into

materiality, into the perishable life of the senses, and where there is sufficient

intellect, theories concerning the immortality of the flesh come to be regarded

as infallible truths. When a man's soul is clouded with selfishness in any or

every form, he loses the power of spiritual discrimination, and confuses the

temporal with the eternal, the perishable with the permanent, mortality with

immortality, and error with Truth. It is thus that the world has come to be

filled  with  theories  and  speculations  having  no  foundation  in  human

experience. Every body of flesh contains within itself, from the hour of birth,

the elements of its own destruction, and by the unalterable law of its own

nature must it pass away.

  The  perishable  in  the  universe  can  never  become  permanent;  the

permanent can never pass away; the mortal can never become immortal; the

immortal can never die; the temporal cannot become eternal nor the eternal

become temporal; appearance can never become reality, nor reality fade into

appearance; error can never become Truth, nor can Truth become error. Man

cannot immortalize the flesh, but, by overcoming the flesh, by relinquishing

all its inclinations, he can enter the region of immortality. "God alone hath

immortality," and only by realizing the God state of consciousness does manenter into immortality.

  All  nature  in  its  myriad  forms  of  life  is  changeable,  impermanent,

unenduring. Only the informing Principle of nature endures. Nature is many,

and is marked by separation. The informing Principle is One, and is marked

by unity. By overcoming the senses and the selfishness within, which is the

overcoming of nature, man emerges from the chrysalis of the personal and

illusory,  and  wings  himself  into  the  glorious  light  of  the  impersonal,  the

region of universal Truth, out of which all perishable forms come.

  Let  men,  therefore,  practice  self-denial;  let  them  conquer  their  animal

inclinations; let them refuse to be enslaved by luxury and pleasure; let them

practice virtue, and grow daily into high and ever higher virtue, until at last

they  grow  into  the  Divine,  and  enter  into  both  the  practice  and  the

comprehension  of  humility,  meekness,  forgiveness,  compassion,  and  love,

which practice and comprehension constitute Divinity.

  "Good-will  gives  insight,"  and  only  he  who  has  so  conquered  his

personality that he has but one attitude of mind, that of good-will, toward all

creatures, is possessed of divine insight, and is capable of distinguishing the

true from the false. The supremely good man is, therefore, the wise man, the

divine man, the enlightened seer, the knower of the Eternal. Where you find

unbroken gentleness, enduring patience, sublime lowliness, graciousness of

speech, self-control, self-forgetfulness, and deep and abounding sympathy,

look there for the highest wisdom, seek the company of such a one, for he has

realized the Divine, he lives with the Eternal, he has become one with the

Infinite.  Believe  not  him  that  is  impatient,  given  to  anger,  boastful,  who

clings to pleasure and refuses to renounce his selfish gratifications, and who

practices not good-will and far-reaching compassion, for such a one hath not

wisdom, vain is all his knowledge, and his works and words will perish, for

they are grounded on that which passes away.

  Let a man abandon self, let him overcome the world, let him deny the

personal; by this pathway only can he enter into the heart of the Infinite.

  The world, the body, the personality are mirages upon the desert of time;

transitory dreams in the dark night of spiritual slumber, and those who have

crossed  the  desert,  those  who  are  spiritually  awakened,  have  alone

comprehended the Universal Reality where all appearances are dispersed and

dreaming and delusion are destroyed.  There  is  one  Great  Law  which  exacts  unconditional  obedience,  one

unifying  principle  which  is  the  basis  of  all  diversity,  one  eternal  Truth

wherein all the problems of earth pass away like shadows. To realize this

Law, this Unity, this Truth, is to enter into the Infinite, is to become one with

the Eternal.

  To  center  one's  life  in  the  Great  Law  of  Love  is  to  enter  into  rest,

harmony, peace. To refrain from all participation in evil and discord; to cease

from all resistance to evil, and from the omission of that which is good, and

to fall back upon unswerving obedience to the holy calm within, is to enter

into the inmost heart of things, is to attain to a living, conscious experience of

that eternal and infinite principle which must ever remain a hidden mystery to

the merely perceptive intellect. Until this principle is realized, the soul is not

established in peace, and he who so realizes is truly wise; not wise with the

wisdom of the learned, but with the simplicity of a blameless heart and of a

divine manhood.

  To enter into a realization of the Infinite and Eternal is to rise superior to

time, and the world, and the body, which comprise the kingdom of darkness;

and is to become established in immortality, Heaven, and the Spirit, which

make up the Empire of Light.

  Entering into the Infinite is not a mere theory or sentiment. It is a vital

experience which is the result of assiduous practice in inward purification.

When the body is no longer believed to be, even remotely, the real man;

when all appetites and desires are thoroughly subdued and purified; when the

emotions are rested and calm, and when the oscillation of the intellect ceases

and  perfect  poise  is  secured,  then,  and  not  till  then,  does  consciousness

become one with the Infinite; not until then is childlike wisdom and profound

peace secured.

  Men grow weary and gray over the dark problems of life, and finally pass

away and leave them unsolved because they cannot see their way out of the

darkness  of  the  personality,  being  too  much  engrossed  in  its  limitations.

Seeking to save his personal life, man forfeits the greater impersonal Life in

Truth; clinging to the perishable, he is shut out from a knowledge of the

Eternal.

  By the surrender of self all difficulties are overcome, and there is no error

in the universe but the fire of inward sacrifice will burn it up like chaff; noproblem, however great, but will disappear like a shadow under the searching

light of self-abnegation. Problems exist only in our own self-created illusions,

and they vanish away when self is yielded up. Self and error are synonymous.

Error is involved in the darkness of unfathomable complexity, but eternal

simplicity is the glory of Truth.

  Love of self shuts men out from Truth, and seeking their own personal

happiness they lose the deeper, purer, and more abiding bliss. Says Carlyle

—"There  is  in  man  a  higher  than  love  of  happiness.  He  can  do  without

happiness, and instead thereof find blessedness.

  … Love not pleasure, love God. This is the Everlasting Yea, wherein all

contradiction is solved; wherein whoso walks and works, it is well with him."

  He who has yielded up that self, that personality that men most love, and

to  which  they  cling  with  such  fierce  tenacity,  has  left  behind  him  all

perplexity, and has entered into a simplicity so profoundly simple as to be

looked  upon  by  the  world,  involved  as  it  is  in  a  network  of  error,  as

foolishness. Yet such a one has realized the highest wisdom, and is at rest in

the Infinite. He "accomplishes without striving," and all problems melt before

him, for he has entered the region of reality, and deals, not with changing

effects, but with the unchanging principles of things. He is enlightened with a

wisdom  which  is  as  superior  to  ratiocination,  as  reason  is  to  animality.

Having yielded up his lusts, his errors, his opinions and prejudices, he has

entered into possession of the knowledge of God, having slain the selfish

desire  for  heaven,  and  along  with  it  the  ignorant  fear  of  hell;  having

relinquished even the love of life itself, he has gained supreme bliss and Life

Eternal,  the  Life  which  bridges  life  and  death,  and  knows  its  own

immortality. Having yielded up all without reservation, he has gained all, and

rests in peace on the bosom of the Infinite.

  Only he who has become so free from self as to be equally content to be

annihilated as to live, or to live as to be annihilated, is fit to enter into the

Infinite. Only he who, ceasing to trust his perishable self, has learned to trust

in  boundless  measure  the  Great  Law,  the  Supreme  Good,  is  prepared  to

partake of undying bliss.

  For such a one there is no more regret, nor disappointment, nor remorse,

for where all selfishness has ceased these sufferings cannot be; and whatever

happens to him he knows that it is for his own good, and he is content, beingno longer the servant of self, but the servant of the Supreme. He is no longer

affected by the changes of earth, and when he hears of wars and rumours of

wars his peace is not disturbed, and where men grow angry and cynical and

quarrelsome,  he  bestows  compassion  and  love.  Though  appearances  may

contradict it, he knows that the world is progressing, and that

      "Through its laughing and its weeping,

      Through its living and its keeping,

    Through its follies and its labours, weaving in and out of sight,

      To the end from the beginning,

      Through all virtue and all sinning,

    Reeled from God's great spool of Progress, runs the golden

          thread of light."

  When a fierce storm is raging none are angered about it, because they

know  it  will  quickly  pass  away,  and  when  the  storms  of  contention  are

devastating the world, the wise man, looking with the eye of Truth and pity,

knows that it will pass away, and that out of the wreckage of broken hearts

which it leaves behind the immortal Temple of Wisdom will be built.

  Sublimely patient; infinitely compassionate; deep, silent, and pure, his

very presence is a benediction; and when he speaks men ponder his words in

their hearts, and by them rise to higher levels of attainment. Such is he who

has entered into the Infinite, who by the power of utmost sacrifice has solved

the sacred mystery of life.

    Questioning Life and Destiny and Truth,

    I sought the dark and labyrinthine Sphinx,

    Who spake to me this strange and wondrous thing:—

    "Concealment only lies in blinded eyes,

    And God alone can see the Form of God."

    I sought to solve this hidden mystery

    Vainly by paths of blindness and of pain,

    But when I found the Way of Love and Peace,

    Concealment ceased, and I was blind no more:

    Then saw I God e'en with the eyes of God.        7. SAINTS, SAGES, AND SAVIOURS: THE


                          LAW OF SERVICE


  The spirit of Love which is manifested as a perfect and rounded life, is

the crown of being and the supreme end of knowledge upon this earth.

  The measure of a man's truth is the measure of his love, and Truth is far

removed from him whose life is not governed by Love. The intolerant and

condemnatory,  even  though  they  profess  the  highest  religion,  have  the

smallest measure of Truth; while those who exercise patience, and who listen

calmly and dispassionately to all sides, and both arrive themselves at, and

incline others to, thoughtful and unbiased conclusions upon all problems and

issues, have Truth in fullest measure. The final test of wisdom is this,—how

does a man live? What spirit does he manifest? How does he act under trial

and temptation? Many men boast of being in possession of Truth who are

continually  swayed  by  grief,  disappointment,  and  passion,  and  who  sink

under  the  first  little  trial  that  comes  along.  Truth  is  nothing  if  not

unchangeable, and in so far as a man takes his stand upon Truth does he

become steadfast in virtue, does he rise superior to his passions and emotions

and changeable personality.

  Men formulate perishable dogmas, and call them Truth. Truth cannot be

formulated; it is ineffable, and ever beyond the reach of intellect. It can only

be experienced by practice; it can only be manifested as a stainless heart and

a perfect life.

  Who, then, in the midst of the ceaseless pandemonium of schools and

creeds and parties, has the Truth? He who lives it. He who practices it. He

who,  having  risen  above  that  pandemonium  by  overcoming  himself,  no

longer engages in it, but sits apart, quiet, subdued, calm, and self-possessed,

freed from all strife, all bias, all condemnation, and bestows upon all the glad

and unselfish love of the divinity within him.

  He who is patient, calm, gentle, and forgiving under all circumstances,

manifests the Truth. Truth will never be proved by wordy arguments and

learned treatises, for if men do not perceive the Truth in infinite patience,

undying forgiveness, and all-embracing compassion, no words can ever prove

it to them.  It is an easy matter for the passionate to be calm and patient when they

are  alone,  or  are  in  the  midst  of  calmness.  It  is  equally  easy  for  the

uncharitable to be gentle and kind when they are dealt kindly with, but he

who retains his patience and calmness under all trial, who remains sublimely

meek and gentle under the most trying circumstances, he, and he alone, is

possessed of the spotless Truth. And this is so because such lofty virtues

belong to the Divine, and can only be manifested by one who has attained to

the highest wisdom, who has relinquished his  passionate and self-seeking

nature, who has realized the supreme and unchangeable Law, and has brought

himself into harmony with it.

  Let  men,  therefore,  cease  from  vain  and  passionate  arguments  about

Truth,  and  let  them  think  and  say  and  do  those  things  which  make  for

harmony,  peace,  love,  and  good-will.  Let  them  practice  heart-virtue,  and

search humbly and diligently for the Truth which frees the soul from all error

and  sin,  from  all  that  blights  the  human  heart,  and  that  darkens,  as  with

unending night, the pathway of the wandering souls of earth.

  There is one great all-embracing Law which is the foundation and cause

of  the  universe,  the  Law  of  Love.  It  has  been  called  by  many  names  in

various countries and at various times, but behind all its names the same

unalterable Law may be discovered by the eye of Truth. Names, religions,

personalities pass away, but the Law of Love remains. To become possessed

of a knowledge of this Law, to enter into conscious harmony with it, is to

become immortal, invincible, indestructible.

  It is because of the effort of the soul to realize this Law that men come

again and again to live, to suffer, and to die; and when realized, suffering

ceases, personality is dispersed, and the fleshly life and death are destroyed,

for consciousness becomes one with the Eternal.

  The Law is absolutely impersonal, and its highest manifested expression

is that of Service. When the purified heart has realized Truth it is then called

upon to make the last, the greatest and holiest sacrifice, the sacrifice of the

well-earned  enjoyment  of  Truth.  It  is  by  virtue  of  this  sacrifice  that  the

divinely-emancipated soul comes to dwell among men, clothed with a body

of flesh, content to dwell among the lowliest and least, and to be esteemed

the servant of all mankind. That sublime humility which is manifested by the

world's  saviours  is  the  seal  of  Godhead,  and  he  who  has  annihilated  thepersonality, and has become a living, visible manifestation of the impersonal,

eternal, boundless Spirit of Love, is alone singled out as worthy to receive the

unstinted worship of posterity. He only who succeeds in humbling himself

with that divine humility which is not only the extinction of self, but is also

the pouring out upon all the spirit of unselfish love, is exalted above measure,

and given spiritual dominion in the hearts of mankind.

  All the great spiritual teachers have denied themselves personal luxuries,

comforts,  and  rewards,  have  abjured  temporal  power,  and  have  lived  and

taught the limitless and impersonal Truth. Compare their lives and teachings,

and  you  will  find  the  same  simplicity,  the  same  self-sacrifice,  the  same

humility, love, and peace both lived and preached by them. They taught the

same eternal Principles, the realization of which destroys all evil. Those who

have  been  hailed  and  worshiped  as  the  saviours  of  mankind  are

manifestations of the Great impersonal Law, and being such, were free from

passion  and  prejudice,  and  having  no  opinions,  and  no  special  letter  of

doctrine  to  preach  and  defend,  they  never  sought  to  convert  and  to

proselytize. Living in the highest Goodness, the supreme Perfection, their

sole object was to uplift mankind by manifesting that Goodness in thought,

word,  and  deed.  They  stand  between  man  the  personal  and  God  the

impersonal, and serve as exemplary types for the salvation of self-enslaved

mankind.

  Men  who  are  immersed  in  self,  and  who  cannot  comprehend  the

Goodness that is absolutely impersonal, deny divinity to all saviours except

their own, and thus introduce personal hatred and doctrinal controversy, and,

while  defending  their  own  particular  views  with  passion,  look  upon  each

other as being heathens or infidels, and so render null and void, as far as their

lives are concerned, the unselfish beauty and holy grandeur of the lives and

teachings of their own Masters. Truth cannot be limited; it can never be the

special prerogative of any man, school, or nation, and when personality steps

in, Truth is lost.

  The glory alike of the saint, the sage, and the saviour is this,—that he has

realized the most profound lowliness, the most sublime unselfishness; having

given up all, even his own personality, all his works are holy and enduring,

for they are freed from every taint of self. He gives, yet never thinks of

receiving; he works without regretting the past or anticipating the future, andnever looks for reward.

  When the farmer has tilled and dressed his land and put in the seed, he

knows that he has done all that he can possibly do, and that now he must trust

to the elements, and wait patiently for the course of time to bring about the

harvest, and that no amount of expectancy on his part will affect the result.

Even so, he who has realized Truth goes forth as a sower of the seeds of

goodness, purity, love and peace, without expectancy, and never looking for

results, knowing that there is the Great Over-ruling Law which brings about

its own harvest in due time, and which is alike the source of preservation and

destruction.

  Men, not understanding the divine simplicity of a profoundly unselfish

heart,  look  upon  their  particular  saviour  as  the  manifestation  of  a  special

miracle, as being something entirely apart and distinct from the nature of

things, and as being, in his ethical excellence, eternally unapproachable by

the whole of mankind. This attitude of unbelief (for such it is) in the divine

perfectibility of man, paralyzes effort, and binds the souls of men as with

strong ropes to sin and suffering. Jesus "grew in wisdom" and was "perfected

by  suffering."  What  Jesus  was,  he  became  such;  what  Buddha  was,  he

became such; and every holy man became such by unremitting perseverance

in self-sacrifice. Once recognize this, once realize that by watchful effort and

hopeful perseverance you can rise above your lower nature, and great and

glorious  will  be  the  vistas  of  attainment  that  will  open  out  before  you.

Buddha vowed that he would not relax his efforts until he arrived at the state

of perfection, and he accomplished his purpose.

  What  the  saints,  sages,  and  saviours  have  accomplished,  you  likewise

may accomplish if you will only tread the way which they trod and pointed

out, the way of self-sacrifice, of self-denying service.

  Truth is very simple. It says, "Give up self," "Come unto Me" (away from

all that defiles) "and I will give you rest." All the mountains of commentary

that have been piled upon it cannot hide it from the heart that is earnestly

seeking for Righteousness. It does not require learning; it can be known in

spite of learning. Disguised under many forms by erring self-seeking man,

the beautiful simplicity and clear transparency of Truth remains unaltered and

undimmed, and the unselfish heart enters into and partakes of its shining

radiance. Not by weaving complex theories, not by building up speculativephilosophies is Truth realized; but by weaving the web of inward purity, by

building up the Temple of a stainless life is Truth realized.

  He who enters upon this holy way begins by restraining his passions. This

is virtue, and is the beginning of saintship, and saintship is the beginning of

holiness. The entirely worldly man gratifies all his desires, and practices no

more  restraint  than  the  law  of  the  land  in  which  he  lives  demands;  the

virtuous man restrains his passions; the saint attacks the enemy of Truth in its

stronghold within his own heart, and restrains all selfish and impure thoughts;

while the holy man is he who is free from passion and all impure thought,

and to whom goodness and purity have become as natural as scent and colour

are to the flower. The holy man is divinely wise; he alone knows Truth in its

fullness, and has entered into abiding rest and peace. For him evil has ceased;

it  has  disappeared  in  the  universal  light  of  the  All-Good.  Holiness  is  the

badge of wisdom. Said Krishna to the Prince Arjuna—

    "Humbleness, truthfulness, and harmlessness,

    Patience and honour, reverence for the wise,

    Purity, constancy, control of self,

    Contempt of sense-delights, self-sacrifice,

    Perception of the certitude of ill

    In birth, death, age, disease, suffering and sin;

    An ever tranquil heart in fortunes good

    And fortunes evil, …

    … Endeavours resolute

    To reach perception of the utmost soul,

    And grace to understand what gain it were

    So to attain—this is true wisdom, Prince!

    And what is otherwise is ignorance!"

  Whoever  fights  ceaselessly  against  his  own  selfishness,  and  strives  to

supplant it with all-embracing love, is a saint, whether he live in a cottage or

in  the  midst  of  riches  and  influence;  or  whether  he  preaches  or  remains

obscure.

  To the worldling, who is beginning to aspire towards higher things, the

saint, such as a sweet St. Francis of Assisi, or a conquering St. Anthony, is a

glorious and inspiring spectacle; to the saint, an equally enrapturing sight isthat of the sage, sitting serene and holy, the conqueror of sin and sorrow, no

more tormented by regret and remorse, and whom even temptation can never

reach; and yet even the sage is drawn on by a still more glorious vision, that

of  the  saviour  actively  manifesting  his  knowledge  in  selfless  works,  and

rendering  his  divinity  more  potent  for  good  by  sinking  himself  in  the

throbbing, sorrowing, aspiring heart of mankind.

  And this only is true service—to forget oneself in love towards all, to lose

oneself in working for the whole. O thou vain and foolish man, who thinkest

that thy many works can save thee; who, chained to all error, talkest loudly of

thyself,  thy  work,  and  thy  many  sacrifices,  and  magnifiest  thine  own

importance; know this, that though thy fame fill the whole earth, all thy work

shall come to dust, and thou thyself be reckoned lower than the least in the

Kingdom of Truth!

  Only the work that is impersonal can live; the works of self are both

powerless and perishable. Where duties, howsoever humble, are done without

self-interest,  and  with  joyful  sacrifice,  there  is  true  service  and  enduring

work. Where deeds, however brilliant and apparently successful, are done

from love of self, there is ignorance of the Law of Service, and the work

perishes.

  It is given to the world to learn one great and divine lesson, the lesson of

absolute unselfishness. The saints, sages, and saviors of all time are they who

have submitted themselves to this task, and have learned and lived it. All the

Scriptures  of  the  world  are  framed  to  teach  this  one  lesson;  all  the  great

teachers reiterate it. It is too simple for the world which, scorning it, stumbles

along in the complex ways of selfishness.

  A pure heart is the end of all religion and the beginning of divinity. To

search for this Righteousness is to walk the Way of Truth and Peace, and he

who  enters  this  Way  will  soon  perceive  that  Immortality  which  is

independent of birth and death, and will realize that in the Divine economy of

the universe the humblest effort is not lost.

  The divinity of a Krishna, a Gautama, or a Jesus is the crowning glory of

self-abnegation, the end of the soul's pilgrimage in matter and mortality, and

the world will not have finished its long journey until every soul has become

as these, and has entered into the blissful realization of its own divinity.

    Great glory crowns the heights of hope by arduous struggle won;    Bright honour rounds the hoary head that mighty works hath done;

    Fair riches come to him who strives in ways of golden gain.

    And fame enshrines his name who works with genius-glowing brain;

    But greater glory waits for him who, in the bloodless strife

    'Gainst self and wrong, adopts, in love, the sacrificial life;

    And brighter honour rounds the brow of him who, 'mid the scorns

    Of blind idolaters of self, accepts the crown of thorns;

    And fairer purer riches come to him who greatly strives

    To walk in ways of love and truth to sweeten human lives;

    And he who serveth well mankind exchanges fleeting fame

    For Light eternal, Joy and Peace, and robes of heavenly flame.              8. THE REALIZATION OF PERFECT


                                      PEACE


  In the external universe there is ceaseless turmoil, change, and unrest; at

the  heart  of  all  things  there  is  undisturbed  repose;  in  this  deep  silence

dwelleth the Eternal.

  Man partakes of this duality, and both the surface change and disquietude,

and the deep-seated eternal abode of Peace, are contained within him.

  As there are silent depths in the ocean which the fiercest storm cannot

reach, so there are silent, holy depths in the heart of man which the storms of

sin  and  sorrow  can  never  disturb.  To  reach  this  silence  and  to  live

consciously in it is peace.

  Discord is rife in the outward world, but unbroken harmony holds sway at

the heart of the universe. The human soul, torn by discordant passion and

grief, reaches blindly toward the harmony of the sinless state, and to reach

this state and to live consciously in it is peace.

  Hatred  severs  human  lives,  fosters  persecution,  and  hurls  nations  into

ruthless  war,  yet  men,  though  they  do  not  understand  why,  retain  some

measure of faith in the overshadowing of a Perfect Love; and to reach this

Love and to live consciously in it is peace.

  And  this  inward  peace,  this  silence,  this  harmony,  this  Love,  is  the

Kingdom of Heaven, which is so difficult to reach because few are willing to

give up themselves and to become as little children.

    "Heaven's gate is very narrow and minute,

    It cannot be perceived by foolish men

    Blinded by vain illusions of the world;

    E'en the clear-sighted who discern the way,

    And seek to enter, find the portal barred,

    And hard to be unlocked. Its massive bolts

    Are pride and passion, avarice and lust."

  Men  cry  peace!  peace!  where  there  is  no  peace,  but  on  the  contrary,

discord, disquietude and strife. Apart from that Wisdom which is inseparable

from self-renunciation, there can be no real and abiding peace.  The  peace  which  results  from  social  comfort,  passing  gratification,  or

worldly victory is transitory in its nature, and is burnt up in the heat of fiery

trial. Only the Peace of Heaven endures through all trial, and only the selfless

heart can know the Peace of Heaven.

    Holiness alone is undying peace. Self-control leads to it, and the ever-

increasing Light of Wisdom guides the pilgrim on his way. It is partaken of in

a measure as soon as the path of virtue is entered upon, but it is only realized

in its fullness when self disappears in the consummation of a stainless life.

                    "This is peace,

      To conquer love of self and lust of life,

    To tear deep-rooted passion from the heart

      To still the inward strife."

  If, O reader! you would realize the Light that never fades, the Joy that

never ends, and the tranquillity that cannot be disturbed; if you would leave

behind for ever your sins, your sorrows, your anxieties and perplexities; if, I

say, you would partake of this salvation, this supremely glorious Life, then

conquer  yourself.  Bring  every  thought,  every  impulse,  every  desire  into

perfect obedience to the divine power resident within you. There is no other

way to peace but this, and if you refuse to walk it, your much praying and

your strict adherence to ritual will be fruitless and unavailing, and neither

gods nor angels can help you. Only to him that overcometh is given the white

stone of the regenerate life, on which is written the New and Ineffable Name.

  Come away, for awhile, from external things, from the pleasures of the

senses,  from  the  arguments  of  the  intellect,  from  the  noise  and  the

excitements of the world, and withdraw yourself into the inmost chamber of

your  heart,  and  there,  free  from  the  sacrilegious  intrusion  of  all  selfish

desires, you will find a deep silence, a holy calm, a blissful repose, and if you

will rest awhile in that holy place, and will meditate there, the faultless eye of

Truth will open within you, and you will see things as they really are. This

holy place within you is your real and eternal self; it is the divine within you;

and only when you identify yourself with it can you be said to be "clothed

and in your right mind." It is the abode of peace, the temple of wisdom, the

dwelling-place  of  immortality.  Apart  from  this  inward  resting-place,  this

Mount of Vision, there can be no true peace, no knowledge of the Divine, and

if you can remain there for one minute, one hour, or one day, it is possible foryou  to  remain  there  always.  All  your  sins  and  sorrows,  your  fears  and

anxieties are your own, and you can cling to them or you can give them up.

Of your own accord you cling to your unrest; of your own accord you can

come to abiding peace. No one else can give up sin for you; you must give it

up yourself. The greatest teacher can do no more than walk the way of Truth

for himself, and point it out to you; you yourself must walk it for yourself.

You can obtain freedom and peace alone by your own efforts, by yielding up

that which binds the soul, and which is destructive of peace.

  The angels of divine peace and joy are always at hand, and if you do not

see them, and hear them, and dwell with them, it is because you shut yourself

out from them, and prefer the company of the spirits of evil within you. You

are what you will to be, what you wish to be, what you prefer to be. You can

commence to purify yourself, and by so doing can arrive at peace, or you can

refuse to purify yourself, and so remain with suffering.

  Step aside, then; come out of the fret and the fever of life; away from the

scorching heat of self, and enter the inward resting-place where the cooling

airs of peace will calm, renew, and restore you.

  Come out of the storms of sin and anguish. Why be troubled and tempest-

tossed when the haven of Peace of God is yours!

  Give up all self-seeking; give up self, and lo! the Peace of God is yours!

  Subdue  the  animal  within  you;  conquer  every  selfish  uprising,  every

discordant voice; transmute the base metals of your selfish nature into the

unalloyed gold of Love, and you shall realize the Life of Perfect Peace. Thus

subduing, thus conquering, thus transmuting, you will, O reader! while living

in the flesh, cross the dark waters of mortality, and will reach that Shore upon

which the storms of sorrow never beat, and where sin and suffering and dark

uncertainty  cannot  come.  Standing  upon  that  Shore,  holy,  compassionate,

awakened,  and  self-possessed  and  glad  with  unending  gladness,  you  will

realize that

    "Never the Spirit was born, the Spirit will cease to be never;

    Never was time it was not, end and beginning are dreams;

    Birthless and deathless and changeless remaineth the Spirit for ever;

    Death hath not touched it at all, dead though the house of it seems."

  You will then know the meaning of Sin, of Sorrow, of Suffering, and thatthe end thereof is Wisdom; will know the cause and the issue of existence.

  And with this realization you will enter into rest, for this is the bliss of

immortality,  this  the  unchangeable  gladness,  this  the  untrammeled

knowledge, undefiled Wisdom, and undying Love; this, and this only, is the

realization of Perfect Peace.

    O thou who wouldst teach men of Truth!

      Hast thou passed through the desert of doubt?

    Art thou purged by the fires of sorrow? hath ruth

          The fiends of opinion cast out

    Of thy human heart? Is thy soul so fair

    That no false thought can ever harbour there?

    O thou who wouldst teach men of Love!

      Hast thou passed through the place of despair?

    Hast thou wept through the dark night of grief?

          does it move

          (Now freed from its sorrow and care)

    Thy human heart to pitying gentleness,

    Looking on wrong, and hate, and ceaseless stress?

    O thou who wouldst teach men of Peace!

      Hast thou crossed the wide ocean of strife?

    Hast thou found on the Shores of the Silence,

          Release from all the wild unrest of life?

    From thy human heart hath all striving gone,

    Leaving but Truth, and Love, and Peace alone?                                BOOK FOUR


        ALL THESE THINGS ADDED.                                  FOREWORD


  In seeking for pleasures here and rewards hereafter men have destroyed

(in their hearts) the Temple of Righteousness, and have wandered from the

Kingdom of Heaven. By ceasing to seek for earthly pleasures and heavenly

rewards,  the  Temple  of  Righteousness  is  restored  and  the  Kingdom  of

Heaven is found. This truth is for those who are ready to receive it; and this

book also is for those whose souls have been prepared for the acceptance of

its teaching.

  James Allen.                PART I: ENTERING THE


                                KINGDOM


                    1. THE SOUL’S GREAT NEED


  I sought the world, but Peace was not there;

  I courted learning, but Truth was not revealed;

  I sojourned with philosophy, but my heart was sore with vanity.

  And I cried, Where is Peace to be found!

  And where is the hiding place of truth!

  FILIUS LUCIS

 

  EVERY  HUMAN  SOUL  IS  IN  NEED.  The  expression  of  that  need

varies with individuals, but there is not one soul that does not feel it in some

degree. It is a spiritual and casual need which takes the form, in souls of a

particular  development,  of  a  deep  and  inexpressible  hunger  which  the

outward things of life, however abundantly they may be possessed, can never

satisfy. Yet the majority, imperfect in knowledge and misled by appearances,

seek to satisfy this hunger by striving for material possessions, believing that

these will satisfy their need, and bring them peace.

  Every soul, consciously or unconsciously, hungers for righteousness, and

every  soul  seeks  to  gratify  that  hunger  in  its  own  particular  way,  and  in

accordance with its own particular state of knowledge. The hunger is one,

and the righteousness is one, but the pathways by which righteousness is

sought are many.

  They who seek consciously are blessed, and shall shortly find that final

and permanent satisfaction of soul which righteousness alone can give, for

they have come into a knowledge of the true path.

  They who seek unconsciously, although for a time they may bathe in a

sea  of  pleasure,  are  not  blessed,  for  they  are  carving  out  for  themselves

pathways of suffering over which they must walk with torn and wounded

feet, and their hunger will increase, and the soul will cry out for its lost

heritage—the eternal heritage of righteousness.  Not in any of the three worlds (waking, dream and sleep) can the soul

find lasting satisfaction, apart from the realization of righteousness. Bodied

or disembodied, it is ceaselessly driven on by the discipline of suffering, until

at last, in its extremity, it flies to its only refuge—the refuge of righteousness

—and finds that joy, satisfaction, and peace which it had so long and so

vainly sought.

  The great need of the soul, then, is the need of this permanent principle,

called righteousness, on which it may stand securely and restfully amid the

tempest of earthly existence, no more bewildered, and whereon it may build

the mansion of a beautiful, peaceful, and perfect life.

  It is the realization of this principle where the Kingdom of Heaven, the

abiding home of the soul, resides, and which is the source and storehouse of

every permanent blessing. Finding it, all is found; not finding it, all is lost. It

is an attitude of mind, a state of consciousness, an ineffable knowledge, in

which the struggle for existence ceases, and the soul finds itself at rest in the

midst of plenty, where its great need, yea, its every need, is satisfied, without

strife and without fear. Blessed are they who earnestly and intelligently seek,

for it is impossible that such should seek in vain.          2. THE COMPETITIVE LAWS AND THE


                              LAW OF LOVE

  When I am pure

  I shall have solved the mystery of life,

  I shall be sure

  (When I am free from hatred, lust and strife)

  I am in truth, and Truth abides in me.

  I shall be safe and sane and wholly free

  When I am pure.

  IT HAS BEEN SAID that the laws of Nature are cruel; it has likewise

been  said  that  they  are  kind.  The  one  statement  is  the  result  of  dwelling

exclusively upon the fiercely competitive aspect of Nature; the other results

from viewing only the protective and kindly aspect. In reality, natural laws

are neither cruel or kind; they are absolutely just—are, in fact, the outworking

of the indestructible principle of justice itself.

  The cruelty, and consequent suffering, which is so prevalent in Nature, is

not  inherent  in  the  heart  and  substance  of  life;  it  is  a  passing  phase  of

evolution, a painful experience, which will ultimately ripen into the fruit of a

more perfect knowledge; a dark night of ignorance and unrest, leading to a

glorious morning of joy and peace.

  When a helpless child is burnt to death, we do not ascribe cruelty to the

working of the natural law by virtue of which the child was consumed; we

infer ignorance in the child, or carelessness on the part of its guardians. Even

so, men and creatures are daily being consumed in the invisible flames of

passion, succumbing to the ceaseless interplay of those fiery psychic forces

which, in their ignorance, they do not understand, but which they shall at last

learn how to control and use to their own protection, and not, as at present,

foolishly employ them to their own destruction.

  To understand, control and harmoniously adjust the invisible forces of its

own soul is the ultimate destiny of every being and creature. Some men and

women, in the past, have accomplished this supreme and exalted purpose;

some, in the present, have likewise succeeded, and, until this is done, that