Chapter 5
Do We Think in Words?
1.0	Two different ways that knowledge of a language might enhance intelligence
It is obvious that knowledge of a language makes one more intelligent in at least some respects. Consider the thought that authoritarian governments tend to be less responsive to the needs of their constituents than democratic governments. Could one grasp that thought without knowing some language or other? We have, I think, at least some inclination to say “no.” And, more generally, we are reluctant to regard creatures that cannot interact with reality through a language, or in any case through some sort of symbolic medium or other, as being capable of grasping, let alone delineating the consequences of, abstract principles or therefore of thinking about reality in a discursive manner.
My own view, as we’ll see shortly, is that this is false—that whatever one can grasp through language, one must be able to grasp independently of language. But this, I grant, is a counterintuitive view; and, speaking personally, it was only after trying to defend the negation of that view, and finding that it was impossible to do so, that I came to accept it. Still, our untutored intuitions do, I think, incline us to hold that, but for knowledge of a language (of some kind or other), a creature would be incapable of thinking discursively about the world.
But untutored intuitions are not always probative. And sometimes they are inconsistent with one another, this being one of those cases. For, while we are reluctant to impute discursive thought to the language-less, we also strongly feel that we sometimes have thoughts of considerable sophistication that we don’t know how to put into words; and, if that’s right (as I personally have no doubt that it is), then it seems to follow that not all discursive thought is language-dependent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a brisk but relatively rigorous answer to the question: Do we think in language?
2.0	Two different versions of the thesis that we think in language
Do we think in language? No. But, before we can say why, there are two very different versions of the view that we think in language.
Version #1: English speakers think in English; Albanian speakers think in Albanian; etc. In general, people think in the natural languages that they learn. (A “natural language” is one that organically arises through human interactions. So English, Spanish, Arabic, Chinese, etc. are natural languages. A non-natural or “artificial” language would be one that people invent—for example, computer-programmers invent languages to serve their special needs, and so do mathematicians and philosophers. Philosophers invent special notations because natural languages often obscure important features of the logical structure of the meanings that their sentences express.)
Version #2: We think in an innately known code, a “language of thought.” So although we think in sentences, those sentences don’t belong to English or Spanish (etc.) but rather to some system of symbolism that is hard-wired into us from birth.
3.0	Why version #1 is wrong
Do English speakers think in English, Spanish speakers in Spanish, etc.? No. (We will find that some of the arguments against Version #1 also apply to Version #2.)
3.1	First reason
We can obviously have thoughts that we are incapable of putting into words. This shows that we grasp those thoughts in some way other than by grasping the English sentences that express them. Also, there are occasions where, although we can put into words what we are thinking, doing so requires great effort: we have to think long and hard about which words to use. This shows that thinking is often a prerequisite to using language, which in turn shows that at least some thinking is non-linguistic.
Astonishingly, many authors (e.g., Ludwig Wittgenstein, Simon Blackburn, John McDowell) deny that we know anything that we can’t readily articulate. “If you can’t say it, you don’t know it,” they say. This presupposes that what we believe is expressed only in the words we utter. But that’s not the case. A given person’s beliefs can be expressed in many ways, and many of them don’t depend on that person’s being able to use words. A person’s knowledge of the differences between x and y may be expressed in that person’s drawings of x and y; or it may be expressed in that person’s movements while he is in the vicinity of x and y; or it may be expressed in some other non-linguistic manner.
The way that authors such as , McDowell, Wittgenstein respond to this is to say that no bona fide knowledge is involved in my painting things accurately—that what is involved is a kind of pseudo-knowledge. This is obviously false. It also overlooks the fact that, but for this “pseudo-knowledge,” we couldn’t know anything about language, since it is only through our ability to differentiate noises, ink-marks, etc., on the basis of their perceptible properties that we can learn, or use, language.Blackburn
3.2	Second reason
Some kinds of information (e.g., visual information) seem inherently incapable of being fully expressed by sentences of English or of any other natural language. Also, sentences have very different structures from pictures, even when the sentences and the pictures overlap in content. A visual perception of a man wearing a leather jacket has a very different structure from any sentence that describes that experience. For example, such a sentence decomposes into a finite number of distinct parts (words), whereas the sense-perception does not so decompose. (Sentences are digital structures, meaning that they consist of discrete entities. Sense-perceptions are analogue structures, meaning that they don’t.)
Also, any sentence must be interpreted to be understood. To understand the sentence “there is a man wearing a leather jacket over there,” you must know the relevant semantic rule (i.e., you must know the rules that assign meaning to that sentence). But you don’t have to interpret a visual perception, at least not in the same way. Perceptions are “self-interpreting” in a way that sentences are not.
3.3	Third reason
In order to learn a language, one must already be able to think. To learn English is to learn that certain sounds have certain meanings; and in order to be able to do this, you already have to be able to synthesize information—to make judgments, on the basis of experience, as to what sounds have what meanings. So knowledge of a language presupposes the ability to think.
3.4	Fourth reason
Different sentences can have the same meaning, and a single sentence can have multiple meanings.
What you think when you think that Bob loves Mary is identical with what you think when you think that Mary is loved by Bob. But the sentence “Bob loves Mary” is different from the sentence “Mary is loved by Bob,” even though they mean the same thing. So if you thought in English sentences, then the belief you’d have by virtue of accepting the sentence “Bob loves Mary” would be totally different from the belief you’d have by virtue of accepting the sentence “Mary is loved by Bob.” But the belief you have in virtue of accepting the one sentence is identical with the belief you have in virtue of accepting the other.
Also, if you thought in language, you couldn’t disambiguate ambiguous sentences. If your thinking Bob is dumb (i.e., unintelligent) were identical with there being an occurrence in your mind of the sentence “Bob is dumb,” then your thinking Bob is dumb (i.e., he can’t speak) would be identical with there being an occurrence in your mind of that same sentence going off in your head, and those thoughts would therefore be identical. But they are not identical. So your thinking Bob is dumb (i.e., unintelligent) is not identical with your thinking “Bob is dumb.”
3.5	Fifth reason (similar to reason #4)
People who speak different languages can have the same thoughts. Monolingual Spanish speakers believe that 1 + 1 = 2, and so do monolingual English speakers. But English and Spanish speakers use different sentences to express that truth, showing that thinking that truth cannot be identical with thinking a sentence of English or Spanish or, by obvious extensions of this line of thought, any other language.
3.6	Sixth reason
Understanding sentences involves thought. You must be able to think to understand what is meant by “if snow is cold, then snow is not hot.” This is because, in order to understand that sentence, you must be able to pair it off with the right meaning, and your pairing that sentence off with the right meaning is obviously different from an image of that sentence flashing through your mind. If I hear a sentence of a language that I don’t understand, it may pass through my mind later (i.e., I’ll remember the sounds later, just as songs that one has heard often flash through one’s consciousness), but I won’t know what it means. So understanding a sentence is different from its flashing through your mind. But if your thinking if snow is cold, then snow is not hot were identical with your thinking “if snow is cold, then snow is not hot,” then your having that thought would be identical with that sentence’s flashing through your mind. Since it isn’t, we don’t think in natural language.
4.0	Why version #2 is false
Do we think in some innate code? No. (Some of the arguments that we used against Version #1 obviously apply to Version #2. So we won’t repeat those.)
4.1	First reason
We often think in images (visual and auditory), and the contents of these images seem to have a structure that is fundamentally different from the structure of any sentence. Sentences are “digital” structures, meaning that they decompose into a finite number of distinct parts. Sense-perceptions are non-digital; they are “analogue” structures, meaning that they don’t decompose into discrete parts and are thus characterized by a kind of seamlessness that sharply distinguishes them from sentences.
4.2	Second reason
Knowing a language involves understanding the expressions belonging to it. Understanding such expressions involves knowing the rules that assign meaning to them. One can’t understand any language, including an
innately known one, without knowing such rules. But if one’s thought is entirely dependent on such a language, then one can’t know those rules, or anything else for that matter, without understanding those expressions. Therefore it is viciously circular to hold that we think in an innately known code.
4.2.1	How advocates of the view in question deal with this argument
Advocates of the view that we think in an innate code deal with this problem by saying that, strictly speaking, we don’t understand the sentences of our innate code. We are merely “built to conform” to those sentences. In other words, although we don’t understand those sentences, we are so neurologically structured that they cause us to act in ways that are appropriate to the meanings of those sentences. So if the sentence of my innate code that means fire is hot goes off in my head, that fact will cause me to go near fire if I’m cold and to stay away from it if I’m hot (or some such).
4.2.2	Why this move doesn’t work
If a sentence isn’t understood by so and so, then from so and so’s viewpoint it is not functioning as a sentence. If, as advocates of the viewpoint just presented maintain, nobody understands the sentences that mediate their thoughts, then those sentences aren’t really functioning as sentences and, for all intents and purposes, they cease to be sentences.
Here’s an analogy. Suppose that you have a book, but that, instead of reading it, you use it as a weapon—you throw it at your roommate, of whose antics you are growing increasingly tired. Even though the thing you are using as a weapon is a book, it is not in this context functioning as a book and, for all intents and purposes, is not a book. Similarly, if nobody understands the sentences that are, supposedly, identical with their own thoughts, then those sentences aren’t really functioning as sentences anymore—they’re functioning more like the copy of War and Peace that, instead of being read, is being hurled at one’s roommate. In any case, to say that our thoughts are sentences that we never understand is to take a very artificial and implausible view.
So we may tentatively conclude that we don’t think in language, even though, undeniably, knowledge of language enormously enhances at least some of our cognitive capabilities.
5.0	Given that thoughts aren’t identical with sentence-tokens, why is it that knowledge of language enhances cognitive ability and why does it feel as though we think in words?
On your computer desktop, there are various “icons.” By manipulating these icons, you can perform various operations—you can close a document, open your email account, etc. But these icon-manipulations are but representations of changes in patterns of electrical activity to which they bear only an extremely schematic resemblance.
When I’m thinking—when, for example, I’m trying to solve a problem (especially one connected to my work)—my thoughts often take the form of a voice. I have mental images of spoken words. This also happens when I’m reading. Sometimes it happens that I read one book for a while (e.g., one by Frege) and then start reading another (e.g., one by comedian Dave Barry), and I’m startled as to why Frege would say such things. Then I realize that I’m no longer reading Frege and that I should therefore “switch voices.”
And, of course, people think with the help of visual imagery. Many a student of calculus, or even of more advanced branches of mathematics, relies on mental images. I know I do. But the images that go through my head when solving some problem aren’t identical with the ratiocinative activities in which my problem-solving thought consists. Taken by themselves, those images are quite feeble. They don’t specify the exact shape of the object I’m thinking about. I’ll use a five-sided figure to stand for a ten-sided figure, since I can’t visualize
the latter. But it doesn’t matter, provided that I can find some mental icon that will stand for the relevant concept. The icon does not itself have to depict the concept or object it represents. It need only be sufficiently differentiated that I won’t confuse it with the image I am using to stand for some other concept of mine.
But even if I were more visually adept and, for that reason, could produce more exact visual surrogates for the concepts I’m thinking about, my ratiocinative activity couldn’t possibly be identical with any sequence of images. For any given sequence of images, a creature that could experience those images wouldn’t necessarily have any of the concepts that they represent in my thought processes. No matter how conceptually impoverished a creature is, little or nothing follows as to what sorts of images can go off in its head.
But everything constitutive of consciousness seems to be image-like or, at the very least, to share with images the property of being phenomenologically pregnant. Wittgenstein (1958) concluded from this that thinking isn’t a private psychological act. For reasons that we’ll discuss in the next section, he inferred that thinking consists of engaging in overt behaviors that involve symbols belonging to some public language.
Wittgenstein’s position is rank absurdity. He’s right, of course, that tickles, itches, etc., aren’t thoughts. But what follows isn’t that thoughts aren’t mental entities. What follows is that thoughts, unlike itches and tickles, aren’t phenomenologically pregnant.
Incidentally, the mistake Wittgenstein is making here is very similar to a mistake that David Hume makes in connection with the nature of personal identity. David Hume argues that there is nothing to one’s mind other than the conscious events that populate it. His argument is that, when introspects, he only encounters various tickles, pains, and other sensations. This argument assumes that everything there is to know about one’s mind is to be known in the same quasi-perceptual, phenomenology-drenched way in which we know of our sensations. But this assumption is blatantly false. I know that I believe that 2 + 2 = 4, and I know it in a relatively direct way. But it isn’t because I experience some sensation or mental image or other phenomenally pregnant entity that I know this.
Wittgenstein’s view that thinking consists of manipulating expressions is inconsistent with the fact that, unless one can think, one cannot use expressions meaningfully. If I just bark out sounds, having no idea what they mean, I’m not in any real sense using language. For my noise-making to be speech, it must be guided by a knowledge of what those noises mean.
Wittgenstein is right that the sensations and images that pass through one’s mind when one is having a given thought do not constitute that thought. But he’s wrong to conclude that thinking isn’t a psychological process. (As previously stated, what he should have concluded is that not all psychological activity consists of images and sensations.) He’s also wrong to conclude that those images categorically have no significant cognitive function. Mental imagery facilitates thought. Thanks to it, we have thoughts that we otherwise simply couldn’t have.
Given this data, I would suggest the following. Though not themselves constitutive of thought, mental images allow us to manage thought-processes that we otherwise couldn’t manage. Just as one can manipulate otherwise uncontrollable patterns of electrical activity by manipulating the icons on one’s computer desktop, so one can manipulate otherwise uncontrollable patterns of ratiocinative activity by manipulating cognitive imagery.
There is another point to make. Consciousness is a place where there are different streams of cognitive activity—where otherwise mutually isolated streams of cognitive activity can meet. The processes that create an olfactory or auditory perception are isolated from those involved in reading music or understanding facial expressions. But, in consciousness, sense-perceptions meet with judgments and with intentions to act, and so on. Consciousness has the effect, and maybe the purpose, of integrating otherwise mutually isolated streams of cognitive activity and, therefore, of pooling otherwise discrete bodies of knowledge. Mental imagery improves thought because it enables otherwise compartmentalized ratiocinative activities to borrow information from other similar activities from which they would otherwise be sealed off.
By virtue of knowing a language, one automatically has at one’s disposal a rich and easily operated system of icons by means of which one can manage one’s cognitive activities in the way just described. This, I would suggest, is why knowledge of a language does so much for thought.
6.0	Wittgenstein on language, thought, and the relationship between the two
Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951) put forth several provocative contentions about language.12 Perhaps the most celebrated of these is his contention that there cannot possibly exist such a thing as a private language. Human beings can devise private codes, he granted. But, Wittgenstein says, any such code must be a translation of an existing public language. It isn’t even theoretically possible, Wittgenstein thought, for there to exist a language that wasn’t created by several interacting individuals.
Once such a language is created, Wittgenstein grants, a single person can use it on his own—he can go off into the woods and keep records with it. But any case of a single person’s using a language for his own private use is, in Wittgenstein’s view, parasitic on there being, or once having been, a multiplicity of people using that same language.
Wittgenstein isn’t making the pedestrian point that, as a matter of psychological fact, it would be hard, maybe even impossible, for somebody to single-handedly create a language (other than one that was a translation of an existing language). He’s saying that it’s logically impossible—that such a language is a surd, like a square circle.
Wittgenstein also held that one can’t think unless one knows a language.13 Wittgenstein seemed to grant that one could have mental states without knowing a language. But he pretty clearly thought that knowledge of a language was a prerequisite for any sort of reasoning.
If Wittgenstein is right, one cannot think unless one is embedded in a society of some kind. It is logically, and not just psychologically, impossible, Wittgenstein thought, for a human being who isn’t either a current or erstwhile member of a society to think. These contentions, along with Wittgenstein’s arguments for them, are put forth in his book The Philosophical Investigations.
Wittgenstein provides an interesting argument for his view that there cannot be a private language, which is known, appropriately enough, as the Private Language Argument (PLA). We’ll discuss PLA in a moment. Wittgenstein provides two distinct arguments for the position that one cannot think without knowing a language. Because of the similarities between them, contemporary authors tend not to distinguish these arguments from one another, and they are collectively referred as to the Rule Following Argument.
6.1	Wittgenstein’s first Rule-Following Argument
(RF114) Not all ideation is ratiocinative. For ideation to be ratiocinative, it must be rule-governed. That is, it must be guided by a knowledge of the canons of logic. Thus, thinking involves following rules.
But there is no psychological condition or event that necessarily accompanies an act of following a rule. To see this, go ahead and follow some rule. (Add two multi-digit numbers together; read some passage out loud.) When you introspect, you may find that you are experiencing these or those feelings or images. But you could obviously follow the rule in question without having such experiences. Thus, following a rule is not a psychological act.

Contrary to what this argument assumes, not all mental states are images or sensations.15 Your belief that 1 + 1 = 2 isn’t such a thing; and your deploying that belief on some specific occasion isn’t identical with your experiencing some image or sensation or series of images or sensations. Not everything in your mind is a fleeting conscious event. Much of what constitutes your mind consists of stable, enduring structures. Your belief that snow is white isn’t a flash in the pan. It’s been there for a while, and will continue to be there for a while and though it gives rise to momentarily conscious events, it isn’t identical with any such event or with any aggregate of such events. Contrary to what Wittgenstein alleges, given only that there is no tickle or itch or other fleeting mental event that necessarily accompanies an act of rule-following, it doesn’t follow that rule following isn’t a psychological act.
6.1.1	Wittgenstein’s second Rule-Following Argument
(RF2) Consider the sentence “rabid dogs foam at the mouth.” For argument’s sake, let’s suppose that there exists some entity M that is the meaning of this sentence. Let’s also suppose that, without grasping or operating with the sentence “rabid dogs foam at the mouth” or any other expression, you behold M—you grasp it. You see it—through your “mind’s eye,” or some such. Finally, let’s suppose that you not only grasp M, but know it to be true. In other words, you know that rabid dogs foam at the mouth.
If you can’t see that, given M, Fido can’t be rabid without foaming at the mouth, your grasp of M is, to that extent, useless and as good as non-existent. Thus, so far as you don’t grasp how M bears on other meanings—so far as you don’t grasp its significance, in other words—your grasp of M is useless and might as well not exist. The problem we had with the sentence “rabid dogs foam at the mouth” arises in connection with M. Wanting to explain what it is to understand that sentence, we posited M. But it turned out that M is just like that sentence: it’s useless unless its meaning is grasped. M turned out to be just another symbol—just another cognitively dead symbolic intermediary.
Meanings are themselves symbols. So unless we already know what it is to understand symbols, positing symbol-meanings doesn’t help us understand the nature of symbol-comprehension. Positing symbol meanings in the hopes of explaining symbol-comprehension is like positing little people inside people’s heads in the hopes of explaining how people think.16 Positing these little people is useless unless it’s already understood how people think. Positing meanings is useless unless it’s already known how symbols are understood.

This argument of Wittgenstein’s bears a striking resemblance to Aristotle’s Third Man Argument (TMA).17 The purpose of TMA is to undermine Plato’s contention that spatiotemporal entities are instances of properties and, in addition, that the latter are not spatiotemporal. It will help if we take a moment to consider Aristotle’s argument (it will soon be clear why the third and fourth sentences are italicized):

(TMA) For argument’s sake, suppose that there is such a thing as the property of being a triangle. Let T1 be that thing. If Platonism is right, T1 must itself be a triangle. Further, if Platonism is right, any case of two objects’ sharing some property is a case of there being some third object of which they’re both instances. Thus, if T2 is some triangle, there must be some third object T3 such that each of T1 and T2 is an instance of T3. But, by the same logic, there must be some fourth thing T4 such that each of T1, T2, and T3 is an instance of T4. And so on ad infinitum.

Aristotle’s argument assumes that properties are instances of themselves—that the property of being a triangle is itself triangular. But that’s precisely what Platonism denies.18 Platonism is the doctrine that spatiotemporal things are but instances of non-spatiotemporal things, the latter being properties. The property of being spatiotemporal is therefore itself non-spatiotemporal and, therefore isn’t an instance of itself. And the property of being a cat obviously isn’t a cat, since cats are spatiotemporal, whereas that property is not.19
Just as, according to Aristotle, Platonism is struck with the problem of explaining why the property of being a triangle was itself a triangle, so according to Wittgenstein, those who believe in meanings are stuck with the problem of explaining how meanings are understood.
But meanings are not themselves understood. They’re no more understood than the property of being a cat is a cat. Consider the expression “I.” I’m referring, not to specific occurrences (utterances, inscriptions) of that expression, but to that expression itself—the expression-type, in other words, as opposed to its tokens. The meaning of that expression is some rule that assigns referents to its tokens depending on the circumstances. More precisely, the meaning of “I” is a rule to the effect that a token t of that expression that is uttered by x refers to x. My knowing that “I” has that meaning is part of what enables me to understand utterances of “I’m getting really bored,” “I really like snow-boarding,” etc. But that meaning is not itself understood. Meanings are either grasped or they’re not. There’s no such thing as grasping a meaning but not understanding it.
A consequence is that meanings don’t have to be interpreted. It’s incoherent to suppose that Hoigaard (who, let’s assume, is Norwegian) should be able to grasp this meaning, but fail to see that people were referring to themselves when they said “I.” If, upon hearing you say, “I am cold,” Hoigaard has to thumb through his English-to-Norwegian dictionary to figure out what “I” means, then he doesn’t know the meaning of the word “I.”
This isn’t to say, what would clearly be false, that one automatically recognizes every consequence of every principle that one grasps. People fail to see the consequences of the principles they grasp. In fact, since any given proposition has infinitely many consequences, people fail to grasp infinitely many consequences of anything that they grasp. But to the extent that one’s grasp of a given principle is determinative of what one knows, there isn’t a gap between grasping meaning, on the one hand, and applying it, on the other. And to the extent that one doesn’t see the consequences of some meaning or principle that one grasps, it isn’t because one has failed to interpret it.
A story will clarify these points. Brown is a highly (but not superhumanly) intelligent person who not only speaks perfect English, but is exceptionally (but, again, not superhumanly) adept at understanding highly intricate sentences. XYZ is a sentence of English that is 100,000 words long but is otherwise normal. XYZ is grammatical, coherent, etc.20 Even though Brown knows the relevant semantic rules, he obviously can’t understand XYZ. But the problem isn’t that Brown can’t interpret the relevant semantic principles. The problem is that, because that sentence is so long, he can’t deploy his semantic knowledge. In and of itself, that semantic knowledge is good to go. But, under the circumstances, it’s weighed down by limitations on Brown’s part that have nothing at all to do with his semantic competence. Brown’s memory isn’t perfect; he can’t keep too many tasks going in his mind simultaneously, even if any given one of them is elementary. These aren’t semantic limitations on Brown’s part. The problem isn’t that he doesn’t know the relevant semantic rules. Nor is it that he hasn’t adequately interpreted the semantic rules that he grasps. The problem is that his grasp of those principles is being inhibited by shortcomings that in no way detract from his semantic competence, even though they do limit his ability to deploy it. To the extent that what Brown knows is determined by his grasping those semantic rules, Brown does understand the expressions to which they assign meaning. But, of course, what Brown knows is a function of many things besides his grasp of those principles.
Wittgenstein’s idea that meanings, if grasped, must be interpreted reflects his erroneous belief that, whenever one can’t see a consequence of some principle that one grasps, it’s because one hasn’t adequately interpreted that principle. But principles aren’t interpreted. They’re grasped. And, if grasped, they guide judgments. And to the extent that one’s grasp of a principle is determinative of what one knows, those judgments are consistent with those principles. But, of course, one’s grasp of a given principle is but one factor among many determining the course of one’s thought-process; so one’s grasp of that principle may be prevented from eventuating in the judgments in which it would otherwise eventuate. But when that happens, it isn’t because that principle wasn’t adequately interpreted.
6.2	The Private Language Argument
Neither of Wittgenstein’s attempts to show that thinking isn’t a psychological act is probative. They’re interesting arguments, if I’ve interpreted them correctly; and if I haven’t, it’s an interesting question how they ought to be interpreted. But given what we’ve seen, we have no reason to reject the plausible, if not self-evident, position that thinking is a psychological act.
But, of course, Wittgenstein doesn’t see it this way. Believing himself to have definitively established (the radically absurd principle) that rule-following and, more generally, thought aren’t mental processes, he attempts to show that there can be no private languages. Here is his argument:

(WA21) Imagine the following. Smith is alone on a desert island. He’s always been this way and, therefore, has never learned a language. But he wishes to create one. He thus decides to stipulate that the meanings of expressions X1...Xn are to be respectively, tree, berry, sand, sun, etc. (He also specifies how those symbols
are to be written down. For some reason, he has a notebook and a pen.) He does this all on Monday. We’ll refer to the language Smith creates as “Smithese1.” One of the semantic rules for Smithese1 is to the effect that:

X35: means that the berries on the dark side of the hill are poisonous.

That same day, Smith sees some poisonous berries on the dark side of the hill, and writes X35 down in his notebook. (Let “X35” be our symbol for that particular inscription.) On Tuesday, he reads what he wrote down. Question: is there any way that Smith can misinterpret what he’s written? If he takes “X35” to mean that the sun is out, his interpretation of “X35” will be inconsistent with his Monday intentions. But so what? Since Smith is the only person who speaks Smithese1. So the expressions belonging to it mean whatever he thinks they mean. An English-speaker can’t just decide that “snow is white” means that grass is green, since it is the thoughts (and practices) of people in general, and not of this or that specific person, that decides what is meant by “snow is white.” But in this context, Smith is “people in general.” So his believing that “X35” means that the sun is out is like everybody’s deciding that “snow is white” means that grass is green. And just as “snow is white” would mean that if everybody thought it did, so X35 means that the sun is out because, in effect, everybody thinks it does, the reason being that, in this context, Smith is everybody.
Thus, the expressions of Smithese1 mean whatever Smith thinks they mean. This means that he can’t be wrong as to what they mean.
But a symbol that can’t be used wrongly doesn’t mean anything. What makes utterances of “John is a soccer player” meaningful is that they are used wrongly if John isn’t a soccer player. If “John is a soccer player” couldn’t be used wrongly, you couldn’t conclude anything from the fact that such an utterance was correct—you would be no less entitled to conclude that the moon was made of styrofoam than you would to conclude that the dog ate your wig.
Thus, there are languages only where there are right and wrong ways to use expressions. Since it is only where several people are using a language that there are right and wrong ways of using its expressions, it is only where there are several people that there are languages: all languages are public.

WA is spurious and establishes nothing. The reason that expressions of English (or any other public language) are meaningful is that people remember what they mean. If everybody forgot what “snow” meant, it wouldn’t be of much use. To be sure, where English is concerned, no one person’s forgetting the meaning of a word is going to strip of it meaningfulness, since there are millions of others who still know it. But that only means that English is causally more deeply entrenched than a language, like Smithese1, that only one person speaks. This is not to mention that, if I forget the semantic rules for English, it will be as useless to me as Smithese1 would be to Smith if he forgets the semantic rules of Smithese1. By the same token, if Smith remembers the semantic rules for Smithese1, the expressions of that language will be useful for him. He’ll know not to eat the berries on the side of the hill; he’ll know where the good-tasting aardvarks are; etc.22
What about Wittgenstein’s point that the expressions of Smithese1 mean only what Smith thinks they mean? A language is a set of semantic rules. If, on Monday, “X35” means that the berries on the dark side of the hill are poisonous, whereas on Tuesday that same inscription means that the sun is out, then the language Smith is using on Tuesday is ipso facto a distinct one from the language he is using on Monday. On Tuesday, he’s speaking Smithese2, not Smithese1. There, “X35” means that the sun is out only if it isn’t an expression of Smithese1. The expressions of Smithese1, then, don’t mean whatever Smith thinks they mean. If his opinions assign new meanings to X1...Xn, those opinions are creating a new language that happens to be orthographically and phonetically coincident with Smithese1; those opinions aren’t assigning new meanings to expressions constituting some existing language. So Wittgenstein is just wrong to say that the expressions of Smithese1 mean whatever Smith thinks they do.23
Thinking seems to involve following rules. Wittgenstein grants that people think. But since he believes totally absurdly, that rule-following and, therefore, thinking aren’t psychological acts, he is forced to come up
with a different analysis of what thought is. He wrongly says that thought consists in the manipulations of symbols. Given his belief that there aren’t private languages, he holds that to think is to manipulate symbols of public languages.
Given that RF and WA are spurious arguments for false conclusions, Wittgenstein has given us no good reason to accept this position. In any case, we know it to be an erroneous one. A prerequisite for speaking a language is knowing its semantic rules and being able to operate in an intelligent and, consequently, thought-mediated fashion.
ENDNOTES

Name: ______________________________________ Date: __________________________

Exercises
1.	In this chapter I’ve put forth several arguments that, if successful, show that not all thought involves the use of a public language (e.g., Chinese, Spanish). Pick one of these reasons and attempt to refute it.
2.	In this chapter, I argue that we don’t think in an innate language or code. Clearly state my argument (in your own words—no quoting allowed), and then try to refute it. (Your conclusion cannot be that it’s irrefutable; you must really try to refute it.)
3.	It seems reasonable to believe that at least some kinds of cognition necessarily involve language, and also that certain other kinds don’t. State which kind of cognition you believe to be language-dependent; and make it clear exactly how you believe them to be language-dependent and why. Then state which kind of cognition you believe to be language-independent (i.e., not to involve language); and make it clear exactly why you believe them to be language-independent.
4.	Make a case that my argument against Wittgenstein’s private language argument fails.
5.	Make a case that my argument against Wittgenstein’s rule-following argument fails.
6.	Make a case that the conclusion of Wittgenstein’s private language argument is correct.
