Part IV
Necessity, Causality, 
and Personal Identity
Chapter 14
Determinism, Randomness, and Unpredictability
1.0 Determinism and indeterminism
Determinism is the view that how the world is at any given point in time fixes how it will be in every respect at all later times. So given how the world is now, there is only one way it could possibly be in a thousand (or a billion) years. And given how the world was a minute ago (or a billion years ago), the world has to be the way it is now: things couldn’t possibly be any other way.
Indeterminism is the doctrine that determinism is false. So it is the view that, for at least one moment in time, how the world is at that time does not completely fix how the world will be at all later times.
Indeterminism is not the view that the world is chaotic or lawless. Indeterminism is actually an extremely moderate doctrine. All it says is that, at some point in time (it could be past, present, or future), some event occurs that doesn’t have to occur. So, technically speaking, for indeterminism to be true, there needs to be only one “renegade” event.
Determinism is thus much harder to establish than indeterminism. After all, the determinist says that, for any time t, how the world is at t determines how the world will be in every respect at all later times. Which is a very strong claim. Indeterminism, on the other hand, only says that there is at least one counterexample to what the determinist says. Which is not a very strong claim.
Nonetheless, even though determinism is a strong statement for which it is difficult to produce definitive grounds, we know that it is true or at least a very close approximation to the truth. It is an open question whether, at the sub-atomic level, the world is strictly deterministic. But whatever indeterminacies there are at that level seldom, if ever, percolate up to the molecular, cellular, biological, planetary, or astronomical scales. So, for most intents and purposes, the world in which we operate—the world of “medium sized” objects—is deterministic.
To be sure, the world often seems to be indeterministic. But careful scrutiny of any such situation, with the possible exception of those at the sub-atomic level, tends to show that it is governed by deterministic mechanisms.
2.0 Determinism vs. predictability
Predictability and determinism are not the same thing. If a system is completely indeterministic, then it is indeed unpredictable (or only fortuitously predictable), since prediction requires regularity and there is regularity only where there are deterministic laws. But a deterministic system may be unpredictable. Even if the world is completely deterministic—even if the state of the universe at any point completely fixes how everything will be, in every respect, at all later points—there are limits to how much any creature could predict about the course of future events. It doesn’t matter how intelligent that creature is or how sharp its senses are or how good its technology is. For reasons of logic, no creature is able to predict everything that happens. There are two reasons for this.
2.1 Why predictability ≠ determinism: Reason #1
We learn about the external world through sense-perception—that is, through vision, hearing, touch, etc. Let’s focus on vision for the moment. Suppose that you’re seeing some rock. (Let’s refer to that rock as “R.”) Here’s 
what’s involved in your seeing R. Some light beam bounced off R. (We’ll refer to that light beam as “L.”) As a result of that collision, L’s structure changed in such a way that R’s structure is now coded in it’s (L’s) structure. For this reason, L bears information about R. L hits your eyes, disturbing them. Those disturbances reflect L’s structure. Given that L reflects R’s structure, it follows that these disturbances of your eyes reflect R’s structure. Those ocular disturbances therefore encode information about R. The resulting neural impulses transmit this information to some part of you that decodes this information. The results of this decoding are embodied in a visual perception that succeeds in representing R.
Light is energy. Things change when bombarded by energy. They don’t always change very much. But there is always some change. It takes time for light, or any other information-bearing process, to travel. So by the time L reaches your eyes, some time has elapsed. During the time that has elapsed, the changes in R that were initiated by L led to other changes in R. Since, for the time being, L is your only source of information about R, and since L gives you dated and otherwise inaccurate information about R, the information encoded in the visual perception that L caused you to have is itself inaccurate.
Before we take the next step, I’d like to clarify this point. Let t be the time that you have the visual perception of R that L caused you to have. Obviously t will happen after the time L hits your eyes and t is later than the time that L collided with R. During the time between that collision, on the one hand, and t, on the other, R has changed. Why has it changed? Because the just-mentioned collision made it change. That collision, as we just pointed out, set off processes because of which R changed.
What you know, at t, about R is confined to what L tells you. And what R tells you is dated information—it’s yesterday’s news. What you know, by virtue of having the sense-perception in question, is now dead and gone. What it tells you is how R was a little while ago; it doesn’t tell you how R is now.
Supposing that R is some rock in your backyard—and not some rock in the depths of outer space—the time lag is minimal. And, no matter where R is, L did extremely little to change it. The changes that L induced in R, by colliding with it, fall well below the limits of sensory discrimination.
But mentally replace R with something small—something so small that the photons involved in its being bombarded with light do appreciably change it. In that sort of case, the thing you see at t is very different from the thing that is now out in there in the world.
You might be aware of this gulf between the perception and the reality. But any attempt on your part to narrow this gulf will only make it wider. If you try to learn more about R—by, for example, shining more light on it—you’ll make it more unlike the thing it was initially. And you’ll only compound the problem if you try to undo those distortions with counter-distortions. Setting aside the problem just discussed, there’s no point in trying to reverse the effects that L had on R by shining more light on R, since you don’t know how R was before you bombarded it with light. Therefore, you don’t know how R has changed and, consequently, you don’t know what the needed corrections are.
What is true of your seeing R is true, to some degree or other, of anything’s having any sense-perception of anything. It doesn’t matter whether the percipient beings in question are super-brilliant aliens or iguanas or God Herself. As a matter of logic, perceiving a thing, involves having an experience that is caused by that thing. And, as a matter of logic, such experience involves that thing’s being disturbed by something that eventually made its way to you. Whatever changes that disturbance had on the object, you don’t know about them, since they occurred after the relevant information-transmitting process left that thing. (Let’s assume that process to be a light ray.) For the time being, that light ray is your one source of information about that thing. So whatever that light ray did to that object—whatever changes, if any, it made—you can’t know what they are. If no changes occurred, you can’t know it; and if changes did occur, you can’t know that either, and a fortiori you can’t know the exact nature of those changes. So what you see is different from what is out there, in the relevant place, at the time of your perception. And, as we saw a moment ago, attempts to remove this margin of error by having more perceptions will only make it bigger.
We are not talking about the limitations of human beings. We’re taking about the conditions that must, as a matter of logic, be fulfilled by any sense-perception on the part of anyone or anything. If it’s said that God could “just know” what is out there—that She (or He or it) didn’t have to be on the receiving end of some causal process starting with external objects—I would reply by saying: “rubbish!” If there’s no causal process, 
then, by definition, there’s no information for God to go off of. And if there’s no such information, then any image God comes up with is a hallucination. It might be a correct one. But, if so, it’ll only be an accidentally correct one, and it won’t be enough for knowledge of anything, and any belief She has in consequence of having that image will be nothing more than a guess. A correct guess, perhaps. Some guesses are lucky guesses. But lucky guesses aren’t knowledge. (See Chapter 10 for an explanation of this.) 
If it’s said that the laws of logic don’t apply to God, I would say: “yes they do.” If, in response to that, it’s said that God, being omnipotent, can’t be hemmed in by anything, even the laws of logic, I would reply by saying that this statement embodies a total failure to understand the nature of logical truth—that God’s inability to create a square circle is no more an abridgment of Her powers than an athlete’s “inability” to score a touchdown in a soccer match shows a lack of athletic talent. If asked why, I can only say: read Chapter 25, Section 4, which is dedicated to this problem.
In any case, the idea God could know of some event without having any causal connection is in the same category as the idea that a sufficiently good athlete could score a touchdown in the course of a soccer match. It’s simply incoherent.
But why exactly is it incoherent? Only justified true beliefs are knowledge. Lucky guesses don’t count. A justified belief is one for which there is evidence. One spatiotemporal thing is evidence of another if and only if the first is causally related to the second in such a way that, given the existence of the first, that of the second can be inferred. Therefore, one’s own mental states are evidence of a given external thing, and therefore give one a justification for believing that thing to exist, only if those mental states are effects of that thing. So the idea that God could know of some spatiotemporal entity without being causally connected to that entity is no more coherent than the abject absurdity that one event could be evidence of another even though the occurrence of the first event provided no reason to suspect the occurrence of the second. Since the latter idea is obviously a non-starter, which deserves to be put in the same category as “squares don’t have four sides,” the same is true of the former. For similar reasons, one would simply be redefining the terms “‘justification” and “knowledge” were one to say that unjustified beliefs were knowledge or that beliefs for which one had known evidence were justified. Nothing that follows from definitional truths can be false; anything that follows from a truth of logic is itself a truth of logic. So it is a truth of logic, since it follows from truths of logic, that God couldn’t have knowledge of some spatiotemporal entity without being causally connected to that entity. It’s also a tautology that causal connections are disruptive and that tautology entails that God’s mental representations of the world must, in at least some cases, be discrepant with the corresponding realities.
Before closing the argument, let’s sum up. Learning about the world involves changing it. A consequence is that the world is different from how it is represented to you as being. So even if the world is 100% deterministic, there is necessarily a gulf between the perception and the reality.
Conclusion: Given the existence of the aforementioned gulf, any predictions one makes are necessarily slightly off. A prediction involves two things: first, knowledge of initial conditions (how things are at the moment—or, in any case, how they were just a moment ago); second, what the relevant causal laws are. Given a knowledge of those causal laws, one can predict what must occur, given those initial conditions. But since one’s knowledge of initial conditions is necessarily off, though sometimes not by very much, one’s predictions will be off.
2.2 Why predictability ≠ determinism: Reason #2
What we know affects how the world is. Why is this? Because what we know affects what we do, and what we do affects how the world is.
We can’t know what it is that we’ll know. Suppose that, right now, you know exactly what it is that you’ll know in 10 years. (Let K be that body of knowledge.) In that case, what you’ll know in 10 years will be K plus all the knowledge you pick up between now and then. And if you build that knowledge, viz. the knowledge you pick up along the way, into your definition of K, then you’ll already know it and you won’t pick it up along the way anymore, and the knowledge that you do pick up along the way will be something else. So it makes no sense to say that you could know now what it is that you’ll know in 10 years.
There are trivial exceptions to this. For example, if you know that you’ll be dead in 10 years, then you know that you’ll know nothing. But assuming that your knowledge grows, you can’t know how it will grow. And since how it grows affects what you’ll do and therefore affects how the world will be, you can’t predict how the world will be—even if, as Einstein thought, it’s completely deterministic.
Thus, the very concept of an infallible self-predictor is an incoherent one. In other words, it makes no sense to suppose that a thing should be able to predict its own future states with complete accuracy.
2.2.1 A variation of Reason #2
There are self-fulfilling prophecies and self-defeating viewpoints. Self-confidence breeds success. You succeed because you believe, perhaps without any good reason, that you will succeed. I’ve found this to be 100% true in my life. I’ve found that self-confidence, even (especially) in the total absence of any reason for it, always works to some degree or other. And I’ve found that unwarranted pessimism has some tendency to breed failure and thus to become warranted pessimism. (For some reason, unwarranted self-confidence is, in my experience, more likely to lead to success than unwarranted self-doubt is to lead to failure. But this may be an illusion; it may be that there are cases where my self-doubt was really a sham—a way of keeping self-destructive, hubris-activated forces at bay, by convincing them that I wasn’t in fact guilty of excessive pride.)
The fact that self-predictions make themselves come true might initially appear more consistent with the idea that we can know the future than with the idea that we cannot. But this appearance is misleading. Self-predictions affect the future. In some cases, they do this because they are self-fulfilling. In other cases, they do it for very different reasons. In any case, given that one’s predictions affect the future, so do one’s predictions about the effects of one’s predictions. Therefore, the self-fulfilling nature of some predictions about oneself open up a gap between how things will be and how we can know them to be.
3.0 Determinism vs. randomness
“Random” doesn’t mean the same thing as “undetermined.” A deterministic world isn’t necessarily one in which nothing random happens; and, give or take a few niceties, an indeterministic world isn’t necessarily one in which anything random does happen. A story will make it clear why these points hold.
Smith arrogantly insulted a high-ranking member of a particularly lethal criminal organization, and that person has sworn to kill him. For unrelated reasons, Smith’s wife also wants him dead, and she has just hired a hit man to kill him. She has always wanted him dead; she just married him for his money. Plus, Smith has a serious heart condition, and his doctor is surprised that he didn’t die years ago. You are a friend of Smith’s, and you know all of this. But you don’t know anything else that is relevant to an estimate of how much longer he is likely to live. Given that information, the right estimate is, of course, “not long.”
But Smith beats the odds. Nobody kills him and nothing goes wrong with his heart. But one day, as he’s making a sales pitch to some prospective clients, a ceiling-lamp comes loose and falls on his head, killing him.
This was a “random” occurrence. But it wasn’t uncaused. When a ceiling lamp falls, there’s a reason for it (e.g., the bolt wasn’t screwed in tightly enough or the weight of the lamp was too much for the beam it was hanging from). It was “random” because, although caused, it wasn’t the sort of thing that, given the information at your disposal, could reasonably be expected to do him in. Thus, it was “random” not because it was uncaused, but because it was independently caused, meaning that the causal sequence that led to his death was independent of the causal sequences that were under way that were reasonably believed, given the information available to you, to eventuate in his demise. So, in this context, “random” doesn’t mean “uncaused,” it means “uncaused by anything that we had reason to believe would occur.”
And this is what “random” typically means. It may be that microphysicists deal with uncaused events. But the rest of us deal exclusively with things that are quite definitely caused. (As previously stated, the indeterminacies at the micro-level don’t percolate up to the macrolevel, at least not enough to engage the structures that change human lives.) So the “random” things we deal with are things that have unforeseeable causes.
A consequence is that randomness isn’t a property of events; it’s a relation that an event has with respect to a given body of knowledge. Relative to what you know, it is unforeseeable, and therefore random, that a ceiling lamp will kill Jones. But relative to what Howard the building inspector knows, that same event is not random. (Howard knows that the plank in question will go at any time, and he sees Smith standing underneath it.)
Thus, randomness isn’t a property of events. It’s a property of statements—or, more accurately, of relations between statements. An event is random, relative to a certain body of information, if its occurrence couldn’t reasonably be predicted on the basis of that information. So randomness is really a relation that holds between the statements describing some body of data and the statement describing some event; that relation holds if the former statements don’t warrant acceptance of the latter.
It’s obvious that there can be random events in a deterministic world. Smith’s death was an inevitable consequence of pre-existing circumstances. But, relative to the information that you had, it was also quite random.
3.1 Determinism vs. randomness (continued)
Supposing that the world is indeterministic, would there for that reason be “random” events in it? The answer is “yes.” But the reasons are not what one would think; and the amount of randomness in such a world is not necessarily as great as one would expect it to be.
For argument’s sake, suppose we know that, given the current state of the universe, it’s causally completely undetermined whether, in five seconds, object O will move to the right or to the left. Each possible outcome is as likely as the other (they’re “equiprobable”).There’s no way, of course, to predict which way it will go. We could make that prediction only to that the extent that we had reason to think one of the outcomes the more likely one—which we obviously don’t. But when, at the moment of true, it goes to the left, was that “random”? We couldn’t predict it; but it isn’t exactly random. On the contrary, it’s consistent with our expectations of it.
To see why, let’s talk about Smith again, but let’s change the story. This time, he isn’t killed by a ceiling lamp. The vindictive criminal kills him. Before Smith died, you knew that, in all likelihood, he would be killed either by that criminal or by his wife or by his heart-condition—but you didn’t know which, since, given what you knew, they were all equiprobable. When the criminal gets him, that surely isn’t random. Quite the opposite. Even though it could not itself be predicted with certainty to happen, it belonged to a class of events which, given the available evidence, was known to contain all and only the things that would kill him.
The same is true of O. In going to the left, it’s doing something that, being uncaused and therefore not itself predictable, it belonged to a class known, or at least reasonably believed, to contain all and only the things that O might be doing in five seconds. So indeterminism doesn’t entail randomness.
But here we must make a subtle distinction. Relative to the knowledge that it’s undetermined whether O goes to the left as opposed to the right, or vice versa, it’s going to the left is random. So O’s going to the left is both random (relative to one body of knowledge) and non-random (relative to another).
4.0 Why determinism is capable of being verified
On hearing me say that the world is at least approximately deterministic, students of mine often respond by saying either that determinism is unverifiable or that it’s simply false. Depending how it’s meant, this statements is either false or vacant. With some trivial exceptions, any universal statement (i.e., any statement of the form “all x’s are y’s”; e.g., “all birds have feathers”) is incapable of being definitively verified. (The trivial exceptions concern cases where the generalization concerns only some very circumscribed class of objects; e.g., “all pencils on my desk are yellow,” or where some statement that, in terms of its content, is not a universal generalization is turned into one through syntax-chopping; e.g., “all objects are such that, if they are identical with George W. Bush, they are mammals.”) Since determinism is given by the statement “all events have complete causes,” it is unverifiable, like “all metal expands when heated.” On this basis, it is concluded that determinism couldn’t possibly be known to be true, and shouldn’t be affirmed, even tentatively.
But is it so clear that “all metal expands when heated” is unverifiable? So far as that is true, it’s only in the trivial sense in which nothing other than analytic truths can be definitively verified. To be sure, “all metal expands when heated” couldn’t possibly be verified on strictly observation grounds. After all, that statement concerns all metal, not just the metal you see. So no universal generalization, with the irrelevant exceptions noted a moment ago, can be verified on purely observational grounds; some element of inference is involved. Anything that can be observed to occur is, for that very reason, not general. And that is why, despite its syntactic similarity to “all metal expands when heated,” “all pencils on my desk are yellow” is not substantively (as opposed to just syntactically) a universal generalization: one can observe that it is true. You can observe this or that metal bar expanding; but you can’t observe the “general fact,” if there even is such a thing, that heated metal always expands. Also, if by “verification” you mean “observation-based verification,” then “all metal expands when heated” and “every event has a cause” are incapable of verification, but only because “verification” has been so defined as to render that statement an empty truism.
But if one allows at least some inference-rules to be permissible sources of verification, then “all metal expands” is verifiable, depending on what those rules are. And if those rules are anything like those that laypersons and scientists permits themselves, then “all metal expands when heated” is verifiable. So it is only in some trivial sense that “all metal expands when heated” is unverifiable.
4.1 Why determinism is capable of being verified (continued)
Some say that “all metal expands when heated” is unverifiable in the sense that, no matter how many metal objects you’ve seen expand when heated, the next one “could” fail to expand. But what does “could” mean in this context? There is a sense in which I “could” win the lottery, or even sprout wings, even though the latter and probably also the former are prohibited by natural law. (In fact, the former is definitely prohibited by natural law since, given who I am, it isn’t psychologically possible for me to buy lottery tickets. I find the very concept of a lottery appalling.) To say that I “could” sprout wings is not to say that it’s permitted by natural law, let alone that it’s possible in some more robust sense. It is only to say that, given what I know, it isn’t ruled out. But I would contend that I do know that I won’t sprout wings and, therefore, that what I know does rule it out. And you too, outside of a philosophy class, would say that you know that you won’t sprout wings.
David Hume famously argued that inductive inference isn’t rational. His argument is not easy to refute. (That said, we saw in Chapter 12 how to refute it.) But nobody accepts Hume’s conclusion; and while it’s one thing to say that we don’t know how to justify a belief, it’s quite another to say that it has no justification. Surely my belief that I won’t sprout wings in the next five minutes is not in the same category as a person’s belief that tomorrow it will start raining gumdrops. And it’s a veritable truism that the difference is that the former is justified, whereas the latter is not.
4.2 An oft-heard argument as to why determinism is incapable of being
      verified
Here is an argument that several students, independently of one another, have presented to me, and that is also found in the work of C.S. Peirce (1839–1914):

Let cell X be a “perfect” clone of cell Y, and suppose that X and Y are kept under exactly similar conditions. (So, although they are kept in different Petri dishes, they are subjected to precisely the same forces.) X and Y will behave differently from each other. Therefore, the same initial conditions fail to lead to the same non-initial conditions. According to determinism, this isn’t possible. (If two qualitatively identical circumstances are succeeded by qualitatively different circumstances, then neither circumstance completely determined what it would be succeeded by.) From this it follows that determinism is false.
Given only that two cells are biologically exactly alike, it doesn’t follow that they’re exactly alike in all other respects. It doesn’t follow, in particular, that they are exactly alike at the atomic and sub-atomic levels. And the chances of their being thus alike are basically zero. There is no real chance that the micro-particles composing one organism will be moving in precisely the same way as the micro-particles composing any other organism. These sub-biological facts can and will have dramatic effects on what happens at the biological level. All this argument establishes, then, is the irrelevant point that different initial conditions may lead to different non-initial conditions.
4.3 Another oft-heard argument as to why determinism is incapable of
       being verified
Many students of mine have put forth the following argument:

Determinism says: “same initial conditions, same non-initial conditions.” But the conditions obtaining at any given time are different in at least some respects from those obtaining at any other time. For, between any two points in time, there has surely been at least one change; some particle has moved or rotated or vibrated. So there is no way to verify determinism.

Causal connections are discovered by seeing how differences in initial conditions correlate with differences in non-initial conditions. You allow initial changes to change in one respect, but do your best to ensure that they’re unchanged in every other respect. This will guarantee that these other factors will at least tend to remain constant, even though, inevitably, they’ll never be perfectly replicated. If changes in that one factor reliably correlate with changes in the outcome, there’s probably a causal connection; and there’s probably no such connection if there’s no such correlation.
You may not be able to establish a perfect correlation between your pushing the button and the elevator’s coming. But that doesn’t mean that you can’t have good reasons for positing the existence of a strictly deterministic connection between the first and the second. For there to be such a connection is not for the elevator to come without fail every time the button is pushed. It is for the likelihood that the elevator will come, given that the button was pushed, to approach 100% to the extent that other factors are held constant; that is, it is for there to be no limit to how close to 100% that likelihood can be made to be by rooting out other factors that aren’t constant.
Your experience can easily give you good evidence that this condition is satisfied. If you find that it’s always possible to make it more likely than before that the elevator will come, given that the button was pushed—if, in other words, you find that, given enough tinkering about with the relevant circuitry and cables and so on, it’s always possible to tighten this correlation—you ipso facto have evidence that the condition in question is satisfied and, therefore, that a strictly deterministic connection is at work.
This doesn’t show they can be definitively established. But it does show that, insofar as they’re incapable of being definitively established, it’s only for the reason that nothing known through sense-perception can be definitively established. Your sense-perceptions make it probable that you have a television, but they don’t make it certain. They make it probable that you’re not a disembodied spirit, but they don’t make it certain. They don’t make anything about the external world certain. A fortiori they don’t make the existence of any causal connections certain. But such connections are no less capable of being definitively established than anything else about the external world. Whatever shortcomings induction may have as a form of inference, they’re no more of a problem for attempts to establish causal connections than they are for attempts to establish that you have hands.
We can’t have perfect evidence of a perfect correlation. But that doesn’t mean we can only have evidence for imperfect correlations. It’s possible to have imperfect evidence for perfect correlations. I’ve examined a million mammals, and they all had backbones. Here we have evidence of a perfect correlation. It’s imperfect evidence, but that’s the only kind that’s available. More precisely, it’s imperfect evidence if  by “perfect evidence” 
we mean definitive observational evidence—as opposed to observational evidence plus reasonable inference-rules. But if this is what we mean by “perfect” evidence, then it’s a sterile triviality that we can’t have perfect evidence for the existence of transperceptual correlations. (By “transperceptual,” I mean “happening on the other side of the veil of perception—out there in the world, as opposed to in our minds.”)
We have similarly “imperfect” evidence for deterministic laws. And such laws are no more incapable of being definitively established, and no less capable of being established with reasonable certainty, than biological concomitances of the kind just described.

ENDNOTES
Name: ____________________________________________ Date: _______________________________

Exercises

1.	True or false? Even if the world is completely deterministic, there are limits to what can be predicted, one reason for this being that learning about the world involves interacting it and, therefore, changing it.

2.	True or false? If the world is indeterministic, then there are limits to what can be predicted.

3.	True or false? If the world is deterministic, the only limits to what can be predicted are of a technological nature. So super-smart aliens with better equipment could predict everything.

4.	True or false? Nobody is ethically responsible for what they’re coerced into doing.

5.	Consider the following passage: A thing’s being governed by deterministic laws is necessary but not sufficient for it’s completely predictable. Why isn’t it sufficient? One reason is that, for reasons that no amount of technological progress could possibly change, there are limits to what sentient beings (such as ourselves) could predict about themselves. Thus, the very concept of an infallible auto-predicter is an incoherent one. 
	a.	The boldfaced passage is mostly, but not entirely, accurate.
	b.	The boldfaced passage is mostly, but not entirely, false.
	c.	Science and technology haven’t reached the point where it can be said definitively whether the boldfaced passage is true or false.
	d.	Given the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, we know that the unpredictability of the world doesn’t have to do with auto-predictive limitations on our part.
	e.	Given the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, we know that the unpredictability of the world has a lot to do with auto-predictive limitations on our part; but the boldfaced passage is still at least partly wrong.
	f.	The boldfaced statement is self-refuting; for, if it were true, then it would follow that it was false.
	g.	None of the above.

6.	Suppose, if only for argument’s sake, that the world is not completely deterministic. Given only that information, does it clearly follow that the world is completely unpredictable?
	a.	Yes.
	b.	The term “unpredictable” is much too vague for this question to be capable of being answered in a principled manner.
	c.	No.
	d.	Maybe.
	e.	None of the above.

7.	Suppose for argument’s sake that the world is completely deterministic. Given this assumption, which of the following statements clearly follows?

8.	Give two reasons why, even if the world (including our minds) is strictly deterministic, even a maximally intelligent being with maximally acute senses couldn’t predict everything.