Chapter 16
Personal and Objectual Identity
1.0 Identity-related expressions ambiguous
We often make statements of the form ‹x is identical with y›. Examples are “I’m the guy in the photo,” “water is H2O,” “Superman is Clark Kent,” “that’s the eraser I was looking for,” and so on. Statements of this form  are known as “identity statements.”
Identity statements don’t always, or even typically, use the terms “identity” or “identical with.” Usually, they just use some form of the verb “to be.” So “that’s the guy who took my money” is an identity statement, even though the terms “identity” and “identical with” are nowhere to be found in it.
1.1 Identity-related expressions ambiguous: predicative vs. non-predicative uses of such expressions
This brings us to a fact that confused many pre-20th-century thinkers. The verb “to be” is ambiguous. As just noted, it sometimes means “identical with” (“he is George” means “he is identical with George”). But sometimes it has an entirely different meaning. When you say “Smith is tall,” you are not saying that Smith is identical with tallness; you are not making an identity statement. So oftentimes “is” (and “are,” “am,” etc.) doesn’t denote the relation of identity and instead denotes the relation of having (as in having an attribute). In other words, “is” sometimes has a predicative meaning: it is used to predicate a property of an individual. (To predicate a property of an individual is to attribute that property to that individual.) But in this context, we will focus on the concept of identity, not on the concept of attribute possession.
That said, it should be pointed that, although it is generally clear what is meant by statements involving the term “is” (or some other form of the verb “to be”), there are cases where it is functioning in both ways—where it both indicates identity and attributes a property to somebody (or something). If you say “Smith is the guy who washes my windows,” that seems both to identify Smith with a certain person and to attribute various properties to him (e.g., the property of a window washer). We will find that these borderline cases expose important facts about the concept of identity.
1.2 Metaphorical uses of identity-related expressions
Identity statements are often used in a loose, figurative fashion. One often says things like “George isn’t the person he used to be—having money has changed him” and “I’m not myself today.” These statements are not meant literally. Although having money may have changed George, since he now has unsavory character traits that he used not to have, George hasn’t literally become a person distinct from the person he used to be. It isn’t as though George’s brain was replaced with that of an alien. Similarly, when one says “I’m not myself today,” one isn’t saying that one is literally not identical with oneself—such a statement would be nonsensical. One is merely saying that, because of fatigue (or some such), one isn’t doing as well as one would like (or some such). Henceforth, we will disregard non-literal sentences like “George isn’t himself today” and will concern ourselves only with what is literally meant by “identical with,” “identity” (etc.).
1.3 Numerical vs. qualitative identity
Terms such as “identical,” “identity,” etc. sometimes refer to “strict” or “numerical” identity, and sometimes refer to “qualitative” identity.
For x and y to be qualitatively identical is for them to have the very same features (or, in any case, it’s for them to be as similar to each other as is possible given the one is not the very same entity as the other). x and y can be qualitatively identical even if they are not literally the same thing—even if, in other words, x and y are two things, not one. If you are cloned, you and your clone are qualitatively identical, meaning that you and your clone are very similar. But there are still two of you.
In philosophy, we are concerned with the other kind of identity, to which we will henceforth refer as numerical identity. This is the kind of identity involved in statements such as “water is identical with H2O.” This doesn’t say that water and H2O are merely very similar. It says that water and H2O are but one thing. Other examples of statements affirming strict identity are “the square of 4 is identical with 16,” “Clark Kent is Superman,” and “light is electromagnetic radiation.”
1.3.1 Numerical identity entails qualitative identity, but not vice versa
If x and y are literally the same thing, then x resembles y to the highest degree possible—after all, x cannot, under that circumstance, have any attribute that y lacks. But x and y can be qualitatively identical—that is, they can resemble each other a great deal, without being numerically identical, as we noted when discussing the possibility of cloning.
1.3.2 Correction: Numerical identity does entail qualitative identity and vice versa
Strictly speaking, qualitative identity entails numerical identity. If x and y are truly exactly the same—if there is no characteristic that the one has that the other lacks—then they must be the same. For, at any given time, they must occupy the same place and must be doing the same things.
It can be proven formally that qualitative identity entails numerical identity. If x and y are numerically identical, then, by hypothesis, neither has any property lacked by the other. x has the property of being identical with x. Therefore, y has the property of being identical with x as well. So y = x.
The principle that genuine qualitative identity entails numerical identity is known as the Identity of Indiscernibles. This principle is to be contrasted with the Indiscernibility of Identicals, better known as Leibniz’s Law, according to which x and y, if numerically identical, are also qualitatively identical.
2.0 Objectual identity
Sometimes identity statements concern people or other animate beings, and sometimes they concern inanimate objects. Examples of the first kind are “Clark Kent is Superman” and “Einstein is the physicist who invented Relativity Theory.” Examples of the second kind are “that’s the shirt I just bought,” “the car sitting in my driveway today is the very one I drove back in the ‘70s,” and “the liquid in your glass is the water that you poured into it a moment ago—I haven’t switched it with poison.”
If an identity statement concerns an inanimate object (or substance), then it affirms a case of objectual identity. “Objectual” is the adjective form of “object.” If an identity statement concerns people or other animate beings (e.g., dogs, martians), then it concerns personal identity. (The term “personal” is used even if the animate being in question is not a person—even if it is, for example, a dog.)
2.1 Objectual identity more fundamental than personal identity
My guess is that most people would find the topic of personal identity more interesting than that of objectual identity. A bit of autobiography may make it clear why I say this.
What is it for me—a middle-aged professor who rarely drives over the speed-limit—to be the same person as the guy who, 20 years ago, was out partying every night? I have changed so much in the meantime that it almost defies comprehension how I could ever have been some young roustabout. My musical horizons, for example, extend no further than the easy-listening channel on my radio, and I no longer have any tolerance for the cacophony of “rock music,” which used to be my life’s blood. I spend my evenings either working or reading. And when I’m not engaged in one of those two activities, it’s probably because I am hobbling (or, more likely, using my “Rascal”—a motor-powered personal locomotion device for the decrepit) at a rate of around 1/2 mph, from my desk to the easy chair in which I watch television shows targeted for senior citizens (e.g., “Murder She Wrote”). Not a single one of these statements would have applied to the person I was when I was your age.
This is not to mention that my once supple joints are frozen with arthritis, and my once pink and healthy vital tissues are now an oxygen-starved gray, thanks to the scourges to one’s health brought on by middle age. In high school I was a creditable athlete, playing on three different teams. These days, even a game of shuffleboard pushes me to my limits; and I’m even considering giving that up, since there’s no Rascal-parking anywhere near the local shuffleboard court.
It thus defies comprehension how, given my current condition, I could possibly be identical with the party animal of two decades ago. This problem, and others like it, are very interesting—much more interesting than the question of why the chair I’m sitting on now is identical with the chair I was sitting 10 minutes ago, when I first started writing this section. In other words, personal identity seems more interesting than objectual identity.
The problem is that personal identity must be understood in terms of objectual identity. Why is this? There are two dimensions to the concept of personal identity, the reason being that people have both minds and bodies, and statements about personal identity often therefore depend for their truth on both bodily and mental facts. By contrast, objects (chairs, rocks, etc.) don’t have minds—they are pure body. So identity statements concerning them (in other words, objectual identity statements) depend for their truth only on physical facts. Identity statements that concern human or animal bodies—for example, “this is the hand that signed that piece of paper”—concern objectual identity. And the reason, of course, is that bodies are objects—like rocks and trees. They are not subjects, like you and me. Statements about personal identity are often concerned both with physical and with mental facts. Since they concern physical facts and objects, such statements are concerned, at least in part, with the concept of objectual identity. One must therefore understand objectual identity before one can understand personal identity, just as one must understand single-variable calculus before one can understand multivariable calculus.
2.2 One kind of objectual identity: diachronic objectual identity
A story will help clarify the nature of statements concerning objectual identity. At 11:00 A.M. I make myself a sandwich. But I don’t eat it; I just place it on the kitchen counter. Let X be the object that at 11:00 A.M. I place on the kitchen counter. At 1:00 P.M. I see my roommate, Smith, holding and apparently intending to consume the sandwich that I made. (There is no doubt that it’s the same sandwich.) Let Y be the object that at 1:00 P.M. Smith is holding.
Under these circumstances, the statement: 
(*) X is identical with Y
is true.
But exactly what does this mean? X doesn’t have the same properties as Y. First of all, X is on the kitchen counter, whereas Y is in Smith’s hands. X, having just been made out of refrigerator-stored ingredients, is nice and cool. Y, having been sitting on the counter for two hours is warm and yucky. Given how different X and Y are, what sense can it make to say that they are identical?
Here we have to take a brief detour through a bit of physics and metaphysics. X is not a simple entity. It has various parts—it consists of two slices of bread, a leaf of lettuce, etc. But each of those parts consists, ultimately, of a vast swarm of incessant displacements of mass-energy. Given any macroscopic physical object—a rock, a bar of soap, a plant—not a single micro-constituent of that object will stay in the same place for any amount of time. Given any one of the atoms composing any macroscopic object, that atom will move (it will rotate, vibrate, and altogether change its location) if you give it so much as a trillionth of a second. And all the objects that we deal with in everyday life—our cars, our clothes, our toothbrushes—are composed of these incessant movements of microparticles. So, really, all of those objects are collections of events. The seeming changelessness of the poster on your wall is an illusion: at any given time, that poster consists of nothing but movements and exchanges of mass and energy.
We must make two final points before we can say what (*) means. First, in some cases, events are causally related to one another, and in some cases they’re not. I brushed my teeth this morning and you put on your shoes. The one event didn’t cause the other. But my brushing my teeth did cause various particles on my teeth to dissolve or change location.
When events are causally related to each other, they satisfy one of two conditions: either they are adjacent in both space and time or, if they are not adjacent, they are connected by a series of events each of whose links is adjacent with at least one other event in that same series. The event of my dragging the toothbrush across the bit of cereal stuck to my tooth occupied the same approximate place as the event of the bit of cereal’s leaving my tooth, and the first event came right before the second. So, in this case, the cause (my moving the toothbrush over my tooth) and the effect (the bit of cereal’s being dislodged from my tooth) are adjacent in space and time.
Not all causes are related to effects in such a direct way. I turn on a flashlight by pushing a button on it. The event of my pushing this button causes a light beam to travel from my flashlight to some distant planet. So one event (my pushing a certain button) causes another event (a certain spot’s appearing on an otherwise dark, planetary surface). These two events are separated in space and also in time (it takes time for light to travel, and the larger the distance, the more time is needed). Nonetheless, the cause and the effect are connected by a series of events each of which is adjacent, in space and time, with another event in that same series. Let t be some period before the light beam reaches the planet but after it has left my flashlight. Suppose that, at time t, the tip of the light beam is in place p. The events—the swarm of photons—in place p at time t cause there to be similar photon-swarms at the place right next to p at the time right after t. So if p* is some place right next to p, and t* is some time right after t, then the photon-swarms in p at t cause there to be similar photon-swarms in p* at t*. In their turn, those photon-swarms—the ones in p* at t*—cause there to be other, similar photon-swarms in some third place (one that is right next to p*) at some third time (one that is right after t*). So even though my pushing the button is remote, in both space and time, from the resulting spot of light on the distant planet, those two events are connected by a continuous series of events each of whose installments is caused by its predecessor and causes its successor. Any such series is known as a “causal sequence.” Light beams are causal sequences; but so, for the reasons given earlier, is every object. X (the cool 11:00 A.M. sandwich on the counter) is part of the same causal sequence as Y (the warm 1:00 P.M. sandwich in Smith’s hands).
In light of these points, we can say what (*) means. (*) says that the events that constitute X and Y are both parts of some one causal sequence. To generalize this point, many statements of the form a is identical with b say that some object is causally connected in a certain way with some other object.
Here’s another example. Let B be the person who is, at this very moment, writing this handout; and let A be the earlier described wild man from many years ago. The statement A is identical with B is true because B resulted, by a series of continuous, causally connected events that were initiated by events constituting A.
To sum up, in some cases, x is identical with y says that x and y are different installments in some one causal sequence.
2.3 Another kind of objectual identity: synchronic objectual identity
But sometimes x is identical with y has a very different meaning. Suppose that the world’s most valuable diamond is the only diamond in the Hawthorn Museum. In that case, the following identity statement is true:
(#) “the world’s most valuable diamond is identical with the only diamond in the Hawthorn Museum.”
But # isn’t saying anything about causal sequences. This becomes clear when we replace # with the (let us suppose) true statement:
(#t) “the most valuable diamond in the world at time t is identical with the only diamond that is in the Hawthorn Museum at time t.”
#t concerns a single instant. It doesn’t concern a stretch of time; and it therefore doesn’t concern causal sequences, since those, by definition, take up more than an instant of time. What # and #t are saying is that there is some one object that has two different properties. So # is saying that:
(##) there exists a certain object that is a diamond that is more valuable than any other diamond in the world and that, at this time, is in a certain museum (the Hawthorn museum) that contains no other diamonds.
Thus, #t is saying that there is some property P and some property P* such that some one thing uniquely has P and also uniquely has P*. Many identity statements are of this kind. Consider:
(SC) “Superman is Clark Kent.”
This doesn’t tell you that two different things are one. Two things can’t be one. If SC said otherwise, it would not only be false but absurd. SC makes a non-absurd statement about properties. It says of the property of being a super-hero who lives in Metropolis and has a domicile on the North pole (etc.) that exactly one thing has that property; and it says that anything that has that property also uniquely has the property of being a wimpy reporter at the Daily Bugle who is the butt of Lois Lane’s derision (etc.).
Similar remarks hold of:
(WH) “water is H2O (or, rather, any body of water is identical with some collection of H2O molecules).”
WH doesn’t make the absurd statement that two different things—water, on the one hand, and H2O, on the other—are the same thing. WH makes a statement about properties. One of those properties is that of being the liquid that we drink, bathe in, etc. The other is the property of having a certain chemical composition. WH says that the first property is uniquely instantiated and, in addition, that anything instantiating that property also uniquely instantiates the second.
To sum up: a = b says one of two things: (i) there is some causal sequence of which a and b are different installments or (ii) there is some one thing that has a number of different properties.
3.0 Personal identity
Suppose that each of “a” and “b” is an expression referring to a person. In that case, of course, “a = b” is an identity statement—but it is one that concerns personal identity, and not merely objectual identity. Nonetheless, the principles in terms of which objectual identity is to be understood are pretty much the same as those in terms of which objectual identity is to be understood. For even when it is a statement about personal identity, “a = b” says either (i) there is some causal sequence of which a and b are different installments or (ii) that 
there are properties P and P* such that each is uniquely instantiated and such that nothing instantiating the one doesn’t instantiate the other.
Consider the statement:
(IB) “the inventor of bifocals is identical with the first postmaster general.”
IB says that there is some one person (Benjamin Franklin, as it happens) who both invented bifocals and who was also a postmaster general before anyone else was. (To avoid philosophically empty complications, we’ll assume that BF is still with us.) So IB says that somebody has a number of different properties. So, in this respect, IB is SC, #t, and WH.
Now consider the statement:
(OF) “the old fogy who, at this very moment is writing this chapter (which no one will ever read and whose comedic excellence will therefore go unappreciated) is identical with the guy who, many moons ago, drove from Los Angeles to New York.
OF says that one set of events—the events constituting a person who, right now, is writing about personal identity—is an installment in a causal sequence of which an earlier installment was some set of events that constituted some person’s driving from Los Angeles to New York. So OF is like our earlier statement (concerning the sandwich):
(*) X is identical with Y.
Each of OF and * affirms that two different, non-simultaneous events (or sets of events) are installments in some one causal sequence.
So the logical structure of statements concerning personal identity is not different from the logical structure of statements of objectual personal identity.
3.1 Personal identity: the mentalistic conception
Human beings have both physical and mental (i.e., psychological) characteristics. I have a certain weight. This is a physical characteristic. I have certain beliefs and interests. These are psychological characteristics. Human existence thus has a dual nature.
It is vigorously debated how the mental and the physical are related to each other. A related, equally vigorous debate concerns the nature of the events that must occur if a person is to continue to exist.
A story will clarify these points. Smith is in an accident and all of his brain is destroyed, except for the parts that regulate involuntary functions (e.g., breathing, digestion, etc.). So Smith is “brain-dead.” Question: Does Smith still exist? My own view is “no.” Legaly speaking, of course, Smith exists as long as his heart is beating. But legal categories are of little use when it comes to settling philosophical issues, and it seems to me that Smith went out of existence the moment his mind did.
Why do I have this view? Because I have what is referred to as a “mentalistic” conception of personal identity. This is the view that you are your mind. People are identical with mental entities of some kind. This doesn’t mean that people aren’t also identical with physical entities. It means that if people are identical with physical entities (e.g., with their brains or certain parts thereof), it is only because those entities are themselves identical with mental entities. If, for example, it turns out that the mental entities with which people are identical are also brain-structures or patterns of brain activity, what follows, the mentalist believes, is not that people are non-mental entities but that people are mental entities and that mental entities, in their turn, are also physical entities.
According to mentalism, the statement “I weigh 200 pounds” really means “my body weighs 200 pounds” and therefore doesn’t really say how much I weigh. And given that I am identical with purely mental entities, I weigh no more than they do—which isn’t very much, since they weigh nothing if they’re non-physical, and next to nothing if they are physical (the reason being that, if they’re physical, they’re patterns of neural activity that have little or no mass).
3.2 An important fact about the mentalistic conception: a materialist can have a mentalistic conception of personal identity
One can believe that mental events are identical with certain kinds of physical events and still have a mentalistic conception of personal identity. So, for example, if you believe that feelings, intentions, and mental events in general are patterns of neural activity, and you believe that a body that isn’t characterized by such patterns of activity doesn’t house a person, then you have a mentalistic conception of personal identity, even though you believe that mind facts are identical with body facts. Most contemporary mentalists fall into this category, and I myself am inclined, with some reservations, to think that it is the right view.
Thus, even if you are what is known as a “materialist”—even if, in other words, you believe that mental events are physical events of some kind—you can still have a mentalistic conception of personality identity. This will be the case if you believe that a body that doesn’t involve the relevant kind of physical events—the patterns of neural activity that are identical with beliefs, feelings, etc.—fails to be a person.
4.0 Personal identity: the non-mentalistic (or physicalistic) conception
Many philosophers these days would disagree with much of what I’ve just said. For these days, non-mentalistic, “bodily” conceptions of personal identity are dominant. So many contemporary philosophers would say that brain-dead Smith still exists.
Why say this? There are some obvious reasons. First of all, we can truthfully say, while pointing to Smith’s thought-free body “that person is brain-dead.” It seems a simple fact that we can describe people as “brain-dead” or even as just plain dead. Of course, dead people don’t have anything going on in their minds. For expository reasons, we’re setting aside the hypothesis that there is life after death). But we can still correctly, and therefore meaningfully, say things like “that person is dead.”
Further, the (brain-)dead person of whom we’ve been speaking is identical with some body—not a body, like yours or mine, that mediates thoughts and feelings, but just a plain old body.
Here’s a rundown of the relevant facts:
(1) Statements such as says “that person is (brain)dead” are often true (sadly).
(2) Such statements must be about people. Otherwise, it would be inappropriate to use the word “person.” When pointing at (brain)dead Smith, one would have to say “that non-person is dead.”
(3) The (brain)dead Smiths of this world don’t have psychological characteristics. Therefore, the right conclusion is:
(4) A thing can be a person without having thoughts or any other psychological attributes.
The argument just given, though accepted by many, involves a gross overestimation of what our linguistic practices can give us in the way of philosophical illumination. It’s true that we refer to certain (brain)dead objects as “people.” But, it seems to me, that could well just be a verbal convention. We refer to certain kinds of scooter as “rascals.” But they’re not really rascals. (A rascal is a mischievous young person.) I also think that our tendency to describe (brain-)dead bodies as “people” has emotional roots. At some level, we are holding onto the idea that, deep within that ravaged body, is a mind. In any case, the present author puts no stock in arguments such as (1)–(4).
4.1 A better argument for the physicalistic view
But there is a much better argument for the physicalistic conception of personal identity. A story will help us state this argument.
Smith is a normal adult with a vigorous mind. One day he’s hit by a bus. There is a complete cessation of all mental activity. Smith’s stream of mental activity has been snipped. But Smith’s body doesn’t die. It goes into a vegetative coma for 20 years. During that time, there is no mental activity at all in what was once Smith’s brain. The brain centers regulating automatic functions (e.g., respiration, digestion) work just fine, but the parts involved in mental activity are totally inactive. No thoughts, no dreams, no sensations. Nothing. After 20 years, the body wakes up, and the hitherto inactive brain centers spring back to life. The occupant of that body is obviously in complete command of his faculties. His personality traits are just like those of the pre-accident occupant of that same body, as are the values, the memories, the cognitive aptitudes, and so on. Let X be the person who occupied that body before the accident and let Y be the person who’s been occupying it since the accident.
Is X the same person as Y? Is the post-coma person Smith? Or is it somebody who is psychologically a lot like Smith, but isn’t actually him?
Surely it really is Smith. That’s what we’d say, anyway. It’s very hard to believe that Y is a brand-new person (albeit one who has the psychological characteristics ordinarily had only by adults).
This is a serious problem for the mentalistic view of personal identity. According to the mentalist, Smith is his mind. No mind, no Smith. Whatever his mind is exactly, it would make no sense to say “his mind is fine—but there’s not so much as a flicker of mental activity going on in that head of his.” Thus, no thoughts, no mind. So if the mentalist is right “no thoughts” means “no mind”; which means “no Smith”; which means that the minute Smith’s mental stream was cut off, Smith ceased to exist.
4.1.1 An unsuccessful mentalistic rejoinder
“But so what?,” a mentalist might ask:
“Smith went out of existence 20 years ago. And he came back into existence a few days ago. The same happens to everyone every day. You go to sleep. During that time, except when you’re dreaming, your mind is gone, and so, therefore, are you. You wake up, and your mind is back, and so, therefore, are you. People go away. They come back. What’s the problem?”
Here’s the problem. Nothing that goes out of existence comes back into existence. Ever. No exceptions. Therefore, if you can survive interruptions of your mental existence—if you can awaken from a sleep, or a coma, during which there was no mental activity at all in your cranium—then you are not a stream of mental activity. And if you are not such a stream, it’s a little hard to see how you could be your mind. So if you can wake up from thought-free slumber, then you aren’t your thoughts or, therefore, your mind; and since it was your body, and your body alone, that existed uninterruptedly during sleep-time, you must be your body.
By way of anticipation, I myself reject one of the steps in this argument. Although I do think that one is one’s mind, I don’t think that one’s mind is one’s thoughts. (I believe, for reasons to be discussed, that one’s mind is a structure that gives rise to thoughts but does not itself consist of them.) But right now, instead of saying why, in my view, this argument is objectionable, I want to make it clear why it is such a powerful argument.
4.1.2 An unsuccessful mentalistic rejoinder (continued)
What most people will disagree with in this argument is the assumption that nothing that goes out of existence comes back into existence.
“But surely that isn’t right,” it will be said. “What about reincarnation? Teleportation? Can’t things take breaks from existence? Can’t they, so to speak, go on holiday, and then come back later?”
No. A story will make this clear. Using your laser gun, you vaporize some rock. So what was once a very sturdy, solid rock has now been dispersed into various atoms. But you manage, through some miracle of technology, to locate all of these atoms, scattered throughout space though they are, and then to reassemble them into a rock that is qualitatively just like the rock you vaporized. Question: is the new rock numerically identical with the one you vaporized? In other words, is it the very same rock? Or, instead, is it a distinct rock that is extremely similar to the old one?
Answer: it’s a distinct rock that’s very similar to the old one. They are, apart from their spatiotemporal properties, qualitatively but not numerically identical.
Another, similar story will reinforce this conclusion. Rock R is vaporized—but not by a human or anything else that can act deliberately. The blind, uncaring hand of nature is what does the vaporizing. R’s atoms are dispersed through the cosmos. But, by some extraordinary coincidence, they all reconvene a million years later and they attach themselves to one another, thereby forming a new rock. Let R* be this new rock. Of course, R* consists of exactly the same particles as R. Moreover, R*’s structure is exactly like R’s. Finally, each of the atoms composing R* has exactly the same role within R*’s structure that it had within R’s structure. So 
R
and R* are, apart from their spatiotemporal differences, qualitatively identical. But surely they’re not numerically identical.
4.2 Continuity the essence of diachronic identity
Continuity is necessary for identity. It’s only a slight exaggeration to say that it is identity. If, on the other side of the world, atoms were to collect and form a creature exactly like you—same physical and psychological characteristics—it wouldn’t be you. (You’re here. That other person is over there.) If you predecease this doppelganger, he obviously won’t become you; he won’t take over your identity any more than he did when you were alive. It’s irrelevant that qualitatively he’s just like you. He doesn’t pick up where you left off. Supposing that you died at time t, pre-t you doesn’t flow uninterruptedly into post-t him.
Let’s change the story a bit. Right now, there’s no doppelganger of you. You pass on (sadly). So, for a period, there’s no one in existence who has exactly your characteristics. But, by some extraordinary coincidence, various atoms come together and form a creature qualitatively just like you, who we’ll call “new-you.” Is new-you you? No. Does it make any difference whether the atoms composing you are the ones composing new-you? No. Once you’re gone, you’re gone.
4.3 Why the concept of teleportation is an incoherent one
On Star Trek, people were routinely teleported. Any case of teleportation has three phases. Phase 1: the disintegration phase. The teleportation candidate is decomposed into small particles. Phase 2: the movement phase. Those particles are moved at or near the speed of light to another place. Phase 3: the reintegration phase. At the new place, those particles are reassembled into a being that is qualitatively just like the one that, moments earlier, was disintegrated. So the Phase 3 entity is exactly similar to the Phase 1 entity.
Is the Phase 3 entity numerically identical with the Phase 1 entity? No. Once Captain Kirk has been disintegrated, he’s gone. What shows up on the Enterprise isn’t him; it is, at most, a doppelganger.
4.3.1 Structure-preserving continuity, as opposed to mere continuity, as the essence of identity
My students often object to this. Here’s their argument: “Teleporting Ct. Kirk (or whoever) involves transforming his energy into a new form, and then, at the target location, converting that same energy back into the old form.” I agree with the first part: Teleporting Ct. Kirk would indeed involve transforming his energy into a new form. But so would dropping a one million ton weight on him or dispersing his atoms across the 
cosmos. “Same energy” doesn’t mean “same object.” I’ve been around for three-and-a-half decades. My energy has been around a lot longer than that. Thirty five years ago that energy came to be embodied in a structure that, through a series of piecemeal, continuous, and structure-preserving changes eventuated in the structure that is writing this sentence.
The changes in question had to be “structure-preserving” because, as we’ll see in Sections 7.0–7.5, a continuous causal process that mediates drastic structural changes may not be enough for identity. The person currently typing this sentence arose, by a continuous series of changes, from a certain tadpole-like creature. But, structurally, I’m sufficiently different from that tadpole that it would be a stretch to say that I used to be it. But I’m structurally enough like the blobby infant in the picture that, given my causal connectedness to him, I can say that I used to be him.
4.4 Once gone, always gone
Let’s map these points onto our points about teleportation. The Phase 2 atom-scatter has no meaningful structural resemblance to the Phase 3 human who, when these atoms are integrated, appears on the deck of the Enterprise. The degree of structural resemblance between me and the zygote that eventually turned into me is far greater than the structural resemblance between the Phase 2 atom-scatter and the Phase 3 Enterprise occupant. We thus have no choice but to say that Kirk was obliterated the moment his atoms were scattered. Whatever it is that “beams aboard” isn’t Kirk: it is, at best, a good imitation of him.
4.5 The physicalist’s high-card: the ice-man
Of course, certain aspects of existence can be interrupted. You can temporarily shelve your career as a hockey player. But you cannot be shelved. “But what if I’m frozen and kept in ice for a thousand years, and then thawed out and reanimated? Would that be me?” Yes, it would (or so I think). But what that means is that, when you were on ice, you were still in existence. If, instead of being frozen, you had been disintegrated and, a thousand years later, the atoms composing you were reassembled into a creature just like you, we would not say that you had come back; we’d say that, although you were gone, somebody just like you popped into existence.
So, returning to our ice-man story, if post-thaw you is identical with pre-thaw you, that’s because the years of frozen stillness didn’t interrupt your existence. “But,” you protest, “my mind was frozen during that time. No dreams. No thoughts. Nothing (in the way of mental activity). So, clearly, my existence was interrupted.”
Your mental life was interrupted—but not your existence tout court. “But,” you respond, “you agreed that the post-thaw person is really me—that the pre-thaw person and the post-thaw person are identical, just as the person typing this sentence is identical with the person who typed the sentence before it.”
Yes, I do agree. “But that makes no sense, given the reasonable supposition that (i) I am my mind and given that (ii) my mental existence was severed.” Yes—it makes no sense given those two assumptions. (By way of anticipation, we’ll find that (ii) is false.)
But it does make sense given a different supposition, namely, that you are your body. Your body remained in existence during the freeze years. There was no interruption. To be sure, certain forms of activity were interrupted. Everything associated with mentation was on hold. But it’s a datum that your body was around—that, in fact, it was kept more intact during that period than most living organisms are kept for a period of more than a day. But, evidently, you were around.
Bottom line: a sentient creature can survive interruptions of its mental existence, but not its physical existence. Interrupted existence is non-existence. So a sentient creature is identical with its body.
That is the main argument on behalf of the physicalistic theory of personal identity. And it’s a good one. To refute it, the mentalist would have to show either (a) that existence can be interrupted or (b) that cessation of mental activity isn’t the same thing as cessation of mind. (a) is a non-starter; establishing it would be like trying to establish that squares could have five sides. But (b) is quite defensible.
4.6 A defense of (b): the mentalist strikes back
People have relatively stable personality traits and beliefs. Yesterday I believed that snow is white. I still believe it, and I’ll believe it tomorrow. This holds of countless other beliefs of mine, as well as attitudes, aspirations, values, fears, etc.
People change, of course. The deepest changes happen in one’s early years. But the change never entirely stops, even though it does become increasingly internal to established structures.
Throughout all this change, however, there is a great deal of stability in one’s beliefs, attitudes, etc., and also in one’s basic personality architecture. And the change itself is, in is broader outlines, continuous. It doesn’t typically happen in fits and starts; it is typically more evolutionary than revolutionary. Of course, there are revolutions—sudden epiphanies or transformations. But they are internal to a larger, continuous structure whose integrity they don’t undermine.
Where there is regularity, there is typically an underlying structure; and where there is irregularity, there is typically a lack of structure. A person who has a job tends to act in the same ways over and over. This is because his activities must be internal to a certain organizational framework. By the same token, a person who doesn’t have a job doesn’t have to behave in those ways. Other things being equal, a person without a job behaves more erratically than one who doesn’t.
In light of this, let’s consider some humdrum facts about my psychology. When I woke up today, I believed that 1 + 1 = 2. When I went to sleep last night, I believed it. I obviously wasn’t thinking 1 + 1 = 2 the entire time I was asleep. (And even if, by some remote chance, I was, there are many other beliefs that I have that weren’t coursing through my psyche during sleep. So just let my belief that 1 + 1 = 2 represent any one of those.) If that belief simply ceased to exist when, upon my falling asleep, it became inactive, it would be a miracle that, on waking up, I resumed having that belief. That would be a causal anomaly, a case of creation ex nihilo. That belief, therefore, must have its basis in some kind of structure that endures even when it isn’t active.
In fact, beliefs are structures. Beliefs must be distinguished from the use to which they’re put. At any given time, most of your beliefs are inactive. You’re not drawing on them, arguing for them, reconsidering them, or emoting about them. But during these lulls the beliefs themselves no more cease to exist than a sheriff’s gun ceases to exist when he’s not firing it.
Beliefs are not happenings. They are not, as philosophers say, “occurrent.” A searing pain is occurrent. So is any sense-perception or act of thought, whether conscious or unconscious. But beliefs aren’t processes. Nor are attitudes or intentions or aspirations.
No individual belief changes. For a person’s beliefs to change is for that person to shed some old beliefs or acquire new ones. I used to be convinced that Platonism is false; now I’m convinced that it’s true. But that change was a case of one belief’s being obliterated and replaced by a different one; it wasn’t a change that was internal to the persistence of some one belief. Whenever a belief is “modified,” what’s going on is that it’s being replaced with another, possibly related belief. And it isn’t the belief itself that is occurrent: beliefs are always stable. What is occurrent is the process whereby the one belief is replaced with the other.
The same is true of attitudes, personality traits, and intentions. What is occurrent isn’t the intention itself; it’s the process of acquiring it or of dumping it (and replacing it with another).
One’s beliefs, attitudes, etc., are an important part of one’s mind. Since these things are structures, it immediately follows that there is much to one’s mind that isn’t a process of any kind. What about the occurrent processes are associated with mind? The pains, the pleasures, the sense-perceptions, the waves of doubt, the conscious acts of deliberation? These, it seems to me, are mental actions and are thus no more constitutive of your mind than a bodily action (e.g., one’s jumping over a fence) is constitutive of your body.
One’s mind isn’t one’s stream of mentation; it is the structure that mediates this mentation. We saw reason to believe this earlier. So the slogan “no thought, no mind” is false. The right slogan is: “no thought-enabling structure, no mind.”
This slogan suggests another one: “mind = thought-enabling structure (as opposed to stream of thought).” When one is in a deep sleep or even cryogenically frozen, the structures responsible for thought are inactive, but they don’t cease to exist on that account. (An elevator that isn’t being used still exists.)
4.7 An objection
Let’s consider an object to the argument just presented:
“But aren’t those structures brain-structures? Ice-man survives his thousand-year ice coma only because those brain-structures remain intact. Those structures are obviously physical; they’re part of one’s body, like one’s heart or gall-bladder. So your theory of personal identity (viz. one’s self is one’s mind and one’s mind consists of the structures underlying one’s thoughts) collapses into a physicalist, and therefore a non-mentalistic, analysis of personal identity.”
Mentalists usually hold that mental entities are physical entities. A mentalist who holds that thought-structures are brain-structures will hold that, when those brain-structures go, so will the corresponding person, the reason being that those brain-structures are identical with that person’s mind. The physicalist holds that, no matter what happens to the parts of brain mediating sentience, a given individual survives provided that his heart, lungs, gall-bladder, etc. are still working. His reason is that one’s self is one’s body and it’s a fact that one’s body can remain alive, and certainly exist in some form or other, well after one’s mind is gone. The difference between physicalist and mentalists isn’t that the former do, whereas the latter do not, believe the minds are brains (or brain-structures). The real difference is this. Mentalists believe the only parts of the mind to be directly responsible for personal identity are the parts that are identical with one’s mind. Physicalists don’t think that these brain-structures are any more important to the persistence of the self than parts of the brain that have nothing to do with thought (that, for example, regulate the manufacture of hormones).
5.0 Degrees of identity
It’s generally held that, for any object x and any object y, x and y are either identical or they’re not; they can’t be identical to a certain degree.
Is this correct? Remember that we distinguished between diachronic and synchronic identity-claims. “Barack Obama is the current U.S. President” is a synchronic identity claim, and “I [JMK in 2009] am identical with that blobby infant [in the photo from 1973]” is a diachronic identity claim. Where synchronic identity claims are concerned, there are indeed no degrees of identity. x and y are synchronically identical or they aren’t—there’s nothing intermediate between total synchronic identity and total synchronic distinctness.
But diachronic identity is a different matter altogether. Diachronic identity not only can come in degrees, but must do so. Let “x = y” be an arbitrary diachronic identity claim. So far as it’s true, it’s only if the following conditions are met. First, y is a causal successor of x. In other words, there is some sequence of events, such that each event in that sequence is caused to occur by its predecessor (if it has one) and causes its successor to occur (if it has one), and such that x and y are both installments in that sequence. But for “x = y” to be true, it isn’t enough that these conditions be met. If x is the particular gamete that, in due course, became me, and y is me, “x = y” isn’t true.
But why not? Because x and y are too different. For “x = y,” when taken as a diachronic identity-statement, to be warranted, it is necessary not only that y be x’s successor in some causal sequence, but also that the relationship borne by x’s condition with respect to y’s condition be a predictively and explanatorily robust one. I am structurally so different from the gamete that eventuated in me, and the bridges that had to be crossed in order for that gamete to eventuate in anything at all like myself were so rickety, that the relationship borne by that gamete to my present self isn’t that of young JMK to old JMK, but is more like that of ancestor to descendant. To be sure, a single entity can change a great deal. The butterfly is structurally very different from the caterpillar that became it. But the predictive and explanatory relations borne by the caterpillar with respect to the butterfly are sufficiently tight enough that it’s more fruitful to see the change in question as internal to the existence of some one thing than it is to see it as a case of one thing’s being replaced by some distinct thing.
Given two bodies of data, D1 and D2, and some event E, D1 can be more relevant to E than D2; D1 can do a better job than D2 of explaining E (if it has already happened) or of providing reasons to predict E’s 
occurrence (if it hasn’t yet happened, but will). Explanatoriness and predictiveness come in degrees. Since “x = y” is true to the degree that x bears the relevant explanatory and predictive relations to y, thinghood is a matter of degree. It’s also a matter of context. In some explanatory contexts, it would be correct to say of some gamete that it is identical, in the diachronic sense, with some philosophy professor.
These points are developed in Sections 7.0–7.5 of the present chapter, which is concerned with the conditions that two different states of affairs must satisfy if they are to both be constitutive of some one entity.
5.1 Degrees of personal identity (continued)
We tend to think that personal identity either holds or it doesn’t. “I remember being little Timmy. (I remember playing kickball with my friends; I remember learning how to read; etc.) If I remember being Timmy, then I am Timmy. It makes no sense to say that I might be 83% identical with so and so.” On the contrary, it makes plenty of sense. True—you have various memories (of playing kickball, watching cartoons, waiting for the ice-cream truck to come to your block, etc.) But all that shows is that certain currently existing mental structures and events are derivatives of the mental structures and events associated with some body (literally, some body) that is related to the body you now occupy in the way that a caterpillar’s body is related to that of the butterfly into which it metamorphoses.
We’re dealing with relations of succession and causation—nothing more. There isn’t some mysterious inner flame, some underlying substance, that remains untouched throughout it all and that somehow underlies the fact that you and the little kickball player are identical. Even if there is such an inner flame, it is inert except in so far as it facilitates the relevant psychological and physiological events. But so far as it does facilitate them, those events do all the work—they are what “keep you going”, so to speak. The inner-flame is a free wheel and thus drops out of the picture.
Thus, so far you are identical with the little kickball player of yesteryear, it is because you and he are connected to each other by a sequence of events whose earlier members provide information about, and provide the causal basis for, its later members. But, as we said, one thing provides different amounts of information about another, and one thing can be causally responsible to different degrees for another. So identity in the diachronic sense is a matter of degree.
“If you’re right,” it will be asked, “why are we so convinced that diachronic identity is absolute—that I either am, or am not, the little kickball player?” I’m not sure that we are so convinced. What does a person even mean when he says that he is the little tyke in the photo? Does he mean that there is some underlying, unphased soul-substance that inhabits that little tyke and also inhabits him? Surely not. So far as he means anything, it can only be something that corresponds to what we’ve been saying—that there is a connection, both causal and thematic in nature, between the little tyke in the photo and the person who is now taking about that little tyke.
5.2 Time-indexed properties and Leibniz’s Law
There’s no doubt that Leibniz’s Law (the principle that, if x is numerically identical with y, x has a given property if and only if y has that property) correctly models the logic of synchronic uses of expressions such as “identical with,” “is” (when used non-predicatively), and so on. (Leibniz’s Law is the principle that, if x is numerically identical with y, x has a given property if and only if y has that property.) Given that Barack Obama is the Commander-in-Chief, the Commander-in-Chief has a given property iff Barack Obama has that property.
But it’s less clear whether Lebniz’s law governs the diachronic use of such expressions. The orthodox position is to say that it does. But there is reason to question this orthodoxy.
Right now I’m a professor. The blobby infant in the picture is not a professor. So I have a property that it does not have. Therefore, by Leibniz’s Law, I am not it. Identity-theorists say that the blobby infant and I do have the same properties. To make this idea work, they bring in the highly artificial notion of a “time-indexed” 
property. I have the property of being-a-philosophy-professor-in-2009, and so does the blobby infant. The blobby infant has the property of being-preverbal-in-1973 and so do I. Therefore, the fact that, unlike my six month old self, I am not now a blobby infant, being instead a non-blobby professor, does not make me different from my six month old self. Given any other property that I now have that I used to lack, or vice versa, a similar argument shows that I have always had that property. For this reason, it is said, Leibniz’s Law does govern diachronic uses of expressions like “identity,” “is” (in the non-predicative sense), and so on.
In addition to being obviously contrived, this view has the absurd consequence that nothing changes. Whatever properties I have now, I’ve always had then and always will have them. In general, nothing acquires properties. It follows that nothing ever loses a property. When a person acquires the property of being able to tie his shoes, he loses the property of being incapable of tying his shoes. In general, any case of property-acquisition is a case of property-loss. So if nothing ever acquires properties, nothing changes. Given that there is change, the no-change must be false.
In any case, we obviously don’t yet know that the no-change view is the right one. So were we to build a theory of identity around that view, we’d be prejudging the outcome of the debate between those who accept that view and those who reject it. Good analyses tend not to prejudge open questions; and when good analyses do prejudge such questions, they tend to prejudge them in a way that is favorable to deeply rooted intuitions. The view that nothing changes is not exactly a deeply rooted intuition. So for the time being we must regard all this talk of time-indexing as nothing more than hollow trickery.
To move forward, we must say a word about the debate that rages between those who accept a doctrine known as “four-dimensionalism” (henceforth, “4-D”) and those who reject that doctrine. According to 4-D, any given object is identical with a “space-time worm.” A space-time worm is an entity that is spread out in both space and time. Thus, according to 4-D, you are identical with a space-time worm that comprises all of the events and states of affairs constituting you from the moment of your birth (or conception) till the moment of your demise.
Bearing this in mind, let t be any instant in time during your lifetime. If 4-D is right, some segment of you exists at t; but you do not exist at t, since you, according to 4-D, are spread out over a period of (say) 80 years. So if 4-D is right, I cannot see you or shake hands with you; I can see and shake hands only some segment of you. The thing I shake hands with, says the advocate of 4-D, is some time-slice of you. 
In my view, I can shake hands with people, and also see them, play tennis with them, and otherwise interact with them. I thus reject 4-D. I am not alone in this. (But I am more isolated than one would think, given how deeply rooted the presumption is that one can see people, shake hands with them, and so on.)
Another reason I reject 4-D is that I believe that people and things change. 4-D denies this. If 4-D is right, the thing that is reading this sentence right now isn’t you; it’s just some time-slice of you. And the slightly different thing that was reading the first sentence of this chapter isn’t you either; it’s just another time-slice of you. The same is true of the thing that decided to buy this book a few weeks ago. According to 4-D, although the thing reading this sentence is different in some ways from the thing that was reading the first sentence of this chapter, those differences aren’t expressions of the fact that some one thing has changed. According to 4-D, you don’t change. For a given object to change is for the way that object is at one time to be different from the way it is at some other time. According to 4-D, for any time t, what exist at t isn’t an one object, and is only some time-slice of an same object. Therefore, there are no two moments of time t and t* such that how some one object is at t is different from how that same object is at t*. Therefore, if 4-D is right, things don’t change.
But this is absurd. Things change. I have changed, and so have you. And each of us will continue to change. 4-D is either dead wrong or it amounts to nothing more than a proposal that we use the words “thing” and “change” in non-standard ways. And even if by some remote chance it turns that things don’t change, it would be bad methodology to make our theory of personal identity depend on that turning out to be the case. In doing so, we’d be assuming facts (or non-facts, rather) that aren’t yet in evidence.
It may be that 4-D is a cogent analysis of some concept. But that concept isn’t the one that is ordinarily associated with expressions such as “identity,” “identical with,” etc. The concept ordinarily associated with such statements is an incoherent one unless people change. The 4-dimensionalist is analyzing some artificial analogue or reconstruction of that concept; he’s analyzing an artifact—a by-product of his technical trickery—
that is devoid of philosophical value and is equally devoid of psychological, clinical, and practical value. And we’ll see in the upcoming section that 4-D is correct only if (i) there is retroactive causation and (ii) instances of retroactive causation have absolutely no effects on anything. Each of (i) is and (ii) is a hideous assault on logic. Should it turn out that 4-D does have these consequences, there would be no good reason to accept it.
In any case, assuming that things change, the only way to go is to say that identity, in the diachronic sense, is to be understood in terms of relations of causal connectedness—that statements like “Bill is the guy in the photo who is wearing a rugby shirt” are to be analyzed in the way described earlier. Since the relevant sort of connectedness obviously comes in degrees, so does identity.
It should be pointed out that David Hume (1711–1776), whose views we’ll discuss in Section 6.0, takes a similar view, and so does Derek Parfit (1942-). 
Finally, it should be pointed out that those who reject this view are reading metaphysics off of sentential surface structure. The expressions we use to denote the relation of diachronic identity (e.g. “is” and “is identical with”) are homonyms of the expressions we use to denote the relation of synchronic identity. Given only that fact, along with some obscure and ambiguous intuitions about selfhood, 4-dimensionalists infer synchronic identity is diachronic identity—that, when I say “I am identical with the infant in the picture,” the relation I am alleging to hold between myself and that blobby infant is identical with the relation that I am alleging to hold between four and the square of two when I say “22=4.” That inference is completely spurious; and it’s one that no self-respecting analytic philosopher would make, given that the essence of analytic philosophy is a stubborn refusal to take surface structure to be a foolproof guide to truth. We’ll now discuss why 4-D entails (i) and (ii).
5.3 An identity-related paradox and the need for a diachronic conception of identity
We’ll now discuss why 4-D entails (i) and (ii). At time t, person X1 splits, like an amoeba, into two people, X2 and X3. X2 is just like X1—in any case, X2 resembles X1 as much as you, in your current condition, resemble the person you were a minute ago. And X3 resembles X1 to the same degree. Further, the causal connection that X1 bears to X2 is qualitatively identical with the causal connection that X1 bears to X3.
It’s obvious that X2 ≠ X3. After all, they’re in different places. And it would obviously be arbitrary in the extreme to say that X2, but not X3, was X1. Whatever claim X2 can make to being X1, X3 can make precisely the same claim. David Lewis’ solution is to say that X2 and X3 have been there all along: as soon as X1 came into existence, so did X2 and X3. There were three people rolled into one body and one mind.
Lewis’ position is absurd in the extreme. Before he split into two, X1 was no more a compendium of different people than you are. There is no relevant psychological or physiological difference between X1, before the split, and anyone else. If X1 had died before the split, not even a shadow of a case could be made that “he” was really a “they”—that he was really three people. So, supposing that X1 does live and, in due course, splits into X2 and X3, his undergoing that split retroactively puts two extra people in X1’s body. So Lewis’ solution goes through only if there is retroactive causation. That is bad enough, but it gets worse. Even though, if Lewis’ solution is to go through, there must be retroactive causation, that causation must fail to make any psychological
or physiological difference to X1 or, for that matter, to the state of the universe before X1’s split. But to be a cause is to create change. So Lewis’s position collapses into the absurdity that there are causes that aren’t causes.
5.3.1 An identity-related paradox and the need for a diachronic conception of identity (continued)
It’s obvious that Lewis is jumping through hoopes. He’s working with a broken concept and is trying to cover up the cracks in it by mutilating wholesome and intact concepts. But Lewis’ position is de rigueur if one holds that the sense in which adult-JMK is “identical” with baby-JMK is identical with the sense in which 2 is 
identical with 1 + 1. We’v e already seen why. X2 is no less “identical with” X1 than is X3. And X2 is no less identical with X1 than you are identical with the person you were a minute ago. Therefore, if we say that you are “identical” with that person in the same sense in which 2 is identical with 1 + 1, we must say that both X2 and X3 are identical with X1 in the very same sense. Since it’s a datum that X2 and X3, being in different places, are distinct from each other, it follows that, just as Lewis says, the mind and body had by X1, prior to the split, were shared by X2 and X3. It follows, in other words, that X1, X2, and X3 were there all along, all rolled into one package.
Given how preposterous that is, it’s clear what we must say. X2 is “identical” with X1 in the sense that it is X1’ s successor; the same is true of X3. And the same thing mutatis mutandis is therefore true of you. You are identical with your teen self in the sense that you are that entity’s successor.
True—the expressions we use (“identity,” “identical with,” etc.) to describe the relationship between Barack Obama and the current President, or between 2 and 1 + 1 are the same ones we use to describe your relationship to your teen self. But so what? Language is mirror of thought; thought isn’t always perfect. Thought is especially prone to error when it comes to emotion-laden issues, such as personal identity. Human beings don’t want to believe that they are event-sequences that can become frayed, like an old rope, and dwindle into nothingness. Human beings don’t want to believe that their identities are internal to emotion-driven narratives. But what we want to believe is irrelevant. What is relevant is that, if we take the conventional view, then we must follow Lewis in embracing the absurdity that you could be 80 different people, even though you are physiologically and psychologically just like somebody who is but one person.
6.0 Personal identity revisited: Hume’s analysis
Few have done as much to clarify the structure of the psyche and nature of personal identity as David Hume (1711–1776). Hume had a mentalistic conception of personal identity. In his view, there are no people where there are no minds. But, unlike us, he held that there are no minds where there are no occurrent thoughts—where, in other words, there is no mental activity. In other words, he rejected contention (b).
Why does Hume hold this? Because Hume is a mentalist who doesn’t believe in the existence of structures of any kind. Hume acknowledges that there are events; but he denies that there is anything underneath those events that guide them. There are no forces, no structures, no powers. (See Chapter 17.) And this is why, being a mentalist, he must identify the self with a stream of mental events.
There is an obvious objection to this view: “If Hume is right, then the person who wakes up in the morning isn't identical with the person who went to sleep at night.” Hume is aware of this objection, and his response to it is very profound. He says that diachronic identity is pseudo-identity. The concept expressed by the occurrence of “is identical with” in “JMK is identical with the blobby infant in the photo” simply isn’t the same concept as the one expressed by its counterpart in “Barack Obama is identical with the current U.S. President.” Taking it for granted that synchronic identity is a genuine form of identity, he infers, very reasonably, that diachronic identity is pseudo-identity.
6.1 A preliminary point: Hume’s empiricism
Empiricism is the doctrine that everything that is known is known through sense-perception. So far as empiricists grant that anything can be known that isn’t directly observed and instead inferred from what is directly observed, the inference-rules involved must themselves be known from direct observation alone.
No sooner is empiricism defined than its coherence is called into question. An inference-rule is a normative truth. It tells you what you ought to infer from a given premise. And, as empiricists themselves point out, observation tells you what is, but it doesn’t tell you what ought to be.
In any case, Hume was a strict empiricist. Unlike other self-described empiricists, he didn’t help himself to rules of inference whose legitimacy doesn’t have a strictly perceptual basis. This was because, unlike his empiricist brethren, he had the acuity to see that many inference-rules that seem to be empiricism-friendly ones are not.
Hume’s empiricism was doubly strict. First, he had extremely conservative views as to which rules of inference had the requisite perceptual basis. Second, he had extremely conservative views about what sense-perception directly tells us. What Hume says about personal identity must be understood in terms of the fact that he is a very strict empiricist.
6.1.2 Hume’s first argument
Hume gives two arguments for his contention that selves are composed of the mental contents that occupy them. Here is the first:
“For my part, when I enter most intimately into what I call myself, I always stumble on some particular perception or other, of heat or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or pleasure. I can never catch myself at any time without a perception, and never can observe anything but the perception.”
There are two ways to interpret this. On the one hand, Hume could be saying that selves don’t exist. On the other, he could be saying that selves are constituted by the thoughts, feelings, etc., that we describe them as “having.”
The right interpretation is the second one. Notice how frequently the word “I” occurs in his argument. He obviously thinks that it has a referent, and it’s a truism that this referent is a person and, therefore, a self. Also, in other parts of the Treatise, he talks at length about the relation that two different mental contents must bear to each other to belong to the same mind or self. Thus, Hume’s position is that, although there are selves, selves are no more distinct from the mental events that occupy them than a swarm of wasps exists independently of the wasps that compose it. For an event to occupy a mind is for it to constitute it.
The just-quoted argument of Hume’s thesis, it will be noticed, is empirical. Hume is arguing on observational, as opposed to strictly logical or conceptual, grounds that there isn’t anything that underlies his various thoughts. When he looks inward, he finds thoughts and nothing else; in particular, he doesn’t find a non-thought that “supports” these various thoughts. This fact is important, as we’ll now see.
6.1.3 Problems with Hume’s argument
Given only that we can’t observe something, it doesn’t follow that it doesn’t exist. There are many unobservable entities (e.g., electrons). If Freud (1915) is right, there are unobservable (unintrospectible) mental entities (e.g., unconscious urges). Saying that selves don’t exist since we can’t introspect them is like saying that electrons don’t exist since we can’t see them.
A related possibility that Hume is ignoring is that minds are structures of the kind described earlier. (This oversight is probably deliberate, as we’ll see in a moment.) He’s also ignoring the correlative possibility that specific mental occurrences (e.g., images, tickles) are products of minds, and are not themselves constitutive of them.
In ignoring these possibilities, Hume is stacking the deck in his favor. We are pretheoretically inclined to see minds as being to specific tickles, itches etc., what car factories are to cars—as being the things that give rise to them and, therefore, aren’t constituted by them. In any case, we’re pretheoretically much more inclined to see minds in this way than we are to see them in Hume’s way, viz. as sequences of mental occurrences, none of which has any moorings in any structure and each of which, therefore, just happens. And in simply dismissing that possibility out of hand, Hume is question-beggingly assuming the falsehood of what is probably the most plausible rival to his own view. In any case, supposing, as Hume does, that such structures aren’t known through introspection, it isn’t necessary to conclude that they don’t exist; for it would be equally reasonable, if not considerably more reasonable, to conclude that introspection is a limited medium.
6.1.4 Why does Hume deny that there are mental structures?
Hume is a hardcore empiricist. You know it only if you (i) observe it or (ii) observe direct evidence for it. (x is “direct” evidence of y if, given no inference rules whose legitimacy cannot be established strictly on the basis of observation, y’s existence can be inferred from x’s.) Hume believes that mental structures cannot be known in either of these two ways. (He’s right.) So they don’t exist as far as he’s concerned.
Hume doesn’t believe in structures of any kind. A structure is something that underlies events and guides them. Hume doesn’t believe that anything guides anything. He doesn’t believe that anything makes anything happen or otherwise influences anything. In his view, words like “force,” “power,” “coercion,” “guide,” and “regulate” are meaningless. He holds this because, so he believes, forces cannot be observed and neither can direct evidence of them. (Hume’s views on causality are the subject of Chapter 17.)
Thus, Hume’s empiricism blocks him from granting the existence of mental structures, given that such structures can’t be known (para)perceptually. Second, given Hume’s very reasonable view that one can’t observe forces or any direct evidence of them, his empiricism prohibits him from granting the existence of structures of any kind. Thus, Hume’s empiricism makes it doubly impossible for him to grant that there is anything to one’s mind other than fleeting, conscious events. (In Chapter 18, we’ll discuss that, contrary to what Hume holds, forces can sometimes be directly observed.)
6.1.5 Problems with Hume’s argument (continued)
In an attempt to show that there isn’t anything to one’s mind other than the various specific mental occurrences that it houses. Hume says that, when he looks inward, he doesn’t find an inner flame; all he finds, he says, are specific images, tickles, etc.
But unless this inner flame is itself a fleeting mental occurrence—unless it’s the sort of thing that can be disclosed to one in the form of an introspectible image or sensation—nothing significant follows from the fact that, when he introspects, he doesn’t find this inner flame. So for Hume’s argument to go through, it must be assumed that the self, if existent, is to be known to one in the same way as tickles and itches. It must be assumed, in other words, that the self is a fleeting conscious occurrence. But that’s the very thing Hume is trying to show; and, were Hume to assume it, his argument would be viciously circular.
6.1.6 The problems with Hume’s argument is reflections of his hardline empiricism
It is through images that our perceptual modalities (sight, touch, etc.) tell us about the world. (Not all images are visual; there are acoustical images, tactile images, etc.) Your seeing a tree consists in your having an image of that tree; your feeling the tree with your hand consists in your having a tactile image of that tree; and so on. There’s no perception where there’s no image. It follows that, if introspection is an inwardly directed perceptual modality, it tells one nothing when it isn’t giving one an image.
Hume says that, when he looks inward, he encounters various “perceptions” (images), but no self. On this basis, he says that there is no self. But the right conclusion is that, if there is a self, it isn’t disclosed to one in the form of an image.
Supposing that it exists, there are, ultimately, two possibilities as to what the self is: it could be (i) one’s center of awareness or (ii) some structure underlying the events in one’s mind and guiding them. (It may be both, given that (i) and (ii) aren’t mutually exclusive.) If this is right, the self cannot be known in a way that can be modeled on sense-perception, and there is thus no merit to Hume’s paraperceptual demonstration of the non-existence of the self.
It is uncontroversial that we are directly, non-inferentially aware of many mental entities that we don’t know of in some image-mediated, perception-like way. I know I believe that 1 + 1 = 2. It’s obviously not 
through inference that I know this—I know it directly. And it obviously isn’t through sense-perception that I know it. Finally, it isn’t by virtue of my experiencing, or being aware of, some mental image that I know it. But surely I know it. So I know it directly. It’s a pretheoretic datum—not the result of an intellectual working over of raw data. No—it is one of the raw data.
The same is true of many other mental contents of mine. I know that I intend to write about causation later today. It obviously isn’t through inference that I know this—it isn’t because I psychoanalyzed myself or engaged in any other such artifices. And it obviously isn’t through sense perception (sight, hearing, etc.) that I know it. Nor is it through the inwardly directed para-perception that Hume describes. But I know it. I know it in the same way that I know that 1 + 1 = 2, that I regret not calling my mother on her birthday, that I plan on improving my skills as pianist, etc.
I know these things through some faculty that gives me direct, non-inferential knowledge of at least some facts about my own mind. Were Hume to deny the existence of this faculty, he’d be butchering obvious facts to make his argument go through and his position would be a most unempirical one. It is thus an empirical fact that not every fact about one’s mind that one is non-inferentially aware of is disclosed to one in the form of an image; and it’s thus an empirical fact that not all knowledge is arrived at through perception or through anything at all like it. It is thus an empirical fact that empiricism is wrong!
6.2 Hume’s second argument: a preliminary point
Hume’s first argument is presented as an empirical argument. He says that his observations yield no evidence that there is some central fire around which his various thoughts orbit. His wording, and the wording that it is natural to use when paraphrasing his argument, suggests that Hume is trying to establish the non-existence of the self on grounds comparable to those on which an astronomer would try to establish the non-existence of a certain planet. “If I had evidence, I’d believe. But I don’t, so I don’t.”
But so far as self-observation yields any relevant evidence, that evidence seems to suggest that there does exist within oneself a center of awareness. When I self-observe, I do feel that there is a core-being around which everything else orbits.
This feeling of mine is by no means probative. I don’t know that it’s accurate. I don’t know that it’s a correct observation. In fact, I don’t know that it’s an observation at all. It may be that, in having this feeling, I’m experiencing as an empirical datum what is in fact a projection into the observational arena of my acceptance of an erroneous, theory-driven interpretation of the relevant data. This is Hume’s position. He explicitly says that those who claim to be aware of an inner flame are either lying or they’re in the grips of some preexisting, empirically unfounded theory of what the self must be and that, if they’re observing anything, it’s only a projection of their acceptance of that bad theory.
The problem is that, even if, as Hume claims, my feeling that there’s an inner flame is an illusion powered by a very wrong theory, it’s a datum that this feeling exists. And it isn’t a datum, though it may be a truth, that this feeling is an illusion. So, even though Hume’s opponent may be wrong, it’s Hume, not his opponent, who’s making the theoretical point. This suggests that he has some theory in mind, his acceptance of which, and not some body of observations, led him to accept the “no inner flame” view.
6.2.1 Hume’s second argument (verbatim)
And, in fact, Hume does have a theory:
When my perceptions are remov’d for any time, as by sound sleep; so long am I insensible of myself, and may truly be said not to exist. And were all my perceptions remov’d by death, and cou’d I neither think, nor feel, nor see, nor love, nor hate after the dissolution of my body, I should be entirely annihilated, nor do I conceive what is farther requisite to make me a perfect non-entity.
This argument, unlike the first, isn’t empirical at all. This time, Hume is trying to show on purely conceptual grounds that there is nothing underlying the various events occupying a person’s mind. He’s arguing that the very idea of such a thing is an incoherent one, like that of a square circle. Why is this idea incoherent? Because, Hume says, it has the, in his view, patently absurd consequence that there could be thought-free minds.
6.2.2 Evaluating this argument: Hume’s failure to distinguish between two very different meanings of the word “thought”
Hume is right that if there is some inner flame underlying one’s thoughts, and therefore distinct from them, it does follow that one’s self could exist in a thought-free condition. But Hume is wrong to say that a thought-free self is an absurdity. The reason Hume thinks it absurd is that he fails to distinguish two very different meanings of the word “thought.”
Sometimes the word “thought” refers to mental occurrences—to what are now known as occurrent mental phenomena. An occurrent mental phenomenon is anything mental that happens. Sense-perceptions are occurrent mental phenomena; and so are acts of ratiocination and emotional epiphanies. (This list is far from complete.)
But sometimes the word “thought” refers to the relatively stable structures that underlie mental occurrences. “For the first twenty years of my academic career,” a philosopher once said to me, “I thought that Platonism was false.” This person was describing a stable, structural constituent of his mind, not a mental happening.
If, by “thought,” Hume means “mental happening,” then, contrary to what he alleges, there’s nothing incoherent in the idea of a mind that, during some period, isn’t populated by thoughts.
If by “thought,” Hume means “stable mental structure,” then Hume is right to say that there couldn’t be thought-free minds. We saw why this is so in Section 6.1.6. Given that, if selves were distinct from their thoughts, there could be thought-free minds. So, given that there cannot be thought-free minds, selves are constituted by the thoughts that belong to them.
So, after a fashion, Hume is right. Just as he says, there is nothing to one’s self other than the thoughts one has. But this claim of his isn’t right in the way he thought it was. He thought that one’s self consists of the thoughts (=fleeting mental occurrences) that occupy it, and not of the thoughts (=stable structures that create and regulate such occurrences). We’ve already discussed why Hume didn’t even grant the existence of stable mental structures or, indeed, of structures of any kind.
7.0 Objectual identity revisited: Which causal sequences are thing-constitutive?
Earlier in this chapter, we saw that every object—every rock, tree, and vase—is a causal sequence. But not every causal sequence constitutes some one object. Some constitute more than one. Others constitute none.
Here’s an example of one that constitutes no objects. Suppose that billiard ball #1 strikes hitherto stationary billiard ball #2, causing it to roll. Ball #2 then strikes hitherto stationary billiard ball #3, causing it to roll. And so on. This sequence of events doesn’t constitute a single entity; this sequence isn’t like a rock or a tree or an ice cube.
Here’s an example of a causal sequence that constitutes more than one object. Let S1 be the series of events constituting some seed and the process by which that seed turns into a tree and the tree itself. S1 is a causal series—a textbook case. But it constitutes two distinct objects, not one. The seed isn’t a mini-tree. It’s a tree-precursor, not a tree, just as a gamete is a person-precursor, not an actual person. (Unlike people, gametes don’t have thoughts or fall in love or play the harmonica.)
Two questions arise. What is the difference between those causal sequences that are thing-constitutive and those that are not? Second, what is the difference between thing-internal change, on the one hand, and wholesale transformation, on the other?
7.1 Some general features of thing-constitutive causal sequences?
Nothing that endures for more than an instant is not a causal process. But what is distinctive about those causal processes that we think of as objects (e.g., frozen ice cubes) is that the changes constitutive of them occur within certain narrow and fixed limits.
There’s nothing unchanging about any ice cube—even one that for the last fifty years has been inside in an undisturbed deep freezer. Given such ice-cube, every particle constituting it is in context flux; and the ice-cube itself is nothing but a flurry of activity.
But even though those particles are all moving vigorously, they’re moving only in ways that allow the flurry they compose to retain more or less the same properties. The flurry doesn’t change, even though the things composing it do. The reason the flurry doesn’t change is that, although its components are changing incessantly, the way in which they change doesn’t change.
Thus, what we usually describe as “changes” are really second-order changes: changes in the changes themselves. Each molecule composing a given ice-cube is an arena within which ceaseless change occurs. But so long as the ice-cube remains intact, there are no significant changes in the relations borne to one another by these different arenas of change. That’s why the ice-cube is unphased by such changes. But if the ice-cube is smashed or melts into a puddle, those mutual relations are significantly changed. That’s why the ice-cube does not survive such changes.
7.2 Change vs. obliteration
Not all objects are as static as ice cubes, and our analysis must be refined if it is to deal with more dynamic entities (e.g., a living human body). Like a rock or an ice cube, a living body consists of individual particles each of which bristles with activity. But where living bodies are concerned, there are changes, sometimes dramatic ones, in the relations that these arenas of change bear to one another. This happens whenever an organism develops in a positive direction, as when maturation or recovery strengthen it, or in a negative direction, as when old age or illness enfeeble it.
Thus, not all second-order changes jeopardize a thing’s existence, and sometimes they’re actually necessary for it. When do second-order changes destroy existence and when do they sustain it? “Such changes are existence-unfriendly,” it might be suggested, “when they’re abrupt or discontinuous and they’re existence-friendly when they’re not.” But this isn’t the right answer, since the melting of an ice cube, though decidedly thing-unfriendly, is as smooth a process as the development of an organism, which is a decidedly thing-friendly process.
“Changes are thing-preserving,” it will be said, “when they’re structure preserving. The general morphology of an adult human being is similar to that of an infant. There are differences, of course, but they’re internal to more fundamental similarities. Thus, the changes that connect the infant to the adult preserve structures. In general, thing-sustaining changes are structure-sustaining changes.”
This position obviously has merit, but it won’t quite do. There are cases where, without going out of existence, some one thing changes in fundamental structural respects. The butterfly doesn’t resemble the caterpillar; but there is some one organism that is first a caterpillar and then a butterfly. So why is it that, whereas the ice cube goes out of existence when it melts, the caterpillar is transformed, not obliterated, when it turns into a butterfly?
7.3 Prediction- and explanation-facilitation—the essence of objecthood
Puddles by no means defy prediction. If you see a puddle that is expanding, you may know roughly how long it will continue to expand and roughly what its shape will be when it stops expanding. But in addition to being of limited scope and low quality, such predictions presuppose ad hoc, circumstance-specific knowledge. The predictive payoff is minimal, given the size of the epistemic investment.
By learning more about the relevant variables (e.g., the shape of the floor, the rate at which the puddle is expanding, etc.), you can increase the predictive payoff. But given a vast improvement in one’s knowledge of these variables, there would be only a slight improvement in the predictive payoff. To have any chance of predicting with any precision what the puddle’s shape will be when it stops expanding, one would need extraordinarily high-resolution knowledge. Further, interference-effects would guarantee that, no matter how good your measuring instruments were or how adept you were at using them, your knowledge of initial conditions would not exceed a rather low threshold. And supposing that, within these limits, you acquired as much knowledge as possible of the relevant variables, any predictions you could make on the basis of that knowledge would be of minimal scope. Given high-resolution knowledge of the puddle’s state at a given time, you could make low-probability, low-resolution predictions about the puddle’s state at times soon thereafter.
But the story is very different where butterflies, human beings, and other bona fide things are involved. Given a knowledge of slight disturbances to a caterpillar’s anatomy, one can make high-resolution, high-probability predictions about the anatomical condition of the butterfly into which, in due course, it will metamorphose. Easily acquired low-resolution knowledge of an animal’s state at a given time may yield a high-resolution of its state at a much later time.
Given a pregnant mother who consumes large enough amounts of alcohol, it can be predicted that, 50 years hence, the person to whom she gives birth (supposing that person to be alive) will be severely damaged, and it can be said with some precision how that person will be damaged. The other, brighter side of the coin is that, given easily acquired, low-resolution knowledge to the effect that a certain person, while in his formative years, is given certain kinds of stimulation, allowed certain kinds of freedom, etc., one can make high-probability, high-resolution predictions about that person’s condition in late adulthood.
Of course, butterflies and children aren’t just things—they’re organisms. And not everything that is true of organisms is true of all things. But points relevantly similar to the ones just made hold of non-organisms. A sculptor who is chipping away at a hunk of marble knows that, barring some extraordinary event, the shape had by the hunk when he’s done chipping away at it is the shape it will keep for centuries to come. The people who built the Washington Monument knew that, barring some extraordinary event, it would remain standing, its shape and general physical condition more or less unchanged, for hundreds if not thousands of years to come. In general, a limited knowledge of a thing’s state at a given time yields high-probability, high-resolution knowledge of that thing’s state at a much later time.
A knowledge of this principle underlies all physical labor. It underlies the manufacturing of cars, houses, fishing rods, and elevators. All of this activity would be pointless were it not for the prediction-friendliness inherent in thinghood.
These predictions are defeasible, of course. Well-built houses are destroyed by earthquakes. Well-educated children from loving homes turn out to be moronic ghouls. But it’s despite, not by virtue of, its being a thing that a sculpture or child or anything else has a counterpredictive future. Embittered by his lack of artistic ability, some unknown kook breaks into the Louvre and destroys famous sculpture X. The world is shocked. Nobody could have predicted that the world would ever be without this masterpiece. X’s future was indeed an unpredictable one. But until its thing-status was completely undermined, X’s future was a predictable one. Thus, X’s future was unpredictable only to the extent that X’s thing-status wasn’t determinative of it. So given only that X’s future was not predictable, it doesn’t follow that things qua things aren’t prediction-enablers; and given that X’s future was predictable to the extent that its thing-status had a hand in it, it follows that things qua things are prediction-enablers.
In general, to be a thing is to be a prediction enabler. It would, of course, be viciously circular to define a “thing” as a prediction- and explanation-enabling thing. But when we replace the second occurrence of the word “thing” in the last sentence with “complex of events,” the circularity goes away. Thus, to be a thing is to be a prediction-enabling complex of events (or “event-complex,” as we’ll say). By the same token, an event-complex that is predictively inert is, to that extent, a non-thing.
Prediction and explanation are conjugates of each other. An explanation uses known laws to go from effect to cause. (I know that Smith is now belittling Brown. I know that, when belittled, insecure, touchy people, like Brown, become angry. So I predict that Brown will become angry.) The corresponding prediction uses the same laws to go from cause to effect. (I know that Brown is now angry. I know that, when belittled, insecure, touchy people, like Brown, become angry. I also know that, the circumstances being what they are, nothing else could have caused Brown to become angry. So I explain his current anger in terms of his being insulted a few moments ago by Smith.) Thus, a swarm of events is a thing to the extent that it is prediction-and explanation-conducive.
7.4 Thinghood is a matter of degree
The property of being prediction-enabling comes in degrees, as does the property of being explanation-enabling. A brick house is richer in these properties than a plywood house; a plywood house is richer in them than a cloud; a cloud is richer in them than a breeze.
A consequence of our analysis is that thinghood comes in degrees. Some things are “thingier” than others. I accept this consequence. A brick house is more of a thing than a cloud; it’s more “thingy.” This means only that it provides a broader and more stable basis than does a cloud for prediction and explanation. Since this is what we are inclined to think anyway, it isn’t to the discredit of our analysis that it has this consequence.
We are inclined to think that things must literally be solid, like rocks and ice cubes, and unlike puddles. So far as there is a connection between actual solidity and thinghood, it is that, within the narrow horizons within which we live, solid things typically provide a firmer basis for prediction than non-solid things. But non-solids can be as thingy as rocks. Though they’re gaseous, as opposed to solid, stars are things to no less a degree than rocks. The reason is that, even though they’re not solid, they have the dynamic integrity of things that, in terrestrial contexts, are typically had by solid things.
7.5 The contextual nature of thinghood
Despite its internal lack of cohesiveness, a galaxy can be highly thing-like in the context of an explanation of why certain extremely large-scale astronomical events are occurring—of why, for example, there is a marked tendency for objects in a certain very large region of space to head in a certain direction. And despite its high degree of internal cohesiveness, a rock can be as unthing-like as, in most contexts, gusts of air would be. To creatures whose minds moved millions of times more slowly than ours, rocks would be as unthing-like as gusts of air are to us. And to creatures whose minds moved millions of times more quickly than ours, gusts of air would be as durable, cohesive, and predictable as marble statues are to us.
Thus, a given system of events can be a thing—in certain respects, at certain junctures—in some explanatory contexts, while being unthing-like—in different respects, at those same junctures—in others. But that doesn’t mean that things are created by our explanations.
8.0 Time-travel an incoherent concept
It is debated whether time-travel is possible. Thanks to our analysis of what it is to persist in time, we can shed some light on this problem.
Setting aside the trivial and irrelevant fact that we travel forward in time at a rate of one minute/minute, the statement “time-travel is possible” has three distinct meanings:
(a) One can “leap” from one time to some non-adjacent time, i.e., one can move in a discontinuous manner from one time to another.
(b) One can travel forward in time at a rate of more than one minute/minute.
(c) One can travel backwards in time.
It is generally thought that (a)–(c) are empirical questions that fall within the jurisdiction of physics. In actuality, they are questions of logic, not of empirical fact. Moreover, each of (a)–(c) is logically false and therefore couldn’t possibly be correct.
Let’s discuss (a) first. In this chapter, we have seen that anything that persists for any amount of time is a causal series (a continuous series of states of affairs such that, given any two of them, one is the (in)direct cause of the other).
An illustration may be helpful. At any given moment during its existence, your car consists of an incessant flurry of mass-energy displacements; and your car is thus a series of “event-flurries,” as we’ll call them. Twenty-four hours ago, your car was constituted by one event-flurry. Right now it’s constituted by a different event-flurry. (Let S1 be the first event-flurry and let S2 be the second.) And, of course, my car is currently constituted by some event-flurry. (Let S3 be that flurry.)
Bearing all of this in mind, imagine the following. While your car was parked in your driveway, somebody crashed into it, severely damaging it. Your car therefore bears little resemblance to what it was twenty-four hours ago. It follows that S1 and S2 are qualitatively very different from each other. By contrast, S1 and S3 are as similar to each other as their being in different places permits. This is sheer coincidence: S1 and S3 are, we will suppose, as causally disconnected from each other as any two non-simultaneous events on this planet can be. It follows that my car, as it is right now, is just like your car, as it was twenty-four hours ago, before it was damaged. It also follows that S1 is much less similar to S2 than it is to S3.
Be all of this as it may, the car in your driveway is, whereas the car in my driveway is not, numerically identical with the car you owned twenty-four hours ago. Mediating between S1 and S2 is a continuous series of events such that, given any two of them, one is the (in)direct cause of the other. No such series mediates between S1 and S3. That’s why (i) the car in my driveway isn’t the very same car as the one you parked in your driveway twenty-four hours ago, their uncanny mutual resemblance notwithstanding. And that’s also why (ii) the car sitting in your driveway is the very same car as the one you parked in your driveway yesterday, their lack of mutual resemblance notwithstanding. Obvious generalizations of these points establish our thesis that objects are identical with causal series.
A consequence of the fact that objects are such series is that a given object ceases to exist the moment the corresponding causal series is severed. If, instead of just being damaged last night, your car was vaporized, my car, though an exact duplicate of your (pre-vaporized) car, still isn’t numerically identical with it.
Given that an object ceases to exist the moment the corresponding causal series is severed, it follows that, so far as it isn’t logically false, the statement:
(i) Smith disappears in 2009 and re-appears in the year 2023
collapses into the statement:
(ii) Smith is annihilated in 2009 and a Smith-like entity that isn’t actually Smith ex nihilo comes into existence in the year 2023.
A question will help clarify the reasoning behind this last assertion: Where is Smith during that fourteen year interval? He’s either nowhere or he’s somewhere. Let’s suppose that he’s nowhere. In that case, for the reasons illustrated in connection with your car, whatever it is that pops into existence in the year 2023 isn’t numerically identical with Smith. So let’s suppose that he’s somewhere—that, at any given instant during 

that time period, he is in some place or other. But in that case he’s no more time-traveling than anything else that exists during that interval. If he’s next to some one tree during that entire period, he’s no more time-traveling than that tree. If he’s going from place to place, he’s no more time-traveling than any one of the satellites that will orbit the earth during that period.
So depending on whether he’s somewhere or nowhere, Smith is either permanently annihilated in 2009 or he’s no more time-traveling than anything else that exists during that period. Therefore, (a) is false.
To see why (b) is false, we need do little more than repeat some of the points just made. Suppose that Smith travels from 2009 to 2023 at a rate of one million minutes/minute. We’ve just seen that Smith cannot make this journey in a discontinuous manner; he cannot disappear from one time and reappear at some other, non-adjacent time. So Smith must make this journey in a continuous manner. So at any given moment during this interval, Smith must be in some place or other. It follows, as we saw a moment ago, that he is no more time-traveling than anything else that exists during that interval. The supposition that Smith is traveling forward in time at a rate of one million minutes/minute thus turns out to collapse into the supposition that he isn’t time-traveling at all. Given any positive number n, an analogous argument shows that continuous forward time-travel at a rate of n minutes/minute collapses into forward time-travel at a rate of one minute/minute.
There is another, quite different problem with the concept of discontinuous time-travel. Let W1 be a universe where (i) is true and (ii) is false; and let W2 be an otherwise indistinguishable universe where (ii) is true and (i) is false. What happens in the one universe at any given time coincides with what happens in the other universe at that time. It follows that, even if (per impossibile) an occupant of the one universe knew exactly what happened in that universe at any given time, he would not, in virtue of that fact, have any legitimate reason for preferring (i) to (ii). A fortiori, no possible observation that one might have would provide one with any reason for believing oneself to be in W1 as opposed to W2. Since observation couldn’t possibly provide one with such a reason, only logic could do so. But logic cannot do so, since (i) is logically false, as we’ve already seen.
Similar points hold in connection with discontinuous backwards time-travel. In the movie Back to the Future, young Marty McFly vanishes from the year 1985 and shows up in the year 1955. This means that, in the year 1985, the causal sequence that constitutes his existence is severed. Like everything else that persists for any length of time, Marty McFly is a causal sequence. It follows that, so far as it isn’t incoherent, the statement
(1) in 1985, Marty McFly traveled backwards in time to the year 1955 and is otherwise unchanged
collapses into:
(2) Marty McFly was annihilated in 1985, and in 1955 there appears ex nihilo somebody who is numerically distinct from him but otherwise just like him.
Also, given obvious adaptations of what we said a moment ago, there is no conceivable event that, were it known, would provide more support for (1) than for (2).
Since, therefore, there couldn’t possibly be any possible observation-based reason for preferring (1) to (2), the only possible reasons for doing so would be of a logical nature. This means that there are no reasons for doing so, given that (1) is incoherent. The concept of discontinuous backwards time-travel is therefore a broken one.
What about the idea of continuous backwards time-travel? For argument’s sake, let’s suppose that, during his continuous journey from the year 1985 to the year 1955, Marty McFly is right next to some stop-sign that was built in 1920 and stays in the same place for several centuries. That means that, at any given moment during that thirty year period, Marty McFly is no more time-traveling than the stop-sign. Each is just sitting there.
There are, of course, some important differences between Mary McFly and the stop-sign. First of all, whereas the stop-sign is crushed or burnt or otherwise destroyed in some pedestrian way, Marty McFly must simply vanish in the year 1985. (If he doesn’t, then he’s still hanging around in the year 1985, in which case

he obviously hasn’t gone back in time.) And, whereas the stop-sign’s presence in the year 1955 is to be explained in the customary way, Marty McFly just popped up ex nihilo.
Bearing these points in mind, let W3 be a universe in which
(3) Marty McFly continuously traveled backwards in time from the year 1985 to the year 1955 but is otherwise unchanged
is true, and in which
(2) Marty McFly was annihilated in 1985, and in 1955 there appears ex nihilo somebody who is numerically distinct from him but is otherwise just like him
is false; and let W4 be a universe that is exactly like W3 except that, in it, (2) is true and (3) is false. Echoing what we said earlier, there is no conceivable event that, were it known, would enable one to determine whether one was in W3 as opposed to W3, or vice versa. Which, taken together with the fact that being annihilated in 1985 didn’t exactly tighten young Marty’s grip on existence, suggests that, other things being equal, (2) is the better way to model the observational data.
There is another, even deeper issue. For there to be backwards time-travel of any kind, there must be back retroactive causation: some events must be the effects of later events. Marty McFly’s appearing in 1955 must be an effect of some event occurring in 1985. But there are empirical and also strictly logical reasons for thinking backwards time-travel an impossibility.
If Relativity Theory (RT) is right, which we’ll henceforth assume that it is, the statement “E2 is an effect of E1, but E1 post-dates E2” is tautologically false. According to RT, order in time is defined in terms of causation: anything caused by a given event ipso facto follows that event. Thus, the view that one could travel backwards in time is in the same category as the view that triangles could have five sides.
A well known consequence of RT is that a given event may precede one event relative to one framework, be simultaneous with it relative to some second framework, and follow it relative to some third framework. Some conclude from this that backwards time-travel is possible.
This is not the right inference to draw. For reasons that aren’t important here, the framework-relative nature of temporal order is a consequence of, among other things, the fact that any effect of an event ipso facto follows that event. In other words, it’s a consequence of the fact that “E2 precedes E1 and is also an effect of it” is tautologically false.
Like any other scientific theory, RT is empirical. It’s based on observation; and acceptance of it is warranted only as long as our observations are consistent with it. Nonetheless, the principle that causes ipso facto precede their effects is an analytic, not an empirical, truth. (We’ll henceforth refer to this principle “CT”—short for “causality and temporal order.”) So CT is true even if RT is false.
“But how can CT be analytic,” it will be asked, “given that RT is an observation-based theory?” Two reasons. (1) Not every statement composing an empirical (observation-based) theory is itself observation-based. Every theory comprises statements of pure logic (e.g., “no true statement entails the negation of anything entailed by any of its consequences”) that aren’t observation-based. (2) Not everything learned with the help of observation is learned through observation. If one learns some complex mathematical theorem by reading a proof of it, one learns that theorem through observations of ink-deposits; but it isn’t by observing such deposits that one learns it. The observations of ink-deposits merely occasion or “trigger” the purely logical ratiocinative activity that does lead to a genuine knowledge of that principle. Somebody with 20/20 vision who has carefully studied those ink-deposits (i.e., who has studied those ink-deposits themselves, as opposed to their meanings) may completely and utterly fail to understand the corresponding proof; whereas somebody whose vision is just good enough to see some of the key lines of the proof may, on the basis only of those observations along with the thoughts they precipitated, understand it extremely well.
Also, somebody who has heard the proof stated but hasn’t read it may, on the basis only of those auditory observations along with the thoughts they precipitated, thoroughly understand the proof. Ink-deposits bear no physical resemblance to noises. Therefore, it isn’t by studying ink-deposits that one learns the proof. So 
given only that empirical discoveries led to our becoming aware of CT, it doesn’t follow that CT was itself discovered empirically.
And, in fact, CT couldn’t have been discovered empirically. Assuming it a given that it was Smith’s pushing the button that caused the elevator to come, there is no conceivable event that, were it known, could warrant a revision one’s subsequent judgment that the pushing of the button preceded the arrival of the elevator.
Einstein himself very clearly said that CT was not empirical hypothesis. He also said (unfortunately for me) that it was a convention—a definition of “order in time”—and, therefore, not a substantive truth. I would suggest that, although he described CT as a definition, he chose this particular definition, as opposed to others, because he saw in it a substantive truth whose roots lie in the very concept of what it is for one event to precede another.
ENDNOTES
Name: ________________________________________________ Date: _______________________________
Exercises
Questions 1–5 are based on the following passage, which we’ll call “UA” (short for “unknown author”):
(UA) For my part, when I enter most intimately into what I call myself, I always stumble on some particular perception or other of heat or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or pleasure. I can never catch myself at any time without a perception, and never can observe anything but the perception.
1.	Who is the author of this passage?
	a. A.J. Ayer
	b. John Locke 
	c. Rene Descartes 
	d. George Berkeley 
	e. None of the above
2.	Of the following statements, which is the most correct? 
	a. UA is an attempt on somebody’s part to show that the self consists of the various events and conditions that we would ordinarily say that it had.
	b. UA is to the effect that, since the self, which obviously exists, can’t be shown to exist on purely observational grounds, empiricism is an inherently flawed doctrine.
	c. UA is an attempt to show that, although conscious mental events in one’s own mind can be known in an observational manner, other mental entities that are less fleeting (e.g., beliefs, attitudes, personality traits) cannot be known in this way, even though they undeniably exist, and that for this reason things about oneself that cannot be known on strictly observational grounds.
	d. UA is an attempt to show that the self should be understood as a subject, not an object, as that which does the looking and is never itself looked at.
	e. None of the above.
3.	Of the following statements, which is the most plausible?
	a. One possible objection to UA is that it’s self-defeating. The author claims that the self doesn’t exist. His argument is that when he looks for himself he can’t find himself. But that argument presupposes the falsity of the conclusion.
	b. UA shows the limitations of trying to find a viable ethical theory on a purely empirical basis. The author is trying to find himself in much the same way that one tries to find a lost penny. To be sure, assuming that empiricism is correct, UA is the approach. But it often takes years to find oneself; and until one does, one can’t really be true to oneself or, therefore, be true to others.
	c. UA is a pithy and effective refutation of Freudian psychology. Freud said that there are events in our minds that we are not conscious of. But the author of UA shows that, when he introspects, he isn’t aware of any such events and, therefore, that the Freudian unconscious doesn’t exist.
4.	Of the following statements, which is the most plausible?
	a.	UA is a passable argument. But because of recent developments in cybernetics, it can safely be assumed that the conclusion of UA is false.
	b.	UA falsely presupposes that minds are identical with brains; and for this reason, it fails to establish its point.
	c.	UA falsely presupposes that minds aren’t identical with constellations of mental events and, for this reason, fails to prove its point.
	d.	Given the assumption that all mental entities are events, as opposed to underlying structures, and given also the assumption that one is, or can readily become, conscious of any mental event in one’s mind, UA might be a decent argument; but if these assumptions aren’t granted, it’s quite weak.
5.	Of the following statements, which is the most plausible?
a.	UA is an ironic indictment of the neurotic and narcissistic over-concern for one’s own self that was dominating Europe at the time the author was writing; and UA’s point, ultimately, is that, ironically, one diminishes oneself, may have even obliterated oneself, by thinking too much about one’s own situation and not enough about those of other people.
b.	The only mental states mentioned by the author of UA are sensations of “heat,” “cold,” “pain,” “pleasure,” “love,” “hate,” “light,” “shade.” Notice that each of these terms denotes a mental state that is agreeable or disagreeable. This suggests that UA is to the effect that pain and pleasure blind ourselves to our true natures.
c.	The author of UA speaks of observing his or her own perceptions. In this context, the word “observe” isn’t being used in a strictly literal sense.
Questions 6–9 are based on the following passage, which we’ll call “X”:
X: When my perceptions are remov’d for any time, as by sound sleep; so long am I insensible of myself, and may truly be said not to exist. And were all my perceptions remov’d by death, and cou’d I neither think, nor feel, nor see, nor love, nor hate after the dissolution of my body, I should be entirely annihilated, nor do I conceive what is farther requisite to make me a perfect non-entity.
6.	True or false? X was written by a rationalist.
7.	True or false? X is an argument of personal identity.
8.	True or false? X is to the effect that, since it makes little or no sense to suppose that a thought-free person could exist, a person ought to be identified with the various thoughts (or some aggregate thereof) that we ordinarily say that he or she has.
9.	True or false? If X is right, then one’s self ceases to exist when one’s mind does, and it therefore makes no sense to say that a person could be completely brain-dead. And, if correct, a statement like “Smith is a brain-dead person” is really elliptical for: “the brain in what was Smith’s body (when Smith still existed) is non-operative.”
10.	Which of the following statements is a numerical identity statement (not necessarily a true one)? a.	Anything identical with the number 10 is even.
b.	Nothing identical with the number 10 is odd.
c.	Starsky is the very much same person as Hutch.
11.	Which of the following statements is true?
a.	22 is qualitatively identical with 4.
b.	22 is not qualitatively identical with 4, but it is numerically identical with it.
c.	Neither of the above.
12.	Which of the following statements is false?
a.	Statements to the effect that x is identical with y are not always to the effect that x and y are both installments of some one causal sequence.
b.	The sentence “(81 = 32” says that there is some one thing that is both the (positive) square root of 81 and also the square of 3.
c.	Neither (81 nor 32 is in space or time; only things that are in space-time can stand in causal relations with respect to one another; identity statements are always to the effect that two things are both installments in some one causal process; therefore, “(81 = 32” doesn’t actually express a numerical identity.
13.	I’m showing you a baby picture of myself. Let x be the blobby infant depicted in the photo (in other words, x is me at age two), and let y be my current self. It is understood in the context that y is showing you a baby picture of himself (i.e., that x is y’s baby-self). Given only this information, which of the following clearly follows?
a.	Even though y knows more than x, there are no differences between x’s brain and y’s.
b.	x has some kind of “implicit” understanding of all the things that y knows, even though x’s impoverished linguistic skills obscure this fact.
c.	The statement “x is identical with y” is true because some kind of continuous series of events beginning with x eventuated in y.
d.	We don’t know enough about brain anatomy to determine whether (a) is the correct response or not.
14.	Which of the following statements is true?
a.	The reason why so-called “identical” twins aren’t numerically identical is that they aren’t causally related to each other in the way in which x and y (as defined in the boldfaced part of question 15) are related to each other.
b.	Biological science hasn’t reached the point where it can definitively say one way or the other whether or not so-called “identical” twins are, or are not, numerically identical.
c.	If Twin-Smith is Smith’s identical twin, and they always wear the same clothes, watch the same shows, etc., then there is some sense in which they’re numerically identical, even though Smith and Twin-Smith aren’t always in exactly the same place.
15.	Which of the following statements is true?
a.	If your car loses a wheel, it isn’t literally the same car that it was before.
b.	Suppose that, at any given time, Person 1 and Person 2 are in different places but are otherwise exactly the same. In that case, we may conclude that Person 1’s parts are numerically identical with Person 2’s parts, even though Person 1 per se isn’t numerically identical with Person 2.
c.	Even though things can remain in existence after losing some of the parts they started out with, a thing must keep most of the parts it started out with.
d.	At the time its existence comes to an end, a thing may be composed of none of the same atoms that composed it when it came into existence.
16.	Which of the following statements is true?
a.	Those who accept a mentalistic theory of personal identity always deny that mental events are identical with physical events.
b.	Those who accept a physicalistic theory of personal identity always deny that mental events are identical with physical events.
c.	Those who accept a mentalistic theory of personal identity are neither more nor less likely than those who accept a physicalistic theory to hold that you (not your body, but you—the “owner” of that body) cannot survive brain-death.
d.	Suppose, for argument’s sake, that a person can continue to exist even after his mind has been completely destroyed. In that case, the physicalistic theory is more likely to be correct than the mentalistic theory.
17.	On Star Trek, people were routinely “transported” from one place to another. This involved breaking them down into very small parts, moving those parts to another place, and then assembling those parts at the second place into a structure exactly like the one that was broken down at the first place. The structure at the second place is the very same person as the structure at the first place: Ct. Kirk himself—and not just a somebody qualitatively identical with him—beams onto the Enterprise (or wherever). Given this information, which of the following is true?
a.	The concept of teleportation, as thus defined, is an incoherent one. If Ct. Kirk is broken down into his constituent micro-particles on Mars, then the thing that “beams aboard” the Enterprise is, at best, something that is very similar to Ct. Kirk but is not numerically identical with him.
b.	The concept of teleportation is a perfectly coherent one. It involves nothing more than transforming a person’s (or thing’s) energy into some other form, moving that energy to a new place, and then transforming that energy back into its original form at the new destination. This happens all the time. When you speak into a phone, acoustical energy is converted into an electrical form, and then converted at the other end back into an acoustical form. The same principles are involved in teleportation, and teleportation, though technologically harder than talking over the phone, is no more of a theoretical impossibility.
c.	Since technology hasn’t reached the point where it’s possible to disintegrate people and then reassemble their microparts in the original form, the question is not, at this point in time, an answerable one.
d.	None of the above.
18.	Which of the following statements is false?
a.	For somebody who accepts a physicalistic view of personal identity, the idea that somebody should exist in some disembodied form (e.g., as a disembodied spirit) is an incoherent one.
b.	For somebody who accepts a mentalistic view of personal identity, it’s extremely improbable, but not necessarily impossible, that somebody should exist without having a mind of any kind.
19.	Try to show that the mentalistic theory of personal identity is correct. You must clearly state what this conception is, what the rival to it is, what the arguments for the rival-conception are, and why those arguments fail.
20.	Make a case that the physicalistic theory of personal identity is correct.
21.	For this question, you must suppose, if only for argument’s sake, that determinism is 100% correct.
If determinism is correct, then everything that is going to happen has always had to happen. If you watch a certain T.V. show tonight, your doing so was made inevitable by the state of the universe millions of years ago. Nothing that happens could have possibly failed to happen—whatever fate awaits you was set in stone long before you were born. Show that, despite this fact, it is still rational to make choices and to work hard for what you want. In other words, make a case that, even though everything is inevitable, it isn’t rational to take an attitude of “I’m not going to try, since everything’s inevitable anyway.”