Actual Intelligence vs. Possession of Intelligence-born Cognitive Structures 
J.-M. Kuczynski 
  
There are some people who are quite obviously not intelligent but who have knowledge or cognitive skills the acquisition of which required intelligence. There are professors, for example, of mathematics or philosophy who were once stars but who, in their 50’s or even 40’s simply aren’t very sharp. In some cases, these people were never sharp, and the papers for which they are famous were simply over-valued or, if not overvalued, then plagiarized. But in other cases, this is not the case; and, in addition to once having done meaningful work, these people do, as previously stated, have knowledge or cognitive skills that a stupid person could not have acquired. But they are indeed stupid or, at any rate, not remotely as intelligent as one would presume them to be.  It is seldom said—though it is obviously the case—that they simply aren’t that smart, even though they may have been smart in the past. Usually the situation is rationalized in some semi-plausible way; for example, it might be said that ‘although they do have intelligence, they are not show-casing it’ or it might be said ‘they are intelligent but their personality are rigid.’ 
In any case, what is going on? Setting aside cases where the person was never actually smart—setting aside cases where the break-out paper in question was plagiarized or hyper-valued or some such---setting those cases aside, what is going on? How could somebody who is not smart have knowledge or intellectual skills that only a smart person could have? 
The answer is clear: These people learned philosophy or mathematics or whatnot when they were still smart. Then their intelligence left them, but they still had the cognitive skills, or at least appreciable thereof, of which their intelligence, when they had it, availed them. Because those skills are ones that only intelligent people can acquired, people assume—even though at some level they know otherwise---that those people are still smart. But those people are not smart. They were smart, and they have vestiges of their former intelligence; but they are no longer smart. And it is a simple fact that intellect, unless exercised, atrophies in much the same way as athletic skill. 
Which brings us to a point of some practical importance. There are many people who are given permanent professorial positions on the basis of work done early in life. And those people quickly become complacent, and their intellects wither, with the result that they not only cease to be of superior intellectual capacity actually drop to average or even below average capacity. But they still have those positions, and the presumption that they are intelligent is very much in place, reinforced as it is by the institution in question. Also, these people are undoubtedly aware, at least at some level, of their deteriorating intellectual condition, that they are intellectual cripples, and they do everything in their bureaucratic power to suppress their own and other people’s awareness of that fact. 
The result is a situation in which the intellectually dead and dying have almost total power to decide the fate of the intellectually alive and up-and-coming, with predictably grim results.

