Aggregative Properties and 
Emergent Properties

by J.-M. Kuczynski PhD

An aggregative property is one that is had pluralities of objects but is absent from any given one of those objects. An example is temeprature. An object’s temperature is proportional to the mean kinetic energy of the molecules composing it, and temperature is therefore a property of systems of interacting molecules. The property of being 78° is the property, had by such a system, of having a certain mean kinetic energy. Given that temperature is a property of systems of interacting particles, no one particle has a temperature.
An emergent property is a property of systems of events that whose existence cannot be deduced from what is known about those events when taken in isolation. For example, given a class of objects each of which has a low degree of thermal conductivity, it may happen that, when those objects are assembled in a certain way, the resulting structure has a high degree of thermal conductivity. 
To take another example, given a class of objects each of which is brittle, it may happen that, when those objects are assembled in a certain way, the resulting structure may be extremely resilient. 
To take a more counterintuitive example: Given two rocks, each of which weighs exactly one lb., if we place the one rock on top of the other, the resulting structure would weigh exactly two lbs. 
A consequence of Relativity Theory is that mass is non-additive, meaning that the mass of a given object is not the arithmetical sum of the masses of its constituents. 
Thus, relative to what was known before Relativity Theory,  masses of object-pluralities were emergent with respect to the masses of their constituent objects. In other words, the mass of a given object-plurality could not be deduced from the masses of its constituents. 
A related consequence of Relativity Theory is that length is non-additive, meaning that the length of a straight object is not the arithmetical sum of the lengths of its segments. Let x be a straight, rigid steel rod with a length of at least two yards. And let alpha and beta be the first and the second yard-long segments of x. The segment of x that consists of alpha and beta is slightly over two yards. 
A consequence of Relativity Theory is that C is just over two yards in length. Thus, relative to what was known before Relativity Theory, the length of a given object was emergent with respect to the lengths of its segments. In other words, the length of a given object could not be deduced from the lenghts of its segments.
A plurality of objects has a given emergent property whenever it has some property that, given only what is already known about the individuals composing that plurality, it is either (a) not expected to have or (b) cannot be deduced to have,  either because it doesn’t follow from what we know or because we are not smart enough to see that it follows. 
Any given aggregative property can, at least in principle, be an emergent property. For example, air-pressure is an aggregative property: it is a property, not of individual air-molecules, but of aggregates of such molecules. Bearing this in mind, suppose that there are creatures of our intelligence that are so small that, in terms of size, air-molecules are to them what great redwoods are to us. Supposing that such creatures were acquainted with individual air-molecules, in much the way that we are acquainted with individual trees, they might fail to infer, or not be samrt enough to infer, that otherwise soft objects are rock-hard when filled with aggregates of such molecules. To these creatures, such properties of molecule-aggregates would be of the emergent variety. And relative to what the layman knows or can deduce, many properties of planet-aggregates and of solar system-aggregates, are comparably emergent in nature. 
Temperature is an aggregative property. It is a property of pluralities of particle-interations, and is therefore not a property of any one particle. Thus, a miniscule creature, of the kind just-described, might be quite as ignorant of the fact that aggregates of such particles could cause previously rigid objects to melt as we used to be of the fact that such objects consist of discrete particles.
By the same token, given the relevant knowledge or degree of acumen, an otherwise emergent  property is non-emergent. Relative to what we know now, the masses, lengths, and volumes of object-aggregates are non-emergent, but they were emergent, relative to what we knew 120 years ago. Any given chemical reaction that is now known to us is ipso facto a non-emergent property of the substances involved, even though it was non-emergent relative to the state of knowledge before that reaction was discovered. 
A consequence is that ‘x is an emergent property’ is never the answer to the question ‘why does x exist?’ 
In an attempt to answer the question, ‘why does consciousness exist?’, John Searle said that consciousness is an ‘emergent property’ of neurons, ‘just as air-pressure is an emergent property of air-molecules.’ And that settles the matter, said Searle. 
But it does not settle the matter. It doesn’t make a dent in it. When someone asks ‘why does consciousness exist?’, the very thing he is asking is, ‘why is consciousness present in aggregates of bits of matter that are not themselves conscious.’ People have always known that, even though intact brains tend to be conscious, dismembered brains are never conscious. But people still don’t know why brains tend to be conscious. 
And the comparison with air-pressure is spurious. Air does not seem to consist of molecules. It not until two hundred years ago that scientists came to believe otherwise. More precisely, here is what they realized. Suppose that air consists of objects that are similar to billiard balls or other projectiles that are known to us. And suppose that those hypothetical air-parts obey the same mechanical laws as such projectiles. In that case, otherwise anomalous facts about air-pressure cease to be an anomalous. For example, suppose that air consists of molecules. And further suppose that when air is hot, those particles are moving faster than when air is cold. It follows that those particles are colliding more frequently and with greater force when air is hot than when they are cold. And it is therfore explained why heating up the air inside a cannister causes it to explode. Heating it causes those particles to collide more frequenly with the walls of the cannister, and also with greater force. And given that fast moving objects disperse more rapidly than slow moving objects, it is also explained why unconfined gases spread faster when hot than when cold.  
Thus, relative to what we have known about the laws of motion since the time of Newton, pressure-related properties of gases are non-emergent with respect to the properties of their constituent particles. This is why we know gases to consist of particles, and not to be the homogenous substances that they seem to be. 
 In fact, everything we know about those particles is derived from our knowledge that pressure-related facts cannot be explained inexplicable it is supposed that the aggregates in question consist of particles.
But if asked ‘why are brains conscious?’, a scientist responded by saying ‘because they consist of neurons’, he would be failing, utterly, to answer the question at hand. This is because, whereas our knowledge that air consists of particles is derived from our knowledge of air-pressure related facts, our knowledge that brains consist of neurons is not derived from our knowledge of consciousness-related facts. We believe brain-tissue to consist of neurons because when we look at brain-tissue with a microscope, we see that it consits of neurons. The fact that it consists of neurons doesn’t help us explain why brains are conscious. 
To be sure, knowledge of this fact can be explanatory. Given that brains are conscious, and given additional data relating to the nature of the various cognitive functions mediated thereby, a given fact about the cellular composition of the brain can be illuminating. For example, suppose it known that brain region X mediates mathematical thought. Further, suppose it known that brain-region X consists of neurons having such and such properties. Finally, suppose it known that  such cells, unlike all other brain-cells, die unless the host-subject consumes a certain amount of Vitamin C on a daily basis. In that case, it is explained why, despite otherwise being cognitively normal, vitamin C-deprived Smith cannot count to 10.  
But so far as discoveries concerning the cellular or molecular composition of brains are explanatory of psychological phenomena, it is only because they are interpreted in light of independently had knowledge relating to cognitive phenomena and their biological implementations. 
 Searle seems to confusing the concept of an emergent property with the concept of an effect or product. When you shake beer, you create foam. It is a product of what you are doing. This means that the shaking pre-dates the creation of the foam. When you shake the beer, you set in motion processes that lead to foam-creation, and you set more such processes in motion as continue to shake it. 
But if given body of molecules has a certain mean kinetic energy, that is its having the corresponding temperature. It is not as though, at t1, it has that mean kinetic energy and then, a little while later, at t2, it has that temperature. The relation in question is one of identity, not of cause and effect, and Searle does not seem to see this. 
Searle also seems not to be aware of the fact that emergence is an epistemic notion. A given property that is emergent with respect to what some creature knows at a given time may be non-emergent with respect to what that same creature knows at some later time. It follows that emergence is a characteristic not of properties, but of our knowledge thereof. And a property of a given sort of aggregate ceases to emergent as soon as we know that such aggregates have that property. But we can know that they have that property without knowing why they do so, and until we know why aggregates of appropriately configured neurons are conscious, we don’t know why they are conscious. 
