OCD and Philosophy 
Hi, I’m Dr. Kuczynski, and I would like to welcome you to my You Tube Channel, OCD and philosophy. The purpose of this channel is to turn the theory of knowledge to practical account by using it to explain and treat obsessive-compulsive disorder. I was a professor of philosophy for many years. But the world of academic philosophy is not hospitable to actual philosophers or, indeed, to anyone who is interested in the truth or is trying to make the world a better place. So I left the academy to start a psychoanalytic practice, which is now taking off and which I am hereby introducing to the world. Please visit me at my website www.ocdandphilosophy Thank you and I look forward to working with you. 
Ask Dr. K:
What Advice Do You Have for People are struggling with depression, OCD, paranoia?
First of all, depression, paranoia, and OCD are all interconnected. OCD is about obsessions and compulsions, and paranoias are obsessive fears. Second, and most importantly, depression, OCD and paranoia are not themselves the problem. OCD is your mind’s of telling you that there is something wrong with your life. True—OCD is debilitating in the short term. But the reason that you are obsessing and compulsing is that there is something about your life that isn’t right but that you are not yet willing to face. And it may be that it isn’t yet time to face it. In any case, there is one, and only one, way to get over OCD. And that is to find a path in life that works for you. It is to do the thing that you truly want to do. As long as you don’t do that thing, you will be afflicted by OCD, paranoia and depression. Once you start doing that thing, you will still be obsessive-compulsive, because that his how your brain is wired, but your obsessive-compulsive tendencies will be an asset, not a liability. They will push you forward, as they did Beethoven, not hold you back. 
With regard to your so-called paranoias, they too are your mind’s way to telling you something. Superficially they may not seem sane, but you are picking up on something, and you must realize that your paranoias are not, ultimately, paranoias. Paranoias are usually inverted and projected desires. One’s ‘paranoia’ that so and so is stalking one is really a desire that so and so be paying attention to one. I discuss this in my forthcoming audio book ‘Paranoia as Unconscious desire.’ I also discuss it at length in my already published audio book ‘Obsessive fear as unconscious desire’, available at audible.com 
As for depression, there is always a reason for it. The same thing that is making you obsessive compulsive is making you depressive: and that thing is that you are not living in a way that is true to who you are; you are selling yourself. Your OCD is about the instincts that you are suppressing bucking and pressing for discharge. Your depression is about the fact that those instincts are not being properly expressed in action. 
So you should see OCD, depression, and paranoia as being about almost but not quite having the life you want. They are all ways that frustrated urges are trying, without success, to express themselves. And you should modify your life so that they can express themselves. See OCD not as a mental illness, but as slightly mis-directed mental health. 

