

Attachment Theory and Mental Illness

The basic tenet of Attachment Theory (AT) is that a person’s emotional attachments influence the way in which he deals with problematic situations and, moreover, that the way in which he deals with problematic situations influences his relations to others.[1] AT is not a single theory.
Rather it is a cluster of theories that are all based on the just-stated tenet.[2]
The first question that arises is whether that tenet is correct. The answer is clearly ‘yes.’ It is a matter of common knowledge that people who have healthy and secure attachments, particularly in early life, are psychologically healthier than people who do not. In fact, a knowledge of this fact seems to be embodied in parental instincts, given the fact that parents, especially mothers, are naturally inclined to bond with their children,
especially when they are young and vulnerable.[3]
In any case, there is no denying that healthy early-life relationships, especially with caregivers, is conducive to psychological health, this being the basic tenet of AT. One of the main objectives of the various theories composing AT is to make it clear exactly how early-life attachments affect one’s personality, including one’s emotional attachments to others.[4] Another
such objective is to make it clear how to treat people who did not have the benefit of unambiguously positive early-life attachments.[5]
Granting that the basis of AT lies in commonsense, its beginnings as a
scientific discipline can be traced to Sigmund Freud (1856-1939), who explicitly stated on several occasions that a person's character-architecture as an adult is largely a consequence of his relations in early life to his parents and who, moreover, tried to work out in detail exactly how early-life attachments to parents determine a person’s psychological profile.[6] Stated as
simply as possible, Freud’s position was that a psychologically healthy adult is someone whose parents loved him but did not spoil him, it being the mother’s job is to provide love and the father’s job to provide discipline. A mother’s love leads to self-love, according to Freud, and a father’s discipline leads to self-discipline, with a person’s success as an adult depending on his
having a healthy combination of self-love and self-discipline.[7]
Though foreshadowed by Freud’s work, AT came into existence in earnest with the work of John Bowlby (1907-1990).[8] Bowlby was a

psychoanalyst who studied the effects of separating children from caregivers. Bowlby observed that the children who reacted the most violently to separation from caregivers were the first to be given substitute-caregivers and were therefore the most likely to survive. On this basis, Bowlby hypothesized that these extreme behaviors were survival mechanisms that were reinforced by natural selection.
Bowlby coined the term “attachment behavioral system” (ABS) to refer to the behaviors and attitudes that determine how a given person forms relationships and also deals with abandonment.[9] Bowlby held that a person’s ABS is largely determined by the nature of his early-life relationships with caregivers. Bowlby also held that in order to become a healthy adult, a child
needed to have at least one stable attachment with a caregiver.
Research based on Bowlby’s work led to the hypothesis that there are four basic attachment patterns in infants: Secure, Anxious-ambivalent, Anxious-avoidant, and Disorganized.[10]
Infants with secure attachments to their caregivers are happy and self-
confident while in the presence of the caregiver; they boldly explore the room and initiate relations with others. When they caregiver leaves, they are distressed but functional, and they are unambiguously happy when she returns. Such infants have nurturing and dependable caregivers. [11]
Infants with anxious-ambivalent attachments are cautious and concerned; they do not boldly explore their surroundings. When the caregiver is present, they are worried that the caregiver will soon leave. They are distressed when the caregiver leaves, but do not greet the caregiver when she returns. Such infants have emotionally withdrawn and unreliable caregivers.
[12]
Infants with anxious-avoidant attachments are not distressed when the caregiver leaves, and they avoid the caregiver when she returns. They tend to focus on toys and other purely physical aspects of their environment and have a diminished interest in other people. Such infants have abusive caregivers.
[13]
Infants with disorganized attachments respond with fear to returning caregivers. They may actively avoid the caregiver; they may pretend to be unconscious; they may rise up defiantly; or they cycle through all of these behaviors. Such infants have extremely abusive or highly unreliable caregivers. [14]
Further research strongly indicates that these four attachment patterns

are present not just in infants but also in children.[15]
Children with secure attachments have positive relations with others. They see others as helpful and that is how others regard them. They do not hesitate to ask others for help but are not clingy.[16]
Children with anxious-ambivalent attachments are insecure. They
cling to their primary caregivers and avoid their peers. [17]
Children with anxious-avoidant attachments have trouble dealing with stress and are reluctant to enlist the help others. They tend to develop antisocial behavior patterns, such as lying and bullying, and they tend to self- isolate. [18]
Children with disorganized attachments may either bully others or isolate themselves from others. Such children are extremely reluctant to ask for others for help, and they tend to be disruptive and hard to manage. [19]
There is good evidence that a child’s attachment pattern tends to be
identical with the one that he had as an infant, but it is an open question whether they are categorically identical.[20]
In the 1980s, it was discovered that these attachment patterns, or
analogues thereof, are present in adults.[21]
Adults with secure attachments tend to be happy with their relationships. They enjoy the company of their friends and partners but are not clingy. They are not reluctant to ask for help but are not needy.
Adults with anxious-ambivalent attachments are clingy and desperate.
They feel incomplete unless in a relationship. But when in a relationship, they alienate their partners by being jealous and emotionally demanding.
Adults with anxious-avoidant attachments are loners who regard interpersonal relationships as encumbrances. They deal with emotional conflicts with others by withdrawing. They value independence and focus their energy on developing themselves.
Adults with disorganized attachments alternate between clinging to others and withdrawing from others. They tend to have unpredictable mood swings and have difficulty forming lasting relationships.
There is some evidence that adults can have different attachment patterns from those they had earlier in life.[22]
There is extremely strong evidence that inadequate early-life
attachments give rise not only to maladaptive personality traits but to full- blown psychopathology.[23] According to Mikulincer and Shaver (2012),

“attachment insecurities (of both the anxious and avoidant varieties) are associated with depression, clinically significant anxiety, obsessive- compulsive disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), suicidal tendencies, and eating disorders.” According to Kernberg (1984b), the explanation that OCD, PTSD, and eating disorders all involve fear- or trauma-driven self-isolation. The obsessive-compulsive is the quintessential loner, hiding not just from the world but from his own emotions, especially his own rage, by barricading himself behind irrational, and therefore fantasy- based, obsessions and compulsions. Compulsive eaters, as well as compulsive non-eaters, are engaged in a similar form of escapism. Those afflicted by PTSD have suffered extreme trauma and have shut themselves off from the world as a way of coping. In any case, it is an empirical fact that people whose early-life attachments are of the anxious-ambivalent variety attachments are more likely than others to be afflicted by such disorders, and the most obvious explanation is that such people’s early-life attachments dispose them to deal with trauma not by connecting with others but by withdrawing.
Later in the same article, Mikulincer and Shaver (2012) write that “Anxious attachment is associated with dependent, histrionic, and borderline disorders, whereas avoidant attachment is y associated with schizoid and avoidant disorders.” Assuming this true, what is the explanation? Kuczynski (2012) puts forward a plausible answer. Schizoid and other psychotic disorders involve a scrambling of the subject’s very grasp of reality: not only are his emotions out of alignment with reality; his grasp of reality itself has been undermined, and he is therefore alienated from reality in the most radical way possible. The reason, according to Kuczynski, is that the early- life attachments of those with such disorders were negative, as opposed to ambiguous, disposing them to flee from reality in the most radical way possible. By contrast, those with histrionic, borderline, and dependent disorders, emotions have a fundamentally non-delusive grasp of reality, but their emotions are not appropriate to the thereby made available to them. The reason, according to Kuczynski, is that early-life attachments of those with such disorders were ambivalent, disposing them to keep their distance from external reality without altogether abandoning it. In any case, whatever the correct explanations are of these facts, it is an empirical fact that people who suffer from schizoid and other psychotic disorders tend to have avoidant early-life attachments and that people who suffer from borderline, histrionic,

and dependent disorders, as well as anxiety-mediated disorders, tend to have ambivalent early-life attachments.
Although people with the afflictions thus far discussed have more relationship-issues than others, they value relationships, and they within limits are able to form and maintain meaningful attachments to others. This is not true of everyone. In particular, psychopaths do not form meaningful attachments with others and have no desire to do so. In this context, a ‘psychopath’ is defined as someone who lacks conscience and whose behavior therefore consistently embodies a callous disregard for others, a high degree of manipulativeness and deceitfulness, and in some cases a high degree of impulsivity, often leading to reckless behavior, including drug
addiction and promiscuity.[24]
Psychopaths use others; they do not have relationships with them, except of a purely pragmatic kind. (More precisely, to the extent that a given person is a psychopath, he cannot have meaningful relations with others.) The question arises: What kind of early-life attachments are psychopaths likely to have had? This question has been researched and definitively answered: Psychopaths are likely to have had attachments of the disorganized variety to caregivers. Although there is some evidence that some people are ‘genetic’ psychopaths, most psychopaths were treated either coldly or cruelly by key caregivers in early life, their attachments to said caregivers strongly tending
to be of the disorganized variety.[25]
Before moving forward, let us organize the points thus far made. Inadequate early-life relationships, especially with caregivers, adversely affect mental health and make it difficult to maintain healthy relationships. If a given adult has a mental illness, the kind of mental illness that he has is in part determined by the way in which his early-life attachments to caregivers were inadequate. Anxious-ambivalent early-life attachments are dispositive of neurosis. Anxious-avoidant early-life attachments are dispositive of psychosis. Disorganized early-life attachments are dispositive of psychopathy. The neurotic tends to be distrustful of others and ambivalent towards actual and prospective partners, making it difficult for him to form and maintain healthy relationships. The psychotic’s grasp of external reality is damaged, making it hard for the psychotic to engage any aspect of the external world, with the result that attachments are disrupted, and sometimes leading to wholesale disengagement from it, with the result that attachments are undermined. The psychopath cannot have meaningful relations with

others and does not wish to have such relations.
Psychopaths do not benefit from psychotherapy and they cannot have meaningful relations with others.[26] But neurotics and psychotics can benefit from therapy, and they can have meaningful relations with others[27], making it necessary to ask what therapists do to maximize the likelihood of their having and maintain such relations. Although we obviously cannot provide a definitive answer to this question in this context, we can provide some useful fragments of such an answer.
First of all, good adult relationships are not the solution to the problems caused by bad early-life relationships. Good adult relationships are consequences of solutions to the problems caused by bad early life relationships. Suppose that Smith is an adult who has OCD in consequence of his having insecure early life attachments. It may well be that Smith does not have any healthy relationships. But if so, that is a consequence of his OCD; and the problem that Smith must solve—and that his therapist, if he has one, must solve---is that he has OCD. If by some stroke of good luck, Smith does manage to initiate and maintain a good relationship, that will indeed improve his life and is likely to make the problems caused by his OCD more tractable. But Smith will be impaired until he has either eliminated his OCD or found a way to function despite it. Moreover, as long as Smith has OCD, it will dramatically decrease his ability to initiate positive relationships or, if does manage to do so, maintain them.
In general, as long as a person is seriously mentally ill, his ability to establish or maintain healthy relationships is seriously compromised. Indeed, people with mental illnesses tend to form relationships that validate their symptoms, rather than alleviating them. People with borderline personality disorder, for example, are likely to seek romantic partners who are likely to abandon them and who are therefore likely to reinforce their fears of abandonment; and when a borderline finds a partner who will not abandon
her, she often unconsciously manipulates him into doing so.[28]
To be sure, becoming psychologically healthy involves having healthy relationships. But unless mental issues are addressed on their own terms, unhealthy relationships are likely and healthy ones are unlikely.
The very first healthy relationship that a therapist should help his patient have is with himself. The patient-therapist relationship must be secure if the therapist is to help the patient. No matter how insightful the therapist is, he cannot help the patient except by way of a secure relationship with him.

Indeed, a secure patient-therapist relationship will by itself do more in the way of helping the patient have healthy relationships than any amount of intellectual insight on the therapist’s part possibly could.[29]
I would like to end by noting two observations I have made from my
own practice. First, when I have been able to help patients, it was not by helping them get what they wanted; it was by helping them use their judgment. Whenever I have had a patient who insisted that she needed a boyfriend having such and such characteristics, the patient never benefited from efforts on my part to help her find such a person. Sometimes she did, and sometimes I helped her do so; but the relationship would simply run its course, and the patient's problems persisted. When I have given patients what they wanted, I was enabling them and making their problems worse. When I have given patients what they needed, I was actually helping them. And what they needed was always to develop their ability to make informed decisions. It is not always within a therapist’s power to eliminate symptoms or to gratify desires, but it is always within a therapist’s power to help the patient make rational decisions. Patients who develop good judgment improve, and those who lack it don’t; and therapists are therefore under a categorical obligation
to help their patients learn how to be rational and autonomous.[30]

Bibliography

Bowlby, J. 1969. Attachment, Vol. 1 of Attachment and loss. London: Hogarth Press.

Cassidy, Jude & Shaver, Phillip. 2016. Handbook of Attachment: Theory, Research, and Clinical Applications. New York: The Guilford Press.

Cleckley, Hervey. 1950. The Mask of Sanity: An Attempt To Clarify Some Issues About the So-Called Psychopathic New York: Martino Fine Books.

Davila J, Burge D, Hammen C. Why does attachment style change? J Pers Soc Psychol. 1997;73:826–838.

Fields, Alan. 2016. Human Psychology 101: Understanding The Human Mind And What Makes People Tick. Make Profits Easy Press. Takoma, Washington.


Hare, Robert. 1993. Without Conscience: The Disturbing World of the Psychopaths Among Us New York: The Guilford Press
Kennedy, J. H., & Kennedy, C. E. 2004. Attachment theory: Implications for school psychology. Psychology in the Schools, 41, 247-259.

Kernberg, Otto. 1984. Object Relations in Clinical Psychoanalysis. London: Rowman & Littlefield.

Kernberg, Otto. 1984b. Severe Personality Disorders. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Kernberg, Otto. 1985. Borderline Conditions and Pathological Narcissism
London: Rowman & Littlefield.

Kernberg, Otto. 2004. Aggressivity, Narcissism, and Self-Destructiveness in the Psychotherapeutic Relationship. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Kernberg, Otto. 2004b. Contemporary Controversies in Psychoanalytic Theory, Technique, and Their Applications. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Kuczynski, John-Michael. 2012. Empiricism and the Foundations of Psychology. Advances in Consciousness Research Volume 87. Philadelphia: John Benjamins.

Mikulincer M, Shaver PR. Attachment in adulthood: structure, dynamics, and change. New York: Guilford; 2007.

Mooney, Carol. 2010. Theories of Attachment: An Introduction to Bowlby, Ainsworth, Gerber, Brazelton, Kennell, and Klaus. Redleaf Press. St. Paul,

MN.

Prior, V. & Glaser, D. (2006). Understanding attachment and attachment disorders: Theory, Evidence and Practice. Jessica Kingsley Publishers.

Holmes, J. (1993) John Bowlby and Attachment Theory. Routledge.

Rogers, Carl. 1961. Becoming a Person. London: Houghton Mifflin Company.



































[1] Mooney (2010).

[1] Mooney (2010).
[2] Fields (2016).
[3] Mooney (2010).
[4] Mooney (2010).
[5] Freud (2016).
[6] “If a man has been his mother's undisputed darling,” Freud wrote, “he retains throughout life the triumphant feeling, the confidence in success, which not seldom brings actual success along with it.” https://www.brainyquote.com/authors/sigmund_freudIn other words, a surplus of maternal love gives the child the self-confidence necessary to succeed, it being the father’s job to temper that self-love with the necessary degree of self-discipline.

[1] Mooney (2010), Holmes (1993).
[2] Bowlby (1969).
[3] Prior & Glaser (2006), Cassidy & Shaver (2016)
[4] Cassidy & Shaver (2016)
[5] Cassidy & Shaver (2016)
[6] Cassidy & Shaver (2016)
[7] Cassidy & Shaver (2016)
[8] Kennedy & Kennedy (2004)
[9] Kennedy & Kennedy (2004)
[10] Kennedy & Kennedy (2004)
[11] Kennedy & Kennedy (2004)
[12] Kennedy & Kennedy (2004)
[13] Kernberg (1984).
[14] Firestone (2013).
[15] Davila (1997).
[16] Mikulincer & Shaver (2012).
[17] Cleckley (1950), Kernberg (1984, 1984b, 1985), Hare (1993). Be it noted that there are different degrees of psychopathy: a given person might have a high degree of professional integrity, and to that extent by non-psychopathic, but otherwise be highly psychopathic. This was the case with Jeffrey MacDonald, the Army doctor who slaughtered his whole family and had no remorse at all doing so. Jeffrey MacDonald's performance as a physician was consistently exemplary, there being no indication that it was in any way corrupted by psychopathy, even though there is no doubt that Dr. MacDonald was otherwise a textbook case of a psychopath. Dr. MacDonald's case is in no way a singularity, there being many cases of psychopaths who, like Dr. MacDonald, are non-psychopathic in specific contexts. See McGuiness (1983).
[18] Schimmenti (2014).
[19] Kernberg (1984)
[20] Kernberg (1984)
[21] Kernberg (1984b)
[22] Kernberg (2004, 2004b) makes similar points.
[23] Rogers (1961) makes similar points.