Autistic People are Not Self-contained
J.-M. Kuczynski
Autistic people seem to live in their own world, and the obvious thing to say about them, therefore, is that they are self-contained. But they are not self-contained. They are pseudo-self-contained. Autism is about needing people early in life and being given trauma instead. And the traumatized child reacts by withdrawing into himself. But his withdrawal is not about being emotionally self-sufficient. It is about quite the opposite. It is about being so dependent on others that unless one is given just the right cocktail of emotional support from others, one hysterically flees into psychotic seclusion. Consider the jilted bride who, instead of going back on the dating scene, continues to wear her wedding dress while pretending that the marriage actually happened. This person is psychotically secluded and therefore isolated from reality—but not self-contained. Quite the opposite. And the same is true of the autistic. 
Being genuinely self-contained is about balance. It is about being given—or having been given—the right level, and the right kind of emotional sustenance from others and, on that basis, being able, like a dolphin that has taken in enough air or a camel that has taken in enough water, to go out on one’s own. This is not what the autistic person is doing. Autism is a way of being damaged. True independence is about the opposite of being damaged. And a sign of true independence is flexibility, and rigidity is a sign of damage-based pseudo-independence.
One last point: Bureaucrats are people who are damaged and have no free will. Bureaucrats need others to tell them what to do. And when they come across someone who is genuinely independently, they invidiously describe him as having ‘autism’ or ‘Asperger’s’, sometimes going so far as to get psychiatrists to formally diagnose them in this way. But such characterizations are, as we have just seen, the opposite of the truth---and, like many invidious characterizations, not just false but also projective. 
