Causal Dependence and Counterfactual Truth
J.-M. Kuczynski, PhD

Causation a relation between events, not objects
Conditions identical with event-patterns
So-called changes typically identical with meta-changes
Explanation, prediction, and control
Stable-event patterns a prerequisite for explanation-identification
Freud on causation in relation to the development of mental illness: Precondition, specific cause, auxiliary cause, precipitating cause
Psychological overdetermination
Threshold effects and the analog-digital distinction
Counterfactual conditionals
David Lewis’s analysis of counterfactuals
Program-causality
Causal redundancy in relation to counterfactuals
The Counterfactual Analysis of Causality (CAC)
The motivation for CAC
CAC evaluated
Problems with CACD
Summary of our discussion of The Counterfactual Analysis of Causality (CAC)
Hume’s argument for this analysis (first version)
Hume’s argument for this view (second version)
The fallacy embodied in Hume’s analysis—Part 1
The fallacy embodied in Hume’s analysis—Part 2
Hume’s argument for this claim
Hume worlds observationally different from their non-Humean counterparts
Three additional objections to the Regularity Analysis of Causation
Explanation of Problem #1
Explanation of Problem #2
Explanation of Problem #3
The deductive-nomological model of explanation (DN)
Problems with DN
Nomic vs. accidental generalizations
How DN-advocates deal with the distinction between nomic and accidental generalizations
DN viciously circular if it requires laws to support counterfactuals
Additional DN-internal vicious circularity
Causal knowledge as differential knowledge
Causation as proportionality restoration
Physical laws as regularities of proportion
The instantaneousness of the interval between cause and effect
Natural Laws dispositive of, but not identical with, regularities
How we know what causes what
Knowledge-why=high-resolution knowledge-what; knowledge of laws often necessary for the latter
Singular causation and the falsity of the Deductive-Nomological Model of explanation
The failure of the Deductive-Nomological model in connection with psychological explanation
DN in relation to statistical explanation
Delimiting DN’s sphere of application
The Raven-Paradox
Hempel’s solution
The problem with Hempel’s solution
The Raven-paradox a by-product of the Regularity Analysis

Causation a relation between events, not objects
 
 If x causes y, then x and y are events. They are not are not rocks, trees, or snowmen. They are not things, in other words, at least not in the sense in which we will use that word.
 Though not themselves causes or effects, things have causal properties. The rock weighs three lbs.; and it is in virtue of this fact about the rock that certain events involving the rock have certain effects. But the rock per se is not a cause. 
 Nor is the rock an effect. Obviously the rock’s existence is the end-result of a series of events. But it is these events, not the rock per se, that are appropriately described as ‘effects.’ 
 Notice that, while we would hesitate to describe the rock as an effect of the various events that led to its existence, we would not hesitate to describe the rock as the product of these events.
 
Conditions identical with event-patterns
 
 Conditions, e.g. Smith’s having high blood pressure, can be causes and effects. This is because conditions are event-pluralities and therefore events in their own right. 
 But not all event-pluralities are conditions: a condition is a stable pattern of events. 
 For your metabolic condition to remain unchanged is for the various events constitutive of it to continue to occur within certain limits; it is for your heart to continue to beat at a certain rate; it is for the cells composing your body to be duly oxygenated at regular intervals; etc. Unless you are cryogenically frozen, for your metabolic condition to remain unchanged is not for you to undergo no metabolic changes.
 For the room’s temperature to remain constant is not for the various particles involved to undergo no change. It is for the changes that they are constantly undergoing to remain within certain limits; it is for those changes to remain such that their mean kinetic energy doesn’t change. Unless their mean kinetic energy is zero---and even then---this means that those air molecules are constantly whizzing about.
 For there to be a change in the room’s temperature is for there to be a change in the pattern of change constitutive of its having a given temperature. Supposing that the room's temperature at a given time is 78⁰, for the room’s temperature to increase is for there to an increase in the frequency of the various particle-collisions constitutive of the room’s being 78⁰; and for the room’s temperature to drop is for there to be a decrease in the frequency of such collisions. The same thing mutatis mutandis holds with respect to changes in your physiological condition.
 
So-called changes typically identical with meta-changes
 
An event is a change. Therefore, all causes and all effects are changes. But we take for granted, and thus cease to be aware of, the occurrence of the changes constitutive of stable conditions; and we thus tend to reserve the use of the word ‘change’ for changes in patterns of change. 
 If the patient’s heart-rate, blood-oxygen level, etc. are stable, the attending physician will tell his supervisor that ‘there are no changes to report', his meaning that, whatever the patient’s condition was, the changes constitutive of his being in that condition have remained within certain limits.
 An economist says that ‘there has been no change’ in the economy if the patterns of buying and selling constitutive of a nation’s economy haven't changed. 
 An accurate thermometer registers no change in the room’s temperature if there has been no temperature-relevant change in the pattern of particle collisions involved in the room’s having that temperature.
 
Explanation, prediction, and control
 
Scientific knowledge enables us to explain past events and to predict future ones, and it thereby enables us, within limits, to control the course of events. Supposing that X is some miracle-cure for some ailment that you have, you know how to improve your health-condition (you should take X); you can explain why your condition improved (you took X); and you can explain why your condition deteriorated (you stopped taking X). 
 
Stable-event patterns a prerequisite for explanation-identification
 
 In contexts in which there are stable patterns of events, it tends to be possible to explain, predict, and control what happens; and it tends to be impossible to do so in contexts in which there are no such patterns and which therefore consist of rogue events. It is impossible to predict what will happen to a 10 MG tablet of X that is being blown about by heavy winds; it is relatively easy to predict what will happen such a tablet is consumed by someone with the aforementioned ailment. 
 It is for this reason that explanation and prediction almost always consist in the identification of program-causes. Given some event En, En’s program-cause is a structure or stable condition that, although not by itself determinative of En, predetermines the occurrence of some structure-internal specific event En-1 that is thus determinative. 
 The immediate cause of Smith’s getting mugged is Brown’s desire for money. The program-cause is the disastrous financial condition of Smith’s country: since that country is poor, it is inevitable that somebody will violate somebody’s property-rights in some way or other. The economist is right to blame the mugging on the evils of capitalism. The psychologist is right to blame the mugging on Brown’s lack of scruples. The economist has correctly identified the program-cause of Smith’s mugging; the psychologist has correctly identified the immediate cause.
 
Freud on causation in relation to the development of mental illness: Precondition, specific cause, auxiliary cause, precipitating cause
 
 Freud correctly says that, if a given person X succumbs to a given psychology malady M, four different kinds of causes are likely to be operative:
 
(1) X’s precondition (how X was before he was afflicted with M); 
 
(2) M’s specific cause (the trauma that, though it did not itself suffice for X’s succumbing to M, made it inevitable that the slightest disturbance in X’s condition would thus suffice);
 
(3) M’s concurrent cause (some trauma experienced by X, e.g. a recent break-up, that is operative independently of (2) and isn’t constitutive of X’s precondition); 
 
(4) The immediate or precipitating cause of M (some specific event, e.g. the sound of a car backfiring, that pushes X, who has thus far been on the threshold that separates those who suffer from X from those who don’t, just past that threshold).
 
Psychological overdetermination
 
Freud says that mental events are often ‘overdetermined.’ What does Freud mean? 
 The obvious answer is: A given event, e.g. x’s falling in love with y, is overdetermined iff that event has multiple independently operative sufficient causes. An event’s immediate cause is not independent of its program-cause; nor is it independent of any one of its non-immediate causes. An example of this form of overdetermination: x falls in love with y because of y’s intelligence as well as y’s looks; and each of these factors was so powerful that, had the other one been altogether absent, it would by itself have sufficed for x’s falling in love with y.
 But even though this is certainly a form of causal overdetermination, it isn't the kind Freud has in mind. Suppose, as before, that x falls in love with y, both because of y’s looks and because of y’s intelligence, but that, were x intelligent but not good-looking or vice versa, x would not have fallen in love with y. Under those circumstances, Freud would still say that x’s falling in love with y was overdetermined. 
 When Freud says that a given psychological event e is ‘overdetermined,’ he means that it was brought about by the confluence of two or more psychological events each of which justified e’s occurrence. Relative to any one such event, e's occurrence made sense, even though not a single one of those events was necessarily capable on its own of bringing about e.
 Thus, if Freud was right, as he surely was, causation in the psychological sphere often involves the exceeding of thresholds: it isn’t enough that x have just one reason for falling in love with y; unless he has several reasons, nothing happens; but once enough such reasons accumulate, the damn bursts and x falls in love with y. 
 
Threshold effects and the analog-digital distinction
 
 Discontinuous changes tend to involve threshold effects. A circuit breaker doesn’t do anything until there is electricity-overload, at which point it shuts off the electrical pathway in question. A firm doesn’t declare bankruptcy until it’s in the red by a certain amount, at which point it files the paper work. Continuous changes don't involve threshold effects.
 To the extent that the world changes discontinuously, it has a digital structure, and to the extent that it changes continuously, it has an analogue structure. An analogue clock is one that changes continuously with the passage of time; a digital clock is one that abruptly changes states at predetermined intervals. 
 
Causes as INUS-conditions (“INUS”=insufficient, non-redundant, unnecessary, sufficient)
 
Suppose that 
 
e (Smith’s flipping the switch) 
 
is the cause of 
 
e* (the light’s turning on),
 
but that e* was not overdetermined e*, i.e. that e* wouldn’t have happened unless e had happened. 
 By itself, e obviously isn’t sufficient for e*. If the bulbs are broken or the circuitry is damaged, e will not bring about e*. 
 But given that e* did happen, it follows that there was some confluence of events/conditions that sufficed for e*; and given that under the operative circumstances e* would not have happened unless e had happened, it follows that e is a non-redundant part of that confluence of events. 
 That confluence of events, though sufficient for e*, wasn’t necessary for e*: after all, an entirely different confluence of events---one not involving my flipping the switch or any of the events intervening between my doing so and the light’s turning on----could have caused the light to turn on.
 It follows that e was an insufficient but non-redundant part of a condition that unnecessary but sufficient for e*’s occurrence---that, in other words, that e was an INUS condition for e*. In most contexts[3], 
 
(i) such and such was the cause of thus and such
 
means
 
 (ii) such and such was an INUS condition for thus and such. 

Counterfactual conditionals
 
 Statements of the form if P had been the case, then Q would have been the case are counterfactual conditionals (or counterfactuals). Thus, the meaning of 
 
 (1) if Kennedy hadn’t been assassinated, the US would have pulled out of Viet Nam before 1965 
 
is 
 
 (1*) Kennedy’s assassination prevented a pre-1965 troop-withdrawal. 
 
Similarly, the meaning of
 
 (2) If Smith hadn’t fall out of the tree, he wouldn’t have broken his leg
 
is
 
 (2*) Smith’s fall caused him to break his leg. 
 
 Thus, many counterfactuals are to the effect that one thing caused another to happen and many counterfactuals therefore hold in virtue of dependence-relations of the causal variety. 
 But some counterfactuals hold in virtue of dependence-relations, not of the causal, but of the logical variety. For example, the meaning of 
 
 (3) If, at time t, Smith had had over $10, then, at time t, he would have had over $5, 
 
is
 
 (3*) Smith had over $10 at t' entails 'Smith had over $5 at t.
 
 Thus, all counterfactuals affirm the existence of instances of necessitation of some kind or other, and all therefore counterfactuals therefore hold in virtue of dependence-relations of one kind or other. 
 In this section, we will focus exclusively on counterfactuals of the causal variety.
 
David Lewis’s analysis of counterfactuals
 
According to David Lewis (1972, 1984), the meaning of (1) is 
 
(1#) If w is a world in which Kennedy was not assassinated but is otherwise as much like our world as that fact allows it to be, then in w the US pulled out of Viet Nam before 1965.
 
 Lewis’s analysis is unacceptable. Any given event has deep causal roots. Kennedy’s assassination was the consequence of a confluence of political, psychological, and physical events, and each of those events is in its turn a consequence of some other confluence of events, and so on. This means that if Kennedy’s assassination doesn’t take place in a given world, then either 
 
(a) That world differs so much from our world that it is no guarantee that Kennedy even exists in it, let alone effectuates an early troop-withdrawal 
 
or 
 
(b) That world differs from ours in respect of the deterministic mechanisms involved in it,
 
Given either (a) or (b), there is little or no chance that, in the world in question, Kennedy effectuates an early troop-withdrawal. So Lewis’ analysis is false.
 Also, it is by examining the causal and logical structure of our world, not other worlds, that we know whether or not a given counterfactual is true. This means that counterfactuals hold in virtue of the logical and causal structure of our world, as opposed to other worlds. 
 Since there is no reason, apart from Lewis’s analysis, to believe that there are other worlds, it follows that there is no reason at all to posit their existence or therefore to accept Lewis’s analysis. 
 
Program-causality
 
Because the water in the vessel is boiling, water-molecules strike the interior walls of the vessel with so much force that the vessel cracks. Let c1…cn be those high-speed collisions. The water’s boiling did nothing in the way of cracking the vessel except in so far as it was responsible for c1…cn. 
 Nonetheless, for reasons having nothing to do with our not knowing about those specific particle-collisions, the appropriate answer in some contexts to the question “why did the walls of the vessel crack?” is “because the water inside the vessel was boiling,” and not “because c1…cn occurred.” Ceteris paribus the vessel would have cracked even if c1…cn hadn’t occurred, since the conditions in question guaranteed the occurrence of some such particle-collisions. 
 Given that the cause of an event is what guarantees its occurrence, the boiling of the water is, insofar as it guaranteed the occurrence of the likes of c1…cn, appropriately described as “the cause” of the cracking of the vessel. 
 
Causal redundancy in relation to counterfactuals
 
(i) c1…cn caused the vessel to crack
 
is true. But
 
(i*) if c1…cn had not occurred, then the vessel would not have cracked 
 
is false. If c1…cn had not occurred, other particle-collisions would have occurred that would have cracked the vessel. 
 In general, where there is causal redundancy, causal truths cannot be converted into counterfactual truths. Suppose it a truth that
 
(A) The bird died because Smith shot it.
 
If the bird was otherwise unthreatened, then a consequence of (A) is 
 
(A*) if Smith hadn’t shot it, the bird would not have died. 
 
But if Smith was part of a pack of hunters, each of whom would have shot the bird had Smith not done so, then (A*) is not a consequence of (A). 
 
The Counterfactual Analysis of Causality (CAC)
 
According to CAC, the meaning of 
 
(#) e is the cause of e* 
 
is 
 
(#*) if e hadn’t happened, then e* wouldn’t have happened. 
 
So according to CAC, the meaning of (A) is (A*). 
 Be it noted that CAC is a theory as to what causal claims mean. If CAC is correct, then the meaning of (#)/A/1/2 is indeed (#*)/A*/1*/2*; and this is not the case if CAC is wrong. 
 
The motivation for CAC
 
Ordinarily the meaning of (#) is taken to be 
 
(#^) e compelled e* to occur, i.e. e’s occurrence necessitated e*’s occurrence. 
 
 Some philosophers and some physicists have argued that there is no empirical (observational) evidence of the existence of forces. This being their position, they have two options. 
 
Option #1: Take the deeply revisionist position that there is no observational support for any causal claim. 
 
Option #2: Hold onto the presumption that causal claims are often observationally well-supported but reinterpret those claims in such a way that their veridicality isn’t predicated on the existence of (supposedly) undiscovered forces. 
 
CAC is meant to provide one such way of reinterpreting causal claims.
 
 CAC evaluated
 
Two questions must be asked in connection with CAC? First, is it extensionally correct? Second, is it intensionally correct? 
 A theory is extensionally correct if there are no counterexamples to it. 
 A theory is intensionally correct if, first, there are no counterexamples to it and, second, the reason there are no counterexamples to it is that it is a correct description of what it's supposed to describe. 
 Intensional correctness entails extensional correctness, but not vice versa.
 Suppose I put forth the following theory: There will be at least 10 articles of furniture in Olin 310 on Thursday, and the reason for this is that the invisible and otherwise undetectable Martian who lives in my closet will telekinetically transport at least 10 desks into Olin 310. 
 Given that, as it happens, there did turn out to be more than 10 articles of furniture in that place at that time, this theory is extensionally correct, meaning that there are no counterexamples to it; but it is intensionally incorrect, meaning that, even though the facts are consistent with it, they are consistent with it for the wrong reason.
 CAC is extensionally false. For 
 
(#*) If e hadn’t happened, then e* wouldn’t have happened
 
is not always consequence of 
 
(#) e is the cause of e*.
 
(#*) fails to be such a consequence whenever e is but one of many would-be causes of e*, and it therefore fails whenever circumstances program for e*’s occurrence.
 CAC is also intensionally false. Suppose it true both that 
 
(A) The otherwise unthreatened bird died because Smith shot it 
 
and also consequently that 
 
(A*) if Smith hadn’t shot it, the bird would not have died. 
 
If it weren’t for (A) or for some other causal claim, there would be no justification for (A*). 
 Another example: 
 
 (I) Because the pancake batter was poured onto the hot griddle, the batter turned into a pancake.
 
Supposing that no other person or force would have poured the batter onto the griddle, a consequence of (I) is 
 
(I*) If the pancake batter hadn’t been poured onto the griddle, it wouldn’t have turned into a pancake. 
 
 But, whereas one can reasonably accept (I*) on the basis of (I), one cannot possibly accept (I) on the basis of (I*): knowledge of (I*) is necessarily derivative of knowledge of (I), suggesting that the truth affirmed by (I) is more fundamental than the truth affirmed by (I*). 
 This suggestion is consistent with the fact that, whereas (I*) is a consequence of (I), (I) is not a consequence of (I*). Explanation: Given only that the batter would not have turned into a pancake had it not been poured onto the griddle, it follows that its being poured on the griddle was in some way or other causative of its turning into a pancake. But given only that the batter turned into a pancake because it was poured on the griddle, it does not follow that the batter wouldn’t have turned into a pancake had it not been poured on the griddle. If the batter was in a pancake shaped vessel which suddenly heated up, then it would have turned into a pancake without being poured onto a griddle. 
 
CAC Defended (CACD)
 
Here is the standard CAC-advocate countermaneuver: 
 
Once again suppose that 
 
(A) The bird died because Smith shot it. 
 
If Smith missed and Smith’s hunting partner Brown took the opportunity to shoot the bird dead, the effect of Brown’s shooting the bird would have been different from the effect of Smith’s doing so. Depending on whether it is Smith or Brown who shoots the bird, the bird dies at this as opposed to that time; the bullet strikes the bird at this as opposed to that angle; the slain bird describes this as opposed to that trajectory as it falls to the earth, where it lands in this as opposed to that location, at this opposed to that exact moment in time. 
 In general, supposing that e is the cause of e*, it is only if e is insufficiently described that 
 
 (#*) if e hadn’t happened, then e* wouldn’t have happened 
 
fails to be a consequence of 
 
(#) e is the cause of e*.
 
Problems with CACD
 
There are three problems with CACD. These have to do with 
 
(i) Events whose causes involve the exceeding of thresholds, 
 
(ii) Events whose causes are mechanisms that can be implemented in different ways, 
 
and 
 
(iii) Events whose causes program for their occurrence. 
 
 (i) Explained: At time t, I push the button and the elevator comes as a result. Had I not done so, someone else might have pushed the button at t and the elevator would still have come, and the result would have been the same: the elevator would have come at the same time, in the same way. 
 Of course, there is little chance that this other person would have pushed the button in the exact way that I did: he would have used either more or less force than I did, and his finger wouldn’t have come into contact with the exact same parts of the button as my finger. 
 But this is irrelevant. The button is a binary-mechanism. When the elevator comes isn’t a function of the way in which the button is pushed, and neither is the manner in which the elevator comes. Thus, had some other person pushed the button, the result would have been the very same event that resulted from my pushing the button. 
 Therefore CACD is false, given that, according to it, the (hypothetical) event resulting from the other person’s pushing the button would not have been numerically identical with the (actual) event resulting from my pushing it. In general, the identity of a given threshold effect is not contingent on the specific composition of its antecedents. Thus, where threshold effects are concerned, there is genuine causal redundancy, and CACD is therefore false.
 (ii) explained: I type “1+2=” into a calculator; then I hit ENTER. My hitting ENTER caused a “3” to appear on 
the LCD. But if I hadn’t hit ENTER, the “3” still would have appeared, since my friend Gus would have hit ENTER had I not done so. 
 Had Gus hit ENTER, he would almost certainly not have hit it with the same degree of force or in the same manner, a likely result being that the electrical activity precipitated by his hitting ENTER would have differed in some respects from the electrical activity precipitated by my hitting ENTER. But so long as Gus didn’t strike the ENTER key with excessive force or otherwise cause the calculator to malfunction, those differences wouldn’t have caused a different operation to be carried out (they wouldn’t have caused 50 to be divided by 5); nor would they have caused the same operation to be carried out in a different way (they wouldn’t have caused the computer to add them in base 3, as opposed to base 10 or base 2). 
 Thus, the differences between the Gus-caused electrical activity and its JM-caused counterpart led to no differences between the Gus-caused software activity and its JM-counterpart. Since the Gus-caused software activity did not otherwise differ from its JM-caused counterpart, the former is numerically identical with the latter. Since the Gus-caused electrical activity did differ from its JM-caused counterpart. And since the JM-caused software activity was identical with its Gus-caused counterpart, that software-activity was in each case distinct from the electrical activity that mediated it. 
 In general, software-level activity---meaning, ultimately, any causal-series that can be implemented in different ways---is to be distinguished from the event-series by which it is implemented, notwithstanding that the two series are spatiotemporally coincident. In general, the identity an event that can be implemented in different ways isn’t contingent on its exact composition or, therefore, on the exact composition of its cause. Thus, where such events are concerned, there is genuine causal redundancy, and CACD is therefore false.
 (iii) Explained: A hot griddle converts liquid pancake-batter into a solid pancake. Let m1…mn be the confluence of micro-events that is immediately responsible for this conversion process. 
 Given that the batter was on a hot griddle, it was inevitable that some such micro-events occur, even though it obviously wasn’t inevitable that those specific micro-events occur. Therefore, if m1…mn hadn’t occurred, the conversion-process still would have occurred, thanks to some entirely distinct confluence of micro-events m*1…m*m. 
 The conversion process precipitated by m1…mn has a different internal composition from the hypothetical conversion process precipitated by m*1…m*m.
 But just as the identity of a military operation isn’t contingent on the exact identities of the infantrymen who are carrying out the general’s orders, so the identity of the conversion-process in question isn’t contingent on the identities of the exact micro-particles that happened to be immediately responsible for it, a consequence being that the hypothetical conversion-process is numerically identical with the actual conversion-process. 
 Therefore CACD is false, given that, according to it, the (hypothetical) conversion-process would not have been numerically identical with the (actual) conversion-process. In general, the identity of an event whose cause programs for it is not contingent on its specific composition or on the precise identity of its immediate antecedents. Thus, where such events are concerned, there is genuine causal redundancy, and CACD is therefore false.
 
Summary of our discussion of The Counterfactual Analysis of Causality (CAC)
 
 According to CAC, e is the cause of e* iff e* wouldn’t have happened had e not happened. 
 Frankfurt’s critique of CAC: My pushing the button is the cause of the elevator’s coming, but the elevator might have come even if I hadn’t pushed the button—somebody else might have pushed it. Therefore, CAC is prima facie false.
 Attempts to falsify Frankfurt’s critique are false. Therefore CAC is demonstrably false, and not merely prima facie so. 
 
The Regularity Analysis of Causation stated: According to Hume, e1 is the direct cause of e2 iff any event that is similar to e1 spatially adjacent to an immediately posterior event that is similar to e2; and e1 is the indirect cause of en iff, for each i (1≤i≤n), any event that is similar to ei spatially adjacent to an immediately posterior event that is similar to ei+1. 
 Hume holds that, if e is the direct cause of e*, then there is a law to the effect that any event similar to e is adjacent to an immediately posterior event that is similar to e*. 
 Hume therefore holds that laws are regularities and causal sequences are instances of such regularities. 
 Hume therefore rejects the conventional view, according to which laws are structures that are responsible for such regularities and are therefore distinct from them.
 Hume therefore rejects the conventional view, according to which causes are responsible for their effects and are therefore not merely their antecedents. 
 Thus, in Hume’s view, laws are regularities and causal-series are instances of regularities.
 
Hume’s argument for this analysis (first version)
 
Says Hume (I am paraphrasing): If there is any empirical (observational) basis for saying that e caused e*, it is 
 
(i) The fact that e was e*’s immediate predecessor and neighbor, 
 
coupled with 
 
(ii) The fact that events similar to e are always the immediate predecessors and neighbors of events similar to e*. 
 
 Hume’s argument for this view (second version)
 
Let e and e* be two events such that: 
 
e is identical with A’s colliding with hitherto stationary B, 
 
and 
 
e* is identical with B’s thereupon begin to roll. 
 
And let e-e* be the sequence consisting of e and e*, in that order. 
 e-e* is a paradigm-case of a causal sequence. 
 Let us suppose that each of e and e* was observed by maximally good vision, whose observations were therefore maximally precise. 
 It is presumed that e compelled e* to occur and that its doing so involved more than its immediately preceding and being adjacent to e*. 
 But no such compulsion was observed. This is not the relevant sense-perceptions were imprecise. It is because there are no forces to observe. 
 
The fallacy embodied in Hume’s analysis—Part 1
 
Hume’s analysis of causality, and his defense of it, embody a failure to grasp some of the most basic truths about the causality. In this section (Part 1), we will state those truths. In the next (Part 2), we will explain why they warrant a rejection of Hume’s analysis.
 There are two kinds of causal processes: 
 
(i) Those that involve interactions 
 
and 
 
(ii) Those that consist solely of instances of persistence. 
 
 An example of (i) would be a projectile (e.g. a tennis ball, a light beam) that bounces off of a wall. 
 An example of (ii) would be a projectile that doesn’t collide with anything or otherwise undergo motion-altering interactions with other objects. Such a projectile’s state of motion at time t is a causal consequence of its pre-t state of motion; the projectile’s mass at t is a causal consequence of its pre-t mass; any given fact about the projectile’s physical condition at t is the effect of the projectile’s pre-t condition. 
 Following Bertrand Russell[4], we will refer to type-(i) causation as “transeunt” causation and to type-(ii) causation as “immanent” causation.
 Anything that endures for any length of time is a series of instances of immanent causation and is thus a causal series: a series of states of affairs such that any given such state, apart from the last, is the cause of a structurally similar such state and any such state, apart from the first, is the effect of a similar such state. The occupants of space-time are causal series. 
 The difference between immanent and transeunt causation is that immanent causation is, whereas transeunt causation is not, structure-preserving. The stain-glass window in the church is a structure-preserving causal series; so is the vase that was just flung at it. When the vase collides with the window, these two causal series converge, and the result is a causal series that is not structure-preserving. The vase and the window shattered upon impact; so their respective structures were thereby destroyed.
 Any given case of transeunt causation involves the cessation of a structure-preserving causal series. Ball A collides with hitherto stationary Ball B; A stops moving and B starts moving. Even though each ball has retained its structure, neither ball’s condition has retained its structure. By virtue of immobilizing A and mobilizing B, the collision introduced a sudden, discontinuous change in the nature of causal-series constitutive of their respective existence. 
 The operative words are “sudden” and “discontinuous.” Objects that are not acted upon sometimes disintegrate and therefore lose their structure. But such structural changes are continuous. A melting ice-sculpture loses its structure in a continuous manner, its loss of structure being a consequence of immanent causation. An ice-sculpture that is smashed by a vandal loses its structure in a discontinuous manner, its loss of structure being a consequence of transeunt causation.
 There are obviously incalculably many instances of transeunt causation. But the relative number of such instances is zero. (A real number can be zero even if the corresponding cardinal is not zero.) This is because any instance of transeunt causation is a singularity---a destroyer of the stable patterns of causal interdependencies that constitute the occupants of the space-time manifold. Any case of transeunt causality is a breakdown of causal integrity. Transeunt causation involves not only involves a weakening, but a severing, of causal ties. The essence of transeunt causation is the discontinuous alteration of object-constitutive causal-series. 
 
The fallacy embodied in Hume’s analysis—Part 2
 
The essence of transeunt causation is discontinuity. The essence of immanent causation is continuity. A consequence is that the world has a digital structure to the extent that it hosts instances of transeunt causation, and an analogue structure to the extent that it hosts instances of immanent causation. A chain-reaction, consists of discrete events. (The first domino falls; then the second one falls; and so on.) The movement of a projectile doesn’t have such a structure; nor does the continued existence of a stationary object, such as a desk-weight. Neither such series consists of discrete, successive states of affairs. A fortiori neither series consists of entities whose causal interrelations to each other have to be explained. All instances of continuity are causal series, but no such instance consists of discrete states whose causal ties to their successors need to be identified.
 Causal explanations are necessary only when they’re possible, and they’re possible only when continuities have been disrupted. Hume takes it for granted that all instances of causation are identical with such disruptions, and Hume therefore takes it for granted that those continuities per se are non-causal. When trying to account for an instance of transeunt causation, the correct approach is to try to find what has been preserved. (When two balls collide, kinetic energy is preserved.) The correct approach is to look for a continuity underneath the discontinuities. (It’s precisely because A’s kinetic energy continues to flow continuously that each ball’s state of motion changes.)
 Because Hume took breakdowns of causal cohesiveness as instances of such cohesiveness, he believed causation to be a relation between disjoint entities. This in turn led him to misanalyse the instances of causation on which he focused: it led him to focus on the ways in which the effect was disjoint from the cause and to overlook the ways in which the effect was continuous with the cause. 
 
The fallacy embodied in Hume’s analysis—Part 3: The Concept of a Hume-world and its uselessness in the way of supporting Hume’s analysis 
 
Hume claims that there is no empirical basis for preferring 
 
(a) e made e* happen 
 
to 
 
(b) e*-similar events always follow immediately antecedent neighboring e-similar events. 
 
Hume’s argument for this claim
 
An event exactly like e could immediately precede and be spatially contiguous with an event that it did not cause but was otherwise exactly like e*. 
 For example: Magnets underneath the surface on which A is rolling cause it to stop at the exact instant in which it makes contact with B, whereupon those same magnets cause B to start rolling. Further, those magnets change the states of motion of A and B in exactly the way in which, in actuality, the collision changed their states of motion. There is no observable difference between this hypothetical situation, on the one hand, and the actual situation, on the other. 
 What is more, in the hypothetical situation, the collision was had nothing to do with the subsequent changes in the balls’ respective states of motion, and there was therefore no causal nexus between the collision and the motion-changes to be observed. 
 Given that the actual and the hypothetical situations are observationally indistinguishable, it follows that no causal nexus linking cause and effect can be observed in the actual situation. Given any instance of causation, a similar argument shows that it is observationally indistinguishable from a non-causal event-sequence. Thus, even though the putative causes of events can obviously be observed, their acting as causes cannot be observed. 
 
Hume worlds observationally different from their non-Humean counterparts
 
But the hypothetical scenario in question is observably different, in many respects, from the actual one. If magnets are responsible for relevant kinetic changes, there will be observable evidence of that fact. That evidence may not be available on the occasion on which you witness the balls collide, but that is irrelevant. If A stopped for no reason at all---if it was sheer coincidence that its coming into contact with B happened at the same time as its ceasing to roll---the situation will be observably very different from one in which its ceasing to roll was a consequence of its coming into contact with B. In the one case but not the other, A and B will be deformed in certain ways, they’ll experience changes in temperature, their centers of gravity will change, and so on. These differences won’t be observable to the naked eye, but that means only that Hume’s analysis of the situation holds, if at all, only with respect to an incomplete description of it.
 In general, genuine causal processes are observationally distinguishable from pseudo-causal processes. And what observation reveals is that the events composing a genuine causal sequence are continuous with each other, whereas those events composing a pseudo-causal sequence are merely contiguous with each other, effects are continuous with their causes, and not merely contiguous with them. 
 In the scenario in which the post-collision kinetic changes undergone by A and B are the result of magnet-involving trickery, there is a continuous process of which B's moving is a segment and there is also a continuous process of which A's ceasing to move is a segment, but there is no continuous process of which both are segments. But there is such a process in the case in which the collision is in fact responsible for the changes undergone by A and B: those changes mediate a continuous transfer of momentum (mass x acceleration), much as changes in individual water-molecules mediate the rippling of water. 
 These points suggest that the essence of causation is continuity: a continuous event-series is a causal process; a discontinuous event-series is a non-causal process, even if every non-terminal member of that sequence is contiguous with its success and every non-initial member is contiguous with its predecessor. If this is correct, then whenever we observe a process to be continuous, we are ipso facto observing states of affairs to be causally responsible for other states of affairs.
 
Three additional objections to the Regularity Analysis of Causation 
 
Problem #1: The temporal order is to be understood in terms of the causal order, not vice versa. Hume's analysis assumes otherwise and is therefore viciously circular and therefore false.
 
Problem #2: Correlation is not causation. A consequence of Hume’s analysis---indeed, the very essence of it---is that correlation is causation. Therefore, Hume’s analysis is false. 
 
Problem #3: Given any spatiotemporally adjacent events, e and e*, there is some regularity of which that event-sequence is an instance. Hume’s analysis therefore entails that any two spatiotemporally adjacent events are related as cause and effect. Since this isn’t the case, Hume’s analysis is incorrect. 
 
Explanation of Problem #1
 
 There is no way to assign relative dates or positions to events except on the basis of their causal interrelations. e is simultaneous with e* iff there is no causal process that begins with the one and ends with the other; and precedes e* iff either 
 
(i) e affects e* (e.g. there is a causal process, such as a light ray, that begins with e and ends with e*) 
 
or 
 
(ii) there is some event that is simultaneous with e that affects e*. 
 
e is spatially adjacent with e* iff either 
 
(a) they are non-simultaneous and the one can instantaneously affect the other 
 
or 
 
(b) they are simultaneous, and therefore cannot affect each other, but there is some event e# such that each cannot instantaneously affect e#. 
 
 Newton said that the concept of instantaneous "action at a distance" is incoherent. He was right: If there is no time-delay between cause and effect, there is no distance between cause and effect, the reason being that for there to be gap, either temporal or spatial, between cause and effect is for that instance of causation not to be instantaneous.
 Statements about spatiotemporal interrelations have neither operational nor philosophical significance unless considered as statements about causal interrelations: 
 
(1) e precedes e*, but e doesn't affect e* or anything simultaneous therewith,
 
which means
 
(2) e is no part of the history of the time-period occupied by e*, 
 
which in turn means 
 
(3) e does not precede e*,
 
which in turn means
 
(4) e and e* are simultaneous occupants of some one spatial manifold, but neither can affect anything affected by the other,
 
which in turn means 
 
(5) At no point in time is there any region of space whose history or whose present includes both e and e*, 
 
which in turn means
 
(6) e and e* do not simultaneously occupy some one spatial manifold.
 
 Truths about spatiotemporal interrelations are therefore truths about causal interrelations, and the spatiotemporal order is to be understood in terms of the causal order. 
 Hume assumes otherwise, and his analysis is therefore incorrect. 
 
Explanation of Problem #2
 
Ball A collides with Ball B and B moves as a result. This is caught on film; a movie is made out of this footage; the movie consists of endless repetitions of the same footage---of A striking and thereby displacing B. In this scenario, whenever there is an image of A striking B, there is a subsequent, spatiotemporally adjacent image of B moving. But the A-image isn’t for the subsequent B-image: there is a projector that causes there to be an A-image and also causes there to be an immediately subsequent, adjacent B-image. This projector is responsible for each image. The A-image per se is no more capable of producing a B-image than a shadow of one man stabbing another can be responsible for the second man’s death. But a consequence of RA is that image-A is responsible for image-B. Therefore, RA is incorrect.
 The sequence consisting of those two images is an instance of epiphenomenal causation. Epiphenomenal causation is not actual causation; it is pseudo-causation. e is the epiphenomenal cause of e* iff 
 
(i) any e-similar event is immediately succeeded by an adjacent e*-similar event, 
 
(ii) e is not the cause of e*, 
 
and 
 
(iii) the cause of each of e and e* is some underlying causal mechanism e#. 
 
 Reality abounds with instances of epiphenomenal causation. If a thermometer is immersed in hot water, the upward-movement of the column of mercury immediately precedes an adjacent acceleration of the particles composing the walls of the thermometer. But the former is not the cause of the latter; the cause of each is the fact that the thermometer in hot water. The fact that the two events are spatiotemporally adjacent has to do with the structure of the thermometer, coupled with the fact that different substances have different coefficients of expansion.
 When my computer is powering on, a moving dot-circle appears on the monitor: each dot appears immediately before an adjacent dot and the series of dot-occurrences forms a circle. No two of those occurrences are related as cause and effect; each dot is created by invisible software activity that also creates a neighboring dot. According to RA, each dot is the cause of its immediate successor. A dot-occurrence in a given place is always immediately succeeded by an adjacent dot-occurrence. Therefore, RA entails that neighboring dots are related as cause and effect. Therefore, RA is incorrect.
 Computers are structured in such a way that bona fide causal processes are mirrored by pseudo-causal causal processes. Visible desktops operations are manifestations of invisible software activity. Software events that are related as cause and effect create desktop-events that appear to be related as and effect but are not so related. These desktop-occurrences are visible representations of otherwise invisible software activity, and because we can be control these desktop-occurrences, by controlling the icons involved therein, we are able to control the aforementioned invisible, and otherwise uncontrollable, software activity.
 In some cases, a given desktop-occurrence is the indirect cause of another such occurrence. Moving the cursor from one place to another causes it to change shape: the location-change precipitates electrical activity that brings about a shape-change. But even this sort of event-sequence is inconsistent with RA. Supposing that a given change in the cursor's location is immediately followed by a change in its shape, the location-change cannot possibly be the indirect cause of the shape-change: nothing can possibly be the indirect cause anything that immediately follows it. And since the location-change obviously isn't directly causally responsible for the shape-change, there exists no causal sequence of which both events are members. A prior location-change on the part of the cursor precipitated the electrical activity that brought about the just-mentioned location-change as well as the subsequent shape-change.
 
Explanation of Problem #3
 
Consider the previously mentioned dot-circle. Let e be one of those dots; let e* be the dot that immediately follows e; and let r and r* be the respective spatiotemporal locations of those occurrences. 
 If k is the class of all dots occurring in r, and k* is the class of all dots occurring in r*, then any given k-occurrence is immediately followed by a neighboring k*-occurrence. 
 Given any event E, there is some category K of which E is the sole instance. It follows that, given any two neighboring events, there is some regularity of which that event-sequence is an instance. According to RA, any such sequence is ipso facto causal. Since this isn't the case, RA is incorrect.
 
The deductive-nomological model of explanation (DN)
 
According to DN, E is explained iff, supposing that C is a description of the circumstances in which E occurred and L is a description of the laws operative in C, then the proposition that E occurred is a logical consequence of the conjunction of C and L. Four examples of DN-compliant explanations: 
Example #1: 
E: the metal bar expands at t*. 
C: the metal bar is heated at previous time t. 
L: metal expands when heated. 
 C+L (C conjoined with L) logically entails E. Therefore, according to DN, the explanation of E is C+L.
 Note: This argument presupposes that the time-lag between t and t* doesn’t scuttle the entailment; it presupposes that nothing happens during that interval that doesn’t stymie the metal bar’s expansion. Given that there, for any distinct time-intervals, there is a time-lag between them, this requirement isn’t always met. So, technically, C+L does not entail E. Rather, C+L entails E on the condition that nothing has changed during the time that has elapsed between t and t*. This is a problem for DN and for RA. But, in the context of this handout, we will assume that the time-lag between t and t* doesn’t make a difference and that the entailment goes through. This fact about Example #1 is true mutatis mutandis of each of the following illustrations of DN. 
 
Example #2: 
E: x is sinking at time t*. 
C1: x was placed in body of water y at t. 
C2: x’s density exceeds y’s. 
L1: a solid body floating in water (or liquid of any kind) displaces a volume of water whose weight equals that of the solid body. 
L2 (a corollary of L1): A solid object floats/sinks in liquid b exactly if a’s density is less than/greater than b’s.
E is a logical consequence of—and, according to DN, is therefore explained by---this statement-set. 
 
Example #3 
E: The rate at which x is approaching y is increasing exponentially. 
C1: x’s mass is m and y’s mass is m*. 
C2: x and y jointly constitute an isolated system. 
L1: the gravitational attraction between two bodies is directly proportional to their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. 
L2 (a corollary of L1): ceteris paribus, the gravitational attraction between two bodies not only increases, but does so exponentially, as they approach each other. 
L3: (a corollary of L2): ceteris paribus, the rate at which two bodies approach each other not only increases, but does so exponentially, as they approach each other. 
 E is a logical consequence of---and, according to DN, is therefore explained by—this statement-set. 
 
Example #4: 
E: the rate at which x is moving around is greater at t* than it was at previous time t. (x is a piece of pollen on the surface of a body of water w.) 
C1: w’s temperature at t* is greater than it was at t. 
C2: all other factors have remained constant during that interval. 
L1: water consists of molecules. 
L2: the hotter a body of water, the more quickly the molecules composing it move. 
L3: the faster an object moves, the greater the force it exerts an object with which it collides, a consequence being that ceteris paribus the greater is the extent by which that collision displaces the impacted object. 
E is a logical consequence of---and, according to DN, is therefore explained by—this statement-set.
 
Problems with DN
 
Laws are given by propositions that support counterfactuals. Increasing gas-temperature increases gas-volume is a law because, other things being equal, the greater the gas’s temperature, the greater the volume it occupies. If the gas is confined to an unbreakable container, and when for that reason other things are not equal, then the gas’s overall volume does not increase with temperature. What increases is the pressure of the gas on the container-walls. Hence the law: pressure is directly proportional to temperature and inversely proportional to container-size. 
 But this law is obviously a corollary of the first law that more temperature leads to more volume. For when the volume-increase is thwarted, it is replaced by a pressure on the gas’s part to let its volume be increased.
 Laws, so the DN-advocate says, are given by statements of the form for any x, if x has phi, then x has psi. In other words, laws (according to DN) are given by universal, conditional generalizations. 
 
Nomic vs. accidental generalizations
 
But, as the DN-advocate recognizes, not all such universal generalizations expression laws. Cf. every coin in my pocket is a quarter (for any x, if x is a coin in JM’s pocket, then x is a quarter). Not a law.
 Why not? The obvious (and obviously correct) answer: a thing’s being a coin in my pocket doesn’t cause it to be a quarter or---to put it more accurately and also more generally---a thing’s being a quarter doesn’t depend on its being a quarter.
 But the DN-advocate cannot accept this response. Suppose that the reason metal expands when heated is a law, whereas all the coins in JM’s pocket are all quarters, is that heating metal causes it to expand, whereas putting coins in my pocket doesn’t cause them become quarters. In that case, the fact that metal expands when heated is a law is contingent on the fact the fact that metal is already known to expand when heated. If this fact about metal is not already known, then there is no more reason to regard metal expands when heated as a nomic generalization and, therefore, as different from an obviously accidental generalization, such as all the coins in JM’s pocket are quarters.
 Why this is a problem for DN: Suppose it known, before it’s known that metal expands when heated is a law, that the reason metal object A is expanding is that it’s being heated. Suppose that, before this law is known, it’s known for any a metal object M, it is known that it’s because M is being heated that M expanding. In that case, the cause of M’s expanding is known and so therefore is the explanation for the fact that it’s expanding. (The cause: M’s being heated. The explanation: M’s being heated.) To know the explanation is to know the cause.
 So in at least some cases, metal object x’s expanding is not to be explained in terms of some covering law; it is not to be explained in terms of the law that metal expands when heated. On the contrary, that law is to be explained in terms of the fact that x expand when heated.
 In general, if the difference between nomic and accidental generalizations is that the former have causal content whereas the latter do not, then DN is eviscerated; for the essence of DN is that events cannot possibly be explained, even approximately, except in terms of laws. And this is indeed the difference between nomic and accidental generalizations, and, consequently, DN is indeed eviscerated.
 
How DN-advocates deal with the distinction between nomic and accidental generalizations
 
For this reason, advocates DN do not hold the difference between metal expands when heated and all the coins in JM’s pocket are quarters is that the former is a causal claim, whereas the latter is not. They therefore have to find some other relevant different difference between the two statements.
 Hempel’s proposal (widely accepted among DN-advocates, since they have no other choice) is this: whereas metal expands when heated supports counterfactuals, all the coins in JM’s pocket are quarters does not. It is not the case that if a given non-quarter-coin were put in my pocket, it turn into a quarter. By contrast, it is the case that, if pinewood object x were placed in body of water y, it follows that x would float in y if x were placed in y. Thus, a law is a generalization that supports counterfactuals. 
 In this way, DN has seemingly insulated itself against the charge that nomic statements express causal relations and therefore against the consequent charge that DN is wrong to hold that explanations are categorically law-based and, in addition, against the charge that DN is fundamentally wrong to deny that nomic truths (truths that express laws) are discovered by consolidating various instances of causal knowledge. 
 
DN viciously circular if it requires laws to support counterfactuals
 
Counterfactuals are cryptocausal statements; to know causes is to know explanations; to explain an event is to identify its cause. Therefore, DN is guilty of vicious circular in so far as its legitimacy is predicated on laws’ being counterfactual supporting.
 Explanation: Let L be the law the pinewood floats.[5] Why does L support counterfactuals? Because, if x is an arbitrary piece of pinewood, putting it in water causes it to float.
 Another example: Metal expands when heated (for any metal object x, if x is heated, then x expands.) This law[6] supports counterfactuals. Why? Because, given some arbitrary metal object x, x’s being heated causes x to expand.
 Universal generalizations are statements to the effect that each member of a class of statements is true, each such member being a conditional proposition (one of the form if P, then Q or therefore, potentially, of the form if x has phi, then x has psi). If a given universal generalization is to support counterfactuals, and is thus, by Hempel’s lights, to qualify as a law, then each of the corresponding conditionals must support counterfactuals. 
 But those counterfactuals support conditionals only if the following condition is met: Supposing that if A has phi, then A has psi is an arbitrary one of those conditionals, A’s having phi is causative of A’s having phi; i.e. A’s having phi must cause A to have psi. If that condition isn’t met, then if A had phi, then A would have psi isn’t true, in which case for any x, if x had phi, then has psi is an accidental, not a nomic, generalization.
 Further, if for all x, if x has phi, then x has psi is to known to be a law, then we must know that a given thing’s having phi causes it to have psi. So, if we are to know that for all x, if x has phi, then x has psi is a law, then we must know that, given some arbitrary instance A of phi, A’s being a phi is what is responsible for A’s being a psi. But if we know that, then we already have knowledge of at least explanation (namely, that A’s being a phi caused it to become a psi). And while it may be that our knowledge of that particular instance of causation is based on some other law L* (if x is phi*, then x turns into a psi*), everything just said about the first law (if x is phi, then x turns into a psi) is equally true of L*---and it is therefore true of any law L** on which L* is based, and so on.
 Since we must therefore eventually get to some law L# our knowledge of which is not derivative of our knowledge of some other law; and since L#, being counterfactual-supporting, is to the effect that, for arbitrary X, X’s having PHI is causative of X’s having PSI (for some properties PHI and PSI); and since, by virtue of knowing of L# and ipso facto knowing that X’s having PHI is causative of X’s having PSI, we already know how to explain at least one thing (namely, X’s having PSI); it follows that explanations are not, at least not in general, law-based and, more precisely, that they do not, at least not in general, have the form to explain E is to identify known laws L1…Ln such that, if C1…Cm is a description of the antecedents of E, then E is a logical consequence of L1…Ln+C1…Cm.
 
Additional DN-internal vicious circularity
 
According to Hempel, if we want to know that the rope snapped, we need to know 
 
(i) what the conditions were that obtained prior to the rope’s snapping, 
 
and 
 
(ii) what the natural laws were in virtue of which those conditions led to the rope’s snapping. 
 
 Some problems: Let E be the rope-snapping in question. Supposing that E happened at time t, the term “the conditions that obtained prior to E” obviously doesn’t refer to the state of the whole pre-t universe. Less obviously, it doesn’t even refer to some small region the universe. Let R be a space-time region hosting the forces of which E was a consequence. Not everything in R was relevant to E. The optical conditions in R are irrelevant; the color of the object at the end of R is irrelevant; and so on. 
 So when Hempel tells us that E is to be explained in terms of “the conditions” preceding it, what Hempel means, assuming it true, is that the rope-snapping is a consequence of the relevant preconditions (e.g. the integrity of the rope, the weight of the suspended object, the distance of that object from the body that is dragging it downward, the density of that body).
 If C is one of E’s preconditions, C is a relevant precondition only if C caused E. [7] We can’t provide a deductive-nomological explanation of E unless we know, for each E’s infinitely many preconditions, whether or not that precondition is relevant to E; and if we know a given precondition C is relevant to E, then we ipso facto know that C caused E, and, since to explain an event is to identify its cause, we ipso facto have an explanation of E. Thus, in order to provide a deductive-nomological explanation of E, we must already have an explanation of E.
 An objection: “Suppose you know that C caused E, but you don’t know how C did so---you don’t know what the operative laws were. In that case, your knowledge of what it is that caused E is incomplete.”
 Response: For me to have a high-resolution understanding of why E happened, I do indeed know the how, and not just the what. For me to know why Smith is sick it is not enough for me to know what made him sick (he ate rotten fish); I also need to know how his eating rotten fish led to his being ill. But if I know, as I surely can, that Smith is sick because he rotten fish, I surely do have knowledge of an explanation of his condition, even though that explanation is low-resolution. 
 Similarly, if I know what led to the rope’s snapping (it was made of bubble gum and there was a heavy ball attached to it), I am surely aware of a correct explanation of the rope-snapping. If know which laws were involved, then I surely have a much better explanation of that same event: I have a scientific explanation of that event, whereas I previously did not. 
 
Causal knowledge as differential knowledge
 
Earlier it was pointed out that we seem to know of individual cases of metal’s being heated and expanding for that reason before we know of the law in virtue of which heated metals expand: indeed, a precondition for our knowing of such a law seems to be that we know of individual cases of metal expanding in consequence of being heated. 
 In response to this, the following is likely to be said (and---though not as a response to this very point---has been said, innumerably many times, by advocates of DN, from Mill to Ernest Nagel):
 
(#) We see many cases of metal objects being heated and then expanding. We are puzzled. So we posit a law L to the effect that metal expands when heated. Now that we (think we) know of this law, we are no longer puzzled.
 You say that we can’t know of L’s existence until we know of individual cases of metal objects’ expanding in consequence of being heated. This is not correct. We know of metal objects’ expanding upon heated. But until we know of L, we don’t know that there to be a cause-effect relationship between those objects’ being heated and their expanding.
 
 L is presumably to the effect that, for any metal object x, x expands if heated. If L doesn’t support counterfactuals, it isn’t a law. So L must support counterfactuals. But if it supports counterfactuals, L is a causal claim (for any metal object x, heating x causes it to expand). So let us suppose, as we must, that L is a causal claim.
 If our only reason for thinking that x expands when heated is that x does expand when heated, then in positing a law to the effect that they are causally connected, all we are doing is saying: "It is so; for it must be so.”
 In which case, L doesn’t really explain anything. And in which case, furthermore, there is insufficient evidence for L, a consequence being that L isn’t really a law so much as it is a tentative hypothesis, which, being of questionable veridicality, cannot serve as the basis of an explanation.
 By the same token, if we have good reason to believe L to be a law, we must have reason to believe, independently of L, that this particular piece of metal expanded because it was heated, the same being true of that piece of metal piece, and also of that other piece of metal, and so on. How such knowledge is acquired is made clear over the course of the next ten sections. 
 
Causation as proportionality restoration
 
Laws are usually expressed by dependence-relations: 
 
*The size-increase depends on the temperature increase.
 
*The pressure-increase depends on the volume-decrease.
 
*The one object’s acceleration depends on its mass and on the momentum of the object that collided with it.
 
*The increase in x’s mass, relative to a framework with respect to which x is accelerating, depends on the rate of acceleration.
 
*The extent to which electron x’s position can be known depends inversely on the extent to which its velocity can be known, and the extent to which x's momentum can be known depends inversely on the extent to which its position can be known.
 
*The extent to which exercise lowers blood pressure depends on the amount of exercise done.
 
*The extent to which insults wound a person depends on the extent to which he gives them credence.
 
*The extent to which poverty leads to crime depends on the extent to which poverty leads to food-shortages.
 
*The extent to which a person needs eight hours of sleep on a given night depends on the extent to which he is running a sleep deficit.
 
*If a solid object is rotated around one of its end points, the extent to which it remains straight depends inversely on the length of the object. 
 
 A related point is that, if a given force (e.g. gravity) is acting on an object, it doesn’t follow that the object’s state of motion changes or that the object otherwise changes. If another force, e.g. an opposite and equally strong gravitational force, is acting on it, the resulting movement on the part of the object will be the vector sum of both forces. (Whence the distinction, notional if not actual, between kinematics and dynamics.) The object may therefore remain stationary or it may move, in any direction with any degree of rapidity. [8] 
 Threshold effects aside, effects are proportional to their causes. This has several consequences, none of them consistent with RA or with DN. 
 First, laws are not expressed by regularities. A collision may or may not displace an object. It may be destroy it. It may not destroy it, but may fail to make it budge. If it does displace it, it could move, with any degree of rapidity, along any one of a number of a possible trajectories. If conditions are held constant, then events that are identical in respect of momentum or temperature (or whatever the relevant parameters are) have the same effects, in which case causal relations are expressed by regularities. If there is to be a perfect regularity of some kind, there must an event e such that perfect e-duplicates occur over and over. That condition isn’t met if conditions are at all variable, since inputs vary when conditions vary. 
 
Physical laws as regularities of proportion
 
 
Second, to the extent that laws are expressed by regularities, they are expressed by regularities of proportion: volume increases directly proportional to temperature increases; gravitational attraction is proportional to the masses of the bodies in question; if an object is subject to no differential forces, the degree to which its trajectory deviates from a straight line depends on the length of that trajectory.
 So if indeed causal nexuses are regularities, they aren’t regularities of the form e-similar events always precede e*-similar events. They are regularities of proportion and are therefore regularities of a much more abstract kind than those that the DN-advocate has in mind. 
 
Explanation of the fact that statistics tend to track causal substructure: In some cases, we may get lucky: conditions may remain perfectly constant; a series of events occurs each member of which is qualitatively and quantitatively just like each of the others. In that case, the effect of any given one of those events will be the same, qualitatively and quantitatively, as the effect of any other given one of those events.
 But circumstances don't remain constant, and they don't have to remain constant for us to learn what causes what. Events are changes. The greater the change, the greater then effect. As long as we can correlate input-differences with output-differences, we can establish causality. 
 A corollary is that a singular events are the effects of a singular antecedent, and, when given a singular event, we know its cause as soon as we identify a singularity among its antecedents.
 Example: You are a square: somebody who follows all the rules. One night, after a lifetime of celibacy, you decide to sleep with a lady of the night. A few days later, you have a venereal disease. 
 Singular event: the malady. Singular antecedent: the dalliance. Effect: disease. Probable cause: The dalliance. 
 Do such dalliances always lead to venereal disease, or even most of the time? No. Does it matter? No. You know of some event predating your malady that is as singular as your malady. Were that event not the cause of your malady, you would have a genuine anomaly on your hands; but since it is, you don't.
 Of course, if you had dalliances with 35 such women, then of course you would not be able to pinpoint the cause---but only because any given one of those events could be the cause, notwithstanding that not a single one of them was an instance of an event-type whose instances are always, or even usually, followed by the onset of disease. 
 And this proves the point at hand, that, when e is known to be the cause of e*, it isn’t because e-e* is an instance of a perfect regularity; it’s because, of e*’s various antecedents, e is the only one that is proportional to e*. 
 If e* has many antecedents e1…en, each of them proportional to e*, then e* has many possible causes. In that case, the actual cause has to be decided experimentally. For each i (1≤i≤n), does an ei-similar lead to an e*-similar event, under conditions similar to those under which e brought about e*? Supposing that the answer is in each case “no,” then, pending further information, e must be presumed to be the cause of e*. 
 Another example: You force yourself to run three miles. You have a heart-attack. 
 Singular event: the heart-attack. Singular antecedent: you run three miles. (You’ve never run so much as a 100 yards in your life.) 
 Do all or even most physically unfit people who run three miles have heart-attacks? No. But there needn't be such a regularity for the jog to have brought on the heart-attack, and you don’t need to know of such a regularity, to know what brought on your heart-attack.
 Given that we can know what causes a given event without knowing of any law L that links cause and effect, it follows, given that to explain an event is to identify its cause, that we can sometimes explain events without explaining them in terms of laws.
 To explain an event in detail is to explain how the specifics of the event depended on the specifics of the cause, and for that we do need laws. We need laws if we are to have scientific explanations, a scientific explanation of event e being that 
 
(i) identifies the event e* that caused e; 
 
(ii) identifies the law in virtue of which e* caused e*; 
 
and, given (ii), 
 
(iii) identifies just what it was about e* that was responsible for its bringing about e.
 
 But scientific explanations presuppose pre-scientific explanations. We must distinguish between non-explanations and pre-scientific explanations. Non-explanations are not pre-scientific explanations. If my explanation of the fact that I burnt my hand is that I touched a hot surface, my explanation is correct, but not scientific. If my explanation is that my parents weren’t home and it wasn’t my touching the hot-stove per se but my transgressing their instructions (don’t touch the stove) that caused me to feel scorching pain, then my explanation is false. Also, if my parents give me permission to touch the stove (thinking that it’s off), and (because it’s on) I scorch my hand, I’ll know that, indeed, it was, on each occasion, because the stove was hot that I burnt on my hand; and on neither occasion is it necessary that I know of some regularity to the effect that all people who touch hot stoves feel pain.[9] 
 
Why role of experimentation in the acquisition of causal knowledge 
 
If it’s always so obvious what causes what, why do scientists bother with tests? Why do the repeat the same experiment over and over?
 Scientific tests have a number of functions. First of all, people’s causal beliefs aren’t always correct. This is partly due to the fact that, as was pointed out in class, a given event may have a number of equally salient antecedents. To a larger extent, however, it’s due to the fact that, when people look for causes, they have some tendency to look for causes that fit a pre-existing narrative and, to that extent, tend not to look for the actual causes. “I didn’t get the job: my ex-boss must have blacklisted me.” I’m overlooking the fact that I was 45 minutes late to the interview.
 Another reason is that experiments identify specific information about causes that is not easy to come by in non-experimental settings. It’s easy to know that a monkey-bite made you sick. It’s hard to know exactly what it was that the monkey transmitted to you. And it won’t be known if experiments aren’t done (not necessarily on you personally, but on other monkey-bite victims).
 Also it would be hard to know under whether the pathogen that was transmitted to you would, if transplanted into another person’s bloodstream, affect that person: maybe your immune-system is unusual in some way. 
 Further, it would be hard to know whether or not a bite, or some other way of intravenously introducing the pathogen, is the only way of doing so: Is the pathogen airborne? If not, is it transmitted through casual contact? These questions cannot be answered except on the basis of controlled studies. At the same time, those controlled studies presuppose correct if approximate beliefs as to what, in some given case, led to some malady relevantly similar to yours.
 Further, supposing that events of kind cause events of some other kind, it’s only in controlled environments that the exact nature of the operative dependence-relation can be learned. It’s easy to figure out that hitting a ball makes it move. It’s hard to figure out the specifics. It’s hard to identify a true, general principle to the effect that, given an object x, if x has such and such a structure and can therefore withstand impacts of a certain amount of force without being deformed, then, neglecting friction and air-resistance, if x is struck by an object with momentum m, then x will be displaced by a certain amount. 
 
The instantaneousness of the interval between cause and effect
 
If e is the cause of e*, e precedes e*. Given that no event is instantaneous, this means that each takes time to occur and, therefore, that it takes time for both of them to occur.
 Let INT be the interval during which e and e* happen. Events could have occurred after e that prevented e* from occurring or at least prevented it from occurring in the exact way it did. Ball A collides with ball B. The collision causes B to move to the edge of the table. During the time that it took B to travel to the table-edge, events could have intervened (somebody could have grabbed B, it might have been subjected to extreme heat and disintegrated as a result, and so on) that would have prevented B from doing so. Supposing that the distance from the collision to the table’s edge is n meters, given any spatial interval less than n, no matter how small, events could have occurred that would have prevented B from traveling that distance or from traveling that distance along that particular trajectory.
 Thus, given any non-null time-interval, interval-initial circumstances of a given kind are compatible with interval-terminal circumstances of many different kinds. The shorter the intervals one considers, the greater the guarantee the probability that interval-initial events will have these as opposed to those interval-terminal outcomes. But that probability is always less than 100%. It approaches 100%, as one considers increasingly small intervals. But, since nothing happens during null time-intervals, the probability that a given event will eventuate in this as opposed to that sort of event is always less than 100%. 
 Therefore, instances of causation are not instances of regularity. For e to be the cause of e* is not for e-similar events to always precede e*-similar events. Whatever it is to be an “e-similar” or an “e*-similar” event, e-similar events---though causative, in some contexts, of e*-similar events---are not necessarily always followed by e*-similar events. 
 This in turn means that, if L is the law in virtue of which e caused e*, L is not to the effect that e-similar events always precede e*-similar events; indeed, L is not to the effect that events of any kind follow events of some other kind. It follows that laws are not regularities. It also follows that laws are not “forces” or “structures” that are responsible for regularities. 
 
Natural Laws dispositive of, but not identical with, regularities
 
The law of inertia disposes bodies have constant velocities during arbitrarily long intervals. And, given some body x, so long as x’s state of motion is governed by no law other than the law of inertia, its state of motion will indeed remain constant. Further, if x is acted upon by many forces other than the force of inertia[10], x’s state of motion will still remain constant so long as those other forces cancel one another out. 
 Galileo knew this and, on this basis of this knowledge, discovered the law of inertia. Galileo considered bodies that, apart from their own inertias, were in states of varying degrees of equilibrium; and he found that that, the closer the equilibrium in question was to perfect equilibrium, the more the projectile in question was to have a constant state of motion (during the time-interval during which that equilibrium lasted). 
 And it was on the basis of this same principle that the Inverse Square-law (the gravitational attraction between x and y is directly proportional to their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them) was definitively verified. An environment was constructed in which each of two balls were in a state of perfect equilibrium, except with respect to the gravitational attraction of the other ball: and the balls moved in exactly the way that, according to ISL, they would move if no forces, other than the gravitational pulls they exerted on each other, were acting on them.
 But no physical object is isolated from all others. And if a given physical object is in equilibrium with respect to all forces but one, it is seldom for very long. For these two reasons, it is only under exceptional circumstances that laws give rise to regularities. 
 
How we know what causes what 
 
According to Hume, we know that e causes e* because 
 
(i) e immediately precedes, and is adjacent with, e*, 
 
and 
 
(ii) e-similar events always immediately precede adjacent e*-similar events.
 
 This is not, at least not in general, how we learn what causes what. If it is known that, apart from being collided with by ball A, hitherto stationary ball B was in a state of equilibrium, then it is known that the collision was necessarily the cause the change in B’s state of motion. 
 “But can it ever be known that a given thing is in equilibrium in every respect but one?” 
 It can be known that, in every respect but one, a given thing is in a state that is sufficiently equilibrium-like that there was but one possible cause of some change subsequently undergone by that thing.
 If it is known that, apart from the nasty remark I just made about your cooking, you were in a state of relative psychological equilibrium, then, even though most people whose cooking is insult don't go into a fit of rage, I know that your outburst was indeed the effect of my remark.
 Thus, if we know that e is the cause of e*, it isn’t necessarily because we have observed some regularity of which that event-sequence (e followed by e*) is an instance. In many cases, there is no such regularity. Cf. the just-discussed tantrum.
 And in many cases where there is such a regularity, it isn’t on the basis of our knowledge of that regularity that we know e to be the cause of e* Cf. the situation. 
 A child touches a hot stove and feels excruciating pain. He knows on that basis alone that touching a hot stove will lead to excruciating pain. He knows this because he knows that, apart from the fact that he was touching the stove, there was nothing distinctive about his situation. It is true that, whenever people touch hot stoves, they feel excruciating pain. So there is in this case a regularity of which the event-sequence in question is an instance. But it isn’t on the basis of the child’s knowledge of such a regularity that he knows what caused his pain. 
 
Knowledge-why=high-resolution knowledge-what; knowledge of laws often necessary for the latter
 
It may be that, unless one has knowledge of laws, one cannot know why a given event followed some other event. But without knowledge of laws one can obviously know that the first event was indeed the cause of the second. 
 Hume seems to have thought that, unless it is known why the collision caused the hitherto stationary ball to move---unless Newton’s second law of motion is known, along with A’s momentum at the time of the collision and B’s mass----it cannot be known that the collision is the cause of its moving; that in order to know that e is the cause of e*, one must know of some ‘covering law’ of which that event-sequence is an instance. And this, we have seen, is false. 
 
Singular causation and the falsity of the Deductive-Nomological Model of explanation
 
To know what caused an event is to know how to explain it. I can explain your tantrum: I insulted you. There are certainly better explanations----one that might be known to your psychoanalyst: but according to each of those explanations, the insult triggered the tantrum. 
 The difference between my explanation (I insulted you) and Freud’s (given your desire to fill the shoes of your father, who is a revered chef, and given your high opinion of my cake-related opinions, the insult initiated a bout of self-loathing, reinforced by loathing of your father for imposing such high standards on you, whose intensity was so extreme that no non-tantrum-throwing behavior could have discharged it adequately), is that the latter is more high-resolution than the former. But the latter includes the former---just as Galileo’s explanation of the change in B’s state of motion will include the layperson’s explanation.
 This shows that, contrary to what DN assumes, not all explanations are law-based. In some cases we know that e causes e*, and we are therefore know a (low-resolution but otherwise) correct explanation of the latter, even though we don’t know of any law that connects the two events.
 It also shows that knowledge of (low-level but otherwise) correct explanations of facts is a prerequisite to knowledge of natural law. In order to learn Newton’s second law (the acceleration of an object depends directly upon the net force acting upon that object and indirectly on the object’s mass), one must know that certain collisions are responsible for certain displacements. If one doesn’t know this, then one a fortiori doesn’t know that among the (invariably very numerous) laws determinative of the exact nature of the accelerations of the displaced objects, one of them is that the acceleration of the displaced object is inversely proportional to its mass and directly proportional the net force acting on it. 
 
The failure of the Deductive-Nomological model in connection with psychological explanation
 
One quite glaring failure of DN concerns its treatment of psychological explanations. If DN is right, as Hempel makes clear, not a single one of the psychological explanations ever put forth identifies the cause of any psychological event. If DN is right, I don’t know that my insult is the cause of your tantrum unless I know of some perfect regularity of which that event-sequence is an instance. I know of no such regularity. Outside of physics and chemistry, any such regularities as are to be found are imperfect. And a consequence of DN, therefore, is that, outside of those two disciplines, nothing has ever been explained.
 This must be understood aright. It may well be that nobody knows the complete explanation of any given psychological event. But a consequence of DN is that, pending the discovery of some perfect regularity of which the insult-tantrum event-sequence was an instance, it simply isn’t known whether or not the insult was in any way, to any degree, the cause of the tantrum. 
 And this consequence of DN is simply false. The cause of many a psychological event is known, even though the corresponding regularity, if there is one, is not known; and if the corresponding regularity is known, it isn’t necessarily implicated in one’s knowledge of the relevant event-sequence. You may well know that people who are dumped feel sadness. But it isn’t on the basis of this knowledge that you know that the reason you are sad is that you were dumped. And you know that you intend to write a five-voice fugue in order to impress your ex-girlfriend, so as to rekindle her interest in you. But even though dumped people often (though not always, or even usually) do things to impress the people who dumped them, they seldom, if ever, try to do so by writing five-voiced fugues. 
 DN entails that, unless you know of some regularity of which your writing this fugue is an instance, you cannot possibly know that your doing so is a consequence of your being dumped. DN also entails that, unless people who are dumped always respond by trying to impress their exes, no person’s attempting to rekindle his/her ex’s affections through a heroic deed is a consequence of him/her being dumped by said ex---which is false---and a fortiori it cannot be known of some particular act of valor performed by some dumped person that his/her heroic deed is a consequence of him/her being dumped---also false. 
 
DN in relation to statistical explanation
 
Hempel acknowledges that perfect regularities often are not available. And he says that, in such cases, one must rely on imperfect regularities: regularities of the form e-similar events usually precede e*-similar events.
 This move is misconceived. The probability that an insult will elicit a tantrum is small: most insults don’t result in tantrums. And supposing that 95% of insults were followed by tantrums, there would not, at least not for that reason, be a ‘statistical law’ to the effect that 95% of tantrums follow insults; for it might not be that the tantrums in question were consequences of the antecedent insults. 
 In general, supposing that most phi’s are followed by psi’s, it doesn’t follow that phi’s cause psi’s, even part of the time, or a fortiori that there is a statistical law to the effect that n% of phi’s cause (or are followed by) phi’s (for some n>50). 
 For example: most people who are swimming pools wear some sort of bathing gear (i.e. they don’t swim in the nude). But that isn’t because they’re in a swimming pool; it’s because (in most cases) they’re in a public place. They are often, presumably, wearing bathing gear despite being in a swimming pool.
 Contrariwise, given only that 30% of phi’s are followed by psi’s, it doesn’t follow that phi’s don’t cause psi’s. Smoking causes emphysema; but only emphysema occurs in less than 30% of people who smoke the requisite amount (the amount the emphysemics smoked, at least before they got emphysema).
 What is true of emphysemics is that the only distinctive thing about their behavior was that they were heavy smokers. For this reason, Wesley Salmon introduced the ‘statistical relevance model,’ as an alternative to DN. But the statistical relevance model, being nothing more than a watered down version of the Deductive nomological model, has the latter’s defects but not its virtues; and it’s not really worth running the diagnostics on this obviously degenerate and degenerating research program.[11]
 
Delimiting DN’s sphere of application
 
DN doesn’t hold with respect to all explanations; it isn’t possible to give deductive nomological explanations of events until it is known what is causally relevant; and to the extent that one knows what is causally relevant to what, one already has knowledge explanations. 
 So far as DN is correct, it’s a correct description of scientific explanation, a “scientific explanation” of E being one that says both 
 
(i) what made E happen 
 
and 
 
(ii) how it did so.
 
The Raven-Paradox[12]
 
As a matter of logic, sentences that are logically equivalent must be confirmationally equivalent, but there are logically equivalent sentences that are not confirmationally equivalent (e.g. ‘all ravens are black’ and ‘all non-black things are non-ravens’). 
Logical equivalence: S1 and S2 are logically equivalent iff S1 entails S2 and S2 entails S1. (n=4 entails n=3+1, and n=3+1 entails n=4. Therefore, n=4 is equivalent with n=3+1.) 
Confirmational equivalence: S1 and S2 are confirmationally equivalent iff, given any datum D, D confirms S1 to degree n iff D confirms S2 to degree n. (D: Two days ago, Smith had no cars, but yesterday he won four cars on a game show. D confirms n=4 and n=3+1, and it confirms them equally.)
Logical and confirmational equivalence logically equivalent: For S1 and S2 to be logically equivalent is, by definition, for neither to entail anything not also entailed by the other. It follows, by an indirect proof, that logical equivalence entails confirmational equivalence. 
 Suppose that S1 and S2 are logically equivalent but confirmationally non-equivalent. Since they are confirmationally non-equivalent, there is some proposition S3 that confirms S2 more than it confirms S1. It follows that S3 is relatively unlikely to be false if S2 is true and also that S3 is relatively unlikely to be true if S1 is true. Thus, S2 entails that S3 is relatively likely to be true and S1 entails that S3 is relatively likely to be false. Thus, there is some proposition that S1 entails that S2 does not entail and there is some proposition that S2 entails that S1 does not entail. Thus, S1 and S2 are not logically equivalent, contradicting our hypothesis. Thus, confirmational non-equivalence entails logical non-equivalence. Equivalently, logical equivalence guarantees confirmational equivalence. 
The Raven Paradox: Consider: 
 
R1: All ravens are black (if x is a raven, then x is black). 
R2: All non-black things are non-ravens (if x is non-black, then x isn’t a raven). 
 
R1 and R2 are equivalent. (That is, they are equivalent if read extensionally, i.e. as concerning only actual, as opposed to possible objects or, equivalently, as concerning what is as opposed to what must be. Hempel doesn’t acknowledge that R1 and R2 can be read either extensionally or intensionally. When expounding Hempel’s theory, we will follow Hempel’s example in this regard. When critiquing it, we won’t.)
The equivalence of R1 and R2 is easily verified using Venn diagrams. But there’s a problem. Consider:
 
R3: x is a pink piano. 
 
R3 confirms R2, but not R1. The pinkness of pianos has nothing to do with the blackness of ravens. But R3 would confirm R1 and R2 equally if they were logically equivalent. Since it doesn’t, they aren’t. But they seem to be----a paradox.
 
Another paradox of the same kind: Consider: 
 
M1: Heated metal expands (if x is metal, then x expands when heated). 
M2: Heated non-expanders aren’t metal (if x doesn’t expand when heated, then x isn’t metal). 
 
The equivalence of M1 and M2 is easily verified using Venn diagrams. But there’s a problem. Consider:
 
M3: Cube steaks shrink when heated. 
 
M3 confirms M2, but not M1: The deflationary tendencies of heated meat have nothing to do with the expansionary tendencies of heated metal. But M3 would confirm M1 and M2 equally if they were logically equivalent. Since it doesn’t, they aren’t. But they seem to be---a paradox.
 
Hempel’s solution 
 
R3 does confirm R1 and R2 equally. We think otherwise because, our background beliefs being what they are, we believe it impossible that pianos should be ravens. We wouldn’t believe this if our background beliefs were different, and we’d therefore see that R3 per se is equally confirmatory of each of R1 and R2. 
 Similarly, M3 does confirm M1 and M2 equally. We think otherwise because, our background beliefs being what they are, we believe it impossible that cube steaks should be made of metal. We wouldn’t believe this if our background beliefs were different, and we’d therefore see that M3 per se is equally confirmatory of each of M1 and M2. 
 
The problem with Hempel’s solution
 
We can’t learn anything about ravens by studying pianos. We can’t learn anything about metal by studying meat. Hempel’s solution implies otherwise and is therefore false. 
 
The actual solution: There are two ways to interpret:
 
(1) All phi’s are psi’s (if x is a phi, then x is a psi). 
 
(1) can be interpreted (or ‘read’) extensionally or intensionally. 
Read intensionally, 1 means:
 
(1*) For reasons of natural law, all phi’s are psi’s. 
 
Read extensionally, 1 means:
 
(1#) By coincidence, all phi’s are psi’s. 
 
 Some statements, for example,
 
(2) all of the coins in JM’s pocket are quarters
 
 are usually to be to be read extensionally, e.g. 2 is usually to be taken to mean: 
 
(2#) By coincidence, all of the coins in JM’s pocket are quarter. 
 
 But if there were some natural law (or mechanism---a mechanism being a way deploying natural laws in furtherance of some objective) that required coins in my pocket to be quarters, then (2) would have to be read intensionally and thus taken to mean:
 
(2*) For reasons of natural law, all the coins in JM’s pocket are quarters. 
 
M1 is usually read intensionally and is thus taken to mean:
 
(M1*) For reasons of natural law, metal objects expand when heated. 
 
Read extensionally, M means:
 
(M1#) By coincidence, all things that don’t expand when heated aren’t metal. 
 
 M1* is not equivalent with M2. M2 is to the effect that a thing’s failing to expand when heated implies that it already isn’t metal, and it therefore implies that its failing to expand when heated cannot possibly cause it not to be metal. 
 Thus, M1* entails the negation of M2 and a fortiori isn’t equivalent with M2. 
 An analogous argument establishes the non-equivalence of R1 and R2. 
 
The Raven-paradox a by-product of the Regularity Analysis
 
For Hempel, as for Hume, there are no causal connections, only regularities that mimic causal connections. So, for Hempel/Hume, any connection between 
 
x is heated metal 
 
and 
 
x is expanding
 
is purely extensional. 
 If that were indeed so, then a shrinking cube-steak would provide quite as much support for 
if x is heated metal, then x is expanding 
as would a piece of heated, expanding metal. 
 But it doesn’t; so there’s no paradox.

