                                  College Papers Plus

                                July and August 2019

 

Is the Turing Test a good test of intelligence? (philosophy)

Is the Turing Test a good test of intelligence? Second Version (philosophy)

Should Caffeine be a Controlled Substance?

Who started the Cold War?

Who was a better President? Eisenhower or JFK?

Who was a better President? Nixon or LBJ?

  Technology-caused Job-shortages and the Need for Universal Welfare

My Reaction to Schoenberg’s  A Survivor from Warsaw  

    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DFXkc9AGoeU

Statistics: Basic Principles and Theorems (Math/Statistics)

Poem and Song Compared: To His Coy Mistress Compared with Don’t Be

Cruel (Literary Analysis)

Random Variables, Discrete Variables, Continuous Variables

  (Math/Statistics)

  Statistics Exam Prep Sheet

Concert Report (Music/Musicology)

  Statistics Final Exam Review Sheet (Math/Statistics)

Music Journal (Music/Musicology)

           Is the Turing Test a good test of intelligence? (philosophy)


 


      The statement ‘the Turing Test is a good test of intelligence’ is


ambiguous. On the one hand, it can be taken to mean that a given entity’s


acting like an intelligent being is evidence of its having intelligence, meaning


that such behavior is good but not definitive reason to ascribe intelligence to


the being in question. On the other hand, it can be taken to mean a given


entity’s acting like an intelligent creature is constitutive of its having


intelligence, meaning that there is no difference between its being intelligent


and its behaving (or able to behave) like an intelligent creature. The first


disambiguation, so I will argue, is correct only if subject to heavy


qualifications, and the second disambiguation, so I will argue, is


unqualifiedly incorrect.


      Turing introduced the concept of the Turing Test through the


following hypothetical. A written but rapid exchange between two parties is


occurring. One of those parties is a machine, and the other is a person. A


second person is monitoring the exchange. This person knows that one of the


parties involved is a person and that the other is a machine, and he also


knows what each party writes and when it writes it, but he has no additional


information as to either one’s identity. According to Turing, if this person is


consistently able to figure out which of the two parties is the machine andwhich one is the person, then the machine does not have intelligence. On the


other hand, if that person cannot consistently determine which of the parties


is the machine, then that machine has intelligence.


      We can use a variant of Turing’s own scenario to demonstrate the


spuriousness of Turing’s own reasoning.  Let X be the person involved in the


exchange just described and let Y be the machine; and suppose that the


exchange they are having concerns arithmetic. X is making arithmetical


statements (e.g. “1+1=2”, “1+2=3”, “1+2≠3”), and Y is evaluating those

                          3
statements. If X says “2=8”, Y responds by saying “that is correct”; and if X

      3
says “2=6”, Y responds by saying “that is incorrect.” As it happens, let us


suppose, X, though an extremely gifted playwright and poet, has a blind spot

                                                                            3
for mathematics. He cannot for the life of him understand why “2=6” is false

          3
or why “2=8” is true. Consequently, when ‘conversing’ with Y, the


statements that he makes are often false. But he never generates those


statements mechanically. In some cases, he draws on poetic inspiration; in


other cases, he considers the aesthetic properties of the inscriptions involved;


sometimes he grasps the mathematical principles but misapplies them; and


occasionally he grasps those principles and correctly applies them. In each


case, a great of intelligence is involved, but it is usually either the wrong kind


of intelligence or the right kind of intelligence but applied in the wrong way.


      Turing would have us believe that, in this exchange, Y is theintelligent one and X is the unintelligent one. But that is the exact opposite of


the truth. The reason X is so often wrong is that he is thinking too much,


albeit the wrong ways; and the reason Y is always right is that its behavior is


completely reflexive, with the qualification that, thanks to the intelligence of


Y’s creator, the reflexes in question track the relevant body of truths. What


makes a creature intelligent is not what it does, contrary to what Turing


assumes, but why it does it. In some contexts, intelligence leads to the wrong


behaviors and its absence leads to the right ones. To be sure, intelligence is


more likely than its absence to generate the right behaviors (including the


right statements). But given a sufficiently constricted context, an unintelligent


or minimally intelligent being can outperform one that is hyper-intelligent:


someone with little mathematical intelligence can be trained to produce sums


and products faster than Gauss could and will therefore do a better job of


passing the corresponding Turing Tests. In certain contexts, certain behaviors


are relatively likely to be engaged in only by intelligent creatures, and certain


behaviors may therefore be relatively good evidence of intelligence; but there


is no single form of conduct engaged in by intelligent beings that cannot be


mimicked by unintelligent ones, and for this reason intelligence is never


identical with a tendency to engage in a certain kind of overt behavior in a


certain kind of context. So yes—Turing Tests are sometimes good tests of


intelligence, but only in the sense that they may provide reasonable strongevidence of intelligence, not in the sense they provide definitive proof of it.


      Like us, John Searle holds that overt behavior is nothing more than


evidence of intelligence, and he therefore rejects Turing’s contention to the


contrary. Unfortunately, Searle’s defense of his own position is a failure and


actually gives undeserved credence to Turing’s position. Searle asks to


suppose that, inside of a giant robot (or robot-like carapace), there lives a


man who speaks no Chinese but who has access to Chinese dictionaries and


pronunciation manuals, and the like. Despite not speaking a word of Chinese


himself, this man has become extremely adept at using these resources to


generate decrypt Chinese statements and respond to them with content-


appropriate Chinese utterances of his own, which are electronically broadcast


in a metallic voice to the external world, making it seem to those in the


external world that there exists a Chinese-speaking robot. According to


Searle, a consequence of Turing’s position is that there really does exist a


Chinese-speaking robot; and Searle takes it for granted that those who hold


this are simply wrong.


      The problem is that the behavior of this ‘robot’ (i.e. the metallic husk


with the man inside it) is intelligent. After all, the sounds that it produces are


guided by an understanding of what linguistic symbols mean and of what


those meanings make it appropriate to say, and those who believe the ‘robot’


to be intelligent are not entirely off the mark. True—those people are verywrong as to the mechanisms involved. They believe electrical circuity, as


opposed to biological wetware, to be doing all the work. But they are right


about intelligence being responsible for the robot’s behavior. What about


their belief that the robot speaks Chinese? Searle takes it for granted that this


belief is false. But is it? There is somebody inside the metallic husk who is


intelligently mapping English statements onto Chinese statements and vice


versa, and this person’s behavior is responsible for the noises leaving the


robot-husk. The essence of a given person’s supposedly mistaken belief that


the ‘the robot’ speaks Chinese is the correct belief the sounds that come out


of the robot are intelligent, as opposed to mechanical, responses to the sounds


that are directed at it.


      In conclusion, although a tendency to engage in certain forms of


behavior in certain contexts can obviously be evidence of intelligence, such a


disposition cannot itself be identical with intelligence, the reason being that


any behavior that an intelligent creature is likely to engage in can be


replicated by an unintelligent creature. Consequently, if Turing’s position is


taken to be that overt behavior can be evidence of intelligence, then it is


correct but trivial, and if it is taken to be that overt behavior can itself be


intelligence, then it is simply false. Though motivated by an awareness of


these truths, John Searle’s miscarried attempt to refute Turing ends up giving


the latter’s an undeserved sheen of legitimacy. Is the Turing Test a good test of intelligence? Second Version (philosophy)


 


      To say that a given entity ‘passes the Turing Test’ is to say that, in


some context or other, its behavior is indistinguishable from that of a being


whose conduct is guided by intelligence. Turing believed, for reasons to be


identified forthwith, that there is no difference between acting like an


intelligent entity and being an intelligent being. Turing’s answer to the


question ‘is the Turing Test a good test of intelligence?’ is therefore ‘yes.’ In


this paper, Turing’s position will be examined and refuted.  I will start by


examining the hypothetical scenario through Turing himself attempts to


motivate what he believes the answer to this question to be, and I will use a


variant of that same scenario to show that Turing’s reasoning is spurious and,


moreover, that his position is false. Then I will examine John Searle’s


attempt to refute Turing’s position. It will be shown that, although Searle is


right to regard Turing’s position as false, Searle’s attempt to refute Turing’s


position has little force.


      Turing introduced the concept of the Turing Test through the


following hypothetical. A written but rapid exchange between two parties is


occurring. One of those parties is a machine, and the other is a person. A


second person is monitoring the exchange. This person knows that one of the


parties involved is a person and that the other is a machine, and he alsoknows what each party writes and when it writes it, but he has no additional


information as to either one’s identity. According to Turing, if this person is


consistently able to figure out which of the two parties is the machine and


which one is the person, then the machine does not have intelligence. On the


other hand, if that person cannot consistently determine which of the parties


is the machine, then that machine has intelligence.


      We can use a variant of Turing’s own scenario to demonstrate the


spuriousness of Turing’s own reasoning.  Let X be the person involved in the


exchange just described and let Y be the machine; and suppose that the


exchange they are having concerns arithmetic. X is making arithmetical


statements (e.g. “1+1=2”, “1+2=3”, “1+2≠3”), and Y is evaluating those

                          3
statements. If X says “2=8”, Y responds by saying “that is correct”; and if X

      3
says “2=6”, Y responds by saying “that is incorrect.” As it happens, let us


suppose, X, though an extremely gifted playwright and poet, tends to


overthink trivial matters and therefore has trouble producing correct


statements of arithmetic. Consequently, when ‘conversing’ with Y, the


statements that he makes are often false. But he never generates those


statements mechanically.


      Turing would have us believe that, in this exchange, Y is the


intelligent one and X is the unintelligent one. But that is the exact opposite of


the truth. The reason X is so often wrong is (so we may suppose) that he isthinking too much, albeit the wrong ways; and the reason Y is always right is


that its behavior is completely reflexive, with the qualification that, thanks to


the intelligence of Y’s creator, the reflexes in question track the relevant body


of truths. What makes a creature intelligent is not what it does, contrary to


what Turing assumes, but why it does it. In some contexts, intelligence leads


to the wrong behaviors and its absence leads to the right ones. Given a


sufficiently constricted context, an unintelligent or minimally intelligent


being can outperform one that is hyper-intelligent: someone with little


mathematical intelligence can be trained to produce sums and products faster


than Gauss could and will therefore do a better job of passing the


corresponding Turing Tests. There is no single form of conduct engaged in


by intelligent beings that cannot be mimicked by unintelligent ones, and for


this reason intelligence is never identical with a tendency to engage in a


certain kind of overt behavior in a certain kind of context. So a given Turing


Test provides, at most, highly defeasible, context-internal evidence of


intelligence, and under no circumstances can a given creature’s passing such


a test be regarded as definitive proof of intelligence; and the Turing Test is


therefore not in any significant sense a good test of intelligence.


      Like us, John Searle holds that overt behavior is nothing more than


evidence of intelligence, and he therefore rejects Turing’s contention to the


contrary. Unfortunately, Searle’s defense of his own position is a failure andactually gives undeserved credence to Turing’s position. Searle asks to


suppose that, inside of a giant robot (or robot-like carapace), there lives a


man who speaks no Chinese but who has access to Chinese dictionaries and


pronunciation manuals, and the like. Despite not speaking a word of Chinese


himself, this man has become extremely adept at using these resources to


generate decrypt Chinese statements and respond to them with content-


appropriate Chinese utterances of his own, which are electronically broadcast


in a metallic voice to the external world, making it seem to those in the


external world that there exists a Chinese-speaking robot. According to


Searle, a consequence of Turing’s position is that there really does exist a


Chinese-speaking robot; and Searle takes it for granted that those who hold


this are simply wrong.


      The problem is that the behavior of this ‘robot’ (i.e. the metallic husk


with the man inside it) is intelligent. After all, the sounds that it produces are


guided by an understanding of what linguistic symbols mean and of what


those meanings make it appropriate to say, and those who believe the ‘robot’


to be intelligent are not entirely off the mark. Although these people are


wrong about the specific mechanisms involved, they are right about


intelligence being responsible for the robot’s behavior. What about their


belief that the robot speaks Chinese? Searle takes it for granted that this belief


is false. But is it? There is somebody inside the metallic husk who isintelligently mapping English statements onto Chinese statements and vice


versa, and this person’s behavior is responsible for the noises leaving the


robot-husk. The essence of a given person’s supposedly mistaken belief that


the ‘the robot’ speaks Chinese is the correct belief the sounds that come out


of the robot are intelligent, as opposed to mechanical, responses to the sounds


that are directed at it.


      In conclusion, although a tendency to engage to engage in certain


forms of behavior in certain contexts can obviously be evidence of


intelligence, such a disposition cannot itself be identical with intelligence, the


reason being that any behavior that an intelligent creature is likely to engage


in can be replicated by an unintelligent creature. Consequently, if Turing’s


position is taken to be that overt behavior can be evidence of intelligence,


then it is correct but trivial, and if it is taken to be that overt behavior can


itself be intelligence, then it is simply false. Though motivated by an


awareness of these truths, John Searle’s miscarried attempt to refute Turing


ends up giving the latter’s an undeserved sheen of legitimacy.


                   Should Caffeine be a Controlled Substance?


 


 


 


                                            Abstract


 


      Average daily caffeine intake among pre-adults in the United States


has increased more than 100% in the last twenty years, from 30 mg/day to 70


mg/day, almost entirely due to the popularity, especially among children, of


candy-flavored, highly caffeinated energy-drinks, such as Rock Star and


Monster. This development is a concern for many reasons. First, caffeine is a


psychoactive substance, like alcohol or marijuana, and for that reason alone,


so it is felt, is not appropriate for children. Second, there is reasonably


compelling that caffeine use among children is linked to temporary episodes


of ADHD-like behavior. Most ominously, there have been recent studies on


rats showing that massive daily doses of caffeine can impair brain-


development. For these reasons, the question arises whether the selling of


energy-drinks or other caffeinated substances should be criminalized or


otherwise heavily regulated. The answer to that question, so it is argued in


this paper, is “no.” There is no demonstrated evidence that, when consumed


in moderate doses, caffeine has any effect on brain development in humans,and there is in fact evidence that, in low doses, it has neuro-regenerative and


neuro-protective qualities. Second, although there is reasonably good


evidence that caffeine-intake in children can temporarily cause ADHD-like


symptoms, such as distractedness and fidgeting, there is no evidence that it


ever leads to antisocial or violent behavior. Third, granting that children


should not in general be allowed to use psychoactive substances to recreate or


self-medicate, there is no evidence that caffeine has become a gateway drug


for children, or that caffeine use among children is dangerously high, or that


such caffeine use as there is has to any degree impaired the psychological or


physical development of children or adolescents. Also, because caffeine is


the active ingredient in a number of over the counter medications, including


all medications for PMS and Migraine headaches, and because caffeine


naturally occurs in high doses in many comestibles, including chocolate,


caffeine-related regulations would be unusually burdensome to businesses


and expensive for the general public. Consequently, the benefits of caffeine-


related regulations, including regulations relating to the sale of energy drinks,


would be far too small to justify the considerable financial and societal costs.


 


                                          Introduction


 


        Caffeine is the most widely used psychoactive substance in existence.For the most part, caffeine is harmless, and there is growing evidence of the


health benefits of moderate caffeine consumption, especially on cognitive


performance (Brice, 2016). At the same time, caffeine is not entirely


innocuous. It is toxic when consumed in large doses. Also, studies have


shown that proper brain development does not occur in rats that are fed


astronomically high quantities of caffeine over a long period, suggesting,


albeit weakly, that moderate consumption of caffeine could inhibit proper


brain development in human children (Doepker et al., 2016). Additionally,


although low quantities of caffeine actually have a calming effect in children,


there is reasonably strong evidence that it can induce temporary ADHD-like


symptoms when consumed in large quantities (França, A. P., 2018). This last


fact is significant, owing to the fact that caffeine consumption among


children and adolescents more than doubled over the last thirty years. The


reason for this spike is the popularity among children and adolescents of


highly caffeinated energy drinks, such as Rock Star and Monster. Loaded


with sugar, these carbonated beverages are as easy to guzzle down as any


soft-drink, making them popular with people of all ages, and they have a


candy-like taste, making them especially popular with children (Chen et al.,


2019).


      What should the government’s response be? Should the government


take a completely hand’s off approach and do nothing to restrict the sale ofcaffeine, even to minors? Or should it intervene and criminalize or at least


penalize the sale of caffeinated products to minors and possibly other


vulnerable groups?


      It is the purpose of this paper to answer this question. After


considering all of the relevant facts, we will come to the conclusion that,


although parents should be mindful of possible caffeine use on the part of


their children, the sale and use of caffeine should not be any more regulated


than they currently are. Although caffeine can be abused, the benefits of


treating caffeine as a controlled substance, even in a highly circumscribed


manner, would not be worth the costs.


      The structure of this paper is as follows. We will start by identifying


the relevant statistical and economic data relating to caffeine-use. Then we


will discuss the effects of caffeine on both children and adults. We will


discuss its various benefits, including its medicinal uses, and we will also


discuss the adverse effects that it can have, especially when consumed in


large doses. We will then discuss the financial and logistical complexities


involved in regulating the sale and use of caffeine, many of which derive


from the fact that caffeine is present not just in coffee, but also in tea, soft-


drinks, and chocolate, as well as in numerous over the counter medications,


including Excedrin and Midol. We will conclude by synthesizing all of this


data, our conclusion being that the sale and use of caffeine should beunregulated or minimally regulated.  


 


                Important Facts and Statistics Relating to Caffeine-use


 


        Caffeine is the most widely used psychoactive substance in existence.


In the United States, for example, approximately 450 million cups of coffee


are consumed every day (Baron, 2019). In other countries, coffee


consumption is much higher. For every three cups of coffee consumed by the


average American, the average German consumes five, the average Slovenian


six, the average Norwegian seven, and the average Finn nine (Baron, 2019.


      Importantly, coffee-drinking, though the primary way of ingesting


caffeine, is not the only way of doing so. High concentrations of caffeine are


present in tea and moderate concentrations are present in soft-drinks and in


chocolate. Caffeine can also be consumed ‘directly’, in the form of caffeine


pills, such as Vivarin and NoDoz. Also, caffeine is the primary active


ingredient in so-called ‘energy drinks’, such as Red Bull and Rock Star,


which, non-coincidentally, are also loaded with sugar, giving them a candy-


like taste, and are increasingly popular with adolescents and, to a lesser


extent, children. Coffee-drinking accounts for 70% of caffeine-consumption;


tea, chocolate, and soft-drinks, including energy drinks, for 28%; and


caffeine pills, for 2% (Brice, 2016).      Unlike opiates, tobacco, alcohol, and almost all other controlled


substances, caffeine naturally occurs in many foods and beverages. Moderate


to high levels of it are present in chocolate, colas, sunflower seeds, and


various other staples; and it is therefore present, sometimes in high quantities,


in foods that contain these ingredients, including ice-cream, trail mixes, and


health bars (Brice, 2016).


      Importantly, caffeine is the active ingredient in many different over


the counter (OTC) medications. It is the active ingredient in Excedrin,


Anacin, and every other OTC remedy for migraines, and it is the active


ingredient in Midol, Pamprin and every other OTC remedy for premenstrual


syndrome. Consequently, restricting the sale of caffeine to minors would


involve restricting the sale of all such items to minors. Though theoretically


possible, this would be expensive, with the costs being passed onto to


consumers, taxpayers, and businesses; and it would also lead to irksome


expansions of regulatory bureaucracies. In order to know whether these costs


would be worth bearing, we must know how caffeine affects people, in both


the short and long terms (França et al., 2018). Let us now turn to this topic.


 


                                  Health-benefits of Caffeine


 


      First of all, caffeine increases cognitive performance. Studies haveshown that people do better on standardized tests when they are under the


influence of caffeine (Grosso et al. 2017). Studies have also shown that


caffeine boosts manual dexterity and, in particular, that physicians


performing surgery, including microsurgery, perform better when they are


under the influence of caffeine (Spiller, 2019). This is obviously linked with


the fact that almost all surgical operations are performed by physicians under


the influence of caffeine. This is true even of physicians belonging to


religious faiths, such as Mormonism, that prohibit the use of caffeine (Kelly


et al., 2016).


      There also appear to be long-term health-benefits to caffeine use.


Several studies have shown that caffeine use correlates with improved long-


term memory. Studies also show an inverse correlation between heavy


caffeine-consumption and likelihood of succumbing to Alzheimer’s and other


forms of dementia. Strikingly, studies show much the same to be true of


Parkinson’s Disease (PD): “26 studies found that the overall risk of


developing PD fell by 24-32% per 300 mg increase in caffeine intake (i.e.


with every 3 cups of coffee, approximately)” (Spiller, 2019). There is also


evidence that coffee-consumption reduces the likelihood of developing


certain kinds of cancer, including oral cancer and colon cancer (Endesfelder


et al., 2017). This is likely a consequence not of caffeine but of the


antioxidants in coffee. 


                            Adverse Health-effects of Caffeine


 


        Caffeine can also have adverse health-effects. Here it is important to


note that the effects of caffeine on adults differ in some respects from its


effects on children and adolescents. In adults, the adverse effects of caffeine


tend to be short-term, the most common ones being insomnia and irritability.


Caffeine-intake also temporarily increases heartrate and blood pressure, but


these effects subside within a few hours. Contrary to what used to be thought,


caffeine does not cause arrhythmia or coronary heart disease; nor does it


otherwise adversely affect cardiovascular health. In adults, the main reason


not to consume caffeine is that it can cause insomnia, which in turn can have


serious effects on quality of life. Also, people with mental illnesses, such as


schizoaffective disorder and generalized anxiety disorder, often have adverse


emotional responses to caffeine (Doepker et al., 2016).


      The effects of caffeine on children and adolescents are not entirely


clear, but there is evidence that it can slow down brain development if


consumed in large quantities on a consistent basis. Significantly, this


conclusion is based on experiments involving rats; it is not based on direct


evidence, such as the performance-metrics of children known to consume


caffeine regularly. Moreover, the rats in question were given astronomicallyhigh quantities of caffeine (the equivalent, after adjusting for their body-


mass, of 100 cups of coffee) every day of their pre-adult lives. Finally,


because those rats experienced acute sleep deprivation, it is possible that their


slow brain development was a consequence of their lack of sleep, not, except


indirectly, of their caffeine intake (Kolahdouzan et al. 2017). Nonetheless, the


study unambiguously showed that caffeine use in some way or other retarded


brain development in rats, and the similarities between rat brains and human


brains make it extremely likely that, if consumed in large enough quantities


over a long enough period of time, caffeine can slow down brain


development in humans (Mohan et al., 2015).


      This last point is subject to some important qualifications. First of all,


when administered to rats in moderate doses, caffeine actually offset the


damage done by brain-injuries and, in cases when the brain-injured rats were


still developing, permitted the resumption of normal brain-development.


Something analogous seems to hold of human beings, in that persons who


take caffeine pills during a stroke minimize the brain-damage subsequently


done by that stroke. Finally, studies have shown that caffeine helps offset the


damage done to neonatal rats by instances of hypoxia (Meeusen et al., 2018).


      Importantly, when taken in low to moderate doses, caffeine actually


has a calming effect on children. This is why it is often prescribed by


physicians to children who have ADHD, the standard daily dose being 200mg to 400 mg. When children do not have ADHD, 300 mg or more of


caffeine may temporarily cause ADHD-like symptoms, mainly fidgeting and


increased anxiety. It is extremely unusual for pre-adolescents to consume this


much caffeine and there are no reported cases of caffeine consumption in


children leading to anti-social or self-destructive behavior or of their having


any adverse health-consequences (Meeusen et al., 2018).


      For ethical reasons, there have been few studies of how caffeine


affects the cognitive abilities of children or adolescents. The only studies that


have been conducted concern children with ADHD who have been prescribed


caffeine by a licensed physician. Those studies show that caffeine improves


test-scores in children with ADHD and also improves manual dexterity. It is


not clear whether the same would be true of children who do not have


ADHD; nor is it otherwise clear whether those results in any way generalize


to other populations. That said, there have been studies of how caffeine


affects cognitive performance in college students and other populations, and


those studies all show that it enhances cognitive performance (Schmidt,


2017).


      As a general rule, caffeine temporarily increases blood-pressure and


heartrate, granting that, when taken in low to moderate doses, it tends to have


the opposite effect on children, especially children with ADHD. For this


reason, people are inclined to suspect that caffeine-use increases thelikelihood of stroke and heart-attack. This has been thoroughly studied and


proven to be totally false. Setting aside people with heart-conditions, even


high doses of caffeine do not increase the likelihood of heart-attack or stroke.


The effects of high doses of caffeine on those with coronary conditions have


not been thoroughly studied. There have been no documented cases of


caffeine consumption causing a cardiac incident, even in people with


coronary conditions; but because caffeine is a stimulant whose effects on


such people have not been studied, physicians recommend that they moderate


or eliminate their use of caffeine (Spiller, 2019).    


 


                          Pros and Cons of Caffeine-regulation


 


        Granting that the long-term effects on children of heavy caffeine use


are still unclear, their short-term effects are moderately well-known and are


sometimes negative. Whereas adults respond to moderate amounts of caffeine


by becoming focused, children sometimes respond by becoming confused


and agitated. Caffeine makes it easy for an adult to get through a boring


meeting, but it can make it hard for a child or even an adolescent to get


through a boring class. (This is subject to the qualification that it helps


children with ADHD to focus and behave properly.)


      This is significant because, over the last twenty years, caffeine useamong pre-adults has risen from an average of 30 mg/day to 70 mg/day.


Almost all of this extra caffeine comes from carbonated, candy-flavored, and


highly caffeinated so-called ‘energy drinks’, such as Red Bull, Monster, and


Rock Star. A single ‘Red Bull’ or ‘Rock Star’ contains around 200 mg of


caffeine—the same as a strong cup of coffee. But these beverages, unlike


coffee, are palatable to children; and unlike coffee, they go down smooth and


can easily be guzzled down. And this is just what is happening, especially


with adolescents and pre-adolescents. Currently, there are no laws preventing


children from purchasing energy drinks, and it must therefore be asked


whether such laws should be introduced (Spiller, 2019).


      In the present author’s judgment, the answer to this question is ‘no.’


First of all, we must distinguish the question ‘should children drink


caffeinated beverages?’ from the question ‘should the sale of caffeinated


beverages to children be criminalized?’ Children shouldn’t spend hours


watching TV; but if they do, neither they nor their guardians should be fined


or jailed for it. When asking whether such and such should be illegal, it is not


enough to know whether X is morally good. It must also be taken into


account whether the cure would be worse than the disease. Laws are


expensive; people have to be paid to enforce them; and before we decide to


criminalize such and such, we must be sure that the financial costs of doing


so do not outweigh the benefits (Friedman, 1962).      We must also know that, in criminalizing such and such, we are not


thereby criminalizing things that shouldn’t be criminalized. It’s well and


good to prohibit minors from purchasing energy drinks and caffeine pills. But


what if the minor is a 17-year-old who is suffering an acute migraine and


needs Excedrin? What if the minor is a 14-year-old female who is suffering


from wrenching pains due to PMS and needs Midol? In terms of its caffeine-


content, a single dose of Midol or Excedrin is comparable to the average


energy drink. (A single Excedrin has 65 mg of caffeine; a single Midol has 60


mg., the recommended dosage of each being two to four pills daily.)


      Of course, one option would be to be to allow minors to purchase


caffeinated medications but prohibit them from purchasing energy drinks or


other caffeinated non-medicinal items. This seems reasonable at first, but it


starts to seem less reasonable when financial realities are considered. This


law cannot be enforced unless police officers and prosecutors are given


special training and then dedicate at least some of their time to investigating


and prosecuting allege offenders. Either the public defrays these costs, in


which case it has that much less money to invest in education and business


and the like, or it doesn’t, in which case police and prosecutors have one


more law to enforce but no extra money with which to enforce it, the


inevitable result being that they cease to enforce some other law. This does


not mean that it would necessarily be wrong to enact the law in question, butit means that before deciding to do so, we must know what we are gaining


and what we are losing (Friedman 1962).


      The gains would be modest. Fatal caffeine overdoses are extremely


rare. In order to die from a caffeine overdose, it is necessary to ingest over 5


grams of caffeine within a few seconds. This can be done, but only by


ingesting caffeine pills or powder; it cannot be done by drinking caffeinated


liquid, since the caffeine being ingested is metabolized before it can reach


fatal levels (Turnbull et al., 2017).


      What about the effects of caffeine on brain development? Do they not


warrant banning the sale of energy drinks to youths? They do not. The rats in


the studies in question were given 300 mg of caffeine every day of their lives


until they reached adulthood. The average rat weighs under 10 oz; the


average person weights around 175 lbs. or 2800 oz. This means that these rats


were given the equivalent of 84000 mg of caffeine every single day of their


pre-adult lives. The average American middle-schooler, by contrast,


consumes 70 mg of caffeine, making it unclear whether that experiment has


any bearing at all on the effects of caffeine on human brain development


(Winerdal et al., 2017).


      What about the ADHD-like symptoms that caffeine elicits from pre-


adolescents? Do they not demand that we criminalize the sale of energy


drinks to minors? No. Children obviously shouldn’t consume energy drinks;but that doesn’t mean that we should criminalize their doing so. Children do


not respond to caffeine by becoming violent or otherwise ‘acting out.’ Their


responses are internal: anxiety, restlessness, irritability, and the like. These


emotional changes may lead to expressions of discomfort, such as fidgeting


and squirming, but there are no documented cases of their leading to violent


or confrontational behavior (Brice, 2016).


      The most serious consequence for children of caffeine-consumption is


difficulty sleeping. Sleep-deprivation, especially in children, is a serious


matter. But, first of all, there are no documented cases of children suffering


from chronic insomnia as a result of caffeine consumption, and even if there


were, the right response would not be to criminalize their behavior. Setting


aside cases of violent or excessively disruptive behavior, substandard


behavior on the part of children can and should be dealt with by parents and


teachers, through instruction and discipline. If we try to solve non-criminal


problems by criminalizing them, we will only create worse problems


(Friedman, 1962).


 


                                            Conclusion


 


      There is no evidence that caffeine consumption among adults does


them harm, and there is considerable evidence that it does good. There arestudies that show that daily mega-doses of caffeine impair brain development


in rats; but the doses given, when adjusted for weight, were over hundreds of


times higher than any dose that any human being could possibly consume.


Also, those studies do not make it clear whether the caffeine directly


impaired brain-development in rats or whether it did so by causing sleep-


deprivation.


      Children with ADHD who are given moderate to high doses of


caffeine respond with improved test-performances and improved conduct.


Children without ADHD who take comparable doses respond by temporarily


having ADHD-like symptoms, such as fidgeting, but they do not act out or


act violently, and the effects last only a few hours.


        Although there has been a large percentage-increase in caffeine


consumption among children, due almost entirely to the popularity with that


demographic of energy drinks, the absolute levels of caffeine consumption


among pre-adults remains low. Moreover, there has been no evidence that


caffeine consumption has adversely affected children’s health or


psychological development, and there is definitive evidence that it is helpful


in these respects to children with ADHD.


      Government regulations are expensive. They are expensive to


implement and expensive to enforce. Oftentimes, these expenses are justified.


For example, the laws that prohibit minors from purchasing alcohol, tobacco,and firearms are justified, given the obvious health-problems that such


regulations prevent. In the case of caffeine-related regulations, such expenses


would not be justified. Currently the sale of caffeine is almost completely


unregulated, and there is no evidence of any kind that children or anyone else


is being harmed as a result. Also, the introduction of such regulations would


be especially thorny, given the fact that it is the active ingredient in many


medications, including every single OTC medicine for migraine headaches


and premenstrual syndrome. It is a distinct possibility that adolescents


wanting a ‘caffeine fix’ might resort to buying Excedrin or Anacin, which,


unlike straight caffeine, are far from harmless. Of course, the government


could counter-respond by prohibiting the sale of Excedrin and other such


medications, but nothing but suffering and inconvenience would come of any


such prohibition, as anyone suffering from a migraine or from premenstrual


syndrome knows all too well.


      Further problems arise from the fact that caffeine is available to


consumers in a wide variety of forms, including snack-bars, teas, and health-


drinks. Restrictions on the sale of caffeine, if enforced, would require a


veritable army of regulators and would also debilitate a wide variety of


businesses. The result of such restrictions would be an unwelcome and


useless encroachment of government on the private sector, with no


foreseeable gain for any demographic. It must therefore be concluded that, atpresent, any dialing up of caffeine-related regulations are contraindicated.


 


                                          Works Cited


 


      Ardais, A. P., Rocha, A. S., Borges, M. F., Fioreze, G. T., Sallaberry,


C., Mioranzza, S., ... & de Oliveira Porciúncula, L. (2016). Caffeine exposure


during rat brain development causes memory impairment in a sex selective


manner that is offset by caffeine consumption throughout life. Behavioural


brain research, 303, 76-84.


      Brice, M. (2016). Seven Surprising Health Benefits of Coffee. Medical


Daily.


      Chen, X., Liu, Y., Jaenicke, E. C., & Rabinowitz, A. N. (2018). The


Added Caffeine, Health Concerns and Potential Regulations: The Case of


Energy Drinks.


      Chen, X., Liu, Y., Jaenicke, E. C., & Rabinowitz, A. N. (2019). New


concerns on caffeine consumption and the impact of potential regulations:


The case of energy drinks. Food Policy, 101746.


      Clark, I., & Landolt, H. P. (2017). Coffee, caffeine, and sleep: A


systematic review of epidemiological studies and randomized controlled


trials. Sleep medicine reviews, 31, 70-78.


      Doepker, C., Lieberman, H. R., Smith, A. P., Peck, J. D., El-Sohemy,A., & Welsh, B. T. (2016). Caffeine: friend or foe?. Annual Review of Food


Science and Technology, 7, 117-137.


        Endesfelder, S., Weichelt, U., Strauß, E., Schlör, A., Sifringer, M.,


Scheuer, T., ... & Schmitz, T. (2017). Neuroprotection by caffeine in


hyperoxia-induced neonatal brain injury. International journal of molecular


sciences, 18(1), 187.


      Friedman, Milton. 1962. Capitalism and Freedom. Cambridge:


Harvard University Press.


      Grosso, G., Godos, J., Galvano, F., & Giovannucci, E. L. (2017).


Coffee, caffeine, and health outcomes: an umbrella review. Annual review of


nutrition, 37, 131-156.


      Kelly, J. P., & Granger, C. B. (2016). More Evidence That Caffeine


Consumption Appears to Be Safe in Patients With Heart Failure. JAMA


internal medicine, 176(12), 1759-1760.


        Kolahdouzan, M., & Hamadeh, M. J. (2017). The neuroprotective


effects of caffeine in neurodegenerative diseases. CNS neuroscience &


therapeutics, 23(4), 272-290.


      Mohan, A., Roberto, A. J., Mohan, A., Liogier-Weyback, L., Guha,


R., Ravishankar, N., ... & Mohan, R. (2015). Caffeine as treatment for


Alzheimer's disease: a review. Journal of Caffeine Research, 5(2), 61-64.


      Meeusen, R., & Decroix, L. (2018). Nutritional supplements and thebrain. International journal of sport nutrition and exercise metabolism, 28(2),


200-211.


      Schmidt, B., Roberts, R. S., Anderson, P. J., Asztalos, E. V.,


Costantini, L., Davis, P. G., ... & Moddemann, D. (2017). Academic


performance, motor function, and behavior 11 years after neonatal caffeine


citrate therapy for apnea of prematurity: an 11-year follow-up of the CAP


randomized clinical trial. JAMA pediatrics, 171(6), 564-572.


      Spiller, G. A. (2019). Caffeine. CRC Press.


        Turnbull, D., Rodricks, J. V., Mariano, G. F., & Chowdhury, F.


(2017). Caffeine and cardiovascular health. Regulatory Toxicology and


Pharmacology, 89, 165-185.


      Winerdal, M., Urmaliya, V., Winerdal, M. E., Fredholm, B. B.,


Winqvist, O., & Ådén, U. (2017). Single dose caffeine protects the neonatal


mouse brain against hypoxia ischemia. PloS one, 12(1), e0170545.


      Verster, J. C., & Koenig, J. (2018). Caffeine intake and its sources: A


review of national representative studies. Critical reviews in food science and


nutrition, 58(8), 1250-1259.


        Yousefi‐Nooraie, R., Akbari‐Kamrani, M., & Mortaz‐Hedjri, S.


(2018). Caffeine for cognition. The Cochrane database of systematic


reviews, 2018(8).


                                     Annotated Bibliography


 


      Brice, M. (2016). Seven Surprising Health Benefits of Coffee. Medical


Daily. Discusses recent research that proves caffeine to have a number of


important health benefits, including longer life, low likelihood of contracting


Alzheimer’s, and improved long-term memory.


      Meeusen, R., & Decroix, L. (2018). Nutritional supplements and the


brain. International journal of sport nutrition and exercise metabolism, 28(2),


200-211. A survey of numerous recent studies concerning the effect of


caffeine on the bloodstream’s ability to transport oxygen and on the


consequent long- and short-term health-effects of caffeine.


      Spiller, G. A. (2019). Caffeine. CRC Press. A comprehensive, non-


partisan analysis of recent scientific work concerning the health-effects of


caffeine, as well as the economics of the coffee- and tea-industries. Special


attention is paid to recent findings concerning the probable link between


increased neural plasticity and elevated levels of caffeine intake.


        Turnbull, D., Rodricks, J. V., Mariano, G. F., & Chowdhury, F.


(2017). Caffeine and cardiovascular health. Regulatory Toxicology and


Pharmacology, 89, 165-185. Describes a series of studies in which the effects


of caffeine on cardiovascular health were shown to be positive and,


consequently, not to be similar to those of other agents, such as sodium andnicotine, that increase heartrate and blood-pressure.


      Winerdal, M., Urmaliya, V., Winerdal, M. E., Fredholm, B. B.,


Winqvist, O., & Ådén, U. (2017). Single dose caffeine protects the neonatal


mouse brain against hypoxia ischemia. PloS one, 12(1), e0170545. A detailed


discussion of striking findings on the part of researchers concerning the use


of caffeine to minimize hypoxia-induced brain-damage in neonatal mice.


        Yousefi‐Nooraie, R., Akbari‐Kamrani, M., & Mortaz‐Hedjri, S.


(2018). Caffeine for cognition. The Cochrane database of systematic


reviews, 2018(8). A discussion of recent studies concerning the alleged


neuro-protective properties of caffeine. Provides clear, quantitative data to


the effect that caffeine improves performance on standardized tests. 


                            Who started the Cold War?


 


              The Soviet Union’s political ideology was inherently aggressive


and expansionistic, and that—and that alone—is why the Cold War


happened. It is obviously more politically correct to take the view that both of


the two major parties involved in the Cold War were equally responsible for


its genesis. But that isn’t at all true, for reasons to be discussed. Nor is it true


that, once the Cold War had begun, the situation was morally symmetrical,


with both parties behaving equally morally and equally immorally. The


situation was fundamentally asymmetrical. This was because communism—


especially, the particularly invidious form of it on which the USSR was based


—was not simply one political system among others. Bolshevik communism


was not intended to bring peace or prosperity either to the Russian people or


to the rest of the world; and the founders of the Soviet Union had every


intention of bringing about a war, or some kind or other, with the ‘decadent


West’, especially the United States.


      “It is better than half the world perish and the other half be


communist”, said Lenin, founder the Soviet Union, “than the entire human


race live and communism perish.” Before World War II, the Soviet


Leadership, headed by Joseph Stalin, had already deliberately starved onethird of the Ukrainian population to death, as a way of breaking Ukrainian


resistance to Soviet rule. In additions, millions of people in all of the Soviet


Republics had been shot, imprisoned in the Gulag, or forced to relocate en


masse. Freedom of speech was non-existent; private property was equally


non-existent; living conditions were wretched; there were virtually no


personal, religious, or commercial freedoms of any kind. Although some


people obviously had more power than others, nobody had any legal rights of


any kind. Stalinist Russia was the purest example in human history of a state


that was inimical to its own people.


      In popular culture, we are often told that Stalin corrupted the


revolution. “The revolution began with noble ideals”, we are told. “Trotsky


and Lenin wanted to create a just and egalitarian social order, but Stalin


seized power and derailed the Revolution.” Lenin and Trotsky had


deliberately created a hyper-authoritarian state, and they used it to break the


Russian the middle class, as well as most of the rest of Russian society.


Lenin’s great ‘theoretical innovation’ as a Marxist was his belief that that, in


order for a Marxist state to be created, it was necessary that a ‘revolutionary


vanguard’, operating without any other party’s consent, autonomously take


power and, once in power, forcibly impose communism on society. As for


Trotsky, his great “innovation” as a Marxist was his belief in “permanent


revolution” in all countries. In Trotsky’s view, the rightful objective of aMarxist “revolutionary vanguard” was to impose Marxist communism on all


nations, not just on this or that specific nation.


      Lenin and Trotsky were in complete agreement on all of these points.


In fact, their only significant points of disagreement concerned matters that


were internal to Marxist theory and proved to be of no significance. For


example, Trotsky, unlike Lenin and Marx, held that labor unions were not


inimical to the long-term interests of the ‘proletariat.’ But since there were no


labor unions in Russia, this disagreement was not important. Also, Lenin and


Trotsky made it their objective to strip all Russians, including peasants, of all


of their assets and to kill those who resisted. They rationalized this by saying


that anyone who had any assets and did not immediately relinquish them was


for that very reason a ‘kulak’ (meaning an exploitative landowner,


comparable to a feudal lord) who, as such, had to be ‘exterminated.’ During


World War 1, when the Red Cross entered Russia to provide food and


medicine to the sick and malnourished Russian peasants, Lenin and Trotsky


organized troops to drive them out of Russia, which they succeeded in doing


and which they rationalized by saying that the Russian peasantry had to


suffer as much as possible so that they would come to hate the Tsarist order


and join them in overthrowing it. 


      Stalin did indeed seize power; but he was only able to do so because


the Communist Party had total power and he belonged to it. The CommunistParty had total power because Lenin and Trotsky fought for decades to give it


total power. Stalin and Trotsky were indeed foes, but not because they had


important ideological disagreements. Quite the contrary, they were in perfect


agreement as to what kind of government Russia was to have, their only


disagreement concerning who was to be in charge of it.


      Stalin exiled Trotsky in 1928; and by the start of WWII, Stalin had


long since had total power. Stalin used World War II to expand his power


base to other countries, his first move in this direction being to absorb all of


Eastern Europe into the Soviet Union. It is generally believed that this was


the beginning of the Cold War. Not so. Before the Soviet Union had even


been established, Lenin and Trotsky had agitated for Communist revolution


in the United States and Britain and had already established a network of


‘fellow travelers.’ After WWII ended, the Soviet Union had real power; and


Stalin, and the many others who wanted to spread the gospel of Marxist


communism, had soviet military power behind them and therefore no longer


had to rely solely on agitation and other such grass-roots measures. But the


so-called ‘Cold War’ was merely a militarized continuation of a campaign to


take control of the West that had been occurring since the first decade of the

th
20 century. This led to the wholesale Marxist takeover of China, North


Korea, Cuba, and Cambodia.


      The United States’ role in the Cold War was entirely defensive, inevery sense. To be sure, it made many terrible mistakes. It fought


communism where it wasn’t a significant threat (e.g. Vietnam, Angola) and


didn’t fight it where it was a significant threat (e.g. Eastern Europe, right after


the end of WWII). But the Soviet Union was the aggressor. Also, the Soviet


Union’s economy was completely broken; so even though its post-Stalinist


leaders lacked the Marxist ardor of their predecessors, they had no choice but


to expand, since their economy wasn’t self-sufficient. (When the Soviet


Union fell in 1989, it was because it simply ran out of money.) The United


States had a booming economy during the Cold War—and before it, except


during the early 1930s—and stood to gain little, from its wars-by-proxy with


the Soviet Union. It did not gain resources or land or trading partners; and it


also lost good will and credibility, with its own citizens and with the rest of


the world. But the Soviet Union had everything to gain from its engagements


abroad; and those engagements where what kept it economically afloat


during its short existence.


      In conclusion, the Cold War was a war of Soviet aggression, fueled by


a commitment to aggressive expansionism that was built into its very system


by its founders and catalyzed by its desperate need for resources. For the


United States, the Cold War was a losing proposition; the United States did


not profit from its engagements in Vietnam or Korea or Cuba or Guyana or


Angola. Moreover, those engagements were public relations disasters. Theonly reason the United States undertook them is that it was trying to keep


Soviet aggression in check. 


                 Who was a better President? Eisenhower or JFK?


 


        Ultimately, Eisenhower was a better president than JFK. This is not


because JFK failed to accomplish anything during his presidency: he


accomplished a great deal; and his list of presidential accomplishments is


longer and more illustrious than Eisenhower’s list. It isn’t because he did too


little that JFK was less of a President than Eisenhower, but rather because he


did too much. The American people take it for granted that their President is


supposed to solve their problems. This is largely JFK’s doing: thanks to him,


government is now expected to be, for lack of a better term, a ‘big brother’—


a righter of wrongs, as opposed to a neutral administrator, with the result that


government is now so large that nobody’s rights are secure. Eisenhower’s


presidency, by contrast, was emotionally neutral and, unlike JFK’s, did not


pave the way for the situation we have now, in which the government is


omnipresent.


      Let us start by listing Eisenhower’s main presidential

                  [1]
accomplishments:


      *He balanced the budget.


      *He created the highway system.


      *He kept America out of war.      *He ended the Korean war and did so on terms that were at least


reasonably consistent with American interests.


      *He signed the first Civil Rights Acts into law.


 


      Now let us state his main presidential failures (or what are taken to be

    [2]
such):


 


      *He failed to end the Cold War.


      *He failed to help the American farmer.


        *Economic growth, though steady, was slow.


      *He did not combat the hard-right, McCarthyite wing of the


Republican Party.


      *He did not promote Civil Rights sufficiently aggressively.


 


      Notice that Eisenhower’s supposed ‘failures’ as a President were


really about his not taking an interventionist, moralizing role in American


affairs. When we say that Eisenhower ‘should’ have done more to combat


McCarthyism, what is the justification? McCarthy had a position; other


people had different positions. It may have been Eisenhower’s responsibilityto curb criminal misconduct on McCarthy’s part, but it was not his


responsibility to extirpate all support for McCarthy’s political views. So this


‘failure’ of Eisenhower’s was a failure only relative to an activist,


Kennedyesque conception of government.


      Now let us look at Kennedy’s presidential achievements and failings,

                                              [3]
starting with his (alleged) achievements:


 


      *He averted nuclear war.


      *He founded the peace corp.


      *He encouraged public service on the part of Americans.


      *He helped usher in affirmative action, equal pay, and civil rights.


      *He started the US space program.


      *He gave a temporary boost to the economy. 


 


      Now let us look at his failures:


 


      *He gave arms to many (then) US allies, many of which are now


dangerous actors.


      *He deepened our involvement in Viet Nam.      *He failed to remove Castro from power, emboldening the Soviets to


threaten us with Nuclear war.


 


      JFK’s achievements are impressive—but dubious. The theme we see


running through his presidency is that it is the President’s job to be a hero: a


righter of wrongs, as opposed to a mere administrator---which sometimes has


positive effects (e.g. civil rights), sometimes has negative ones (e.g. Viet


Nam), and sometimes has ambiguous effects (e.g. expansion of money supply


and credit, leading to temporary economic spike), but has led to over-


expansions of government in both domestic and foreign policy.


      Sadly, unless there is an actual crisis, it is the government’s job to


govern—not to inspire, not to create a utopia, not even to eliminate all


injustices. Eisenhower’s Presidency was a blank compare to Kennedy’s, his


main accomplishment being the construction of the national highway system.


Kennedy’s system was certainly not a blank, and he was obviously in many


respects a singularly good president; but his legacy was that Presidents are


supposed to be heroes, not mere civil servants, which has caused politics to


become much more ideological and divisive than it has to be and which,


consequently, has impaired the effectiveness of government.


                   Who was a better President? Nixon or LBJ?


 


        Richard Nixon is now made out to be a bigoted right-wing extremist,


and LBJ is made out to be the exact opposite, the conventional wisdom that


Richard Nixon was an oppressor and LBJ a champion of the oppressed. But


this position is not consistent with their actual political legacies. Under LBJ,


and to a large extent because of him, the United States government engaged


in aggressive campaigns to improve education and to fight poverty,


unemployment, and racial discrimination. But the aftermath of these


measures is increased unemployment among African Americans, a


dysfunctional educational system for everybody, and a bloated and hyper-


authoritarian Federal government. Richard Nixon, by contrast, did have at


least some unambiguous successes as President and must therefore be


regarded as better President than LBJ.


      Let us start by listing what many would regard as LBJ’s greatest


accomplishments:


 


      *He created the welfare system, with its general financial provisions


for those in dire economic straits.


      *He signed into law measures that aggressively racism towards ethnicminorities illegal in all but the most completely personal contexts.


      *He increased Federal funding, as well as oversight, of education by a


factor of ten.


 


      LBJ’s greatest mistake as President is generally believed to be his


decision to deep American involvement in Viet Nam.


 


      What about Richard Nixon? What were his greatest accomplishments


as President?


 


        *Nixon founded the EPA.


      *Nixon officially recognized Communist China, which, by his


      intention, hastened the demise of the Soviet Union.


        *Nixon ended the Viet Nam war


 


              What were Nixon’s greatest mistakes?


 


      *He used the instruments of government to cover up a crime that he


committed.      *He deepened American involvement in Viet Nam before ending the


war.


      *He started the War on Drugs.


      *He took America off the gold standard.


 


      With regard to the last item, I do not myself know that this was a


mistake; but it is sufficiently often mentioned that I felt obliged to include it.


As for the War on Drugs, for various reasons (the main being that penalizes


lifestyles, as opposed to crimes, and therefore turns the police into thought


police), I believe this to be one of the worst mistakes ever made in the history


of public policy, and it is, in my judgment, the blackest spot on Nixon’s


legacy.


      Given only what we’ve said thus far, LBJ appears to be the obvious


front-runner. But not so fast! LBJ’s ‘War on Poverty’ created more poverty,


especially among the very groups that it was intended to help. Prior to LBJ’s


great reforms,


 


        *Unemployment among African Americans was lower than it is.


      *African Americans were considerably more likely to own their


      businesses than they are now        *African Americans were more likely to be employed as engineers


and to have trades.


      *Crime among African Americans was lower, as were incarceration


rates.


      *Income-gaps between Caucasians and African Americans were


      smaller, as were education-gaps.


      *Public education was better and less expensive.


      *The Federal government was smaller.


      *The cost of living was lower.


      *Rates of depression and mental illness were lower.


      *Rates of homeownership, including among African Americans, were


higher.


        *Levels of well-being, including among African Americans, were


higher.


 


      In a word, each of LBJ’s signature policies, though admirable in


intent, seriously backfired. Also, LBJ’s decisions concerning Viet Nam cost


lives on both sides, while failing to advance American interests.


      By contrast, Nixon’s good deeds as Presidents have stood the test oftime. By recognizing China, Nixon created infighting within the Communist


bloc and thereby paved the way for the demise of Soviet Communism. AS for


the EPA, it does water it is supposed to do: it protects the environment,


including wildlife, and helps keep water clean and water drinkable. As for


Nixon’s behavior vis-à-vis Vietnam, this, like many other aspects of his


presidency, was ambiguous. But he did end the war, despite being under


pressure from his own base to continue it; and that is more than can be said


for Johnson.


      In conclusion, LBJ clearly meant well, but his policies to a large


extent did the opposite of what they were supposed to do. According to


economists, this is because those policies replaced the invisible hand of


supply-and-demand with the dead hand of government policy, leading to a


weakened economy and a consequent loss of wealth across the board,


especially for those on the bottom economic rung. I suspect that there is more


to the story. I personally do not believe that welfare is particularly


destructive, economically or otherwise, and I don’t believe LBJ was wrong to


implement generous welfare policies. But his expansion of government was


too fast and too large, its aftermath being a government that is too large and


is too involved in people’s lives.


 


     Technology-caused Job-shortages and the Need for Universal Welfare


 


How, if at all, will artificial jobs affect employment in the future? Are you an


optimist on this score, or a pessimist?


 


 


        Artificial intelligence eliminates several jobs for each job that it


creates. This is what has been happening since AI’s very inception, and this is


what will continue to happen. Some people claim that AI creates as many


jobs as it eliminates. This is false, and it is the purpose of this essay to prove


that it is false. I will start by showing that it is inherent in what technology is


that technological advancement decreases the amount of work that there is for


people to do. I will then explain why this is doubly true of AI. I will end by


discussing how government should deal with the job-shortage that AI  will


inevitably lead to.


      Technology reduces the need to work, and it makes the work that it


doesn’t eliminate less difficult. Thanks to tractors, sewing-machines, and gas-


powered drills, it takes little effort to do in an afternoon what it would take


months of back-breaking labor to do by hand.  What is true of cars, tractors,


and sewing machines is true of AI-based technologies:  thanks to


smartphone-apps and computer-programs, it takes little effort, as well as littletraining, to do in a single afternoon what would otherwise be impossible or


would require months of intense intellectual work on the part of a trained


professional.


      Many people have either lost jobs to technology or fear that they soon


will. Right-wing economists have argued that such people are wrong.


According to such economists, technology creates a job for every job that it


takes away. In their view, technology took jobs away from cobblers, but it


created new jobs for the engineers needed to build and maintain the machines


that made cobblers unnecessary. Similarly, so they argue, AI is taking jobs


away from stockbrokers, but it has created new jobs for the programmers


needed to service the e-platforms that eliminated the need for stockbrokers. In


general, so it is argued, technology needs people to service it and therefore


creates jobs that take the place of those that it eliminates.


      This position is false and always has been. In societies that have little


or no technology, the unemployment rate tends to be zero. There was no


unemployment in Cambodia under Pol Pot; nor was there any in an Eskimo


fishing community in the year 1600. The reason is the same in each case:


where there is no technology, labor is inefficient, and everybody must


therefore work. To be sure, new technology does indeed create new kinds of


work: before there were cars, there were no auto-mechanics; and before there


were smartphones, there were no app-developers. But the purpose oftechnology is to minimize how much work we have to do; it is not to alter the


nature of what we have to do while keeping its quantity the same. If cars,


tractors, and fork-lifts didn’t lighten workloads, we wouldn’t have much use


for them. Consequently, there is no truth whatsoever to the idea that


technological advancement creates as much work as it eliminates.


      Why was such an absurd position ever argued for? The main reason is


that the economists who advocate this position want to minimize the amount


of government-interference in the economy. Their position is that


government regulation restricts commerce and thwarts economic


development: and in most contexts, they are right, since a society cannot


function for long unless its members are allowed to exchange goods and


services. But even if unregulated societies economically outperform regulated


ones, it doesn’t follow that the government should never regulate. Second,


unemployment benefits are not a form of government regulation and don’t


have the same invidious economic effects as regulations. The law that


prevents people from teaching unless they have a master’s degree in


education is a regulation, since it prevents the market from deciding who


works and gives that power to the government. The laws prevent people from


killing and robbing are not regulations, since they don’t do this, and neither,


for the same reason, are the laws that give people welfare benefits. To be


sure, welfare benefits are not economically innocuous, since they have to bepaid for out of people’s taxes; but granting that excessive taxation hurts an


economy, moderate taxation is sometimes a necessity, this being a case in


point.


      Technology has always eliminated jobs; but in times past, the contrary


position, though false, was at least defensible. Pre-AI technology did not run


itself, and its effect was not so much to eliminate employment as it was to


make employment less about physical labor and more about knowing how to


operate labor-saving machines. When the tractor came into existence,


agricultural work became that much less about physical labor and that much


more about knowing how to operate a tractor. But the story is very different


when tractors are replaced by self-operating tractors and when, more


generally, machines are replaced by robots. True—people will still be needed


to maintain those robots, but there will be very few such jobs in relation to


the number of labor jobs lost, and those jobs will also require unusually high


levels of training and intellectual acumen. In general, a slight improvements


in technology creates massive gains in efficiency and a corresponding drop in


the demand for a given person’s labor.


      This is cause for alarm if people are still required to work for food,


lodging, and other necessities, since new technology, especially AI-based


technology, makes most people economically redundant. But it is not a cause


for alarm if people are not forced to work for basic necessities. And thanks tothe surpluses of wealth created by the very technologies that make most


people economically redundant, there is no reason for most people to work.


      The standard response to this is that, unless people are forced to work,


they will become parasites and society will fall apart. But the truth is that


most people right now are parasites: most jobs are not necessary and cost


society more than they are worth. Somebody who receives $20,000 in welfare


is quite harmless. But a redundant police officer or government bureaucrat is


not harmless, since, unlike the welfare recipient, that person has power. This


is not to say that all government employees and police officers are useless.


But there is no way to create jobs for people without giving them at least


some power. Even the lowliest and most unnecessary clerk can jam up


legitimate business—and is likely to do so to make himself feel important.


Creating jobs for unemployable people gives them the ability to prevent


employable people from contributing, and it is therefore best simply to give


them money for basic necessities. Ironically, the belief of right-wing


economists that everyone should have to compete in the arena of commerce,


with its consequent refusal on the part of government to give welfare to


people who simply cannot do so, leads to the creation of vast numbers of jobs


that benefit nobody, including those who have them. I therefore suggest that a


universal welfare policy be instituted. In this I am in agreement with many


distinguished people, including economically informed right-wing figures,such as Richard Nixon, who was one of the first public figures to advocate


such a policy, as well as technology-wise left-wing figures, such as Mark


Zuckerberg.


 


           My Reaction to Schoenberg’s  A Survivor from Warsaw  


                https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DFXkc9AGoeU


 


      The ‘point’ of this work, so to speak, is that the events in question


were not simply dark but fell outside of what human beings are able to


process; and this work conveys that point by being atonal and, on that basis,


deriding and caricaturing pre-existing musical norms, rather than deploying


them in any ordinary way. The first sounds that we hear are of an almost


triumphant-sounding trumpet (01:-04). The motif is almost like that of a


national anthem (e.g. the Chinese National Anthem, which is based on what


sounds like a tonal version of this same trumpet-riff). But the modal is askew,


being atonal, and is quickly met with a dark, semi-atonal orchestral


background. Incidentally, the cello motif immediately heard thereafter sounds


like Philip Glass, and I suspect that he may even have consciously borrowed


it. (Cf. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Stu7h7Qup8 32:09)


      The rest of this work followed suit, all of it being on the edges of tonal


music and all of it being, as it were, derogatory of it and, so it seems, of the


cultural norms thereby represented, the work’s overall point seemingly being


that what was happening in the world could no longer be understood in the


usual rationality-based ways. What was a little hard to understand—or at


least to fit into this way of understanding this work---was Chorale part, sungin Hebrew, as to the Jewish people’s future responsibilities to itself. The


lyrics were straightforward and clearly non-ironic; but the accompanying


music was atonal and, so it seemed, derisive, making it unclear whether the


words being sung were to be taken literally, on the one hand, or, on the other


hand, dismissed, in light of recent events, as naïve. I suspect that they were


meant to be taken literally and were accompanied by atonal, ambiguous-


sounding music only because that was the genre in which Schoenberg


happened to composer.


      I chose to listen to the video that did not feature Holocaust pictures.


This was because I wanted to listen to the music without being ‘told’, so to


speak, how to react. (The singing, especially the solo singing in English, did,


however, tell me, quite literally, what I was to be thinking and feeling; and I


was a bit surprised at this brazen violation of the ‘show, don’t tell’ rule


governing theatrical performances.) Frankly, I found this work  easy to listen


to, precisely because it doesn’t use conventional tonality. I was able to listen


to each bar on its own, without having to feel that I had to embed in a larger


musical narrative. Also, even though this music is classified as ‘atonal’, it is


not, literally speaking, atonal; it is only relatively atonal. Relatedly, I think


that contemporary audiences would find this piece much less jarring than


Schoenberg’s contemporaries, mainly because so much film music sounds


like this, probably because, so I suspect, Schoenberg’s music itself influencedfilm-composers.


      And this last point, I think, is central to what is going with


Schoenberg’s music. Bach’s music is not meant to represent anything; neither


is Mozart’s or Beethoven’s. These composers did, of course, compose masses


and operas and other story-accompanying works; but their music is always,


ultimately, to be listened to by itself. Schoenberg’s music, by contrast, sounds


like a movie score and is easy to listen if listened to in that way. But if


listened to on its own, in the way in which Mozart or Beethoven are listened


to, it is a bit grating. I would conjecture that part of what allowed Schoenberg


to compose atonal music was that his music  was, at least by his intention, to


be listened to as an accompaniment to a play or some such, and not on its


own, so that the dissonances in it as comments on an independent story-line,


and not as musical ends unto themselves.


           Statistics: Basic Principles and Theorems (Math/Statistics)


 


  DEFINITIONS/IMPORTANT THEOREMS


 


RANGE: TOP VALUE MINUS BOTTOM VALUE


MEAN: AVERAGE


MEDIAN: VALUE THAT SPLITS DATA SET


STANDARD DEVIATION: AVERAGE DIFFERENCE OF DATA POINT


FROM MEAN


VARIANCE: SQUARE OF STANDARD DEVIATION


MODE: VALUE THAT OCCURS MOST OFTEN


UNIMODAL: HAVING A SINGLE HIGHEST VALUE


BIMODAL: HAVING TWO HIGHEST VALUES


RIGHT-SKEWED: VALUES BUNCHED TOWARDS LEFT


LEFT-SKEWED: VALUES BUNCHED TOWARDS RIGHT


Z SCORE (TWO KINDS SEE INSERT)


 x with bar over it=sample mean


mu=population mean


sigma=population standard deviation


s=sample standard deviation


P(A)=probability of A

  C
P(A)=probability of NOT A 

  C
P(A)=1-P(A))


P(AUB)=probability of either A or B


P(A∩B)=probability of both A and B


P(A/B)=probability of A given B


 


PROBABILITY THEOREMS (SEE BELOW FOR ILLUSTRATIONS)


 


PROBABILITY OF EITHER A OR B (ADDITIVE RULE)


 


P(XUY)=P(X)+P(Y)-P(X∩Y) 


PROBABILITY OF A AND B (MULTIPLICATIVE RULE)







PROBABILITY OF A GIVEN B


 








                                MULIPLICATIVE RULE (ALTERNATIVE


VERSION)


 









 


 


 


BAYES RULE


  





 


 


 


 


SEE BELOW FOR EXPLANATIONS/EXAMPLES 


EMPIRICAL RULE


 


68% OF DATA POINTS FALL WITHIN ONE STANDARD DEVIATION


95% OF DATA POINTS FALL WITHIN TWO STANDARD


DEVIATIONS


97.5% OF DATA POINTS FALL WITHIN THREE STANDARD


DEVIATIONS


 


SO ANYTHING IN TOP 2.5% OR BOTTOM 2.5% IS OUTLIER.


NOTHING ELSE IS OUTLIER


 


USE TI 84 TO FIND MEAN/MEDIAN/STANDARD DEVIATION/QL/QU


 


Let’s suppose you want to do statistics (find mean, median, standard


deviation etc.) on the following numbers:


1,5,22,999


Ti-84 makes it easy.


HIT STAT


CHOOSE EDIT


ENTER NUMBERS IN FIRST COLUMN (TITLED L1)(JUST TYPE NUMBER THEN HIT ENTER)


HIT STAT


SCROLL TO RIGHT TO ‘CALC’


HIT ENTER TWICE













 


The x with the bar over it is the mean.


∑x=sum of all the values


σx=POPULATION STANDARD DEVIATION


Sx=SAMPLE STANDARD DEVIATION 


 


 


FIND MEDIAN WITH TI 84


 


To find MEDIAN, scroll down some more


  


Q1=QUARTILE 1


Q3=QUARTILE 3


YOU NEED TO KNOW Q1/Q3


 


 


Frequency=number


Relative frequency=percentage


Example:


H=hockey play


S=soccer player


 


HHHSSSSSSSHHHSSSSSSS


 


Frequency of H=6


Relative frequency of H=30% 


PARETO DIAGRAMS


 


Pareto Diagram: bar diagram, with bars in descending order, where there is a


line indicating cumulative (total) amount.














 


STEM AND LEAF DISPLAY


 


Stem and leaf display: two column chart where first column (‘stem’) gives


first digit of statistic and second column (‘leaf) gives rest of statistics.


 


StemLeaf


25 9 8


43 8


37 7 9This means that the statistics are as follows:


25


29


28


43


48


37


37


39


To get total number of observations/statistics in leaf diagram


The original numbers for a stem and leaf display are the actual numbers. So


in this case, they would be: 25, 29, 28 etc.


When the stem column contains a ‘0’, the original numbers are identical with


those in the leaf column.


 stemleaf


Row 103 5 6


Row 223 9


  The original data for row 1 are: 3, 5, 6. The original data for row 2 are 23,


29. (when there is a single digit number, you put a zero in ‘stem’ column.)


 


Histogram 


Each bar is an ‘interval.’ To count total ‘intervals’ just count bars. To count


total number of measurements, add up the y-values of all the bars.


 


FIND MEAN/MEDIAN/ETC. ON TI 84


 


Mean=average


1, 50, 100


Mean=151/3


 


ON TI 84, EASY TO FIND MEAN, MEDIAN. REPEAT STEPS


DESCRIBED ABOVE


STAT-EDIT-ENTER DATA-STAT-CALC


Median=number that separates lower half from higher half.


1, 50, 50, 50, 50, 50, 100


Median=50


 


Mode=number that occurs most often


1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 75, 100


Mode=1


 ∑-NOTATION


 


 








n=number of numbers


∑x=y means that when you add up those numbers, you get y


So


n=10, ∑x=84


means that there are 10 numbers, and when you add them up, you get 84


so to find the mean you divide 84 by 10, and you get 8.4


 


MEAN AFFECTED BY EXTREME VALUES, MEDIAN NOT


AFFECTED BY EXTREME VALUES




The mean is affected by extreme values, while the median is not. If the


data set is skewed to the right, then the median is less than the mean. If


the data set is symmetric, the mean equals the median. If the data set is


skewed to the left, the mean is less than the median.


 Extreme values affect mean, not median.


Skewed right means there are very high outliers, which raises mean, but not


median.


Skewed left means there are low outliers, which lowers mean, but not


median.


Salaries at a big company would be skewed left, because most people would


earn little and there would only be a few millionaire executives.


Scores on an easy test would be skewed left, since a disproportionate number


of people would ace it.


Scores on a hard test would be skewed right, since a disproportionate number


of people would flunk it.


 


  MINIMUM/MAXIMUM/RANGE


 


Minimum/maximum=lowest/highest


Range: difference between lowest and highest value.


1,2,9,112


Range=111


Minimum=1


Maximum=112


  


VARIANCE/FINDING VARIANCE ON TI 84


 


VARIANCE=SQUARE OF STANDARD DEVIATION


POPULATION VARIANCE=SQUARE OF σx


POPULATION STANDARD DEVIATION=SQUARE OF Sx


TI 84 DOES NOT DIRECTLY OUTPUT VARIANCE


EXAMPLE:


 


1,2,9,112


FIND VARIANCE ON TI 84


REPEAT STEPS FROM ABOVE (STAT-EDIT-ENTER NUMBER-STAT-


  CALC-ENTER-ENTER)


THIS GIVES YOU: 


TO GET POPULATION VARIANCE, SQUARE 46.866…


TO GET SAMPLE VARIANCE, SQUARE 54.117….


 


Z-SCORE


 


z-score:


 










 x with bar over it=sample mean


mu=population mean


sigma=population standard deviation


s=sample standard deviation


 


OUTLIERS


 


NON-OUTLIER = BETWEEN  -2.58 and +2.58 99.9%


OUTLIER = NOT BETWEEN  -2.58 and +2.58 99.9%


FOR Z SCORE, JUST CRUNCH NUMBERS. DON’T USE TI 84 SPECIAL


FUNCTION.


 


QUARTILES


 


Q/Q
LU


Q =lower quartile XX
L


Q = upper quartile
U


THEY WILL GIVE YOU THIS. IF YOU NEED TO FIND IT, FOLLOW


SAME STEPS AS YOU DO TO FIND MEAN


75% ARE LESS THAN Q
                              U25% ARE LESS THAN Q
                              L


  IQR=INTERQUARTILE RANGE=Q-Q
                                            UL












TWO ERRORS WITH DIAGRAMS THEY WANT YOU TO KNOW ABOUT


 


WHEN THEY ASK TO IDENTIFY PROBLEMS WITH CHARTS, CHECK


FOR TWO THINGS:


DATA NOT MATCHING CHART


CHART NOT STARTING AT ZERO


 


 


PERMUTAITONS/COMBINATIONS


  


 


 


WHEN THEY ASK YOU TO CHOOSE R ELEMENTS FROM N objects


(E.G. WHEN THEY ASK YOU HOW MANY WAYS 2 OBJECTS CAN


BE SELECTED FROM A SAMPLE OF 10), YOU DO THE FOLLOWING:


FIRST ENTER TOTAL SAMPLE SIZE (THE BIG NUMBER)


THEN GO TO MATH MENU


THEN RIGHT ARROW OVER TO PROB


THEN GO TO nCr (which stands for n choose r)


THEN ENTER THE OTHER NUMBER (IN THIS CASE 2)


SO IF THEY ASK YOU HOW MANY WAYS YOU CAN CHOOSE 2


JELLY BEANS FROM GROUP OF 10, YOU


ENTER 10HIT ‘MATH’


GO TO ‘PROB’


SCROLL DOWN TO nCr


ENTER 2


HIT ENTER


YOU GET 45


 




 


PROBABILITY


 


PROBABILITY = FAVORABLE CASES DIVIDED BY ALL CASES


100 JELLY BEANS IN BOWL


33 RED ONES


PROBABILITY OF CHOOSING RED ONE = 33/100 =.33


P(R)=PROBABILTY OF RED JELLYBEAN

  C
P(R)=PROBABILITY OF PICKING NON RED JELLYBEAN


P(R)=.33

  C
P(R)=.67


PROBABILITES=DECIMALS LESS THAN/EQUAL TO ONE AND


GREATER THAN/EQUAL TO ZEROP(XUY)=PROBABILITY OF EITHER AN X OR A Y


P(X∩Y) =PROBABILITY OF X AND Y AT SAME TIME 


P(XUY)=P(X)+P(Y)-P(X∩Y)


SUPPOSING YOU ARE ROLLING SINGLE DIE


LP(E)=PROBABILITY OF EVEN ROLL


P(O)=PROBABILITY OF ODD ROLL


P(1)=1/6


P(2)=1/6


P(3)=1/6


P(4)=1/6


P(5)=1/6


P(6)=1/6


P(E)=3/6=1/2


P(O) =3/6=1/2


P(E∩2)=1/6


  P(EU2)=P(E)+P(2)-P(E∩2)=3/6+1/6-1/6=1/2










 MULTIPLICATIVE RULE (FIRST VERSION)


 


  P(B/A)=PROBABILITY OF A, GIVEN B







 


4 JELLY BEANS IN JAR, TWO YELLOW, TWO GREENS


P(Y)=CHANCE OF PICKING YELLOW FIRST TIME=1/2
  1


P(G)= CHANCE OF PICKING GREEN FIRST TIME=1/2
  1


P(Y/G)=CHANCE OF PICKING YELLOW IF FIRST TIME DREW
  21


GREEN=1/2-1/6=2/5


P(Y∩G)=CHANCE OF PICKING GREEN FIRST TIME AND YELLOW
  21


SECOND TIME=P(G)P(Y/G)=1/2(2/5)=2/10=1/5
                        121


 


MULTIPLICATIVE RULE (ALTERNATIVE VERSION)









P(Y/G)= P(Y∩G)/ P(G)
    21211 


2/5=(1/5)/(1/2)


 


 


BAYES RULE


 


 





 


 


 


Also need to know the product rules:


 











 


NO WAY TO USE TI 84 TO DO THIS, EXCEPT JUST TO CRUNCH


NUMBERS.For example:


 



































 


 


 


 Poem and Song Compared: To His Coy Mistress Compared with Don’t Be


                              Cruel (Literary Analysis)


 


      The poem that I chose to discuss is To His Coy Mistress (1650), by


Andrew Marvel, and the song I chose is Don’t Be Cruel (1956) by Elvis


Presley. There are several striking similarities between these works, and


several striking differences, the similarities ultimately being more significant


than the differences. In both cases, the man is playing a defensive game: he is


pleading with a woman who is withholding her affections from him and over


whom the man appears to have little or no leverage. 


      Let us start by quoting To His Coy Mistress in its entirety:


 


      Had we but world enough and time, 


      This coyness, lady, were no crime. 


      We would sit down, and think which way 


      To walk, and pass our long love’s day. 


      Thou by the Indian Ganges’ side 


        Shouldst rubies find; I by the tide 


      Of Humber would complain. I would 


      Love you ten years before the flood, 


      And you should, if you please, refuse       Till the conversion of the Jews. 


      My vegetable love should grow 


      Vaster than empires and more slow; 


      An hundred years should go to praise 


      Thine eyes, and on thy forehead gaze; 


      Two hundred to adore each breast, 


      But thirty thousand to the rest; 


      An age at least to every part, 


      And the last age should show your heart. 


      For, lady, you deserve this state, 


      Nor would I love at lower rate. 


       But at my back I always hear 


      Time’s wingèd chariot hurrying near; 


      And yonder all before us lie 


      Deserts of vast eternity. 


      Thy beauty shall no more be found; 


      Nor, in thy marble vault, shall sound 


      My echoing song; then worms shall try 


      That long-preserved virginity, 


      And your quaint honour turn to dust, 


      And into ashes all my lust;       The grave’s a fine and private place, 


      But none, I think, do there embrace. 


       Now therefore, while the youthful hue 


      Sits on thy skin like morning dew, 


      And while thy willing soul transpires 


      At every pore with instant fires, 


      Now let us sport us while we may, 


      And now, like amorous birds of prey, 


      Rather at once our time devour 


      Than languish in his slow-chapped power. 


      Let us roll all our strength and all 


      Our sweetness up into one ball, 


      And tear our pleasures with rough strife 


        Through the iron gates of life: 


      Thus, though we cannot make our sun 


      Stand still, yet we will make him run.


 


      This is obviously the work of an erudite and intelligent man, and it is


also a sincere expression of passion. But it is ultimately not really about love,


despite the author’s own asseverations to the contrary. Every single reference


to the woman is concerns physical beauty: 


      An hundred years should go to praise 


      Thine eyes, and on thy forehead gaze; 


      Two hundred to adore each breast, 


      But thirty thousand to the rest;


 


      And every single reference on the author’s part to his own feelings


concerns lust, not love:


 


 


      Now let us sport us while we may, 


      And now, like amorous birds of prey, 


      Rather at once our time devour 


      Than languish in his slow-chapped power. 


      Let us roll all our strength and all 


      Our sweetness up into one ball, 


      And tear our pleasures with rough strife 


 


      The author’s ‘pitch’ to the woman is that, in a few years, she will be a


corpse and that she might as well submit to his wishes:


  


      Thy beauty shall no more be found; 


      Nor, in thy marble vault, shall sound 


      My echoing song; then worms shall try 


      That long-preserved virginity, 


      And your quaint honour turn to dust, 


      And into ashes all my lust; 


      The grave’s a fine and private place, 


      But none, I think, do there embrace. 


 


        Consequently, even though it is meant to be tender and romantic, this


poem comes across as desperate and angry, its subtext being: sex with me or


die. And the author’s frequent references to his own ‘love’ are very clearly


references to his own lust, given that he says nothing about the relationship


he would like to have with the woman apart from his wanting it consist of


“rough” sex (”And tear our pleasures with rough strife/Through the iron


gates of life”). Finally, given the fact that he frequently mentions the


woman’s rotting corpse, the author’s feelings not only seem to be entirely


sexual in nature but also aggressively so.


      Don’t be Cruel describes a very different situation, as the lyrics clearly


indicate: 


You know I can be found


Sitting home all alone


If you can't come around


At least please telephone


Don't be cruel to a heart that's true




Baby, if I made you mad


For something I might have said


Please, let's forget the past


The future looks bright ahead


Don't be cruel to a heart that's true


I don't want no other love


Baby it's just you I'm thinking of




Don't stop thinking of me


Don't make me feel this way


Come on over here and love me


You know what I want you to say


Don't be cruel to a heart that's true


Why should we be apart?I really love you baby, cross my heart






Let's walk up to the preacher


And let us say I do


Then you'll know you'll have me


And I'll know that I'll have you


Don't be cruel to a heart that's true


I don't want no other love


Baby it's just you I'm thinking of


 


      This is not the work of an educated or sophisticated person, but it is a


genuine express of love. The author never mentions the woman’s physical


appearance; nor does he mention wanting to have sex with her. He only


mentions missing and needing her:


 


If you can't come around


At least please telephone.


 


      Also, the author is being self-effacing: the situation is his fault, not


hers, and he will do whatever he must to make himself worthy of her,including dedicating his life to her:


 


Baby, if I made you mad


For something I might have said


Please, let's forget the past


The future looks bright ahead


Don't be cruel to a heart that's true


I don't want no other love


Baby it's just you I'm thinking of


 


    In all of these respects, Don’t be Cruel contrasts sharply with To His


Coy Mistress. Marvel is angry blaming his ‘coy mistress’ for his situation; he


explicitly claims that his inability to gratify his lusts with her is a


consequence of her short-sightedness and stupidity: she is, in Marvel’s view,


an attractive floozy who doesn’t realize how fleeting her looks are or how


little she has to offer apart from being physically beautiful. By contrast, Elvis


at no point denigrates the woman he is addressing, and he conceives of a


relationship with her as an opportunity for him, whereas Marvel conceived of


a relationship with his ‘coy mistress’ as an obligation for her.


      Despite these differences, both works about a man’s emotional


dependence the woman in question. In Marvel’s case, this dependence isfiltered through lust, whereas in Elvis’s cases it is not thus distorted. But both


works are about the man’s need for the woman: she is on the one calling the


shots, and the man simply has to wait on her decision. Marvel’s attitude


towards his addressee is predatory and narcissistic, whereas Elvis’s attitude is


genuinely loving; but these differences seem to have to do with the


differences in the personalities of the two men involved, it being the


similarity between the two situations that reflect what is universal in the


nature of man’s love for woman.  


 


         Random Variables, Discrete Variables, Continuous Variables


                                    (Math/Statistics)


 


Abbreviations


μ =mean

2
σ=variance


σ=standard deviation


 


Formulas for these terms


Consider the following numbers: 1,3,5,9


μ = average


μ=(1+3+5+9)/4=4.5

2
σ=the average of the square of the distance of the points from the mean, i.e.

2
σ=(1-4.5)2+ (3-4.5)2+ (5-4.5)2+(9-4.5)2=11.6667


σ=square root of variance=3.41565


 

                                                2
Mean, variance, standard deviation (μ,σ,σ): How to get them on TI 84


(review)


Suppose your data-points are,


1,5,22,999

            2
To find μ,σ,σ on TI 84, do the following (repeated from last handout).HIT STAT


CHOOSE EDIT


ENTER NUMBERS IN FIRST COLUMN (TITLED L1)


(JUST TYPE NUMBER THEN HIT ENTER)


HIT STAT


SCROLL TO RIGHT TO ‘CALC’


HIT ENTER TWICE


If you don’t find what you’re looking for, scroll down.


 


Square standard deviation to get variance


The TI 84 gives you standard deviation. It does not directly give you


variance. To get variance, just square standard deviation.

                                                      2
In other words, TI 84 gives you σ. Variance= σ. You have to manually


square σ to get variance.


 


Expected value


Expected value=sum of each value multiplied by probability of that value


There is a 40% the stock will be worth $2500, a 50% of it will be worth $100,


and a 10% chance it will be worth $10.


Expected value= μ=[.4(2500)+.5(100)+.1(10)]/3


=1051/3≈350


Example:


You are thinking about buying one share of Amazon stock at a price of


$2000.


You have to sell that stock on August 30, 2019, no matter what. Y


You cannot sell it before August 30, 2019, no matter what.


A: There is a 40% chance that on August 20, 2019, the price will be exactly


$2500.


B: There is a 50% chance that on August 20, 2019, the price will be exactly


$100.


C: There is a 10% chance that on August 20, 2019, the price will be exactly


$10.


Should you buy it?


No.


The expected value on August 30, 2019 will be $350. See above.


So you can expect to lose $1650.


 


 


Discrete variable


One whose values are integers.


Examples: population, number of heart-beats per minute, number of housesin a city.


Tip: Whenever you can ask how many?, you are asking about a discrete


variable, e.g. “how many people are in the house?”


 


Continuous variable


One whose values are real numbers.


Example: temperature, mass, volume, length (spatial or temporal).


Tip: Whenever you can ask how much? or to what degree?, you are asking


about a continuous variable, e.g. “how much does Smith weigh?”, “how


smart is that person? (i.e. to what degree is he intelligent)?


 


Random variable


A variable whose values are unknown, either because they are the outcome of


a statistical experiment (e.g. a series of coin-flips) or because they are not


objectively fixed (e.g. people’s heartrates).


Example: number of heads tosses, number of three-tosses (when throwing


die), number of times Microsoft Stock rises above $3200 in a given year.


 


 


 ContinuousDiscreteInflation-rateX 




Score on a scale X


of 1-10 (only


whole numbers)


Number of people X


at a theatre


Length in timeX 




Heartbeats/minute X




temperatureX 




 


Probabilities must add up to 1


If there is a 30% chance that the stock will go up, and a 60% that the stock


will go down, then there is a 10% that the stock will stay the same. (We are


assuming that there is no fourth option.)


 


Probabilities expressed as decimalsWhen they ask for a probability, they usually want a decimal. If there is a


60% of raining, the chance that it will rain is .6.


 


“Or” means “add” when the probabilities are mutually exclusive


If there is a 10% that the stock will stay the same, then the chance that it will


either go up or down is 90%. This is because going up and going down are


mutually exclusive.


 


“Or” means “add then subtract probability of simultaneous occurrence”


when probabilities are not mutually exclusive


Suppose that there is a 50% chance that it rains and a 40% chance that it is


over 87° and a 30% chance that it both rains and is over . In that case, the


probability that it either rains or is over 87° is 50%+40%-30%=60%=.6


 

                C
AUB, A∩B, A


AUB means A or B


A∩B means A and B

C
A means complement of A, i.e. everything that is not in A 


The probability of A =.5


The probability of B =.4


Probability AUB=.3


Probability A∩B=.3

                  C
Probability of A=.5

                C
Probability of B=.4

                        C
Probability of (AUB)=.4

                        C
Probability of (A∩B)=.7


 


 


p(A)=probability of A


p(A)=probability of A


p(AUB)=probability of A or B


p(A∩B)=probability of A and B

  C
p(A)=probability of not A


  


Probability of not happening equals 1 minus probability of happening

                      C
If p(A)=.3, then p(A)=.7


 


 


Probability Distributions IMPORTANT AND HARD


You’re going to get a lot of questions like the following, and there is no way


to get the TI 84 to completely do them for you:


 


xP(x)


2.5


3.1


4.25


 


You are going to be asked for the following information:


The mean, i.e. μ

                    2
The variance, i.e. σ


The standard deviation, i.e. σ


 


You get the mean by multiplying each x by p(x) and then adding up the


results 


xP(x)x*p(x)μ=2.3


2.51 


3.1.3 


4.251 


 

                                    2
Once you have μ, you can get σ. Here is how.


  1. You subtract μ from x, for each x SEE COLUMN E


  2. then you square the result SEE COLUMN F


  3. then you multiply the result of that by p(x) SEE COLUMN G

                                                          2
  4. then you add up the results. This gives you σ, which is the variance


      SEE COLUMN H

                                                                        2
  5. If you want standard deviation, take the square root of σ. SEE


      COLUMN I


 


 


 


ABCDEFGHI


  xP(x)x*p(x)μ=2.3x-(x-22σ≈.667
                                                (x- μ)*p(x)σ=.8165

                                μ2
                                        μ)2.51 -.3.09.09*.5=.045  


3.1.3 .7.49.49*.1=..049  


4.251 1.72.892.89*.25=.7225  


 


A weird question that you will get (just memorize)


 













The answer will always be the one that says: SINCE THE OUTER TWO


VALUES IN EACH DISTRIBUTION ARE THE SAME DISTANCE


FROM THE MIDDLE AND THE PROBABILITY IS THE SAME FOR


BOTH THE OUTER VALUES, THE MEAN SHOULD BE THE SAME.


 


Notice the bottom part of the question in the picture:


 






 The answer is:




 


The answer is always the one where the end values are larger and closer the


middle. It’s a trick question. Just memorize the answer.


                               Statistics Exam Prep Sheet


 


TWO IMPORTANT PRELIMINARIES


FIRST, KNOW HOW TO CREATE EXPONENTS ON TI 84. NO


AUTOMATIC WAY TO DO THIS.


SECOND, HOW TO RESET/CLEAR TI 84

      ND
  1. 2 KEY


  2. + KEY


  3. HIT 7


  4. ENTER


  5. SCROLL DOWN TO 2 (RESET)


  6. ENTER


 


SEVEN MOST IMPORTANT FORMULAS RELATING TO


DIFFERENTIATION


(EXPLANATIONS BELOW)


 


                                           2
SO FIRST DERIVATIVE OF Y=X IS 2X


OF Y=7 IS 0

        2
OF Y=X IS 2X

        87
OF Y=X IS 8X


 
















SO….


 






                                xx
I.e. the first derivative of 5 is 5ln(5)

                                  xx
And the first derivative of e is itself e


 


LOGARITHM DEFINED                          Z
LOG(Y)=Z MEANS X=Y
    X


EXAMPLES:




 



 


 


 


 


Intervals/brackets


Square brackets mean endpoints included: [3,10] is the interval from 3 to 10,


including both 3 and 10


Round brackets mean endpoints not included: (3,10) is the interval between 3


and 10 and not including either. (3,10] is the interval between 3 and 10


including 10 but not 3.


 


 


  


 


In the chart above, the first interval does not include a or b; the second one


include both; the third includes b but not a; etc.


 


Important notation


{x│x<2} means ‘the class of all x such that x is less than 2, i.e. all numbers


less than 2

    22
{x│x+10<80} means the class of all x such that x plus 10 is less than 80.


 


 


Limits and Continuous Functions 


Continuous function: no gaps in itIf function continuous, then its limit as it approaches a certain value x is


identical with F(x)


Example:






      2
F(x)=x is continuous, So the limit of this function as x approaches 5 is 25


 


 


Limits and Discontinuous Functions 


If function discontinuous, then the limit is what the function would equal if it


were continuous.


Example:

      2
F(x)=x if x≠5 and if x=5, F(x)=0


The limit of F(x) as x approaches 5 is still 25


Right limit/left left


If a function is discontinuous, its limit from the right (denoted by plus) may


be different from its limit from the left. 


This functions limit, as it approaches 1 from the left is 4, but its limit as it


approaches 1 from the right is 2.


I.e. the answer to 47 is 4 and the answer to 48 is 2


 


Different example:The limit of this function as it approaches .4 from the left is 3.3 and its limit


as it approaches .4 from the right is 3.7


 


SCREENSHOTS OF RULES FOR DIFFERENTIATING


(EXPLANATIONS BELOW)


 









  


 


RULES FOR DIFFERENTIATING


To ‘differentiate’ a function at a given point is to find its slope at that point.


‘First derivative’ is slope at given point.


RULE 1: Linear function always has same slope. The first derivative of


f(x)=7x is simply 7. This is because the slope is always 7.

                                          nx-1
RULE 2: The first of derivative of  x is nx.

                            22
First derivative of f(x)=x is 2x. So the slope of f(x)=x at 7 is 14.

                            434
First derivative of f(x)=x is 4x. So the slope of f(x)=x at x=3 is

  3
4(3)=4(27)=108


RULE 4: When finding derivatives, the only numbers you care about are


exponents and coefficients.

                                                2
For example, the first derivative of f(x)=x is identical with the first                      2
derivative of f(x)=x+5. They are both 2x. This is because derivative is slope,


and the +5 doesn’t affect slope.


RULE 5: Derivative of constant function is 0. The derivative of F(x)=4 is 0,


since that function is just a horizontal line.


RULE 6: A function cannot be differentiated at a corner.


The function below cannot be differentiated at (0,0). 















            -nn-44
RULE 7: x is the same as 1/x. So x=1/x.

                                -n-n-1-2-3
Rule 8: First derivative of x is -n.  So first derivative of x is -2x.

  -3 -3
-2x= -1/ x. (See Rule 7)


RULE 8: Root of degree n = exponent of 1/n


For example:





 

                        1/3
The cube root of x is x. And so on.RULE 9: The first derivative of:  


 


 





Graphs


No exponent=straight line


Example: y=x+2




















 


 


 


When exponent=2 or any other even number, graph is parabola

              2
Example: y=x+5 


When exponent=3 or any other odd number, graph has S-shape

              3
Example: y=x-11 


 


TIP: Always use TI 84 to graph.


 


GRAPHING AND SOLVING GRAPH-RELATED PROBLEMS ON TI 84


                                    2
Suppose you want to graph y=x on the TI 84.


   1. Y=

                                                      2  
  2. ENTER EQUATION, IN THIS CASE: XBTW, THE ‘X’ KEY IS


      NEXT TO THE ‘ALPHA’ KEY


  3. HIT GRAPH


  4. DONE


 


 


STEP 1STEP 2STEP 3 


STEP 4 


 


FINDING INTERSECTIONS OF GRAPHS ON TI 84


Suppose you are asked to plot a graph when taking the exam. For example,


you are asked to graph:


 y=3x-7


 


You will need to have two distinct points. To do this on the TI 84, do the


following:


 


  1. HIT Y=


  2. ENTER EQUATION


  3. HIT GRAPH


  4. THIS WILL GIVE YOU Y INTERCEPT


  5. TO GET X INTERCEPT, HIT LEFT OR RIGHT KEY UNTIL YOU


      GET TO TWO NUMBERS THAT DON’T GO ON FOREVER (AND


      THAT YOU CAN THEREFORE USE ON EXAM)


 


SOLVING ALGEBRA PROBLEMS ON TI 84


Suppose you want to solve the equation X+3=22


Here is what you do


  1. GO TO MATH


  2. SCROLL DOWN TO C: NUMERIC SOLVER


  3. IN TOP SCREEN ENTER X+3


  4. HIT ENTER


  5. IN THE BOTTOM SCREEN ENTER 22  6. HIT ENTER


  7. LEAVE THE CURSOR WHERE IT IS. THEN HIT ALPHA


  8. THEN YOU HAVE YOUR ANSWER


 


STEP 1


































  


STEP 2


































 


STEP 3 


STEP 4 


STEP 5 


STEP 6STEP 7 


Computing Interest on TI 84








SUPPOSE YOU NEED TO SOLVE THE FOLLOWING PROBLEM. 


SMITH PUTS $1000 IN SAVINGS ACCOUNT AT 5% COMPOUNDED


ANNUALLY. HOW MUCH MONEY DOES SMITH HAVE AFTER 20


YEARS?


TO COMPUTE INTEREST ON TI 84 DO FOLLOWING:


  1. HIT APPS


  2. HIT ENTER


  3. HIT ENTER


  4. YOU ARE NOW WHERE YOU WANT TO BE. HERE IS WHAT


      YOU SHOULD SEE:


  


 


  5. PUT 20 AFTER N= (N IS THE NUMBER OF COMPOUNDING


      PERIODS, THIS BEING 20)


  6. PUT 5 AFTER I%


  7. PUT NEGATIVE 5000 (I.E. -5000) AFTER PV (STANDS FOR      ‘PRINCIPLE VALUE)’ MAKE SURE YOU HIT THE (-) KEY, NOT


      THE OTHER MINUS. I.E. HIT KEY TO THE LEFT OF ENTER.


      OTHERWISE YOU GET SYNTAX ERROR.


  8. THE OTHER ONES CAN BE LEFT ALONE EXCEPT FOR FV.


  9. PUT CURSOR NEXT TO FV (FUTURE VALUE)


10.                  HIT ALPHA KEY , I.E. GREEN KEY IN PICTURE


11.                  THEN HIT ENTER


12.                  HERE IS WHAT YOU GET:


  


SO AFTER 20 YEARS, YOUR $5000 HAS TURNED INTO $13266 AND


CHANGE.


 


A PROBLEM YOU ARE LIKELY TO GET CONCERNING


COMPOUND INTEREST  TO USE THE TI 84 TO DO THIS, READ INSTRUCTIONS AFTER


PICTURE:





















 


 


  1. HIT Y= KEY

                                                  X
  2. ENTER EQUATION, I.E. 1000*1.06


  3. HIT ENTER


  4. MOVE CURSOR SO THAT = IS HIGHLIGHTED

                      ND
  5. THEN HIT 2 KEY FOLLOWED BY WINDOW KEY


  6. ENTER THE NUMBER CORRESPONDING TO THE EQUATION


      (WHICH IS PROBABLY 1)


  7. ENTER                      ND
  8. THEN HIT 2 KEY FOLLOWED BY GRAPH


  9. TABLE WILL APPEAR


10.                  SCROLL DOWN FOR DESIRED YEAR


 


 


 


 


                         Concert Report (Music/Musicology)


 


      Part 1: Research on Composers and Musical Works 


      The first piece of the concert was Concerto Grosso No. 12 Propitia


Sydera (1701), by Georg Muffat (1653-1704). Of Scottish ancestry, Muffat


was born and raised in France but considered himself German, presumably


because he spent some of his most productive years in Germany


(Wollenberg, 2001). Relatedly, Muffat is credited with doing much to


introduce French and Italian musical styles into Germany (Brewer, 2016).


Given that Muffat did this just prior to Bach’s birth and during the latter’s


childhood, it is a distinct possibility that Muffat’s influence is partly


responsible for the existence of a musical climate in Germany that made it


possible for the young Bach to develop his gifts as fully as he did (Marckx,


2000). This conjecture is consistent with the nature of his music—especially


of the Concerto Grosso No. 12—which, though definitely not in the same


league as Bach’s work, anticipates it in some respects, having, as it does, a


similarly counterpoint-based, highly structured quality (with the qualification


that the counterpoint is not nearly as developed as it is in Bach’s case).


Muffat was a child prodigy and, as a child, studied under Jean-Baptiste Lully


(Wollenberg, 2001). As an adult, he had a series of positions, mostly in


Germany in Austria. His life was uneventful, consisting as it did of one ofcomfortable position after another, with the qualification that political turmoil


sometimes forced him to switch posts abruptly. Much of his music is written


for all-string ensembles, and his works often have a free-form, jazz-like


quality, in that, as is the case with much jazz, a given instrument will take the


lead for a while, to be followed by another instrument, with the remaining


instruments forming a kind of chorus or backdrop (Jander, 1968). Muffat’s


music is often playful and has a jig-like quality; and all of his music, even the


slow movements, have a light-touch and are easy to listen to (Marckx, 2000).


      The last piece of the concert was the Serenade in C Major, Op. 48


(1880) by


      Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, (1840-1893). Like Muffat’s Concerto


Grosso, coincidentally, this work was written for an all-string ensemble. Able


to read French and German by the age of six, Tchaikovsky came from a


wealthy family and was raised and educated accordingly. It is known that


received piano lessons starting the age of six, and also received lessons in


composition from acclaimed instructor Rudolph Kündinger, an acclaimed


instructor (Wiley, 2001). But Tchaikovsky’s parents expected him to become


a civil servant, not a musician, and it wasn’t until, at 23, he had already


received his law degree that he enrolled at the St. Petersburg Conservatory,


from which he graduated two years later, this being the only well-


documented fact about his musical education (Schroeder, 2015). While at theUniversity, he studied composition under Anton Rubinstein, the famous


pianist and composer. Rubinstein is described as having been reasonably


encouraging of the young Tchaikovsky but as being unwilling to admit to


himself how inferior he was to his own pupil. In any case, Rubinstein’s


brother, Nikolai, saw to it that Tchaikovsky had a position as a professor of


music at the St. Petersburg Conservatory. (Ironically, Nikolai Rubinstein


became a bitter critic of Tchaikovsky and, to his own discredit, wrote a


scathing review of Tchaikovsky’s first piano concerto.) Thanks to his


professorships, Tchaikovsky had him time to composer, and his career was


soon launched (Greenberg et al., 2000). Tchaikovsky had a turbulent


marriage, which ended badly and was followed by several turbulent affairs


(Schroeder, 2015). Tchaikovsky suffered from periodic bouts of intense


depression (Schroeder, 2015); and he became increasingly temperamental as


he aged, eventually quitting his professorship to travel around Europe.


During this time, he was financially supported by Nadezhda von Meck, a


wealthy girlfriend of his. There is evidence that Tchaikovsky was gay, it


often being suggested, without much evidence, that this was a major factor in


his emotional problems, a hypothesis that is contravened by the fact that his


bouts of depression tended to follow turbulent break-ups with lady-friends.


One of the greatest composers of all time, Tchaikovsky is known for his first


piano concerto, his violin concerto, Swan Lake, The Nutcracker, Romeo andJuliet, and the Sixth Symphony (Schroeder, 2015). His work is strikingly


melodic, and movie goers are all familiar with much of his work, especially


the famous love theme from Romeo and Juliet and the opening bars of the


First Piano Concerto. 


      Muffat completed his Concerto Grosso No. 12 in 1701. At this time,


he was employed as the kapellmeister to the Bishop of Pasau. It is divided


into five moments:


 


      1. Sonata: Grave—Allegro


      2. Aria: Largo


      3. Gavotta


      4. Grave—Ciaconna


      5. Borea: Allegro


 


      These are the composer’s own designations. Muffat explicitly stated


that this work is intended to be ‘court music’ and that the different


movements are meant to be able to fulfill court functions, more than one each


in case. (Of course, Bishops do not have courts; but we may safely assume


that not everything that Muffat composed while in the Bishop’s employ was


for the Bishop.) In the case of the sprightly Gavotta, it is clear what this


function is: it is meant to be a dance. The court-related functions of themovements are not as obvious. Muffat stated that the title he gave to each


movements is meant to indicate a range of different court-functions (Jander,


1968).


      This work is described as a ‘cross-pollination’ of Muffat’s French and


Italian influences. It is also said to have influenced Bach, which is palpably


accurate, especially since some of the slower sections sound eerily like some


of the slow movements from the Violin Concertos and Brandenburg


Concertos (Marckx, 2000). The total length of the piece tends to be just over


seventeen minutes (Wollenberg, 2001).


        Tchaikovsky completed the Serenade in C Major in 1880. It first


performance was for a private audience at the St. Petersburg Conservatory,


where Tchaikovsky had previously been a professor, and where, in 1881, it


was first performed for a public audience (Greenberg et al., 2000. This work


is best known for its magisterial 36 bar opening. This work is divided into


four movements:


 


      1.Pezzo in forma di sonatina: Andante non troppo — Allegro


moderato


      2.Valse: Moderato — Tempo di valse


      3.Élégie: Larghetto elegiaco


        4.Finale (Tema russo): Andante — Allegro con spirito 


 


      Each of the first two movements is a stand-alone work. Although


Tchaikovsky is alleged said that it was intention that the first movement have


the same form as a “Mozart Sonatina”, it does not, at least obviously, have


that form. The main themes from the first two movements have been featured


in a number of movies, and the main theme of the Waltz was the start-up for


the British Channel Television Station (Greenberg et al., 2000).


 


      Part 2: Event Description


 


      The venue was an extremely upscale Manhattan synagogue, right next


to Central Park. It was very elegant, in a minimalist way, and spacious.


Although it took place in a Synagogue, there was nothing religious about the


experience or about the people there, so far as I could tell. It appeared that the


Synagogue was simply hosting the event, granting that it did give the


performance a kind of dignity it might otherwise not have had. Most of the


people there were old, or late middle-aged, which I found depressing.


      There was a rather long piece, titled “Conference of the Birds”, by one


Lembit Beecher (born 1980), who was present and who gave a rather


memorable and very non-scripted introduction to the piece, which was beingpremiered then and there. When I was listening to him talk, I was focused on


externals: his clothes, his posture, and his evident nervousness; so I didn’t


fully take in what he was saying, which was basically to the effect that his


work was basically program music for a 12 Century Persian poem about birds


and, for that reason, included a number of effective instances of word-


painting, including realistic violin-create cawing sounds. (The word-painting


was probably the most effective aspect of this work.) Had I absorbed


Beecher’s prologue, I might have been enjoyed the piece more, since, unlike


the other pieces performed, it wasn’t a stand-alone work. It was skillful in


many ways, but decidedly ‘modern’, in that seemed like a series of atonal


sound-effects, not a musical work in the conventional sense. The performers,


however, were not bored. There was no doubt that they enjoyed performing


each and every bar of this work and each of the others.


      Lembit’s piece was the third performed that night, the second being


another modern (or post-modern) work, title Entr’acte, written by 2011 by


Caroline Shaw (born 1982). Entr’acte was a very intricate work, which


showed obvious mastery, but was still a bit too unconventional for me.


 


      Part 3: Musical Analysis


      Muffat’s Concerto Grosso no. 12 is divided into several movements:


      1. Sonata: Grave—Allegro      2. Aria: Largo


      3. Gavotta


      4. Grave—Ciaconna


      5. Borea: Allegro


 


      These are the composer’s own designations.


      All of the movements are in G major.


      The first movement is slow and meditative and sounds like the middle


movement of one of the Bach violin concertos. Despite its name, it is not in


Sonata form. Nor is it an Allegro, making the composer’s designation


inexplicable.


      The movement they next played was spirited and quick. It was not an


Aria or a Largo. Either they simply skipped the Aria: Largo, which is not


likely, or, more likely, the Aria: Largo was built into the first movement. In


any case, whichever movement it was, it was obviously being meant to


contrast with the first movement, with the violins and violas carrying the


main melody and the cellos keeping the beat with a supporting melody of


their own.


      The third movement that they performed, which I assume was the


Grave, was extremely slow---and grave in that respect but not otherwise,


what with it rather sunny, major-key-based tonality---and comes across asbeing more monophonic than the other movements.


      The next movement---which, I have to deduce, was the Grave-


Ciaconna—was not, despite its name, at all grave. Indeed, it sounds as though


it was meant to be danced to, with its  crisp little melody and plucky beat.


      The next movement---presumably, the Grave-Ciaconna—was


extremely slow and was presumably meant to offset the previous movement.


It sounded more like an interlude than a movement proper.


      The last movement (i.e. the last movement that was performed) was


indeed an Allegro. It had a spirited, jig-like quality and ended the work on an


upbeat note.


      My takeaway is that the first movement really was quite beautiful, and


I did not, when listening to it (either when I was physically at the concert or


when re-listened to the concert), feel that I was simply ‘enduring’ the


experience. The other movements were not quite as good, and I listened to


them as a detached observer, not as someone who was immersed in the


experience.


        Tchaikovsky’s Serenade in C Major was strikingly different in this


respect. I had heard this work behavior, though I did not know what it was


called or wrote it.


      Like the Concerto Grosso, it is all for an all-string ensemble; and like


the Concerto Grosso, it is divided into a mini movement: 


      1.Pezzo in forma di sonatina: Andante non troppo — Allegro


moderato


      2.Valse: Moderato — Tempo di valse


      3.Élégie: Larghetto elegiaco


        4.Finale (Tema russo): Andante — Allegro con spirito


 


      The first movement gets ‘straight to the point’, as it were, locking the


listener’s attention onto the piece. It starts with a bold and yet thoughtful


theme, which, like many of Tchaikovsky’s themes, is familiar to, and beloved


by, people who do not have any idea who wrote it and who do not, except


accidentally, listen to classical music. The first movement is a ‘world unto


itself’, as it goes through several sub-movements of its own, which it then


weaves together into brilliant contrapuntal sections.


      Like that of the first movement, the main theme of the second (Waltz)


movement is, I suspect, familiar to, and much loved by, people who do not


self-identify as classical music listeners. As in the first movement, there are


some brilliant contrapuntal moments.


      The third movement starts with a slow and serene all-strings section,


then shifts into a lyrical section with a lovely melody and pizzicato


accompaniment. The theme of this submovement is brilliantly developed bybeing reprised multiple times, each time with a twist and a new layer of


complexity.


      The fourth movement begins with a short, quiet Andante, which


introduces the central theme of the movement-property, which is a fast-paced


but cerebral Allegro, which, the other three movements, is often heavily


contrapuntal.


 


      Part 4: Interview


      The intermission followed Lembit Beecher’s work, which, I am sorry


to say, was probably deliberate, as in, the people who put the concert together


knew audience-members would need a break after listening to that work.


During that time, I interviewed James Fishkin, M.D., a 55 year-old Beverly


Hills plastic surgeon who was there with his wife, and I also interviewed


Nathan Nebeker, a 60 year old engineer was there with his girlfriend. Dr.


Fishkin was friendly and made it clear he was there to humor his wife, who


was friends with one of the performers. He was, he told me, visiting from out


of town, and it was his wife’s idea to make sure that took in some New


York’s culture. I asked him he liked the pieces; and he chuckled and set,


‘well, I’m not really the best person to ask, but let’s just say that it’s a bit


high-brow for me!’, this being his way of saying that, although the works in


question probably did have merit, he was not one to know quite what themerit was. He told several semi-funny jokes during the interview, most of


which involved his flipping my questions back onto me.


      Mr. Nebeker gave more cerebral responses. Although he was quick to


say that he was not a musician, he had, it seems, made it a point of


memorizing what the pieces sounded like and then mentally categorizing


them. Referring to the first piece, he said ‘I can see why people liked it back


then’, his point being that what was innovative about that work in its time


was done, and done better, by later composers, jading us to its merits. He


seemed to like the Shaw piece, because of the intricacies in it. He maintained


a dignified silence concerning the Beecher piece, not because he disliked it,


but, so I suspect, because he wished to keep an open mind. Which, when I


listened to Beecher on YouTube, which I did several times, proved to be the


right attitude.


 


      Part 5: Critical Reflection


      The concert I attended was posted on YouTube, and I watched it


several times before doing this assignment. For me, there were dramatic


differences between the listening to (and watching) the concert ‘in person’


and listening (and watching) a video of it.


      When I was at the actual concert, I was absorbed in the setting---in the


behavior of the other people there, in the aesthetics of the synagogue---andalso in the technicalities involved in my being there (e.g. whether I should


stay in the city overnight or should simply try to make it hope, whether I


would have enough money to stay overnight, and so on).


      When I watched it on YouTube, my focus was strictly on the music;


and, as is my wont, I would replay passages that I liked over and over again


—which I cannot do at live concerts and which I find annoying. I found all of


the pieces more enjoyable when listening to them on YouTube, mainly


because the music was the center of my attention, whereas, when I was at the


concert, my attention was on the surroundings and the music was almost like


an annoying add-on.


      There can be no doubt that these works will continue to be valued and


enjoyed for centuries to come. The Muffat’s Concerto Grosso is over three


hundred years old, and we are listening to it today, albeit largely (though by


no means entirely) as a way of a paying homage to our cultural forbears. As


for the Tchaikovsky, we are still listening because it is---there is no way other


way to put it—it is good. We are no under compulsion to listen to it; but we


do listen to it, because we like it, and our descendants will listen to it for the


same reason.


 


Part 6: Works Cited


 Brewer, C. E. (2016). The instrumental music of Schmeltzer, Biber, Muffat


and their contemporaries. Routledge.


Greenberg, R., & Rodriguez, S. (2000). Great Masters: Tchaikovsky, His Life


and Music. Teaching Company


Jander, O. (1968). Concerto Grosso Instrumentation in Rome in the 1660's


and 1670's. Journal of the American Musicological Society, 21(2), 168-180.


Marckx, L. H. (2000). French Baroque influences on Johann Sebastian


Bach's" Six suites for violoncello solo" with an emphasis on French court


dance and Suite V (Germany).


Schroeder, D. (2015). Experiencing Tchaikovsky: A Listener's Companion.


Rowman & Littlefield.


Temple Emanu-El. (2019, July 29). Naumburg Orchestral Concerts - July 18,


2019 - A Far Cry. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?


v=sZRsyM-oz_U&t=452s


Wiley, Roland John. (2001, January 20). Tchaikovsky, Pyotr Il′yich.


Retrieved from https://www-oxfordmusiconline-


            com.libproxy.temple.edu/grovemusic/view/10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.001.0001/omo-


  9781561592630-e-0000051766?rskey=Yl2NeK


Wollenberg, Susan. (2001, January). Muffat, Georg. Retrieved from


  https://www-oxfordmusiconline-            com.libproxy.temple.edu/grovemusic/view/10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.001.0001/omo-


      9781561592630-e-0000019294?rskey=ujKGtx&result=1


               Statistics Final Exam Review Sheet (Math/Statistics)


 


IMPORTANT PROBLEMS


AVERAGE RATE OF CHANGE















RATE OF CHANGE = RISE OVER RUN


RATE OF CHANGE BETWEEN 0 AND 1 = 80/1=80


RATE OF CHANGE BETWEEN 1 AND 2 = (127-80)/(2-1)=57


RATE OF CHANGE BETWEEN 2 AND 3 = (160-120)/(3-2)=40


RATE OF CHANGE BETWEEN 3 AND 4 = (186-160)/(4-3)=26


 


 


GROWTH RATE 


 


FIND OUT HOW MUCH BABY GREW DURING FIRST TWELVE


MONTHS. THEN DIVIDE BY 12 TO GET MONTHLY GROWTH


RATE.


BABY GREW FROM 6 LB TO 20. SO 14 LB TOTAL.


SO MONTHLY GROWTH = 14/12≈1.2


SO ANSWER=B


RULES ETC. BELOW


 


EXPONENTIAL FUNCTION 


APPLY RULES BELOW (POWER RULE AND EXPONENTIAL


FUNCTION RULE)


THIS GIVES US:


 



















  


 


ELASTICITY OF DEMAND


















 


YOU NEED  TO ELASTICITY OF DEMAND FORMULA:





First we find D’(x)


This turns out to be: 




 


 


When we plug this back into elasticity formula, we get:


 







 


AND THIS TURNS OUT TO BE 1.


 


 


PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTION












 


TO GET THE EXPECTED DAMAGE FOR FIRM A, YOU


MULTIPLY EACH POSSIBILTY (LEFT-MOST COLUMN) BY ITSPROBABILITY (MIDDLE COLUMN) AND THEN ADD UP THE


NUMBERS (RIGHT-MOST COLUMN). THE EXPECTED DAMAGE


IS $1250. YOU DO THE SAME WITH THE OTHER FIRM. 


 


400.014


900.50450


1400.30420


1900.17323


2400.0124


2900.0129


 


 


IF THEY ASK YOU TO COMPUTE  , USE THE CALCULATOR.


 


 


 


YOU NEED TO KNOW JUST TWO THINGS FOR THIS CLASS


  1. HOW TO GRAPH ON CALCULATOR (YOU’RE ON YOUR


      OWN HERE)


  2. THE STUFF BELOW


 Two parts to this class:


Calculus


Statistics


 


PART 1: CALCULUS


 


Three kinds of functions: no exponent on x (straight line), even exponent


on x (cup shape graph), odd exponent on x (s-shape graph)


 


x has no exponent


e.g. y=2x


always straight line


graph of y=2x 


 


X has even exponent

        2
e.g. y=x


cup shaped

              2
graph of y=x 


x had odd exponent

        3
e.g. y=x


has S-shaped

              3
graph of y=x















 


Differentiation (i.e. finding slope of function)


Rule 1: if constant function, then first derivative=0Rule 2: if no exponent on x, then first derivative equals coefficient of x


 





Rule 3: if exponent on x, then use POWER RULE





Example of power rule:




 


Other example of power rule:




 


Rule 4: With Exponential functions (functions where x is itself the exponent),


you get first derivative by multiplying function by lnx.





Example:




  


Rule 5: with logarithmic functions there is just one rule:






Rule 6: square root = exponent of ½

























Rule 7: negative square root is positive square root in denominator

-1
x=1/x

-22
x=1/x

-33
x=1/x


etc. 


Interval notation (mickey mouse)


(x,y) means ‘everything between x and y but not x or y’


[x,y] means ‘ ‘everything between x and y and also x and y’


(x,y] means ‘ ‘everything between x and y and also y but not x’


[x,y) means ‘ ‘everything between x and y and also x but not y’


e.g. (4,9) means ‘everything between 4 and 9 but not 4 or 9’


and so on


 


  


 


 


PART 2: STATISTICS


RULE OF SUBTRACTION:







 


EXAMPLE: IF THERE IS A 1/36 CHANCE THAT YOU WILL ROLL


DOUBLE SIXES, THEN THERE IS 35/35 CHANCE THAT YOU WILL


NOT ROLL DOUBLE SIXES.


 


RULE OF ADDITIONEXAMPLE: IF THERE IS A 40% CHANCE THAT YOU WILL GO TO


DELAWARE NEXT WEEK, A 70% THAT YOU WILL GO FISHING


NEXT WEEK, AND A 30% THAT YOU WILL DO BOTH, THEN THERE


IS 40+70-30=80% CHANCE THAT YOU WILL DO BOTH.


 


RULE OF MULTIPLICATION







EXAMPLE: THERE ARE 10 JELLY BEANS IN A JAR, FIVE RED, FIVE


GREEN. WHAT ARE THE CHANCES THAT THE FIRST TWO DRAWS


YIELD RED JELLY BEANS.


A=RED JELLY BEAN DRAWN ON FIRST PICK


B=RED JELLY BEAN DRAWN ON SECOND PICK


B/A=RED JELLY BEAN DRAWN ON SECOND PICK ASSUMING THAT


RED JELLY BEAN WAS DRAWN ON FIRST PICK.


P(A)=5/10


P(B)=5/10


P(B/A)=4/9P(A∩B)= P(A)* P(B/A)=5/10*4/9=2/9


SO THE CHANCE THAT THE FIRST TWO DRAWS ARE RED JELLY


BEANS IS 2/9


 


PROBABILITIES ADD UP TO 1


ADD UP THE PROBABILITIES YOU HAVE AND SUBTRACT FROM 1


TO GET MISSING PROBABILITY


 


E(X)=EXPECTED VALUE OF X1, X2,…XN= P(X1)+P(X2)+…P(XN)


EXAMPLE:


THERE IS A LOTTERY.


IT COSTS $100/TICKET.


THERE IS A 1/1000,000 CHANCE OF WINNING.


COMPUTE EXPECTED VALUE OF PURCHASED LOTTERY TICKET.


OK.


TWO POSIBILITIES: YOU WIN OR YOU LOSE


IF YOU WIN: YOU SPEND $100 AND YOU GAIN $1000000. So that’s:


$999900


THERE IS A 1/1000000 OF WINNING. SO


    P(999900)=999900/1000000=.9999


IF YOU LOSE, YOU SPEND $100 AND GAIN $0. SO YOUR ‘GAIN’WOULD BE -$100. THERE IS A 999999/1000000 CHANCE THAT THIS


WILL BE THE OUTCOME. SO P(-100)= 999999/1000000= NEGATIVE


$99.9999.


SO EXPECTED VALUE= PROBABLE GAINS FROM WINNING PLUS


PROBABLE NEGATIVE GAINS FROM LOSING=NEGATIVE


  $99.9999.+$.9999=NEGATIVE $99 DOLLARS.


                         Music Journal (Music/Musicology)


 


1. Briefly, describe your initial impressions of each of the four musical


  works we listened to in this unit. What did you think of them and what


  made you think that way?


  Musical WorkYour Impressions


Caro MeaIt is very austere. It is entirely monophonic, sung either


                        by just one person or by several people singing in


                        perfect unison; and the tonality is restrained, not


                          sensuous; all of which gives it a laconic quality. Also,


                        the range is narrow—‘constricted’, like everything else


                        about it.


Ordo VirtutumDark and sad, but self-restrained in the way that


                        medieval music seems to be. It is more emotive than


                        Caro Mea, however; and there is also more metrical


                          variability—there are some flourishes that stand out.


I Can All TooIt actually sounds very Scottish or Irish—very Celtic, I


Well Compare Mysuppose, given that the Celts originated in France, like


Ladythis work’s composer. It has the ‘jig’ rhythm that we


                        have come to associate with Celtic music—sounds like                        the music from Scorsese’s ‘Gang’s of New York.’


A ChantarThe rugged cello (or cello-like instrument), along with


                        the open fifths (I think), give it a rugged, ‘wintry’


                        quality. The drums give it a spontaneous quality that


                        isn’t as present in other medieval music.


 


2. Review your notes from the Dark Ages video. Imagine that you are a


  person living in Europe during those times. Briefly, describe your


  medieval alter-ego. Who are you? What do you do? What do you think


  about your life? Your response should reference at least one specific thing


  you learned from the Dark Ages video. 


I pretty much do the same thing every day. I work. I ply my trade, e.g. I


might be a black-smith. I pay tithes to my guild-master (union


representative, essentially). I do not work long hours; I am well rested.


After working a restful day, I drink mead with my mates, and eventually


report home. I might take the family to a play or musical performance put


on by fellow villagers or, more likely, by an itinerant theatre troop. Life is


not anxious, but also not deeply fulfilling (though I probably don’t think


that to myself).


  


3. Choose any one piece from this lesson and listen to it again. As you listen,


  try your best to imagine how it might sound if you were the medieval


  person described above. Where might you hear this music, what might you


  think of this music, and why might you think that way?


What piece did you 


choose?Caro Mea


Type your response here.  If I were an ordinary peasant—as opposed to an


aristocrat or member of the clergy—I would associate this piece with


obligatory Church-attendance. I would admire this piece, but I would not be


moved by it, since it was not written for me. It embodies the asceticism of a


monastic life, which is very different from my life, which has all of the


drama of a life with a wife, children, taxes, and the like. This work’s austere


quality is alienatingly high-brown to me.


 


 


 


4. Respond to the following question: what is the relevance of medieval


  music in today's society? 


Type your response here. What struck me when listening to these works is                                                  thth
that they have a rather modern quality. 18 and 19 century European


music is emotionally unambiguous. Modern classical music, e.g. Bartok, is


different and has an austere quality. Medieval music, especially Gregorian


chants, have a similar quality; and I feel that history is--in this respect, and


probably therefore in others—is looping. So its relevance is that it


prefigures modern music.


 


 


 


      Word Painting Assignment


      This song is about a 'nowhere' man, this being a total cipher of a


person: a blank, somebody who does what he is supposed to and doesn't have


any kind of life. The first 15 seconds are completely monophonic---just all


four Beatles singing the same bit of melody in complete unison.  This bit


of monophonysounds like what it is supposed to represent: it sounds bleak


and depressing, and it supposed to represent a bleak and depressing form of


existence.  Notice also that the monophone,  a Capella into is divided into


three parts, with the second being lower (tonally) than the first and the third


being lower than the second:


      He's a real nowhere man (high)


      sitting in his nowhere land (medium)      making all his nowhere plans for nobody  (low), 


      creating a depressing effect. 


      Then, the instrumental part begins (fifteen seconds into it) begins with


a little guitar riff that consists  of four descending notes--creating another


'heading downward' , depressing effect. 


      The singing through  main part of the song (the 'A' in the AABA


structure that this Beatle's song, like most pop songs, has) is all monophonic,


creating the song's signature 'bleak', 'nowhere' sound. 


      Also, in the 'B' part of the song ("nowhere man, please listen/you don't


know what you're  missin'/nowhere man,  the world is at your command') is


the only part of the song in the singing is homophonic. This gives that part of


the song a brigher, less 'nowhere-y' quality, which is obviously deliberate.


Also, it is only part of the song where the drum beat (which marks the


4:4 meter) varies at all. This  bit of rhythmic variation gives that one part of


the song a bit of pep, making it contrast with the rest, of the song,  which is


depressing and, given that it is about what a loser the proverbial 'nowhere


man' is, is supposed to be depressing. 


 


 Prompt 1 I chose Faure's famous (and deservedly so, as you'll see


when you listen to it) so-called 'Pavane.' Most of you have probably heard it. 


A 'pavane' is a stately-court dance; and this work is indeed rhythmicallyconservative in much the same way as the music for a court dance. But the


theme is the exact opposite of conventional and stately. It is introspective and


haunting. 


      The key is F-sharp minor (three sharps, like A major).


The meter is 4:4.  It is homophonic, not polyphonic, with the melody being


carried by a flute (or set of flutes, rather), and the accompaniment--the very


distinctive and famous accompaniment---is carried along


by pizzicato strings, for the most part repeating the same three notes (f#-a-


c#-a). 


      The 'cover' that I chose is a jazz piano rendering of the piece. There


are many jazz covers of this piece. For some reason, this piece 'translates'


well into jazz, for reasons that I invite to explicate. 


      The first is the original; the second, the cover. 


      I personally prefer the jazz version. I like the soft contours of the


piano version, with its flashes of modern harmony and dynamic nuances. I


especially like the 'totally jazz' part (2:04-2:20), and I like the strange


additions to the composer's original harmonies (2:34-2:38).


        Prompt 2 There are many reasons why a given composer might want


to adapt preexisting work, the main one being that the first composer sees


that there are ways of developing the other composer's work.  One extremely


striking example of this involves Busoni's adaption for piano of Bach'sfamous Chaconne for violin. 


      Original Chaconne 


      Busoni's Adaptation for piano 


      A not-so-famous but, in its own way, striking example is this person's


adaption for electric guitar of Bach's prelude in c-minor for harpsichord. 


      Original prelude 


      Adaptation 


      I found what sounds like a semi-adaptation of this same work, though


it may be more of an original piece (let me know): 


      Edited by N/A on Jul 15 at 1:28am


      Prompt II


      There are many reasons a composer might want to base work on


another composer's work. The main one is that composer A had a winning


idea which composer B knows that he can further develop. This happens all


the time. A striking example is Bach's Chaconne (1720), originally for solo


violin, which Busoni adapted for piano. 


      Original Chaconne 


      Busoni 'cover'


      A lot of art is based on other art (e.g. Romeo and Juliet is based on a


poet by Ovid), and a lot of thought is based on other thought. The difference


between plagiarism and adaptation is that the latter involves development,whereas the former does not. 


 Reply Reply to Comment


Name:


1. The conductor describes 4 distinct parts of the exposition. What are these


  4 parts?


Type answer here. First theme. Transition. Second theme. Closing part.


 


 


 


2. Based on the video, what is the difference between hearing music and


  listening to music?


Type answer here. Hearing music means hearing the noise that bears the


music. Listening to music means hearing the music in the noise, which is


done by actively engaging that noise.


 


 


3. What is meant by the tern unison, and what part of Beethoven’s Fifth


  Symphony is played in unison?


Type answer here. Unison means playing (or singing) the same notes at the


same time. The famous opening sequence (g-g-g-e flat) is in unison, givingit a stark and definitive quality that it would lack if it were harmonized.


 


 


4. In musical terms, what is meant by a sequence?


Type answer here. It is the repetition of a musical conceit (sequence of


notes) at different pitch levels.


 


 


 


5. What is ternary form?


Type answer here. A musical work is in ternary form if it consists of three


sections.


 


 


 


6. According to the conductor, what is different about sonata form as


  compared to ternary form?


Type answer here. Two differences. Whereas ternary form is ABA, sonata


form is ABA*, i.e. in sonata form, A is not simply repeated but developed.


Second, in sonata form, each of the three sections is itself subdivided intofour parts: theme, transition, second theme, closing part.


 


 


 


7. What is syncopation?


Type answer here. When the emphasis is placed on the naturally weak beat.


 


 


 


8. How is the opening of the recapitulation different from the opening of the


    exposition?


Type answer here. In the opening of the recapitulation, there are key


changes, crescendos and decrescendos absent from the exposition.


 


 


 


9. According to the video, why did Beethoven decide to have the bassoons


  announce the second theme in the recapitulation instead of the horns?


Type answer here.  Because in Beethoven’s day, horns could not easily play


in different keys (since this required the valves inside them to be manuallyreplaced), whereas bassoons do not have this issue.


 


 


 


10.   What emotional impact does Beethoven’s use of dissonance have on


  you?


Type answer here. I like the starkness. It is bracing and makes me feel a


sense of urgency on Beethoven’s part, a need to get across a message of


angst.


 


 


      My first piece is Beethoven's Sonata #12 opus 26 in A flat major,


completed in 1792---before Beethoven began to go deaf or otherwise suffer


from any of the health problems that would plague him, this perhaps being


responsible for this work's serene quality. This piece is unusual among


Beethoven Sonatas in that the first movement (0.20-1:46), rather than


having sonata form, is a theme and variations (0.20-. All of the variations


have the same meter (3:4) and same tempo (andante); and, setting aside the


minor variation (4:02-5:53), can be simultaneously without in any way


sounding dissonant. (I have verified this personally; as in, I myself have


performed the piece while someone else played the opening theme.)Incidentally, the first movement of this sonata is the only piece of


Beethoven's that Chopin ever publicly performed. (Chopin disliked


Beethoven's music, which he saw as overly disciplined.)  I can personally


attest that this piece is very enjoyable to play; the opening chords are soft and


warm and induce a feeling of centered calm, in performer no less than in


listener. Also, the mechanics are very intuitive for the performer. 


      The second movement (9:13-11:52) is a brilliant scherzo, also in A flat


major (though it starts out in F minor), which, because of the


brilliant contrapuntal(9:42--9:56) section, sounds almost like Bach,


suggesting, I believe, that although Beethoven was Mozart's immediate


successor and composed in the same genre, Beethoven was in some ways


closer to Bach. (Speaking personally, this is one of my favorite pieces to


perform: the counterpoint is intellectually demanding and the fast-paced


thirds in the right hand are satisfyingly aggressive.)


      The third movement (11:56--18:17) --the Funeral March in A flat


minor (a very unusual key to compose in...usually g# minor is preferred)---is


the part of the piece that qualifies as 'program music', since, of course, it is


meant to depict the 'death of a hero' (its subtitle). The hero is usually taken to


be Napoleon (also the subject of Beethoven's famous 'Eroica' (heroic)


symphony). Napoleon was still alive when opus 26 was composed; so


presumably the 'death' in question is figurative in nature, as in, Napoleon had,in Beethoven's mind, fallen short in some way and thus 'died', as it were. 


      The final movement (18:20-21:45) is a brisk allegro, again in A flat,


which offsets the dark mood the previous movement. This movement is


striking because the left hand replicates and inverts the main conceit. 


      The second piece I chose, also by Beethoven, is his Sonata #17 in d


minor (opus 31), a.k.a 'the Tempest', completed in 1802. Of course,


Shakespeare wrote a play of the same name. But Beethoven did not himself


give this name to this work, and, even though there is commonly presumed to


be a connection between this work and Shakespeare's play, there is not much


of a connection. Shakespeare's play is light-hearted; this sonata is dark and


turbulent---genuinely storm-like. 


      An interesting feature of this work--one which makes it genuinely


program-music-like--is that, whereas most Beethoven sonatas 'get right into


it' and dispense with any 'introductory' material, this one begins with a very


calm and unassuming few bars (0:21-0:31), which are followed by toccata-


like material that is as agitated as the first few bars were calm. The use


of triplets in the right hand (1:05--1:27) gives the piece of a striking


briskness, which sounds rather like the program-music from early movies


(probably because that was music was directly modeled on it). The meter


is 4:4. 


      The second movement (9:07-18:00), in b flat major, is gorgeous andserene, contrasting with the dark, stark, and fast-pace first and third


movements. The meter is 3:4.


      The third movement (18:20-25:15) --which, I suspect, will sound


familiar to most people, even those not familiar with classical music---has a


very catchy, almost music-box-like tune. The mood reprises that of the first


movement. The meter is is 3:8.


      Beethoven composed this after his deafness was under way, granting


that there is no real way to know if there is a causal connection at work.


      The third piece I chose is the Coriolan Overture (opus 62), also by


Beethoven and completed in 1807. This piece was written as program-music


for the play Coriolan by Heinrich Joseph von Collin, which is based on the


play Coriolanus by Shakespeare. Beethoven's music was not meant to be a


mere accompaniment or background, and this work, despite technically being


'scene' music, is no exception; and this overture probably absorbed the


audience's attention far more than the play itself. Like Beethoven's 5th


symphony, (completed two years earlier) it is composed in c minor; and also


like the 5th symphony, it is very much based on a single, rather aggressive


four-note (c-e flat-e flat-d) conceit (0:30-0:35).


      The story of Coriolanus is worth knowing (both in this context and in


general). Coriolanus was a Roman general who, after a successful career in


the military, tried his hand at politics. Unfortunately, he proves to be as bad atpoliticking as he was good at soldiering, and, after making one emotion-


driven decision after another, he is eventually violently deposed. Attempts


have been made to map the story onto Beethoven's overture, which is divided


into a dark 'A'-part in c minor and a light 'B'-part, which is in e flat.


According to some scholars, the A-part represents Coriolanus's ambition--


specifically his desire to go on an ill-advised military campaign---and the B-


part represents his mother's attempting to persuade him otherwise. Beethoven


does seem to have identified with the figure of Coriolan and, indeed, seems to


have identified with many a tragic figure--c.f. the points made above about


Napoleon. 


      Edited by N/A on Jul 25 at 11:57pm


 Reply Reply to Comment


Name:


  1. The conductor describes 4 distinct parts of the exposition. What are


      these 4 parts?


Type answer here. First theme. Transition. Second theme. Closing part.


 


 


 


2. Based on the video, what is the difference between hearing music and


  listening to music?Type answer here. Hearing music means hearing the noise that bears the


music. Listening to music means hearing the music in the noise, which is


done by actively engaging that noise.


 


 


3. What is meant by the tern unison, and what part of Beethoven’s Fifth


  Symphony is played in unison?


Type answer here. Unison means playing (or singing) the same notes at the


same time. The famous opening sequence (g-g-g-e flat) is in unison, giving


it a stark and definitive quality that it would lack if it were harmonized.


 


 


4. In musical terms, what is meant by a sequence?


Type answer here. It is the repetition of a musical conceit (sequence of


notes) at different pitch levels.


 


 


 


5. What is ternary form?


Type answer here. A musical work is in ternary form if it consists of threesections.


 


 


 


6. According to the conductor, what is different about sonata form as


  compared to ternary form?


Type answer here. Two differences. Whereas ternary form is ABA, sonata


form is ABA*, i.e. in sonata form, A is not simply repeated but developed.


Second, in sonata form, each of the three sections is itself subdivided into


four parts: theme, transition, second theme, closing part.


 


 


 


7. What is syncopation?


Type answer here. When the emphasis is placed on the naturally weak beat.


 


 


 


8. How is the opening of the recapitulation different from the opening of the


    exposition?Type answer here. In the opening of the recapitulation, there are key


changes, crescendos and decrescendos absent from the exposition.


 


 


 


9. According to the video, why did Beethoven decide to have the bassoons


  announce the second theme in the recapitulation instead of the horns?


Type answer here.  Because in Beethoven’s day, horns could not easily play


in different keys (since this required the valves inside them to be manually


replaced), whereas bassoons do not have this issue.


 


 


 


10.   What emotional impact does Beethoven’s use of dissonance have on


  you?


Type answer here. I like the starkness. It is bracing and makes me feel a


sense of urgency on Beethoven’s part, a need to get across a message of


angst.


 


  


 


 


 


 


 


Name: N/A


Respond to the following prompts.


  1. The author of your textbook makes the following claim: “Music can


      make us see things differently, even when we don’t realize it’s there.”


      Using one or more of the movie clips from the assignment page on


      Canvas, explain how this can be true. Be specific.


Type answer here. The scene from Grease is a good illustration of this.


When the scene is played without music, the behavior of the young men on


the bleachers seems crude, totemic, and devoid of kindness. The obviously


sexual gestures come off as aggressive. When it is played with the music in


the background, it seems light-hearted and funny. The sexual gestures come


off as playful.


 


 2. Choose one of the scenes on the Canvas assignment page and describe the


  specific emotion conveyed by the music. For instance, "happy" is too


    generic because there are many kinds of happiness, ranging from


    exuberance to contentment.


Type answer here. The music from Psycho is aggressive, stark (because


monophonic or semi-phonic), repetitive, and dissonant, and it thereby


conveys both the terror of the woman as well as the ruthlessness of her


killer. Also, the lack of dynamic contrast, as well as the lack of a fade-in,


turns the music itself into an assault on the movie-goer. The latter is


surprised by the music in much the way that the woman is surprised by the


assailant.


 


 


3. Identify three specific musical elements the composer used to help


  convey the emotion. Clearly describe how these elements are heard while


    demonstrating that you fully understand their meaning. For example, a


    response like "the piece uses dynamics well" would earn 0 points because


  it does not specify the dynamic level (forte, piano, etc.) or show that the


  student understands what dynamics are. Use time markers when


    appropriate.   MusicalDescription of How Each Element Is Heard


Element


Type element 1Type description here. Musical onomatopoeia: The


heremusic from the Psycho stabbing scene is an example, in


                    more than one way, of musical onomatopoeia. The string


                    sounds mirror the act of stabbing with their aggressive


                      repetitiveness. Also, they they themselves sound like


                    shrieks and thereby evoke the abject terror that the


                    woman is experiencing; and they also externalize the


                      psychological condition—one of pain and madness—of


                    the assailant. The music in this scene has no dynamic


                      contrast, being uniformly forte. This sends the message


                    that the killer is totally inhuman and devoid of internal


                      gradations---just a killing machine. Be it noted that in


                    order to produce the sound in question, a string player


                    must practically ‘strike’ his instrument with his bow, in


                    much the way that the Norman Bates character is stabbing


                    his victim. Finally, the music has a symbiotic relationship


                    with events in film, in that the stabbing at one point (0:32-


                    0:36) keeps the beat of the music.


  


Type element 2Type description here. Lack of dynamic contrast: There


hereis no fade-in. The music simply explodes out of nowhere,


                    and it does so onto what was previously a placid shower


                    scene. There is no dynamic contrast: it is forte (or


                      fortissimo) all the way, and is therefore itself surprising


                    and unrelenting in much the same way as the killer.


 


Type element 3Type description here. Zero rhythmic variation.  This


heremusic seems to have a meter of 1:1—one beat/bar. There


                    is no variation; there are no flourishes. Just the same


                    stabbing, shrieking sound, repeated with almost military


                      regularity, underscoring the killer’s total lack of remorse.


 


 


 


4. Is the music in the scene you chose for prompt #2 diegetic or non-


  diegetic, and why?


Type answer here. The music is non-diegetic, since its source is not what


happens in the scene. By contrast, the shower-sounds are diegetic, since


they are made events in the scene itself. 


 


      The ‘point’ of this work, so to speak, is that the events in question


were not simply dark but fell outside of what human beings are able to


process; and this work conveys that point by being atonal and, on that basis,


deriding and caricaturing pre-existing musical norms, rather than deploying


them in any ordinary way. The first sounds that we hear are of an almost


triumphant-sounding trumpet (01:-04). The motif is almost like that of a


national anthem (e.g. the Chinese National Anthem, which is based on what


sounds like a tonal version of this same trumpet-riff). But the modal is askew,


being atonal, and is quickly met with a dark, semi-atonal orchestral


background. Incidentally, the cello motif immediately heard thereafter sounds


like Philip Glass, and I suspect that he may even have consciously borrowed


it. (Cf.Philip Glass - Glassworks (complete) (Links to an external site.)






                      32:09)


      The rest of this work followed suit, all of it being on the edges of tonal


music and all of it being, as it were, derogatory of it and, so it seems, of the


cultural norms thereby represented, the work’s overall point seemingly being


that what was happening in the world could no longer be understood in theusual rationality-based ways. What was a little hard to understand—or at


least to fit into this way of understanding this work---was Chorale part, sung


in Hebrew, as to the Jewish people’s future responsibilities to itself. The


lyrics were straightforward and clearly non-ironic; but the accompanying


music was atonal and, so it seemed, derisive, making it unclear whether the


words being sung were to be taken literally, on the one hand, or, on the other


hand, dismissed, in light of recent events, as naïve. I suspect that they were


meant to be taken literally and were accompanied by atonal, ambiguous-


sounding music only because that was the genre in which Schoenberg


happened to composer.


      I chose to listen to the video that did not feature Holocaust pictures.


This was because I wanted to listen to the music without being ‘told’, so to


speak, how to react. (The singing, especially the solo singing in English, did,


however, tell me, quite literally, what I was to be thinking and feeling; and I


was a bit surprised at this brazen violation of the ‘show, don’t tell’ rule


governing theatrical performances.) Frankly, I found this work  easy to listen


to, precisely because it doesn’t use conventional tonality. I was able to listen


to each bar on its own, without having to feel that I had to embed in a larger


musical narrative. Also, even though this music is classified as ‘atonal’, it is


not, literally speaking, atonal; it is only relatively atonal. Relatedly, I think


that contemporary audiences would find this piece much less jarring thanSchoenberg’s contemporaries, mainly because so much film music sounds


like this, probably because, so I suspect, Schoenberg’s music itself influenced


film-composers.


      And this last point, I think, is central to what is going with


Schoenberg’s music. Bach’s music is not meant to represent anything; neither


is Mozart’s or Beethoven’s. These composers did, of course, compose masses


and operas and other story-accompanying works; but their music is always,


ultimately, to be listened to by itself. Schoenberg’s music, by contrast, sounds


like a movie score and is easy to listen if listened to in that way. But if


listened to on its own, in the way in which Mozart or Beethoven are listened


to, it is a bit grating. I would conjecture that part of what allowed Schoenberg


to compose atonal music was that his music  was, at least by his intention, to


be listened to as an accompaniment to a play or some such, and not on its


own, so that the dissonances in it as comments on an independent story-line,


and not as musical ends unto themselves.


      The composer I chose is Martha Callison Horst. Dr. Horst received a


PhD in music from the University of California, Davis in 1996. Her


dissertation was itself a musical work, titled 'suite.' In preparation for this


assignment, I listened to a number of her works. I was hoping that there


would be a clear thread or concept running through all of her music that


would enable me to put her music in a single category, such as 'minimalist' or'romantic' or 'neoclassical.' But she seems to compose in a number of


different genres and does not have any clear musical agenda. My favorite


piece of hers is a percussion work titled 'Bam!" (link at the end of this post),


which was strikingly 'non-academic.' But the piece I chose to write about is a


work for three guitars, titled 'Sylvan Winds': 


      This is definitely a work of the 'minimalist' variety. It consists of a


repetition of single motif, much like Philip Glass's music. This work sounds


very--and I am tempted to say 'suspiciously'--like another minimalist work


titled 'Phrygian Gates', by John Adams: 


 


      Listen to 0:40-1:20 of Phrygian Gates and compare them to 0:00-1:20


of Sylvan Winds. Obviously they are not the same work, but the concept is


very similar; and so, in fact, is the tonality, the rhythm, and general


architecture. Notice also that both works have similar titles. 


      Both works strike me as versions of, or attempts to emulate,


Prokofiev's striking toccata in d minor: 


      This work, like the other two, is minimalist; but unlike them, it has a


definite 'edge' and a definite focus. The other two, by contrast, are meant to


be, and largely are, serene. 


      Listen to 3:40-3:46 of Sylvan Winds, and note the similarities to 3:00-


3:04 of the toccata in d minor. Both sections are 'climactic' and are meant tobe antithetical to the rest of the piece in question, granting that the toccata's


climax is a bit more striking--a bit more 'climactic', for lack of a better way to


put it--than that of Sylvan Winds.


      Phrygian Gates is so called because it is based on the Phrygian Mode,


meaning that it is based on the scale starting with E and consisting only of


naturals (white notes on the piano). See 0:35-0:40 in the following video: 


      This modality, being an unusual one, turns off some of our standard


tonal expectations of a piece and allow us to 'surrender to the experience'


without any preconceptions (Powers, 278), making this tonality well-suited


for soothingly repetitive 'mood' music,  (Carver, 84), Sylvan Woods and


Phrygian Gates being cases in point. 


      As for my feelings about Sylvan Winds, I found it easy to listen to and


soothing, but some of the dissonances put me off. The main virtue of the


piece was its serene quality, and the dissonances, so I felt, didn't quite belong


there.  What I did very much like about this piece was that it is a clear


illustration of what I believe could be a good compositional template: a


single, simple motif, repeated but with slight changes each time.  I myself


have used this template and I believe that, if nothing else, it is very good


compositional exercise to compose a piece based on it. 


      As previously stated, my favorite piece by Dr. Horst (of those that I


could access) is "Bam!", which, I am inclined to believe, many people willagree with me in believing to be the most 'listenable' of her works on


YouTube: 


Citations:


1) Powers, H. S. (1998). From psalmody to tonality. Tonal structures in early


music, 275-340.


2) Carver, A. F. (2005). Bruckner and the Phrygian mode. Music and


Letters, 86(1), 74-99.


 


[1]
 https://www.nps.gov/features/eise/jrranger/5accompx.htm
[2]
 https://www.nps.gov/features/eise/jrranger/5accomp2X.htm
[3]
 https://www.mic.com/articles/74045/jfk-s-top-5-political-accomplishments