Determinism, Indeterminism, and Personal Freedom

A Dialogue

by J.-M. Kuczynski PhD

MAX: What is determinism?

Dr. K: Determinism is the doctrine that nothing is uncaused.  

MAX: So if determinism is correct, then how the world is now determines exactly how it will be in the future. 

Dr. K: Correct. 

MAX: And how it was in the past determines exactly how it is now.

Dr. K: Correct. 

MAX: What is indeterminism?

Dr. K: The doctrine that determinism is false.

MAX: If indeterminism is true, does that mean that the universe is chaotic?

Dr. K: It means that it is chaotic to a non-null degree, but there is otherwise no limit to how orderly it can be. 

MAX: Please clarify.

Dr. K: If there is a single uncaused event, then indeterminism is correct, even if the universe is otherwise completely deterministic. And it doesn’t matter how minute that event is. 

MAX: I see. But to the extent that the universe is indeterministic, it is chaotic. 

Dr. K: Correct. 

MAX: And to the extent that it is deterministic, it is orderly. 

Dr. K: Correct. 

MAX: So if the determinist is right, then my making this very statement is an inevitable consequence of the previous state of the universe.

Dr. K: Correct 

MAX: So if t is some moment in time billions of years ago, then, given the state the universe at t, it was inevitable that you and I would have this conversation, and have it in exactly the way in which we are having it. 

Dr. K: Exactly. 

MAX: So everything that any person thinks, feels, or does is the inevitable result of events that occurred before he was born. 

Dr. K: Correct. 

MAX: But if indeterminism is true, then the current state of the universe is not the inevitable consequence of its previous condition. 

Dr. K: Correct. 

MAX: So if the indeterminist is right, how the universe was a billion years ago did not necessarily make it inevitable that we would be having this exchange. 

Dr. K: Correct. And you were right to include the word “necessarily.” Depending on the exact way in which the universe is indeterministic---supposing that it is, in fact, indeterministic---our having this conversation might or might not be an inevitable consequence of the pre-conversation state of the universe. 

MAX:  The obvious thing to say, of course, is that, if the determinist is right, then we have no free will. 

Dr. K: Yes, that is indeed the obvious thing to say.  

MAX: You don’t agree with it, I gather. 

Dr. K: I do not. 

MAX: But you do agree, surely, that, other things being equal, we are more free in an indeterministic universe than in a deterministic universe.

Dr. K: I do not. Indeterminism is more of a threat to freedom than determinism. In fact, determinism is not a threat to freedom. It is in fact necessary for it. Determinism is as necessary for freedom as indeterminism is fatal to freedom.

MAX: Explain. 

Dr. K: Imagine a hypothetical world  where our minds and bodies are as deterministic as they are in our world but where the rest of the world is far more indeterministic than our world is. Let’s refer to that world as ‘W’.

MAX: I think I understand. The idea is that W is so indeterministic that when you throw a baseball, it is just as likely to turn into a hawk and fly away as it is to land in the catcher’s mitt. 

Dr. K:  Exactly. Now let me ask you, would we be more free in W than we are here?

MAX: No; if anything, less free. At least in our world, there are dependable mechanisms. So we can control it. But in W, we can’t even do that. 

Dr. K: Exactly. So indeterminism in the external world would not make us more free.   

MAX: Right. The indeterminism would have to be in us. 

Dr. K: That’s right. So let’s suppose that our nervous systems are indeterministic. In that case, the condition of my nervous system at a given time fails to determine its condition at later times. 

MAX: Which wouldn’t make us more free. 

Dr. K: No, it wouldn’t. 

MAX: I understand. At time t, I decide to put on my shirt. Since my nervous system is indeterministic, its condition at time t leaves it open whether I will make the requisite bodily movements. 

Dr. K: And what about if your central nervous system was indeterministic? 

MAX: The central nervous system---the brain---mediates thought, feeling, memory, desire, decision-making, judgment. It is responsible for all cognitive and emotional functions. 

Dr. K: That’s right. 

MAX: So to the extent that it is indeterministic, what I know now fails to influence what I do tomorrow.

Dr. K: It also fails to influence what judgments and inferences you make tomorrow.  

MAX: Explain.

Dr. K: At time t1, you know that the berries in your backyard are poisonous. At later time t2, you are hungry and you are in your backyard. Your berry-knowledge won’t necessarily lead to the right decision unless the mechanisms that convert knowledge into intentions are intact.  And so far as those mechanisms are intact, the universe is deterministic. 


MAX:  And so far as it isn’t, they aren’t. 

Dr. K: Correct. And it is only to the extent that the universe is deterministic that there are any mechanisms to begin with, even ones that function only intermitttently.

MAX: Explain.

Dr. K: A mechanism is something that can be relied on to produce on output of a certain kind, when given an input of a certain kind. You put in a quarter; a coke comes out. You flip the switch; the light turns on. Where there are mechanisms, there is determinism. Where there is indeterminism, there are no mechanisms. 

MAX: So the world is deterministic to the extent that my psychological condition at a given time is responsible for my psychological condition at later times.

Dr. K:   Correct. 

MAX: So indeterminism threatens my mind’s ability to have any effect on its later condition.

Dr. K: Correct. 

MAX: So to the extent that my mind is indeterministic, it has no control over itself. 

Dr. K: Correct. 

MAX: And to the extent that the mechanisms linking my mind to my body are indeterministic, my mind has no control over my body. 

Dr. K:  Correct. 

MAX: And to the extent that the mechanisms governing the external world are indeterministic, I have no control over the external world. 

Dr. K: Correct. 

MAX:  So the more indeterministic a mind is, the more incoherent it is.  

Dr. K: The more its future condition fails to cohere with its present condition. 

MAX: And the more its present condition fails to cohere with its past condition. 

Dr. K: And it is therefore no mind at all, but rather a series of mutually isolated minds . 

MAX: And the same is true of each of those mini-minds. 

Dr. K: Since its earlier states fail to cohere with its later states. 

MAX: So it exists only for an instant. 

Dr. K: And therefore doesn’t exist at all. 

MAX: You’ve convinced me. Indeterminism is a threat to personal freedom.

Dr. K: Not to just to personal freedom, but to personal identity. 

MAX: How do you mean?

Dr. K: You said it yourself. The less deterministic a mind is, the less its past states cohere with its future states. And unless there is a minimum of coherence, there is no enduring self. There is, at most, a series of mutually isolated mental states. 

MAX: Yes, but those states would all belong to the same body; so even though they couldn’t have the direct sort of influence that, in the case of lucid human beings, mental states have on one another, they could influence each other indirectly. A given mental state could influence the host-body, which in turn could give rise to, or otherwise influence, some later mental state. 

Dr. K: Yes, but you are presupposing the presence of deterministic mechanisms in that body. 

MAX: Touché. 

Dr. K: And could there even be enduring physical bodies in an indeterministic world?

MAX: Are you referring to bodies in the biological sense or in the strictly physics-related sense?

Dr. K: Both. 

MAX: I don’t see why not. In an indeterministic world, there would be billiard balls, but the laws governing their interactions would leave it open what those interactions led to.

Dr. K: First of all, when you talk about the ‘interactions’ of billiard balls, you are talking about the effects they have on one another, and in an indeterministic world, things don’t have effects on one another.  

MAX: I don’t follow. 

Dr. K: Suppose that, in this hypothetical world of ours, which we will once again refer to as W, billiard ball x collides with billiard ball y. If there are laws in W that determine what the outcome of that collision will be, then W is not, at least not that extent, a genuinely indeterministic world.

MAX: I follow. 

Dr. K: So to the extent that W is indeterministic, it is open what the outcome will be. Upon being struck, the  ball might go right, left, up, or down, or sprout wings and fly away. 

MAX: I see. 

Dr. K: And whatever that outcome is, to the extent that the collision was so much as dispositive of it, W deterministic.  

MAX: Please clarify. 

Dr. If such a collision made that outcome 98% likely, then ceteris paribus W is more deterministic than a world in which such a collision made it only 51% likely.

MAX: And a world in which that outcome was 51% likely would, in turn, would be more deterministic than one in which it was only 14% likely and in which no possible outcome had a probabilility of more than 14%. 

Dr. K: Now you’re getting the idea. 

MAX: And a maximally indeterministic world would be one in which nothing was more dispositive of a given outcome than any other thing. 

Dr. K: That’s right, bringing us to the question I asked a moment ago: In a maximally indeterministic universe, would there be anything to begin with? I mean, would there be any thing? 

MAX: Explain. 

Dr. K: Is it that, in such a universe, there would be rocks and trees, and maybe even babies and giraffes, but their interactions would be irregular and would have no foreseeable outcomes?  

MAX: Obviously such a world wouldn’t comprise any organisms. If the beating of a heart was as likely to make blood boil as it was to pump it, and if other organs and tissues were similarly unable to guarantee the right results, then, obviously, there would be no giraffes or babies.  

Dr. K: Exactly. So let’s talk about purely physical objects: things that aren’t minds, don’t have minds, and aren’t organisms, not even of the single celled variety. 

MAX: Rocks, billiard balls, planets, atoms. That sort of thing. 

Dr. K: Right. Could such things exist in an indeterministic universe?

MAX: I don’t see why not.  

Dr. K: To the naked eye, a billiard ball looks like a single indivisible object. But it consists of trillions of micro-particles interacting with each one another. 

MAX: I see where you’re going. And if those interactions weren’t governed by deterministic laws; if a given such interaction was just as likely to lead to this as opposed to that outcome; then each particle would go its own way, not being kept in place by deterministic laws, and the billiard ball would powder into nothingness. 

Dr. K: It would disintegrate. Literally. 

MAX: Right. Or, rather, it wouldn’t even be there to disintegrate in the first place. The only things that would exist in such a universe would be the micro-particles that,  in a deterministic universe, would have composed it. 

Dr. K: Would they? 

MAX: How do you mean?

Dr. K: Atoms consist of interacting parts, just like billiard balls. 

MAX: I see. Only the sub-atomic parts would exist then. 

Dr. K: Are you sure about that?

MAX: I don’t see why they wouldn’t. But it doesn’t really matter. You’ve proved your first point, that indeterminism is a threat to personal freedom. But you have not proved your second point, that determinism is necessary for it. 

Dr. K: Actually, I have proved it.  

MAX: Explain. 

Dr. K: To the extent that the world outside of our bodies is indeterministic, we cannot control it, and it follows that it is controllable only to the extent that it is deterministic.  

MAX:  Yes, that does follow. But freedom is not about being able to control external objects. At least, that’s not all it’s about. 

Dr. K: What else is it about? 

MAX: Being able to control one’s body.

Dr. K: Agreed, but it is only to the extent that the world is deterministic that there are mechanisms by which mind can control body. 

MAX: Good point.  But control over the external world, and even control over one’s own body---these are mere manifestations of freedom. These things are significant--- utterly significant. But what makes them significant is that they mobilize some other, deeper kind of freedom. 

Dr. K: I am in intrigued. Please explain.

MAX: A rock cannot be said to have control over anything. Events involving the rock have effects, obviously. But when the rock smashes a window, it isn’t doing anything, at least not in the sense in which a person is doing something when he brushes his teeth or plays the piano or digs a ditch.  

Dr. K: I agree. But why? What is it that a person has, that a rock lacks, whereby the person can, but the rock cannot, do things, in the relevantly pregnant sense of the word “do”?

MAX: There is a kind of inner freedom that the person has that the rock lacks, and when the person interacts with the world, he is externalizing that inner freedom.  

Dr. K: I vaguely understand. There is freedom, and there is power. Power is the ability to convert freedom into desired results. But power presupposes the existence of freedom, and must therefore be distinguished from it. 

MAX: Well stated. 

Dr. K: I agree with all of this, so far as I understand it. And all of it is further proof that determinism is a prerequisite for freedom. 

MAX: How do you mean?

Dr. K: If a person does not have control over his future mental states, does he have this inner freedom you speak of? 

MAX: No. If a person cannot govern his own mind, he is not free. He is like someone who, because of a degenerative neural disorder, cannot govern his own body. 

Dr. K: Someone like Stephen Hawking, who has Lou Gherig’s disease. 

MAX: Exactly, except that Stephen Hawking has an intact mind, and therefore has a very important sort of freedom that this other person lacks. 

Dr. K: That’s right. Stephen Hawking can control his thoughts. He can make judgments and decisions that appropriately reflect his past experiences and are otherwise appropriately controlled by considerations of logic and evidence. 

MAX: Exactly. 

Dr. K: So this inner freedom you are discussing---one has it to the extent that one’s current mental state embodies the appropriate sort of responsiveness to one’s previous mental states. 

MAX: That sounds right. 

Dr. K: Therefore, one has it only to the extent that one’s future mental states embody the right sort of responsiveness to one’s present mental state. 

MAX: That obviously follows. 

Dr. K: So possession of this inner freedom is not about having a mind whose mental states don’t determine one another; it is about having a mind whose mental states determine one another in the right way. 

MAX: I see. Your second point is correct, then: determinism is indeed necessary for freedom. But it is not sufficient for it.
  
Dr. K: There is a trivial sense in which that is true. In a deterministic world in which there are no animate beings, there is no freedom.

MAX: Yes, but that isn’t what I mean. You seem to holld that there different kinds of freedom---control over the external world, control over one’s body, and control over one’s mind. 

Dr. K: That’s right. 

MAX: Each of which you believe to be identical with some sort of causal integrity. 

Dr. K:  Yes, a person is free if his mind is constitutive of the right sort of causal integration. 

MAX:  And my view is that a person is not free unless his mind is constitutive of the right sort of causal integration, but I don’t grant that a person is free if that condition is satisfied.    

Dr. K:  So in your view, indeterminism is incompatible with freedom, and so is determinism. 

MAX: Exactly. Freedom is impossible in an indeterministic world, it is impossible in a determinstic world, and it is therefore impossible sans qualification.

Dr. K: Why is it impossible in a deterministic world?

MAX: For the reason given earlier, that, in a deterministic world, what I am doing now is the inevitable consequence of what happened before I was born. Therefore, what I am doing now is the inevitable result of events over which I have no control. Therefore, I do not control the things that control me. Therefore, I control nothing and therefore have no freedom.

Dr. K: Well stated.

MAX: So you agree.

Dr. K: No. 

MAX: Why not?

Dr. K: For illustrative reasons, let’s consider somebody who did very bad things and who is to be blamed for those things, at least in so far as anyone is to be blamed for anything. 

MAX: Someone like Stalin.

Dr. K: Yes, exactly. And for argument’s sake, let’s suppose that the world is deterministic. Question: Did the state of the universe prior to Stalin’s birth make Stalin do the things he did?

MAX: Yes. Assuming, as we are, that the world is deterministic, then yes.  

Dr. K: Or---there is a second part to my question---is it rather that the universe made it inevitable that Stalin would come into existence and, once in existence, freely do all of the bad things he did?

MAX: I don’t see how those questions differ. 

Dr. K: Before Stalin was born, the universe could---and did---make it inevitable that Stalin eventually come into existence.  

MAX: Clearly. 

Dr. K: So however it was that Stalin’s character was configured, the universe made it inevitable, long before Stalin was born, that someone with that exact configuration would come into existence.   

MAX: Exactly.  

Dr. K: And it made it inevitable that forces constitutive of Stalin’s character lead to certain decisions on Stalin’s part, and therefore to certain actions on Stalin’s part. 

MAX: I am beginning to understand your position. 

Dr. K: The state of universe prior to Stalin’s conception made it inevitable that Stalin would come into existence and, moreover, that Stalin-constitutive psychological structures be responsible for decisions and subsequent actions on Stalin’s part. 

MAX:  I see. For an action on Stalin’s part to be free is for Stalin to be responsible for it. 

Dr. K: And for Stalin to be responsible for it is for Stalin-constitutive forces to be responsible for it. 

MAX: And for such forces to be responsible for it is for them to cause it.  

Dr. K:   And until such forces, such Stalin-constitutive forces, are in existence, we cannot talk of Stalin’s being made to do this or that. 

MAX: And once he is in existence, his being made to do this as opposed to that consists in those forces being directed in this as opposed to that direction---in some direction that do not allign with Stalin’s objectives, presumably. And his doing something freely consists in their being directed by forces that do so allign. 

Dr. K: Well put. 

MAX: Is there more to know about free will? 

Dr. K: There is, but that is almost everything that the discipline of philosophy has to say about it.  The rest, or at least a good part of the rest, is for psychoanalysis to say. 

MAX:  And what will we discuss next time?

Dr. K: The relationship between predictability and determinism. 

MAX: I look forward to it. 


