                                  What is an intention?

 

                                J.-M. Kuczynski, PhD

 

 

Introduction: Intentions as system-level judgements, values as system-level

beliefs

1.0 Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom

1.1 Rational ≠ intelligent, irrational ≠ unintelligent

1.2 Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom (continued)

1.3 “x is free”= “x does what x wants to provided that what he wants to do is

adequately rooted in his personality structure”

1.4 Problems with this analysis

1.4.1 Frankfurt’s analysis systemically flawed

2.0 An as of yet unidentified problem with Frankfurt's analysis

2.1 Second order desires sometimes are the puppets of first order desires

2.2 Fake freedom: The warping of one’s higher-order desires to make them

validate one’s lower-order desires

3.0 Values ≠ desires

3.1 Free acts = value-driven acts

3.2 Some general facts relating to the nature of values.

3.3 What are values?

3.3.1 An objection to what we just said

3.3.2 What are values? (revisited)

3.3.4 What are values? (continued)

3.4.0 The question “what are values?” considered in light of Mill’s analysis

of moral value

3.4.1 The question “what are values?” considered in light of Mill’s analysisof moral value (continued)

3.5. An objection to our position concerning the nature of values

4.1 Minds ≠ Selves (continued)

4.2 Minds ≠ Selves (continued)

4.3 Minds ≠ Selves (continued)

5.0 Co-corporeal, informationally integrated mental states enough for a mind,

but not for a self

5.1 Co-corporeal, informationally integrated mental states enough for a mind,

but not for a self (continued)

5.2 Minds that are selves and minds that are not

6.0 When minds become selves

6.1 Summary

7.0 The concept of intrinsic value in relation to the concept of selfhood

7.1 Some preliminaries

7.2 Two Illustrations of Our Thesis that what is Valuable is what consolidates

one's Agency

7.3 Selfhood a matter of degree

 


Introduction: Intentions as system-level judgements, values as system-level

beliefs

 

  In this monograph, it will be made clear what intentions are. Specifically,

it will be proved that intentions are judgments as to how to consolidate one’s

psychological architecture. It follows, so it will also be established, that

values are beliefs as to what, in general, is conducive to the integrity of one’s

psychological architecture.

  The meanings of these claims, as well as the justifications for them, are to

be understood in terms of Harry Frankfurt’s incisive analysis of the conceptof freedom, to which we now turn.

 

1.0 Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom

 

  According to John Locke, you are free to the extent that you can do what

you want to do, and you are unfree to the extent that you cannot.

  According to Locke, this entails that freedom is a property of actions, not

of desires, i.e. whereas actions can be meaningfully describe as free or as

unfree, desires cannot be meaningfully be so described. Locke’s reasoning:

 

        One does not desire to desire to go jogging. Were it one’s desire to

    desire to go jogging, one would ipso facto already desire to go jogging.

    In general, second-order desires (desires to desire) collapse into first-

    order choices (desires to act). Therefore, given that one is free to the

    extent that one can do as one desires, it follows that freedom is a

    property of actions, not of desires per se.

 

  Freedom to do as one pleases is obviously a kind of freedom—a very

important kind.

  But it isn’t the only kind. And contrary to what Locke says, there is a

sense in which choices can be free or unfree. Harry Frankfurt made this clear.

A story will help us begin to understand Frankfurt’s insightful analysis of

freedom.

  Jones is a great writer who is addicted to heroin. Because his addiction is

only moderate, he is able to function perfectly well even when he is heroin-

deprived. (When heroin-deprived, he doesn’t feel good, but he is in no way

incapacitated.) He knows that, if he were to shoot up right now, the

subsequent lethargy would make it impossible for him to write a single wordfor the rest of the day. He also knows that, if he doesn’t write 10 pages today,

he will lose his book contract. Jones does not want to lose the contract. Plus,

he wants to grow as a writer, which he won’t do, at least not today, if he

shoots up. He thus has a desire to not take the heroin—even though he

simultaneously has a desire to take the heroin.

  Jones’ desire to take heroin is a first-order desire. Jones’ desire not to act

on this desire is a second-order desire. This is because Jones’ desire not to

take heroin is a desire as to what to do with another desire; it is a desire not to

cave in to a desire to take heroin.

  Suppose that Jones caves in and he takes the heroin. In that case, Jones is

a slave to his desires. His will has been compromised. He is not acting freely.

  But now suppose that Jones does not cave in. He does the right thing:

instead of taking the heroin, he endures the discomfort of a heroin-free day

and manages to get his work done. In this context, Jones is not a slave to his

desires. His will has not been bent. His conduct expresses a “free will.”

  In light of considerations such as these, Frankfurt says that somebody has

a free will to the extent that his conduct aligns with his second-order desires.

  But here a question arises. Why are second-order desires so special? Why

is it that freedom consists in one's doing the bidding of one’s second-order

desires—as opposed to one’s third-order, or fourth-order, or first-order

desires? What, in this context, is so special about the number two?

  When the heroin-addicted writer decides not to take heroin, what is

driving him is a rational appraisal of his situation. But when the heroin-

addicted writer gives in to his addiction, it is not his rationality (or his

morality) that is driving him.

  Before we can close this argument, we must address Frankfurt’s

discussion of the concept of a “person.” By a “person,” Frankfurt does not

mean a member of the species homo sapiens. He means anything that has thesame basic psychological architecture that we have. What is so special about

that structure? First of all, we are self-conscious. Second, we are rational.

Third, we are rational not only about how to attain our objectives, but also

about what those objectives should be. What distinguishes persons from non-

persons is that the former, but not the latter, subject their own desires (and,

more generally, their own mental states) to critical scrutiny.

  Non-persons are often very clever when it comes to figuring out how to

attain their objectives; for example, beavers show a lot of intelligence when it

comes to building dams. But they are not smart about whether they should be

building dams in the first place. The question doesn’t arise. They have the

desire, and they act on it (or they die trying). In general, persons do, whereas

non-persons do not, subject their own desires to rational scrutiny. Non-

persons do not ask themselves: “What would the consequences of acting on

this desire be? And should I act on this desire?”

  We persons, on the other hand, do subject our objectives to rational

assessment. And this is obviously made possible by the fact that we are self-

conscious. If I am overtaken by a desire to build a dam, I will ask myself:

“how would my acting on this desire help my overall interests?”

  We can now close the argument. Whenever someone is driven by a

rational assessment of their own desires, they are driven by a desire about a

desire. Thus, one is rational only to the extent that it is one’s second-order

desires that drive one’s conduct. There is a sense in which rational conduct is

free and in which irrational conduct is not.

  To make it clear what this sense is, we must first distinguish between

intelligent conduct and rational conduct.

 

1.1 Rational ≠ intelligent, irrational ≠ unintelligent

   An irrational act can involve an enormous amount of intelligence. Smith is

a brilliant inventor. He tries to impress his wife by building a giant robot that

sings romantic songs in a metallic voice. This alienates her and she divorces

him. Moreover, the financial and personal resources he sunk into this project

have left him destitute. Smith's act might have been about as intelligent as an

act can be. But it was not a rational act. For intelligently carried out though

the act was, the immediate object of that act (namely, the construction of a

robot that would sing love songs to his wife so that he’d be spared the trouble

of doing so) was not intelligently arrived and failed to embody consideration

of relevant facts that it was well within Smith’s ability to consider.

  A rational act is one that embodies due regard for one's various interests.

An irrational act is one that does not. An intelligent but impulsive act (e.g.,

Smith's speedily building this robot to allay his rapidly growing anxieties

about his marital situation, all of which are projective but which become

legitimate as a result of this endeavor on his part) fails to embody due regard

for one's own interests. (Smith isn't taking into account the consequences of

his actions; he is misdeploying his vast stores of intelligence. And, granting

that there are different kinds of intelligence, he obviously has whatever kind

of intelligence one needs to have to know that (supposing for argument's sake

that there's no chance that this project would bring him to the attention of any

potential benefactors) this project is bound to land him on Skid Row.) So far

as one is driven by first order desires, one is neglecting to gratify one's

second order desires. So, given that second order desires are clearly more

closely hewed to one's middle- and long-term welfare---or, if it isn't one's

own welfare that one cares about, one's middle- and long-term situations---it

is clearly more rational to act on one's second than on one's first order

desires. Also, to make a point that we will soon develop, it is often rational to

perform actions in which, were one's first-order desires allowed to dischargethemselves, those desires would be expressed. Too much self-restraint is

dysfunctional and, in addition to being unpleasurable, seals off possible well

springs of insight and creativity. But, setting aside cases of psychopathology,

when a person performs one of these enjoyment-oriented actions, he isn't

acting on an impulse; he's acting on his approval of an impulse. In other

words, he's considered the impulse, determined that it lines up with second

order desires (or, what I believe to be different, his values), and, on that basis,

lifted the initial inhibition on his impulse. So, while the resulting action may

be indistinguishable from what he would have done had the impulse itself

been the proximal cause of his deeds, his psychological condition, given that

his action was not directly prompted by that impulse, is radically different

from what it would have been had that action been thus prompted.

  Having distinguished between rational conduct and intelligent, we may

proceed with our discussion of Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom.

 

1.2 Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom (continued)

 

  There’s more to being free than being able to do what you want to do.

Your desires must reflect who you are. If they don’t, those desires belong to

you but aren’t of you. And in that case, you are alienated from your own

mental states, in much the way that a person with Parkinson’s is alienated

from his body.

  But, in a way, the alienation is even worse. Involuntary behavior is

unintentional behavior. Intentional behavior is voluntary behavior. Voluntary

behavior is desire-driven behavior. (If you don’t want to raise your arm, but it

goes up anyway, you didn’t intend for it to happen.) Epileptic fits are not

actions. Unintended behaviors are not actions. Unlike actions, they’re

undergone, not done. So estrangement from one’s own actions amounts toestrangement from all of one’s own desires; and it’s hard to imagine a

condition less free than that.

  Another story will help expose a problem with the analysis of freedom

just described, and it will also clarify the raison d’être for Frankfurt’s soon to

be discussed emendations of it.

  Smith’s first-order desires are seriously out of alignment with his second.

He values writing poetry; he’s good at it; and he enjoys it about as much as

it’s humanly possible to enjoy it. But he has a voracious craving for drugs.

His craving for drugs, especially cocaine, is unusually strong; and his desire

to write poetry, though intense, is not as intense as his desire to do cocaine.

  Smith’s desire to do cocaine is out of alignment with many of his values

(second-order desires). Were he to give into this desire, he couldn’t write

poetry; nor could he maintain friendships or play sports or, with only a few

exceptions, do any of the other things he values. For this reason, he doesn’t

give in. But given how intense his craving is, every day is a struggle for

Smith. If, as Frankfurt suggests, one is free to the extent that one acts on

one’s second-order desires, Smith is as free as a person can be. But given

how hard life is for Smith, it’s counterintuitive to suppose that he’s

maximally free. To be sure he has a kind of freedom, and he has it in

abundance. But there’s some other sort of freedom that he doesn’t have.

  Frankfurt is aware of this problem, and he revises his view to deal with it.

According to his revised view, if an act is to be free, it is necessary that it be

driven by a second-order desire, but it isn’t sufficient. Another condition must

be met: one’s first-order desires must be consistent with the second-order

desires that are driving that act.

  Here’s the idea. Person X has no self-control. He binges on drugs and

food, and he hates himself for doing this; but he can’t stop—he’s too weak

and his urges are too strong. His life has no meaning and he knows it; but hewill not, or cannot, do anything about it. Unlike X, Person Y has a huge

amount of self-control and never caves into temptation. But everything is a

struggle, since he’s always fighting temptation, like a drowning man trying to

stay afloat. (Y is like Smith.) Person Z cannot be categorized with X or with

Y. Z always does what he values, which is composing music. And what he

values is what he wants. He wants what he wants to want. Because he’s doing

what he wants, he has the freedom that X has that Y lacks. Because he’s doing

what he wants to want, he has the kind of freedom that Y has that X lacks.

And since, of the three, he’s the only one who has both kinds of freedom,

he’s obviously the most free of them all.

  Thus, one is free insofar as two conditions are met: (i) one acts on one’s

second-order desires, as opposed to one’s first-order desires; and (ii) one’s

second-order desires are in alignment with one’s first-order desires.

  To see the merits, and also the shortcomings, of Frankfurt’s brilliant

analysis, we must take a moment to say how that analysis relates to

compatibilism.

 

1.3 “x is free”= “x does what x wants to provided that what he wants to do is

adequately rooted in his personality structure”

 

  We’ve considered two analyses of freedom:

 

  (i) “x performed act A freely” = “it is because x chose to do A that he did

it,”

 

and

 

  (ii) “performed A freely’’ = “A reflects who x really is.” 

  These two views can be combined into the view that:

 

  (iii) “x performed act A freely” = “it is because x chose to A that he did it,

provided that this choice of x’s reflects who x really is.”

 

  This analysis, which is basically Frankfurt’s, embodies a profound insight

into the nature of human freedom. We will presently see that, although it’s a

step in the right direction, it isn’t correct: for it is possible to warp one’s higher-

order desires to suit one’s first-order desires and, thus, to make one’s higher-

order desires be mere vehicles for first-order desires.

  But right now, I’d like to concentrate on an apparent problem with

Frankfurt’s analysis that, although, I suspect, some would be inclined to think

otherwise, isn’t an actual problem with it:

 

          (FD)  Smith has given himself over to drug addiction. He spends days

          doing drugs. (He has unlimited supplies of money and never has

          trouble getting them.) Smith has many talents—he’s a great water-

          skier, a great short-story writer, etc., but, because of his addiction,

          these gifts of his lie fallow.

              Green, on the other hand, hasn’t given himself over to addiction.

          He spends his days doing things that augment who he is. Green can’t

          indulge every craving that he has. Unlike Smith, he doesn’t have the

          money to do so.

              You (JMK/Frankfurt) would say that Green is freer than Smith,

          and your reason would be that, even though he can’t gratify as many

          desires as Smith can, the desires that Green does gratify have the

          right roots, whereas those that Smith gratifies do not.              I grant that Smith’s condition is worse than Green’s, and also that

          Smith is less free than Green. But, contrary to what you say, that is

          because, when it comes to desire gratification, Green’s batting

          average is better than Smith’s. There are a lot of aspirations that

          Smith has that will be thwarted as long as he’s imprisoned by

          addiction. Smith wants to do cocaine more than he wants to be a

          writer, but it doesn’t follow that he no longer wants to be a writer. He

                                        [454] 
          could very well want both.Let’s suppose he does. In that case, a

          very strong desire of his is being frustrated. It’s true that he’s the one

          who’s frustrating it, but that doesn’t mean it isn’t frustrated.

              Smith will inevitably have many other desires that his cocaine

          addiction dooms to frustration. In his pre-addiction days, we may

          suppose, Smith enjoyed many things that he no longer enjoys. We can

          assume that he desired to do each of these things, and we can also

          assume that he still desires them, even though he obviously doesn’t

          desire them as strongly as he desires cocaine. Many desires are

          rooted in personality structures. A desire to play the piano or read

          Nietzsche doesn’t just overtake one; it’s rooted in enduring structural

          facts about one’s personality. And as long as the personality structure

          is there, one’s inability to express it in the form of action is,

          practically by definition, a form of frustration. Smith’s personality

          structure may still support those desires. (And almost certainly will.

          Addiction doesn’t turn people into complete vegetables, at least not

          right away, and usually not ever.) It could be that Smith thinks it

          would be greater. But it’s not so clear that it would in fact be greater.

          The phenomenological expression of that frustration would be more

          intense. But that doesn’t necessarily mean that the desire in question

          is itself more intense. Desires, even short-lived ones, are structures;          they aren’t feelings. And the feelings to which a desire gives rise don’t

          necessarily make it clear how intense that desire really is.

 

 

1.4 Problems with this analysis

 

  FD is close to the truth, but it falls just short. Another story shows why.

Aaronson is a coward who has no self-confidence. So even though he wants to

write novels and is extremely talented at it, he doesn’t do so. It isn’t safe

enough. It’s too bohemian for his stodgy, blinkered parents and for his equally

stodgy friends (who he doesn’t even like—he just pretends to like them, since

he’s supposed to). To make a living, Aaronson sells insurance, which he hates.

His life is a waking death.

  In living as others want him to, Smith is surrendering his freedom and he is

also dooming many desires of his to frustration. But those two failings, though

related, are not identical. Aaronson is suppressing an important side of himself.

The personality structures that he is suppressing give rise to many ardent

desires, but they aren’t identical with such desires. His losing his freedom

consists in his suppressing these structures. The desire frustration that follows

is an effect of this loss of freedom and isn’t identical with it.

  So Aaronson’s loss of freedom isn’t identical with his being unable to do

what he wants; his being unable to do what he wants is a by-product of his

loss of freedom. To be sure, his inability to do what he wants is itself a loss of

freedom. But, important though this second kind of freedom is, it’s distinct

from the first kind and a derivative of it. So being free consists primarily in

being oneself, and secondarily in being able to do what one wants. And this is

obviously close to what Frankfurt is saying, if it doesn’t coincide with it.

 1.4.1 Frankfurt’s analysis systemically flawed

 

  Many analyses that philosophers put forth seem not to embody genuine

attempts to find the truth. Frankfurt's analysis of freedom does embody such

an attempt. And that attempt is almost successful.

  But it falls short. In the next section, we will see why. Here's an outline of

what we'll find. Acts that are driven by one's Higher-order desires need not be

free; for people can, and often do, warp their higher-order desires, so as to

make them fit their first-order desires. Higher-order desires, in other words,

can become vehicles for first-order desires. A lazy, weak person can warp his

higher-order desires so that they merely rubber-stamp the craven first-order

desires of which his actions are compulsive expressions.

  We will find that truly free acts are those that are driven, not by higher-

order desires, but by values. We will find that there is no agency of any kind

where there are no selves, and we will find that, where there are no values,

there are no selves, though there may be minds. I will leave it at that for now,

since the entirety of the last part of the present will work will clarify and

justify those statements.

 

2.0 An as of yet unidentified problem with Frankfurt's analysis

 

  According to Frankfurt, a free act is one that is driven by higher-order

desires. This is false. A free act is one that is driven by one’s values. Values are

not desires. (Values may lead to desires, and desires may lead to values. But

values aren’t desires.) A story will help us begin to establish these claims.

  You hate opera, and you hate the kind of people who hate opera. But those

people are chic; they’re the “right” sort of people. You want to be one of them;

you want to be chic. But it isn’t because you see their lives as being valuablethat you want to be one of them. In fact, you see them as empty, bad people who

act in empty, bad ways. But you’re a follower, not a leader. Your desire to enjoy

listening to opera has nothing to do with your valuing opera or, indeed, with

your valuing anything. That second-order desire of yours is simply a means to

end, the end being the fulfillment of some first-order desire, the nature of which

we will discuss in a moment. You know that, if you don’t come to have a

genuine love of opera, you’ll inadvertently disclose to the people whose ranks

you are trying to join that you don’t much care for them. While in your box-seat

at the opera-house, you’ll look bored and sullen; you’ll sound fake when you

tell these big people how much you like opera. And you believe that, as a result,

they won’t let you join them, in consequence of which you’ll wither away.

  That first-order desire is not a desire to survive: you know that your survival

doesn't depend on your being in the good graces of these people. Rather, it is a

cowardly desire to fit in. And that first-order desire is, we may plausibly

suppose, the off-spring of another, equally despicable first-order desire, namely,

your desire to avoid the hard, anxiety-ridden work of forging your own identity.

So it is laziness and cowardice that underlie your first-order desire to fit in. It is

not, I repeat, a desire to survive.

  In this context, your behavior is a compulsive response to fear and laziness.

It is not a free act. It is a compulsive, pseudo-free act.

  In this context, it is important to distinguish between fear-driven behavior

and cowardly behavior. People are vulnerable. They must take their

vulnerabilities into account when deciding what to do. The coward has no

compunctions about parting with who he is in his efforts to survive. The fearful,

non-coward will avoid parting with his identity until, having considered all of

the possibilities, even those that would involve the hard work and alienation

from ways of living to which he is accustomed, he judges that he has no

alternative but to forfeit at least part of his identity in order to survive. It shouldbe said that many a fearful, non-coward will risk death before forfeiting his

identity or even a part thereof.

 

2.1 Second order desires sometimes are the puppets of first order desires

 

  So, in this context, your higher-order-driven desire is purely instrumental: It

is just a means by which you try to gratify your desire to survive. And, though

you want to survive, you don’t value it; or, what is probably more accurate, your

desire to survive is more basic than your judgment that it would be good to

survive, and the latter is an intellectualization, a derivative, of the former. Your

desire to survive is a force unto itself. It doesn’t await your approval. It directly

motivates action. And, should you come to approve of it, this judgment of yours

has little role, if any, in the instigation of actions on your part that, so you hope,

conduce to your survival. Your desire to survive is much more primitive than

any judgment of yours as to the extent to which some norm is being complied

with. All animals want to survive; but not all animals make judgments. Even

though there may well be cases where your desire for such and such is a

consequence of your judgment that such and such has value, your desire to

survive isn’t one of these cases. Thus, second-order desires can be value-free;

for they can be nothing more than the techniques for gratifying (valuatively

empty) first-order desires.

 

2.2 Fake freedom: The warping of one’s higher-order desires to make them

validate one’s lower-order desires

 

  What if one warps one’s higher order desires to validate one’s lower order

desires? What if one rationalizes?

  These questions show that, as it stands, Frankfurt’s analysis won't do.Knowing that doing right by one’s existing second-order desires would be

difficult, and knowing that doing right by one’s first-order desires would be easy

and pleasurable, one can convince oneself that one’s current second-order

desires are the wrong ones and that they ought to be replaced with ones that, as

it happens, validate one’s current first-order desires. If one is too lazy and weak

to do what one believes to be the right thing, one has a choice: (i) one can

choose to do the right thing, which, as one knows, involves making much

needed, but labor-intensive, changes to one’s own character; or, (ii) one can

choose to replace one’s existing second order desires with ones that---what a

surprise!---just happen to validate one’s existing first-order desires.

  Doing this involves convincing oneself that one’s character-defects are

actually virtues. So, supposing that Green is somebody who is doing just this,

here is what he might tell himself (“GR” is short for “Green’s rationalization”):

 

    (GR) I’m not “lazy.” Unlike the blinkered maniac who works all the time

    and never takes the time to smell a rose or go to the beach, I see the larger

    picture. Nor am I “weak.” Unlike the so-called “hero” who moronically

    tries to buck the system, I see the larger picture; I see that despite that

    system’s imperfections, it is one that I am duty-bound to comply with; and,

    unlike the so-called hero, I am enough of a realist to know that complying

    with the system involves getting one’s hands dirty. The “hero” isn’t a hero

    at all.

        To be sure, the (so-called) hero’s efforts have a sheen of valor. And, in

    sticking up for the little guy---the one whose work is being plagiarized by

    the well-entrenched senior professor, the one who is being framed by the

    oft-decorated police-officer---the hero’s conduct might initially appear to

    be more in keeping with the rules that are constitutive of the system. But

    that initial appearance is an illusion.        We need the system. If we don’t follow the rules, the system will

    collapse. But there are two kinds of system-constitutive rules: those that

    are spoken and those that are not. The hero’s behavior is heroic only

    relative to the first set of rules. But, in this context—the one in which it

    would be said by a short-sighted person that I am being “weak,” the one in

    which I’m supporting the senior professor’s portrayal of events---it is the

    second set of rules that count. The hero (the odd graduate student or pre-

    tenure professor who is “telling it like it is” and isn’t abetting the efforts of

    the senior professor) is violating those rules. And he’s doing so knowing

    that, because the rules he is violating must never be spoken, people will be

    forced to characterize his anti-social, system-undermining behavior as

    system-compliant. So the hero’s behavior is particularly insidious.

    Therefore, to the extent that his behavior is antithetical to mine, I will take

    it as a complement when somebody reacts my system-friendly conduct by

    calling me “a weak, faceless bureaucrat” or “an empty, servile, cringing

    shell.”

        To be sure, the system isn’t perfect. It often rewards the wicked and

    punishes the virtuous. It often requires that one speak ill of somebody who

    one knows is decent---who, though nobody says it, everybody (except for a

    few imbeciles) knows is decent and who, though nobody says it, everyone

    (same qualification) knows to be a person of merit---and to laud somebody

    who one knows (and who everyone knows, etc.) to have no merit.

        But, on balance, the system is good, and to keep it going, one must

    follow the rules---all of them, not just the spoken ones. And if that means

    taking the “coward’s path," so be it.

 

  Deep down, Green doesn’t really believe GR. Deep down, he knows that

he’s a servile, weak person who is doing the pragmatic thing, as opposed to theright thing. But, at least to the extent that he’s convinced by GR, Green has

replaced one set of higher-order desires (e.g., a desire to act virtuously, even

when, because of circumstances, one wishes to act in a craven and iniquitous

manner) with a different second-order desire (a desire to resist the odd

temptation one occasionally feels to do the “right” thing, even when it is not to

one’s practical advantage to do so).

  It’s pretty clear that this world is replete with people like Green.  This is a

problem for Frankfurt’s analysis. So far as Green is acting on his new higher-

order desires---the ones that, in telling himself GR, he is installing---Green is

letting his own cowardice make his decisions for him and he is thus not acting

freely. A junky who lets his low cravings make his choices for him; he is acting

freely only when he takes the reins and acts in accordance with what he wants to

do, as opposed to what his addiction wants him to do. Green is similarly unfree,

since, instead of doing what he wants to do, he does what his cowardice wants

him to do.

  So, contrary to what Frankfurt says, an act can be unfree even if it expresses

a higher-order desire. This happens when the higher-order desire is the puppet

of a lower-order desire.

 

3.0 Values ≠ desires

 

  Given the points just made, Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom must be

modified or augmented in some way. More specifically, Frankfurt must take

one the following four positions (and make any such adjustments to his system

as the position chosen requires). The result will, I believe, be a decent analysis

of at least one, very important kind of freedom. Here are those positions:

 

        (i) Contrary to what was just said, people don’t rationalize; they don’t    deceive themselves.

 

          (ii) Although people do rationalize and deceive themselves, their

          doing so doesn’t involve their actually replacing any higher-order

          values of theirs with other higher-order values. It involves only their

          falsely believing that they have done so. The original values stay on,

          this being why rationalizers are tormented by gnawing feelings of

          guilt (from which they typically attempt to insulate themselves by

          adding more rationalizations to their existing rationalizations). In

          other words, rationalization isn’t about actually replacing one’s

            values/higher-order desires with new ones. It is about making oneself

          believe that one has effected such a replacement.

              So, in deferring to the senior professor, Green isn’t acting

          according to his second order desires. Rather, he’s acting according

          to what he’s deluded himself into believing are his second order

          desires. (Consequently, the fact that Green’s actions are not free,

          except in the sense that they’re voluntary, is consistent with

          Frankfurt’s analysis.)

 

          (iii) Situations such as those described by GR neither constitute cases

          where one set of higher-order values is replaced with another nor

          constitute cases where some new set of higher-order values has

          altogether failed to have been installed. Rather, such situations

          involve a bifurcation or fracturing of the psyche---a kind of splitting

          of oneself into two selves, one of which still has the old set of values

          and the other of which has the new set of values.

              So, according to this hypothesis, rationalizations do install new

          higher-order desires. Contrary to (iii), however, they do so, not by          ousting old higher-order desires, but by adding new ones to them.

              Given that the new ones are inconsistent with the old ones,

          rationalization necessarily involves a degradation of one’s

          psychological integrity. One’s thinking must become more illogical

          than it used to be or one’s agency---by which I mean the totality of

          faculties involved in one’s being able to decide what to do---must

          undergo a sort of splitting.

                                                                    

          (iv) Although second-order values can be uninstalled and replaced

          with others, a distinction must be made between higher-order values,

          on the one hand, and core values, on the other. All core values are

          higher-order values, but not all higher-order values are core values.

          Green’s actions are unfree because, although they’re consistent with

          (some of) his higher-order values, they aren’t consistent with his core

          values.

 

3.1 Free acts = value-driven acts

 

  (i) is out of the question. To say that people don’t rationalize is itself to

rationalize, given what an obvious empirical fact it is that people rationalize.

  Also, the essence of Frankfurt’s position is that, if one is to be free, one must

not be at war with oneself: intrapsychic conflict is the enemy of freedom.

Frankfurt is aware that there are different ways of eliminating intrapsychic

conflict and that some of them not only fail to bring one freedom but strip one

of it. For example, given somebody who is torn between shooting heroin and

kicking his addiction, that person can cease to be at war with himself by

relinquishing his desire to kick his addiction and, thus, to surrender to it. But, as

Frankfurt himself clearly states, by resolving his internal conflict in that way,the junky is forfeiting his freedom. Nonetheless, Frankfurt holds that, in cases

where internal conflict is so intense that no one party has uncontested control

over the reigns of agency, one cannot possibly become free without ceasing to

be internally conflicted. Knowing that some ways of resolving internal conflicts

fail to make one free, Frankfurt holds that the way in which a person resolves a

case of internal conflict will bring that person freedom if and only if two

conditions are met, to wit:

 

        (a) The resolution of the conflict involves his higher-order desires

    prevailing over one’s lower desires;

  

          (b) The way in which that person’s higher-order desires prevail over

          his lower-order desires doesn’t involve the latter being unduly

          frustrated and, consequently, requires that the victorious higher-order

          desires so align with the lower-order desires over which they’ve

          triumphed that the latter can discharge themselves in a way that

          doesn’t threaten the hegemony of their higher-order masters.

 

  This position is a near duplicate of a position that Freud explicitly advocated,

                                            [459]
in various forms, throughout his career. It may be possible in some

attenuated, strictly logical sense for there to be Intrapsychic conflict without

self-deception or rationalization. But, human psychology being what it is, it

seems that self-deception is essential to the perpetuation, if not the initiation, of

such conflict. In any case, (i) is prima facie discrepant with empirical facts; and,

although many philosophers and psychologists virulently deny (i), they do so on

a priori grounds that, as we’ll see, are made of straw or, what is much more

common, they don’t bother to defend their position.

  (ii) is inconsistent with empirical facts. People’s values do change. As a 20year old, Jim wants to save the world. He works for the Peace Corps. He spends

his weekends working at soup kitchens. As a 40 year old, Jim is an investment

banker who lives to accumulate wealth and wouldn’t dream of not having a live-

in maid, butler, etc. One could say that, even as a 20 year old, Jim’s values were

really those of a greedy banker or that, as a 40 year old, his values are really

those of a hippie do-gooder. But such a position would be ad hoc and counter-

empirical.

  To be sure, there are many cases where somebody who is in fact a greedy

sociopath works at a soup-kitchen (etc.), so as to bolster his resume in the hopes

of making a lot of money on Wall St. And there are people who make a lot of

money on Wall St. who wish that they were doing good for the world and

whose consequent grief all the gin in the world cannot drown out. But there are

also people whose values truly change.

  (iii) describes something that, I suspect, really does happen. But, so I also

suspect, it does not describe what is typically happening in cases of

rationalization. In my personal experience, and in the clinical experience of

many an authority, what typically happens is that some one set of higher-order

desires becomes corrupt: there is a mixing of the old (pure) higher-order desires

with new (corrupt, rationalization-driven) higher-order desires. There is still just

one agent. There aren’t two agents—a Dr. Jekyll and a Mr. Hyde—inhabiting

one body. There is but one agent. Some of his higher-order desires are

wholesome and some of them are unwholesome; and in some cases a single

higher-order desire may be wholesome in some respects and unwholesome in

others.

  (iv) is the only remaining option. In the pages to come, we'll find much

reason to accept (iv) and no reason to reject it. Incidentally, this analysis, though

clearly similar to Frankfurt’s analysis, does differ from it in a non-trivial way.

Frankfurt seems to hold that one’s higher-order desires ipso facto are one’s coredesires. But that is precisely what the present hypothesis denies.

 

 

3.2 Some general facts relating to the nature of values.

 

  In the next section, we’ll answer the question: “what are values?” Having

answered this question, we’ll be able to answer the question: “what is it for an

act to be free?” We’ll answer the latter question in the next section.

 

 

        (1) Values must be distinguished from things that have value. A great

    novel has value, but it is not itself a value.

 

        (2) "Value" is a relational term. What has value for Smith may not have

    value for Jones.

 

          (3) (2) doesn’t entail that no value is better than any other value; nor

          does it entail that values are in any way ‘subjective’ or ‘unreal.’ The

          term ‘three miles from’ is relational; but whether Smith is three miles

          away from Jones has nothing to do with anyone’s feelings or opinions

          about anything. The same thing is true of values, as we’ll see. Given

          that values are judgments, values can be correct or incorrect.

              Given that values are relational judgments, two people who have

          different values needn’t disagree about anything. I value playing the

          piano and I don’t value playing scrabble. That means that, in my

          judgment, I bear a certain relation to the first activity that I don’t bear

          to the second. Smith, let us suppose, values playing scrabble more

          than he values playing the piano; this means that, in his judgment, he          bears a certain relation to the one activity that he does not bear to the

          other. Those two judgments are perfectly compatible. So even though

          my values are antithetical to Smith’s, there is nothing that we

          disagree about.

 

          (4) Liking something is not the same thing as valuing it. People value

          activities (e.g., helping somebody in need) that they don’t enjoy and

          enjoy activities (e.g., doing cocaine) that they don’t value.

              One tends to enjoy the activities that one values. I value playing

          the piano, and I also enjoy it; and these facts are obviously closely

          linked. But the relation I bear to that activity by virtue of enjoying it is

          distinct from the relation that I bear to it by virtue of valuing it. By

          virtue of the fact that I value playing the piano, I bear a cognitive

          relation to that activity; in other words, my valuing it consists in my

          having made a judgment about it (viz., I see it as having value and

          therefore---for reasons that we’ll soon identify---as being agential).

          By virtue of the fact that I enjoy playing the piano, I bear a purely

          affective relation to it (viz., it makes me feel good).

 

3.3 What are values?

 

  A value is a judgment on the part of some person (or sentient creature) to the

effect that a certain course of action, or a certain outlook, will increase the scope

of its agency. A moment ago I was reading a book (The Scientific Image, by Bas

Van Fraassen). I then had a sudden urge to read a different book (The Will to

Power, by Nietzsche). I was driven by a whim. Van Fraassen’s book was

illuminating; I was not wasting my time by reading it. And, although, for

personal and professional reasons, I do at some point have to read Nietzsche’sbook (which, judging from the fragments I’ve read, is extremely good), I would,

in giving in to my whim to ditch Van Fraassen, be undermining a resolution of

mine, and doing so for no good reason.

  The result of my ditching Van Fraassen under these circumstances would

have been a degradation of psychological integrity. I would have been allowing

my decision-making process to give undue weight to sudden fancies. I would

have been sending a message to myself that it’s ok not to carry out an intention

that I had formed in a rational and informed manner and that I knew that, if

successfully carried out, would make me a better and more powerful person.

This illustrates, and also supports, though only to a small degree, our contention

that value is a judgment to the effect that a certain course of action or way of

living increases the scope and power of one’s agency.

  I value carrying out rationally formed intentions. But why? Because I would

be diminishing myself if I indulged every passing whim. So far as the fickle

winds of fancy determined by life-path, I would not be calling the shots; I would

not be the captain of the U.S.S. Mordecai Einstein. So far as impulses, rather

than rationally formed intentions, determined my conduct, I would not be an

agent.

  Even though I may have desired to read The Will to Power more than I

desired to read The Scientific Image, I valued reading the latter at that particular

juncture more than I valued reading the former. My reason: under the

circumstances, my reading The Will to Power would have constituted a

surrender of agency to sub-agential whims.

 

3.3.1 An objection to what we just said

 

  There seem to be counterexamples to this contention. For there seem to be

cases where, driven by his values, somebody martyrs himself or otherwisediminishes himself. There are cases where a person correctly characterizes an

act as “valuable” even though that same act, if carried out, would diminish his

agency and possibly destroy it. But that isn’t because our thesis is false. It’s

because the word “value” is ambiguous. Sometimes it means “belief that a given

way of acting (or being) enhances one’s own agency.” Sometimes it means

“belief that a given way of acting (or being) enhances agency in general---not

necessarily one’s own, but net amount of agency had by people overall.” This

second usage of the term “value” is derivative of the first, even though one’s

initial impression would probably be that it’s the other way around.

  Most ethical systems use the word “value” (or its analogues) in the just-

mentioned derivative manner. The one exception to this is ethical egoism,

which was advocated by Nietzsche (and not---at least not to my limited

knowledge----by very many other thinkers of substance). We’ll find at the

end of this book that ethical egoism, though not ultimately a viable moral

system, has some hidden virtues.

 

3.3.2 What are values? (revisited)

 

  There are times when I desire to watch TV more than I desire to read Non-

Standard Analysis by Abraham Robinson. But, in general, I value doing the

latter more than I value doing the former. (Why “in general” as opposed to

“always”? There are times when my reading Non-Standard Analysis would

represent a compulsive, pseudo-agential act; and on many of those occasions,

my watching TV would be a more “integrated” and rational course of action

than would my reading some onerous treatise. In general, many is the time when

what would ordinarily be characterized as the “lazy” course of action is the

rational, non-lazy one, the reason being that what is in fact an agency-

diminishing impulse cloaks itself as an intention to perform some action thatwould ordinarily be seen as agency-promoting, as when one’s intention to cut

one’s break short so as to go for a five mile run (even though one’s bursitis

makes it a bad idea to do so) or to continue reading some treatise (even though,

owing to one’s fatigue and consequent vulnerability to performance diminishing

influences, one would ultimately be a better treatise-reader (and treatise–writer)

were one, at this particular juncture, to take a break from treatise reading---we’ll

revisit this obscure parenthetical point). I value reading Non-Standard Analysis

even though, at that particular juncture, I do not desire to do so, at least as much

as I desire to watch TV, because I judge that reading that book would

consolidate my agency and expand its jurisdiction, whereas watching TV would

fail to have such consequences and would indeed lead to a withering of agency.

  To be sure, once I turn off the TV and start reading Non-Standard Analysis, I

not only experience gratification, but do so on a number of levels. First of all, I

am proud of myself for doing the right thing. Second, and much more

importantly, in reading Non-Standard Analysis, I experience what I will refer to

as agential enjoyment, whereas in lazily watching TV I am experience non-

agential enjoyment. (We tend to use the word “pleasure” to refer to non-agential

enjoyment: one experiences “pleasure” when one enters a warm bath. But,

although one enjoys reading difficult treatises or working on one’s backhand,

and although one does experience a kind of pleasure in doing so, that pleasure is

derivative of a certain kind of enjoyment (for lack of a better word) that comes

from exercising one’s agency.)

 

3.3.4 What are values? (continued)

 

  I have impulses. Impulses are in me. But they are not of me. I am not my

impulses. There is a sense in which, so far as my behaviors are impulse driven, I

am not acting. To put it another way, so far as I am acting in suchcircumstances, my actions are but vehicles for sub-agential impulses.

Consequently, my behavior in such circumstances is ultimately only pseudo-

agential. In such cases, that is to say, my agency is involved, but only as a way

of discharging impulses that are sub-agential and, in being acted on, diminish

my agency.

  Here it is important that we make a distinction between two kinds of

impulses: those that one has by virtue of being an agent and those that one has

before one’s mind becomes agential. My impulse to read The Will to Power is

obviously not in the same category as my impulse to eat tubs of ice-cream or to

engage in certain carnal acts. The former impulse---though one that, in the

previously described circumstances, ought to be suppressed---is obviously

derivative of the development in me of values and aptitudes that jointly

constitute agency. For that reason, were I, on a whim, to stop reading Van

Fraassen’s book and start reading The Will to Power, I would rightly not judge

myself as harshly as I would if I stopped reading Van Fraassen’s book and

punched my annoying next door neighbor or ate a tub of ice-cream. Giving into

impulses---be those impulses agency-derivative or agency-independent---is a

bad thing. But giving into agency-independent impulses is worse.

  “But by never giving into one’s impulses,” it must be asked, “doesn’t one

become a robot? Doesn’t one become a brittle, neurotic square who can’t live,

love, or laugh?”

  How that question is to be answered depends on what, in this context, it

means to “give in” to an impulse. A healthy person ought indeed to discharge

his base impulses and---what sometimes coincides with so acting---one ought to

act spontaneously. But when one scrutinizes a non-maladaptive case of “giving

into one’s impulses” or of “acting on the fly," one finds that the decision to do

so was a considered one; one finds that the thought-process behind the decision

was to the effect that, since one damages oneself and deprives oneself ofstrength by alienating oneself from one’s base impulses---of which one’s higher

values are rarified derivatives---one weakens oneself: one turns oneself into an

emotional cripple, a neurotic nerd, who, having drained his agency of a source

of power, is less agential than one would otherwise be. So what appear to be

cases of acting “on a whim” are cases in which one non-whimsically (though

perhaps almost instantaneously) realizes that it is to the advantage of one’s

agency to act in a way that seems to be whimsical. Genuine cases of whimsical

behavior are the prerogative of schizophrenics, whose minds are so disorganized

that impulses don’t have to go through the usual vetting process to be converted

into action, and of psychopaths, whose vetting process operates much more

intermittently than that of a normal person and is governed by different

operating principles. (Though it may not be apparent, these points about

psychopathy are in the process of being substantiated.)

 

3.4.0 The question “what are values?” considered in light of Mill’s analysis

of moral value

 

  According to John Stuart Mill, happiness is the one thing that truly has

      [460]
value. So far as anything other than happiness has value, Mill says, it's only

to the extent that it leads to happiness. Right now we'll examine this thesis of

his, along with his argument for it. In so doing, we’ll find support for our

contention that to value x is to judge x to increase the scope or the strength of

one’s agency.

  There’s no denying that writing novels of the same level of merit as War and

Peace is more valuable than doing cocaine. Mill admitted this. Mill also

admitted that, not having been duly educated or endowed with the requisite

cognitive faculties, one might fail to know the delights of reading Hamlet and

would prefer drinking vodka to reading Shakespeare. But, Mill insisted, so faras reading Hamlet is more valuable than drinking vodka, it is only to the extent

that the former brings more happiness than the latter.

  One problem with what Mill says is that happiness presupposes a value-

system. Happiness involves believing oneself to have measured up to certain

benchmarks and thus to embody certain values. (Mice can probably feel good.

But they can't be happy, they can't make judgments of the relevant kind.) A

consequence is that happiness presupposes that there are things other than

happiness that are of value.

  Thus, Mill's contention that happiness is the one and only non-instrumental

good is false. In fact, it's tautologously false, given that happiness consists in

judging oneself to be good in some way or other. What is good for one person

may not be good for another.

 

3.4.1 The question “what are values?” considered in light of Mill’s analysis

of moral value (continued)

 

  Also, Mill claims that, if a person fails to prefer Tolstoy to grain alcohol, it's

because he's defective in some way. But in making that claim, Mill is saying

that Tolstoy is valuable in a way that grain alcohol is not and that one must be

deficient not to see that and, therefore, not to derive more pleasure from reading

good literature than from drinking cheap liquor. So Mill is saying that there are

values other than happiness and that our happiness is a consequence, and thus

not the essence, of our receptiveness to these values.

  Of course, Mill could claim that one can fail to derive any pleasure at all

from Mozart's music, etc. and yet not suffer from any defect. But in addition to

being totally ad hoc---not to mention hypocritical, at least when put forth by the

likes of a cultured person such as Mill, who spent his days reading “good”

literature and listening to “good” music---such a position is brazenly false. Atone-deaf person who can't distinguish Mozart's music from the noise made by a

dump-truck clearly is deficient in some way: there is something to which he is

blind (or deaf, rather). Setting aside people who are rightly held in contempt for

their musical deficiencies, nobody really believes that any given person is as

good a composer as Mozart or, equivalently, that Mozart is as bad a composer

as any given person. At least some of Mozart’s works are better than at least

some of those of at least some other people. This is a conservative claim. It’s

hard to see how one could sincerely deny it.

  This is not to say that, given any two musical works, one is better than other.

Two musical works may not be comparable. Each may be good in its own right

and it would be artificial to say that one was better than the other. But there are

aesthetic truths. I wrote a fugue once. It wasn’t as good as any of the fugues that

Bach wrote. The statement “it’s not all a matter of how we feel about a given

work of music: some musical works really have merits that others lack” doesn’t

entail “there is some one relation R such that musical work x bears R to y iff y is

better than x and such that, given any two musical works, one bears R to the

other." (Aesthetic properties are not unusual in this respect. Outside of the

narrow horizons within which we operate, the question ‹is x hotter than y?›

ceases to have a determinate meaning or therefore a single answer. But surely an

object’s thermal properties are not “subjective” or “unreal.”)

  Of course, these days, many claim to reject this sort of non-relativism, and to

hold its advocates in contempt. But that can very easily be explained without

supposing either that it's true or that anyone believes it. If it's all just a matter of

taste, then—good news!---your sonatas (which even your mother describes as

"execrable”) are just as good as Mozart's. We’re all geniuses! Break out the

party hats!

  If there is no aesthetic right or wrong---if a person's view as to the level of

value of a given musical work is a projection of his emotional (and, so it isassumed to follow, unfounded) response to it, instead of his emotional response

to it being a consequence of his belief as to its degree of merit then, at least in

the arena of musical composition, nobody need fear censure. And given how

obviously false that view---or, at least, how thoroughly at variance it is with

people's behavior and sentiments---and given, therefore, how much self-

deception is involved in making oneself believe it, that view makes it possible to

accept other positions that absolve one of one's deficits. No longer is one stupid;

one just has a different "but equally valid" opinion.

  Mill could rid his position of its vicious circularity by replacing the term

"happiness" with the term "pleasure," in which case his thesis becomes "a thing

is valuable to the extent, and only to the extent, that it promotes pleasure." An

immediate consequence of this view is that the life of a tapeworm that

experiences a large amount of pleasure is more valuable than that of an Einstein

who does not experience quite as much pleasure. Mill is aware of this problem

with his view. He deals with it by saying that listening to Mozart, reading

Shakespeare, etc. brings one more pleasure than does shooting heroin. But while

it can be said that reading Timon of Athens brings one more happiness than does

shooting heroin, it cannot plausibly be said that it brings one more pleasure.

 

3.5. An objection to our position concerning the nature of values

 

  People sometimes see things that diminish them---that abridge the scope of

their agency and possibly even kill them---as being "valuable." In some cases,

this is simply the result of error. (I value doing push-ups all day because I

                                                                        [461]
foolishly think that, as long as I do so, I'm in control of my life.) But in many

cases no error is involved. Smith rightly sees his self-diminishing activities as a

UNICEF-volunteer as having "value." In fact, practically every system of ethics

                                    [462]
demands a reduction of oneself.   This objection is not hard to neutralize. Let VS be a value-system according

to which one's primary ethical obligation is to augment the scope of other

people's agency. One has no moral obligation to promote what has no moral

value. So, one has no moral obligation to promote welfare (agency) unless

agency has moral value. A fortiori one's primary moral obligation cannot be to

promote other people's welfare unless agency is the most valuable thing. But

agency is, of its very nature, something that has only a relative value: relative to

me, my agency may well be the most valuable thing. (In fact, I have no doubt

that it is.) But relative to you, my agency has no value at all--except in an

irrelevant, purely instrumental sense. (All references to "value" in this context

are to intrinsic, not instrumental, value.) So VS is saying that, ethically, what is

worthless to a given individual is the very thing that has the most worth. And I

do not see how such a value system could be a coherent one.

  This suggests that one of the following propositions holds:

 

          (i) What is of moral value may not be of the slightest value to any

          given individual, in which case anyone who acts morally is ipso facto

          acting irrationally. (In fact, even in cases where what is moral

          happens to coincide with what is valuable to a given agent, it is not as

          somebody who is acting morally that he is acting rationally. His

          behavior, if rational, merely coincides with that of somebody who is

          genuinely moral. It does not itself embody any morality, being nothing

          more than a mere simulation of it.)

 

        (ii) What is of moral value is what it is in one's own interest to do.

 

  So a certain incoherence is internal to public value systems. But such

systems must be incoherent in the just-described ways if they are to do their job.Public value systems exist to ensure that, on balance, people's rights aren't

horribly violated. The only value systems that can accomplish this are ones that,

from a logical viewpoint, are incoherent. (There is nothing incoherent in the

supposition that a value system must be incoherent if it is to have the causal

properties that a public value system ought to have. This is because how much

merit a value-system has is to be judged by the effects on people’s lives through

implementing it, not by its coherence. Value systems are not scientific doctrines.

Thus, a welfare-maximizing viewpoint may be incoherent.) Setting aside people

who are simply deluded (e.g., people who believe that joining cult X, a

precondition for which is wire-transferring their life-savings to the Master’s

Swiss Bank account, is the royal road to self-actualization), when people say

that performing self-diminishing acts (e.g., working at a soup-kitchen) has

"value," they may be speaking the truth; for what they are saying is that

performing such acts, though not intrinsically valuable, is valuable in that it

consolidates value-systems that are instrumental in preserving and augmenting

agency in general.

 

4.0 Minds ≠ Selves

 

  In this section I will make some points about the difference between minds

and selves. What I say in this section will be obscure, and I will provide little or

no argumentation for it. The contents of this section will be both clarified and

justified in the sections following it.

  All selves are minds, but not all minds are selves. A self is a mind that is an

agent. An agent is a mind that acts, and doesn’t just react. In order for a mind to

be capable of acting, instead of just reacting, that mind must do more than

simply facilitate the gratification of primal urges; it must do more than provide

the organism with information concerning the external world that makes it clearhow, without being killed or injured, that organism can eat, sleep, etc. A mind

whose only objectives are to gratify such urges, and in which the sole purpose

of knowledge is to enable such urges to be gratified, merely reacts, in light of

the knowledge that it has, to the directives of instinct. Such a mind does not act.

It does not itself do anything. It merely reacts to instinctual pressures.

  These reactions are not blind. The exact nature of these reactions is

conditioned by the knowledge stored in that mind. But non-blind reactions are

not actions; and given an organism of the just-mentioned kind, that organism’s

self does nothing. It has no self, as we’ll see; and its instincts, not its non-

existent self, are the real agents. The behaviors in which the organism engages

are compulsive responses to instinct. They are therefore not acts. Put another

way, so far as those behaviors are acts, they are not acts on the organism’s part,

but rather on the part of its instincts.

  The organism’s mind doesn’t act. Its only function is to determine, in light of

its knowledge of the external world, what exact form the organism’s instinct-

directed behaviors must take if those behaviors are not to lead to the organism’s

being injured or killed. Such a mind’s function is not to act, but only to ensure

that the organism’s reactions to its instincts don’t run afoul of the forces at work

in the external world.

 


4.1 Minds ≠ Selves (continued)

 

  A self is a mind that has values; it is a self whose behaviors are driven beliefs

as to what is of value. Value-driven acts often involve the gratification of

instinctual urges; indeed, if value-driven acts systematically make it impossible

for such urges to be gratified, the value-system underlying those acts is not a

viable one. Nonetheless, a self is a mind that permits the organism housing it to

behave in a given way only if, in its judgment, that behavior is in compliancewith some value. Of course, its judgments as to what is of value are, and should

be, heavily influenced by its knowledge of what will permit the gratification of

primal urges. But what is relevant is that, in an organism that has a self, as

opposed to a mere mind, it is judgments as to what is of value that lead to

behavior; and it is not, except in the indirect sense just described, urges per se

that do so.

  It follows that selves act. Of course, creatures that are selves sometimes

merely react. But it isn’t as a self a creature reacts. (I am a tennis player. But it

isn’t as a tennis player that I am writing this book.)

 

4.2 Minds ≠ Selves (continued)

 

  A story will help us move forward. Smith is a sapient being. (It doesn’t

matter whether Smith is human or not.) Smith can make judgments as to how

it must act in order to discharge its instinctual energies. Like all judgments,

these judgments involve knowledge of principles. So there must be principles

that Smith is aware of and that guide Smith’s thinking. But given an arbitrary

one of these principles, Smith doesn’t know that he has knowledge of that

principle.

  One day, however, Smith becomes aware of at least some of the principles

that guide his thought. (How Smith could come to have this second-order

knowledge is discussed in Sections 5.0-6.2. Let “P” stand for an arbitrary one

of the principles that Smith thereby comes to know himself to know. Let us

 
assume that Smith has these realizations at time t.(Though they’re

experienced as mere feelings, embodied in these responses are rational

judgments as to what to do, given what Smith’s objectives are (instinct-

gratification) and given what he knows about the circumstances. We must

distinguish the instinctual response per se from the conscious experiencesthat merely represent it, much as the icons on your desktop must be

distinguished from the patterns of electrical activity to which they

correspond.) Before he knew that he had knowledge of P, Smith obviously

couldn’t make judgments of the form: my judgment that such and such is

consistent with my knowledge of P. Prior to time t, Smith’s judgments were

indeed guided by a knowledge of P; but he obviously could not, as of yet,

make judgments as to whether his thinking was being properly guided by his

knowledge of P. (One’s thinking can be misdirected by one’s knowledge of a

legitimate principle. This may happen either because one’s auxiliary

assumptions are wrong (e.g., knowing that gross disparities in wealth lead to

injustice and are themselves unjust, but not knowing that certain ways of

eliminating such disparities may lead to even greater injustices, President

Jones destroys the economy in his attempt to redistribute wealth) or because

one’s ability to deploy one’s knowledge of the principle in question has been

blunted by garden-variety performance-inhibiting factors, such as fatigue and

lack of memories.) But, as of time t, Smith can form judgments as to whether

the manner in which he arrives at judgments is consistent with P. He is thus

aware of a norm from which his thinking mustn’t deviate; and, when such

deviations occur, he can make judgments as to their nature and extent. He can

thus evaluate his own judgments. And his evaluation of them is positive

(negative) to the extent that, to his knowledge, they (fail to) comply with P.

  Integral to the argument just put forth is a delicate but important

distinction. There is a big difference between being aware of a principle and

being aware that one is aware of it. A talented athlete’s behavior embodies

awareness of principles that the athlete doesn’t know himself to be aware of.

The point being made here is not that his behavior accords with some

principle of which, at every cognitive level, he is ignorant. It is that, although

a knowledge of a given principle may be what is guiding that behavior, theathlete in question may not be aware of that fact and, indeed, is exceedingly

unlikely to be.

  Philosophers and psychologists often regard an act as being entirely

“mechanical” if it isn’t guided by knowledge that the agent can articulate. But

it is only when one has second-order knowledge----knowledge as to what it is

that one knows---that one can articulate what one knows; and philosophers

are therefore likely to regard behaviors that fail to embody second-order

knowledge as failing to embody any knowledge and, therefore, as being

entirely unprincipled. In fact, one needs a certain amount of verbal dexterity

in addition to such second-order knowledge if one is to be able to articulate

the grounds on which they make practically any one of the decisions that they

make.

  Of course, in saying “snow is white," I am not affirming my knowledge

that I know that snow is white; I am talking about snow, not about my own

mind. But, in producing that utterance, I am expressing the fact that I know

that snow is white. And one could very easily know that snow is white

without knowing that one knows it. One can know that snow is white without

having the concept of knowledge. But one must have that concept to know

that one knows that snow is white. So knowledge of P is different from, and

needn’t involve, knowledge that one has knowledge of P. Also, by virtue of

having a concept of knowledge, one has various concepts---e.g., belief, truth,

mental activity---not had by an otherwise comparable creature that doesn’t

have the concept of knowledge.

 

4.3 Minds ≠ Selves (continued)

 

  Now endowed with knowledge, not just of P, but of the fact that he has

knowledge of P, Smith doesn’t react to situations; he reacts to his reactions tosituations. Given a situation, he instinctively makes a judgment. Aware that

his judgment must comply with P, he makes a second judgment. This second

judgment doesn’t concern the situation in question, at least not directly; it

concerns his initial judgment concerning that situation. It concerns the extent

to which his initial judgment is consistent with the principles his knowledge

of which eventuated in it.

  Assuming there to be any cognitive dimension to it at all, one’s response

to any given situation is ipso facto principle-driven. But that, by itself, isn’t

enough for that response to be an action, as opposed to a reaction. Actions are

behaviors that result from judgments about judgments. Confronted with a

situation, one makes an initial judgment. One may then make a judgment as

to whether that initial judgment was consistent with the principles guiding it.

In other words, having made an initial judgment, one may evaluate that initial

judgment. One is acting, as opposed to reacting, if one’s behavior expresses

such an evaluation. One is reacting, as opposed to acting, if one’s behavior

expresses one’s initial judgment.

  There is no self where there is no ability to act---where there is no agency.

There is no agency, where there is no self. There is no self where there is no

self-evaluation.

  To put this last point in a way that, in addition to being more precise,

doesn’t make it seem viciously circular: there is no self where there are no

judgments as to the integrity of other, co-corporeal judgments.

  Where there are such judgments, there are values. To approve of

(criticize) a judgment (or anything else) is to judge it to have (lack) some

value that it ought to have.

  What directly leads to a bona fideaction is never a desire and is always an

attitude of approval towards a desire. Where there are no values, there is no

approval or disapproval. So where there are no values, there is no agency. 

5.0 Co-corporeal, informationally integrated mental states enough for a mind,

but not for a self

 

  Anything that has the cognitive wherewithal to have a series of mental

states ipso facto has a mind. But there is more to having a self than there is to

being capable of having a series of mental states. Consider Smith as he is

before time t. Each of his mental states could be understood on its own terms:

as a reaction to immediate stimuli. Each of those reactions may have been

intelligent. (In other words, each resulted from cogent reasoning as to how to

discharge the relevant instincts, given the available information about the

environment.) And, supposing that they were intelligent, each was more

likely than not to incorporate the information encoded in previously

occurring, co-corporeal mental states. So, if we think of Smith’s pre-t mind as

a series of links in a chain of events (or conditions), the links in that chain are

bound together not merely by virtue of being co-corporeal and not merely,

therefore, by virtue of the earlier being partly causally responsible for the

existence of the later ones, but by virtue of the fact that (in at least some

cases) the former ones bequeathed the information encoded to them to the

later ones and, therefore, that it was as mental entities that the earlier ones (in

some cases) had a hand in determining the contents of the later ones.

 

5.1 Co-corporeal, informationally integrated mental states enough for a mind,

but not for a self (continued)

 

  Still, co-corporeality, even when coupled with content-transmission, isn’t

enough for self-hood: supposing that M…M is a series of co-corporeal
                                              1n

mental states such that, for each i and j, (1 ≤i < j ≤ n), for M…M to form a
                                                                      1nself, as opposed to a mere mind, it is not enough that M be corporeal with M;
                                                                ij

nor it is enough that M help bring about the occurrence of M; nor, most
                        ij

importantly, is it enough that M do this in the distinctively psychological
                                    i

manner just described.

  A story will help make this clear. There is a group of around 20,000

people, all of whom live on the same land-mass, which we’ll call “LM.” (LM

is big enough that nobody feels crowded but small enough that nobody feels

lonely and, more importantly, interactions among its occupants are frequent.)

LM-occupants all speak the same language, and they often exchange

information with one another. They also often exchange goods with, and

provide services for, their fellow LM-occupants.

  Being reasonably intelligent and well-informed people, these people tend

to have accurate beliefs; and being reasonably honest people, they tend to

provide one another with accurate information. Also, most of the time,

they’re reasonably honest not just in their communications with their fellows,

but in their transactions with them. They tend not to defraud one another.

  In at least some cases, the ties that LM occupants have to one another are

deep ones. (For the moment, we’ll set aside cases where LM-occupants have

no significant ties to their brethren.) Those ties are not purely geographical: it

isn’t just that the parties involved live in the same place. Nor are those ties

purely causal. (It isn’t just that LM-occupants accidentally bump into other

LM-occupants, thereby inadvertently changing the latter’s lives.) The ties in

question involve:

 

          (i) the fact that one person intentionally transmits information that

          is arrived in a principled manner to some other person who makes

          principled inferences from that information,

 and:

 

          (ii) the fact that two people may (for prudential, moral, or even

          libidinal reasons) benefit each other by honoring an agreement to

          exchange goods or services.

 

 

  One fact about LM’s occupants must be made explicit. There is nothing

regulating their exchanges with one another. Should one LM-occupant

defraud another, there would be no penalties. Given that there are no laws in

LM, the victim would have no legal recourse and he’d have to take it upon

himself to see that justice be done. An LM-occupant who’d been misinformed

by another would be in the same situation mutatis mutandis. It may be that,

because LM’s occupants are so honest with one another, they’re better off for

the fact that their lives aren’t weighed down by the presence of the regulatory

entities that would be needed for there to be any formal penalties for fraud.

  But what is relevant here is that, precisely because their lives are not thus

“weighed down," the occupants of LM do not jointly constitute a nation, at

least not in the sense in which France constitutes a nation. There is nothing

                                                          [463]
under whose jurisdiction the occupants of LM fall.

 

5.2 Minds that are selves and minds that are not

 

  Bearing these points in mind, let us turn our attention back to M…M,
                                                                              1n

and let us make some further assumptions about that series. The information

encoded in M (1 ≤ i ≤ n) is likely to be accurate. That information, if
              i

transmitted to M, (1 ≤ i < j ≤ n), is likely to be transmitted in an accurate
                  jform. Moreover, the synthesizing of that information with other bodies of

information (e.g., information currently being uploaded through the senses as

to the nature of environment in Smith’s vicinity) is likely to consist of

inferences in which correctly understood correct rules of inferences are

correctly applied.

  But----and this is the final, and most important, assumption that we’ll

make about M…M-----none of the members of that series constitute
              1n

judgments concerning the merits of either the information-exchanges

occurring among other such members or of the manner in which the beliefs

encoded therein are generated. Those exchanges and syntheses of

information are not policed. It may be that each of the exchanges and

inferences in question is done impeccably. But, if so, that isn’t because there

is anything overseeing those operations; it is simply because, despite the

absence of any supervisory agency, the mental states involved in those

operations happen to satisfy the relevant desiderata. By the same token, if the

ratiocinative activity that generates M…Mis inconsistent, even
                                            1n 

systematically so, with the very principles embodied in that activity, no

internal mechanisms exist to ensure that the needed course-corrections occur.

The spuriousness of the reasoning involved in M…Mmay well ensure that
                                                        1n 

Smith fails in his attempts to gratify his desires.

  But there isn't any internal agency that prevents Smith from making such

mistakes or, therefore, that protects him from the damage to his person that

such mistakes are likely to entail. There is, in other words, nothing under

whose jurisdiction the various members of M…Mfall. Nothing polices
                                                    1n 

either the manner in which members of that series exchange or produce

information or the manner in which that series generates new members. Thus,

M…M, though constitutive of a mind and perhaps of something that has an
1nenduring identity in the sense in which a rock does, doesn’t represent

anything that has an enduring identity in the distinctive sense in which a

human being does.

 

6.0 When minds become selves

 

  Let’s revisit, and duly extend, what we said earlier about Smith/M…M.
                                                                                1n

At time t, it will be recalled, that series generates a mental state that embodies

a judgment as to the fitness of (some of) the activities by which that series

has thus far arrived at judgments. An internal regulatory agency is thereby

born.

  That agency will inhibit the conversion of impulses into actions. This does

not mean that it will simply thwart those impulses. It means that if, once that

agency scrutinizes a given impulse, that agency judges it to be one worth

acting upon, then it will lift the inhibition. But, for the reasons given in

Section 3.3., the aforementioned impulse isn’t the proximal cause of the

body-movements that result from the lifting of such an inhibition.

  Even before M…M became to any degree self-policing, the activity
                    1n

constituting M…M embodied knowledge, not of some one principle, but of
                1n

many. So for that activity to become systematically self-policing, it must be

guided by a knowledge of many different second-order principles of the sort

previously described. But it’s a distinct possibility that not all of those

second-order principles will be consistent with one another. As a result, an

analogue of the process that led to Smith’s acquiring knowledge of those

second-order principles will lead him to acquire knowledge of third order

principles, the purpose of which knowledge being to ensure that the totality

of second–order principles guiding Smith’s mentation be a coherent one---

that those principles not be such that, when complied with, the result is that itis judged de rigueur to lift the inhibition on some impulse and also de rigueur

not to lift that inhibition. Second-order principles that don’t fit in with the rest

are weeded out; they are no longer countenanced. For the same reason,

second-order principles are countenanced that were not previously so. So far

as this enterprise is successful, the result is an integrated body of principles,

any two of which are consistent with each other, under whose jurisdiction

falls all of the activity constitutive of Smith’s decisions as to how to act. So,

given the reasonable presumption that, at this stage, none of Smith’s mental

activity is purely theoretical, all of it being oriented towards instinct-

gratification, this means that this enterprise, so far as it’s successful, yields a

single, cohesive regulatory agency under whose jurisdiction all of Smith’s

mental activity falls.

 

6.1 Summary

 

  Just as group of people who live in the same place don’t become a state

until their activities come to fall under the jurisdiction of some regulatory

agency, so a group of co-corporeal, informationally integrated thoughts don’t

necessarily constitute a self until they all fall under the jurisdiction of a

regulatory agency. Before that happens, there are no actions, only reactions;

after it happens, there are actions. We finally have an agent and, therefore, a

self.

 

7.0 The concept of intrinsic value in relation to the concept of selfhood

 

  With the inception of selfhood, values replace desires. Under the growing

power of a supervisory structure of the just-discussed kind, the various

constituents of that mind become increasingly unified: the structure they formbecomes more and more of a self. (Incidentally, a consequence of this last

statement, and therefore of our analysis, is that there are degrees of self-hood.

This redounds to the credit of our analysis, since selfhood does come in

degrees. Though clearly on independent grounds, a justification for it is given

later.) Certainly, the initial purpose of this supervisory superstructure was to

maximize the amount of instinctual gratification enjoyed by the mind falling

within its power. And, surely, that always remains one of its purposes.

Indeed, it arguably always remains its primary purpose (though, for reasons

I’m about to state, I personally don’t think this).

  But that superstructure has needs of its own; and, as that superstructure

develops, it becomes increasingly difficult to find an instinctual basis for

those needs and increasingly necessary to understand them on their own

terms.

 

7.1 Some preliminaries

 

  Before we can see what exactly this claim amounts to, or, therefore, why

it’s true, we must make preliminary points of a general nature as to the nature

of the supervisory agency in which we have claimed the essence of selfhood

to lie. There are some impulses that, if acted on, would weaken the integrity

of this supervisory agency. Tautologously, this agency, so far as it’s in good

working order, will inhibit such impulses. But little harm will come to that

agency if it’s too good at its job---if it inhibits impulses that it could, without

in any way jeopardizing its own authority, allow to be expressed in action. If

that agency is too good at its job---that is, if it’s too conservative, if it inhibits

impulses that, erring on the side of caution, it needn’t inhibit—the result will

be merely a forfeiture of pleasure; it will not, at least not in the short term (or

even the medium term), do any damage to itself or to the structuresresponsible for the mentation falling in its jurisdiction.

  As a result, this supervisory agency comes to be overly restrictive: it

disapproves of the disinhibition of impulses that ought to be disinhibited. So

far as those inhibited impulses are permitted gratification, it is only on the

condition that they assume such forms that, if acted on, consolidate this

agency’s power over the course of mental activity falling into its jurisdiction.

In some cases, it is possible for those impulses to assume such forms. (This is

what Freud referred to as “sublimation.” My aggressive instincts are

discharged by my writing treatises that aggressively critique the views of my

colleagues.) In other cases, this is not possible. This leads to what Freud calls

“neurosis”: an inhibition of impulses that cannot be discharged in ways that

are in keeping with one’s values but that, because they are so strong, must

come out in some way or other and are forced to be expressed as symptoms.

Since symptoms are unintentional, neurosis involves an abridgment of

agency. One would have been better off yielding to the impulse and

discharging it agentially, instead of forcing to find non-agential ways of

discharging itself. (Freud makes this point in his (1926) book Symptoms,

Inhibitions, and Anxiety. As he puts it: somebody riding a horse must

sometimes let the horse go where it wants to go, lest the horse cease to let the

rider have any control over it.)

 

7.2 Two Illustrations of Our Thesis that what is Valuable is what consolidates

one's Agency

 

  Illustration #1: We see Bach’s music as being more valuable than

Eminem’s. (Eminem is a pop-star.) Why? First of all, the enjoyment of

Eminem’s music is easily traced back, by way of multiple pathways, to

enjoyment of the sexual act, it being largely for that reason that we enjoyEminem’s music. By contrast, it is not because of any obvious connection

that Bach’s music has to the sexual act that we enjoy it. The pleasure Bach’s

music gives us is more akin to the pleasure given us by a philosophical or

mathematical insight than it is to the (sub-agential) pleasures given to us by

the sexual act. Implicated in the experience of listening to Bach’s music, and

largely constitutive of the pleasure it brings us, are ratiocinative abilities that

have no obvious connection to sexual gratification, or to any other form of

instinctual gratification, and that do have obvious connections to the rational

operations on which the supervisory agency in question depends to

consolidate and extend the hegemony it has over the course of mental

activity. Bach’s music is studied in conservatories; it is performed in places

(e.g., concert-halls) where the operative norms of conduct require tremendous

self-restraint---where one has to sit still for hours on end, where one must

speak to others in a very controlled manner, and where one must display all

of the asceticism involved in the transformation of instinct-driven proto-

humans into instinct-suppressing actual humans.

  When people say that Eminem’s music is as highly “valued” as Bach’s, so

far as what they are saying is true, they are saying in a distorted way that

Eminem’s music is liked as much as Bach’s. And there’s no doubt that (at

this juncture in history) there are more Eminem fans than there are Bach fans

(that said, pop-stars are seldom liked solely for the merits of their music); and

it may be that, during its brief recess from oblivion, Eminem’s music is a

source of more pleasure (not pleasure per capita, but aggregate pleasure) than

Bach’s music. But, in saying that Eminem’s music is more highly valued than

Bach’s, one is confusing the concept of pleasure, and the related concept of

desire, with the very different concept of value.

  Illustration #2: People enjoy reading (and writing) philosophical treatises.

To become capable of this sort of enjoyment, one must alter one’spsychological structure in non-trivial ways. In order to pull off the

remodeling of one’s intellect needed to become at all adept at this discipline,

or therefore to derive any enjoyment from it, one must suspend gratification

of urges that one would otherwise gratify, and one must do so without having

any firm assurance that, in due course, one will be able to enjoy gratifications

as intense as those that one has foregone. Because it takes a long time to

acquire the philosophical acumen needed to make the reading, let alone the

writing, of philosophical works more pleasurable than painful, and because

during that long period otherwise fecund sources of instinctual gratification

are off-limits, one must, if one has chosen to acquire that degree of acumen,

develop a certain asceticism. One must come to devalue (some forms of)

instinctual gratification and to hyper-value the self-control that comes with

becoming capable of suspending instinctual gratification.

  This is not to say that the enjoyment of philosophical discourse has no

instinctual foundation. Like Nietzsche, I believe that the enjoyment one

derives from the exercise of one’s intellect is a form, or at least a derivative,

of the instinctual pleasure one receives from having power over others and

acting aggressively towards them. But, supposing this correct, the way in

which, by virtue of engaging in philosophical discourse, one discharges these

primitive impulses is contingent on one’s exercising faculties that, being

purely ratiocinative, are much less directly connected with instinct-

gratification than they are with the inhibitions of instinct so essential to the

existence, and to the consolidation, of the supervisory agency in which the

essence of selfhood lies.

  The same point mutatis mutandis holds of the pleasure one derives from

very sophisticated forms of music. Bach’s music is passionate, and the

passion embodied in it arguably has a sexual basis. But Bach’s music

expresses that passion in an extremely controlled and ratiocination-heavymanner; and the faculty underlying the ratiocinative component of Bach’s

music is one and the same with the faculty underlying the instinct-inhibitory

ratiocinations constitutive of the regulatory agency that is one’s self.

 

7.3 Selfhood a matter of degree

 

  Some minds are more intact than others. In this respect, minds are like

nations. The official government of Pakistan has uncontested control over

some areas and only little or no control over others. Thus, the landmass

coincident with the nation of Pakistan is less unified than it would be if the

loyalties of its occupants weren’t fragmented by the para-governmental

agencies that occupy it. By contrast, the landmass coincident with the

continental United States can be said to fall under the more or less

uncontested jurisdiction of some one government, the same being true of the

discontinuous landmass that is formed when Hawaii and Alaska are added.

Therefore, the landmass coincident with the U.S. is more of a nation than the

landmass coincident with Pakistan. Thus, nationhood comes in degrees. x is

more of a nation than y if x’s government does a better job than y’s

government of unifying the occupants of the landmass falling in its

jurisdiction.

  It is for similar reasons that one mind can be more of a self than another.

If the regulatory agency governing mind x has more scope and power than its

counterpart in mind y, then x is more of a self than y.

  That our analysis has the consequences that self-hood isn’t equally

distributed among minds is to its credit. People’s selves disintegrate. And

there are degrees of integratedness (i.e., of non-disintegratedness), as

everyday experience makes obvious and as clinical observation of the

mentally ill makes even more obvious. 

 