                          Two Kinds of Late-onset Psychopaths


                                        Freud Institute


        Bureaucratism is late-onset psychopathy. Let me explain.


      First of all, psychopathy is simply a complete lack of integrity. In

some cases, this lack of integrity sets in very early in life. When this happens,

the person in question never even develops the character-architecture of a

normal person, and so far as he ever appears to have one, it is simply because

he is faking it. These people are con-artists, grifters, drifters, cult-leaders, and

altogether plastic and obviously phony people.

      A vastly more common kind of psychopath is the bureaupath, this

being  someone  who  forfeits  his  integrity  into  order  to  fit  into  some

bureaucratic institution or pseudo-legitimate area of professional endeavor,

such as academia or the law. This sort of person parted with his integrity late

in life, and therefore did develop the characterological properties of a normal

person and still, even after psychopathizing, retains the formal properties of

such a person. In this case of this sort of person, psychopathizing is the same

as bureaucratizing—becoming a bureaucratic husk of a person, somebody for

whom the magic is gone and in whom the spark is gone. In any case, contrary

to  what  people  are  likely  to  presume,  such  people  are  indeed  bona  fide

psychopaths. The reason they seem not to be psychopaths is that, unlike the

early onset psychopath—who becomes an obvious conman or some such—

the  bureaupath  is  a  late  onset  psychopath,  who  psychopathized  in  an

institutional  context  and  in  order  to  submit,  in  the  most  complete  way

possible, to institution-internal, purely political mandates.

      But there is a third kind of psychopath, also a late-onset psychopath.

Academia,  specifically  the  humanities,  are  replete  with  this  sort  of

psychopath. Some background will help. A lot of people, instead of saying

that  they  agree  with  Freud  or  that  they  disagree  with  him,  wil  make

statements long the lines of “he had a model”, or “the Freudian critique is

compelling, but should be tempered by the Marxist critique”, or “Freud’s

narrative was informed by such and such…” The most invidious such dodge

is: “Freud is interesting, but it should be treated as literature…”

      People who say these thigns don’t understand Freud. Which is not in

and of itself a crime, let alone psychopathic, and which in most contexts is noconsequence. What is psychopathic is the hypocritical, projective stalling that

they are doing. They simply don’t understand Freud. One option under such

circumstances is to say: I don’t understand Freud. No comment.’ Another

option is to say: ‘I half-understand him, but I half-don’t understand him. And

I do, or do not, agree with the half that I understand.’ What is not an option is

to  project  one’s  own  failure  to  understand  onto  the  object  of  one’s  non-

understanding: it is to slime up that object by saying that it is ‘literature’ or a

‘narrative’ or a ‘critique’, etc.

      These terms are used by phonies: by people who don’t understand but

want  to  seem  authoritative.  So  they  are  scumming  up  the  truth  and  the

categories  in  terms  of  which  the  truth  is  to  be  grasped  with  spongiform

pseudo-cognitive categories, like ‘narrative’, ‘critique’, and ‘literature.’ That

is psychopathic. It is driven by narcissism, hate, and psychopathic, infinite

disregard for the truth. There is a heavy element of sheer stupidity in there as

well, since someone with half a brain wouldn’t diminish themselves by so

alienating themselves from the truth. But stupidity is perfectly compatible

with psychopathy, which is nothing other than a total lack of integrity.

      A  magnet  for  psychopaths  of  this  particular  variety  is  the  whole

concept of the ‘paradigm’, in the sense in which Kuhn uses that term in his

absurdly over-valued book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. There are

certain topics and conceits that psychopaths of this variety swarm all over—

time  travel,  quantum  theory,  relativism,  post-modernism.  The  first  two  of

these  topics  obviously  have  inherent  legitimacy,  but  they  are  used

illegitimately by the psychopath. The latter two have legitimacy as objects of

analysis  but  not  otherwise.  In  any  case,  these  topics,  and  the  conceits

popularly  associated  with  them,  are  magnets  for  the  spongiform,  truth-

concealing humanities professor psychopath.

      I must stress that when I describe such people as psychopaths, I am

speaking  literally.  These  people  are  systematically  dismantling  life-  and

thought-critical epistemic instruments, and they are putting nothing in their

place,  and  they  are  even  going  so  far  as  to  spurn  the  idea  of  putting

something  in  their  place.  And  that  is  heavy-duty  psychopathy:  no  one  is

drawn to such positions because they believe them, since it is biologically

impossible to believe such positions. Such people are perpetrating fraud, for

reasons of convenience and ego and hate. When people hand-wave and hem

and haw with jabber about deconstructionism and narratives and critiques,

know that you are dealing with a feather-head twig who is wasting your time—that you are dealing with someone who himself has no integrity and whose

career is an attempt to undermine the very notion of integrity—and be on

your way.

 