                    Ask me anything about Epistemology!

                                  J.-M. Kuczynski

                Link to Video Version of Book Below (at End)








John-Michael Kuczynski

Psychoanalyst, Philosopher

Epistemology is the theory of knowledge. It is the discipline that makes it

clear what conditions one must meet if one is to have knowledge.

Epistemology thus explains how it is that we can have knowledge of the

future, the past, and the present but imperceptible. Epistemology also

explains how we can have knowledge of truths that concern abstract entities,

such as numbers and properties, as opposed to spatio-temporal entities.

Epistemology also explains how our ability to have a given kind of

knowledge may interact with our ability to have some other kind of

knowledge, so as to produce an ability to have a third kind of knowledge.

Thus, our ability to understand truths of a purely mathematical kind interacts

with our ability to grasp truths about the external world, in such a way as to

produce an ability on our part to grasp laws of physics.

Epistemology also explains how we can have knowledge of an external

world, and it identifies the limits of such knowledge, some of the principles

relating to which are embodied in important scientific principles, such as

Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle. Finally, epistemology clarifies the nature

and limits of our knowledge of ourselves; and in so doing, it elucidates the

nature of the discoveries made by Freud and Chomsky, and also suggests

ways to re-articulate and improve upon the theories put forth by those

investigators.

In this AMA-session, I answer people’s questions about epistemology.

 

PRERNA_19

Have you ever felt successful, and if so, what made you feel successful?My books and my ability to update my intellect and, for that reason, to

adapt to ever-changing circumstances.

MAY 13, 6:56PM EDT1

TERIKA

How does the outside world get inside the mind in order that it may be

known?

Very simple. We have raw experiential data, and we assume that

something comes never comes from nothing, i.e. we assume that nature is

continuous. This leads us to interpolate continuities between the

spontaneities of experience. And this leads us to posit an external world,

which, by virtue of connecting our experiential data to each and by

virtue of satisfying the just-mentioned continuity-requirement,

necessarily corresponds, at least approximately, to our perceptual

representations. A similar process leads us to posit unconscious ideation.

MAY 13, 6:14PM EDT0

AINEJEL

Are feelings in some way accurate descriptions of the world / universe?

MAY 13, 1:29PM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Feelings represent our relationship to the universe. Therefore feelings are

inherently perspectival, as in, they embody the peculiarities of the outlook of

the person who is doing the feeling. So no--feelings are of their very nature

not accurate representations of external realities. But they can embody

accurate representations of the subject's relation to some aspect of external

reality.


JODELHAT

What do you feel is the humanity's greatest hour / greatest achievement?MAY 13, 10:47AM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

The written word.

MAY 13, 12:05PM EDT1

KATYB

What are some of the greatest ideas in the history of epistemology?

MAY 9, 7:11PM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

The greatest triumphs of epistemology relate to the limitations of empiricism

(or, equivalently, the strengths of rationalism), our knowledge of causality,

our knowledge of counterfactual truths, and the difference between

  knowledge-by-acquaintance and knowledge-by-description.  All of which are

thoroughly but concisely discussed in the following

book: www.amazon.com/Epistemology-J-M-Kuczynski-

      ebook/dp/B00VO5NF16/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1525910934&sr=8-

        1&keywords=kuczynski+epistemology&dpID=51UBxLpnyZL&preST=_SY445_QL70_&dpSrc=srch

MAY 9, 8:09PM EDT0

IRISHJC_DEQUINA

Are there any major subdisciplines of epistemology?

MAY 9, 6:34PM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

There are two points to make in response to your question. First of all, there

are different foci of epistemological thought, e.g. the debate between

coherentists and foundationalists; our knowledge of causal ties; our

knowledge of counterfactual truths; self-knowledge; etc. But as it is currently

structured, the discipline of epistemology is extremely narrow and therefore

doesn't really comprise any sub-disciplines, bringing me to the second point.

The discipline is going to undergo major changes in the next few years,

mainly because it will break free of the custody of academic philosophers and

become more practical and real-world oriented. And when that happens, it

will become broader and will therefore become too large to be a single, non-

subdivicded discipline. But right now it is small and therefore more or less

non-subdivided.

MAY 9, 6:55PM EDT0

VIPULMTR

Do you think the justification is often not necessary for knowledge? If so,

on what grounds can one explain the authenticity?

MAY 9, 9:41AM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

I think that justification is definitely a necessary component of inferential

knowledge, this being knowledge that is acquired through a process of

reasoning. For example, our knowledge of scientific laws is acquired through

an elaborate process of reasoning, and it is clear that unless the steps in that

process were justified, we would have mere belief, as opposed to actual

knowledge. It is less clear whether justification is a component of non-inferential knowledge, this being knowledge that one 'just has', without

having to go through a process of reasoning. For example, if you open your

eyes, you 'just' know whether it is dark or light out, whether there are other

people in the same room, etc. And it is not clear under such circumstances

whether your having the knowledge in question involves your having a

justification for your beliefs. But what is clear is that, although you may or

may not be aware of the justification of your beliefs, a justification can be

provided for them, supposing that they are in fact knowledge. So I would say

that justification is categorically a component of knowledge, even though the

psychological role of justification may vary from case to case.

MAY 9, 2:27PM EDT0

MJPILAPIL

Where do you see the study of Epistemology evolving in next 5-10 years?

MAY 7, 4:28PM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

I see it rapidly shifting in a more practical direction, for two reasons. First, I

see philosophy-departments, with all of their inefficiencies and

anachronisms, being shut down and replaced by superior online services.

Second, once that happens, epistemology will quickly be right-sized.

MAY 8, 1:17AM EDT0

SAFTAIN342

Why do people adhere to scientific truth as opposed to other forms of

truth?

MAY 7, 7:45AM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

A belief is either true or false. But if a belief is scientifically generated, its

likelihood of being true is higher than it would otherwise be, this being why

people give more credence to 'scientific' beliefs than to non-scientific beliefs.

But the term 'scientific' describes the process by which a belief is formed; it

does not describe the way in which it is true.

MAY 8, 1:15AM EDT0

LIANCHUY

What sourcebooks or online sites do you refer to learn more about

Epistemology?

MAY 7, 3:59AM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

www.philosophypedia.com Which offers very, very good courses in

epistemology (and related fields)

Analytic Philosophy by J.-M. Kuczynski

      www.amazon.com/Analytic-Philosophy-J-M-Kuczynski-

      ebook/dp/B01N2TD490/ref=sr_1_14?ie=UTF8&qid=1525756278&sr=8-

14&keywords=Analytic+PHilosophy

Epistemology by J.-M. Kuczynski 

    www.amazon.com/Epistemology-J-M-Kuczynski-

  ebook/dp/B01GNMX4KG/ref=pd_sim_351_1?

    _encoding=UTF8&psc=1&refRID=FKEJZQRC7WVAX9TA7S13

MAY 8, 1:13AM EDT0







MMALAHOOWhat would you say differentiates facts from opinions?

MAY 7, 12:02AM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Actual knowledge is belief that is true and that is arrived through

mechanisms that consistently lead to the truth. Mere opinion is belief that is

not arrived at through such mechanisms and that, if true, is therefore only

accidentally so.

MAY 7, 12:27AM EDT0







ALAMIN HOSSEN RAJ

What would you say is the future of epistemology?

MAY 6, 10:20AM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

The discipline is going to be entirely reconstituted and given a more practical

bent. Instead of being concerned with dated artefacts and stale puzzles, it will

increasingly focus on the growth and transmission of knowledge---

epistemology will be replaced by what is now referred as 'knowledge-

management', this being the use of knowledge of technological and practical

ends.

MAY 6, 3:07PM EDT0LIACBNTG

What would you say is better for humans: knowing or believing?

MAY 6, 3:30AM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Knowing and believing are not mutually exclusive. On the contrary, knowing

always involves believing (but not vice versa). Knowing is believing in a

reality-tracking manner. Believing might or might not be reality-tracking. So

knowing is better than merely believing.

MAY 6, 3:06PM EDT0

KHUSHBOO

What exactly is epistemology in the philosophy of science?

MAY 5, 7:48AM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

The Philosophy of Science is the epistemology of scientific knowledge. Not

all knowledge is scientific knowledge. Scientific knowledge is impersonal

and non-perspectival, meaning that it does not embody the peculiarities of

some one person's perspectival. Non-scientific knowledge is perspectival,

meaning that it does embody some one person's perspective. Epistemology is

about the acquisition of perspectival knowledge. The philosophy of science is

about the conversion of perspectival into non-perspectival knowledge.

Equivalently, it is about the conversion of non-scientific knowledge into

scientific knowledge. 

Last edited @ May 5, 4:55PM EDT.

MAY 5, 1:06PM EDT0JENESPULGAR

How would you define "passive observation" and "active experiment"

from the perspective of epistemology?

MAY 5, 7:14AM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Most of the knowledge that we acquire is not acquired through deliberate

effort. You happen to see a nearby stop-sign; so you know that there is a stop

sign nearby. A consequence of the fact that most beliefs are arrived at

unintentioanlly is that they are not arrived at in a way that is intended to

exclude biases. Finally, most knowledge that people have is specific; it does

not concern the laws that govern the universe, but is rather concerned with

specific matters of fact. Experimental knowledge is knowledge that is

acquired intentionally; that, more specifically, is acquired with the intention

of excluding biases; and that is usually (though not always) intended to lead

to knowledge of a law or truth of some general nature, as opposed to 

knowledge of some specific fact. 

MAY 5, 2:32PM EDT0







DEBORAH MORRISON

How is the study of epistemology most helpful for you as a

psychoanalyst?

MAY 1, 10:09PM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

I think it's more that my knowledge of psychoanalysis has helped me as an

epistemologist. As an analyst, one becomes very aware of the fact that a

given piece of information can be known in one way and not known in

another; that a given datum can be accessible to certain faculties and

inaccessible to others. And an analyst knows that a given piece of

information has to be presented in a multitude of ways, not simply so that it

can power through resistances, but so that it can actually be deployed: it is

not enough for a given truth to be known to one, it must be known to one in a

way that renders said knoweldge actionable. And a lot of what analysts

conceive of as drilling through resistances is less about emotional blocks than

it is about so articulating what is already known that it can be acted upon. So

as an analyst I know what we refer to as 'knowing' is quite as much a relation

between different cognitive faculties, which are sharing information and

which are only in imperfect communication, as it is a relation between

'subject' and object. Epistemologists have very crude views about the

structure of the psyche and they correspondingly inaccurate beliefs about the

nature of knowledge. 

MAY 1, 10:40PM EDT1







BASHIR1122

How long have you been into philosophy, and what led you to your

interest in epistemology?

APR 26, 11:01PM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

I have always been profoundly interested in knowledge--in acquiring it and,

therefore, in learning how it is that we acquire it. I also believe that my

interest in epistemology is to some extent a derivative of my wish to know

what other people are thinking. As someone who is interested in what other

people are thinking, I am interested not just in acquiring knowledge, but in

acquiring knowledge about knowers and about knowing. As such a person,

then, I am an epistemologist. 

APR 29, 5:48PM EDT0

DASHA BABUSKO

This is an age-old question from what I’m told, but how DOES one argue

with a skeptic?

APR 26, 9:31AM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

If the skeptic is right, every event that occurs is a miracle, and its coherence

with earlier events is a double miracle, and its coherence with subsequent

events is a triple miracle. Maybe miracles happen. But a theory that depends

on them is not as good as one that doesn't, other things being equal, and the

anti-skeptic's theory doesn't depend on them.  But the best way to argue with

a skeptic is not on his own terms. Skepticism is a bureaucratic evasion: "the

data is insufficient, my hands are tied." Plus, the skeptic is selective about his

skepticism. He isn't a skeptic about his own perceptions or memories. So he

is not, in being a skeptic, attempting to do justice to the epistemology that is

implicit in his own practices. But the main problem with skepticism, as

earlier indicated, is that it is really simply a refusal to accept explanationswhere explanations are possible. And if someone doesn't want to reason,

which the skeptic doesn't (except in little spurts, according as it suits his

position), then it's just time to move on: that person is playing games. 

Last edited @ Apr 26, 10:54AM EDT.

APR 26, 9:51AM EDT0







PAOLA ANTONELLA

How would describe/explain how we retain, or keep knowledge, and

claim to actually “know” it?

APR 26, 5:56AM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

First of all, we are 'wired' to acquire and retain knowledge, in the sense that to

be a human being is to have knowledge of dependence-relations on the basis

of which stimulations of our sensory surfaces are converted into perceptions

and on the basis of which those perceptions are organized into a coherent

narrative, from which, in turn, we deduce additional such organizational

principles, which we refer to as theories, thus refining our ability to know.

This aboriginal knowledge that I am referring to--this in-built knowledge of

  dependence-relations---is procedural knowledge; it is not so much knowledge

that we 'have' as it is knowledge that is built into the very structure of minds

and that is therefore knowledge that, in effect, we 'are.' As for how we can

know that our beliefs ever amount to knowledge, as opposed to delusion, this

question is very much over-rated: Rationality is based on the principle that

something doesn't come from nothing or, at any rate, that, when choosing

between two hypothesis, the one that posits cases of things coming out of

nowhere is worse, other things being equal, than one that doesn't. The skepticsays that everything comes from nothing; which, even if possible, is a

maximally bad explanation of the data and the negation of which is a

maximally good explanation of the data. 

APR 26, 4:25PM EDT0

STARFALL1

Where does knowledge begin and end for an epistemologist? Where does

it begin to look like it, and end with us “knowing” it?

APR 26, 4:14AM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

I believe that we are hard-wired to grasp relations of logical dependence that

enable us to organize sensations into perceptions and perceptions into

coherent (and probably therefore correct) narratives.

APR 26, 10:56AM EDT0







MOHAMED SALAH

Who would be the most instrumental philosopher in epistemology?

APR 26, 1:11AM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

I wrote some pretty ok stuff in Empiricism and the Foundations of

Psychology (Benjamins 2012). But the main ones would be Plato (for hisrationalism), Aristotle (for his empiricism), Leibniz for his (updated)

rationalism, Kant (for his nativism, this being the position that we are so

hard-wired as to derive knowledge from what would otherwise be

meaningless physical stimulations), and Russell (for his distinction between

knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description). 

APR 26, 10:58AM EDT0







YANNYREY

Where does epistemology stand in the field of philosophy in terms of

garnered interest and dedicated scholars?

APR 25, 9:08PM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

There are plenty of philosophy professors who self-describe as

epistemologists. But with few or no exceptions, they are not really

epistemologists. They are students of the works of other epistemologists, and

they are really just monkeying around with artefacts--with dead models,

created long ago, intended to solve problems that have lost their relevance

and vitality. Right now, it's about cleaving epistemology apart from the

philosophical community, which is now an idea-morgue. 

APR 26, 2:28AM EDT0

MOMINUR RAHMAN

How has your work as a psychoanalyst interacted with your

interest/work in philosophy, if at all?

APR 25, 8:48PM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Profoundly. First of all, it has spurred to answer philosophical questions that I

would not otherwise have answered, for example, "how are self-deception

and rationalization possible?", "how can there be unconscious mental

activity?", "what is the difference between the Freudian (personal)

unconscious and the Chomskyan (impersonal, deep) unconscious?" Also, my

work in psychoanalysis has shifted my general way of thinking about the

mind in a direction that makes it relatively easy to answer questions that,

although technically capable of being answered within a strictly philosophical

framework, are very unlikely to be meaningfully answered within such

framework; for example, 'how is weakness of the will possible?', 'what are

intentions, and how are they different from desires?' Also, my psychoanalytic

work has made me aware of the empirical reality of things that other

philosophers regard as 'constructs' or 'models.' My experience is that, when

people use the term 'model'--as in, 'Freud had a model...' or, more generally,

'so and so had a model...'---it is because they don't understand what so and so

said, and they are hedging---not going so far as to reject it, but stalling with a

weasel-half-position. But yes--profoundly.

APR 25, 9:01PM EDT0







TAE123

What exactly is analytic philosophy? What does it deal with?

APR 25, 8:37PM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Philosophy is the analysis of the logical structure of the concepts in terms of

which we think about the world. Analytic Philosophy is philosophy that is

done with conscious awareness of what philosophy is and is therefore duly

systematic and cautious. Analytic Philosophy deals with all of the standard

philosophical problems, but it tends--partly for historical reasons, and partly

because of the mentalities of the people who go into analytic philosophy (and

only slightly because of anything inherent in analytic philosophy itself)--to

focus on matters relating to language and logic.

APR 26, 11:00AM EDT0

MANAVISAIN

What exactly is “regress” in the context of this field, and what does it

entail to those seeking knowledge?

APR 25, 7:16PM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Many different regresses are of interest to epistemologists. But the main one's

have to do with the question: What is the first thing that we know? In order to

know that such and such, we have to have some justification for believing

that such and such. But if we have such a justification. So if T1 is the first

thing that Smith knows, then Smith has to know of some justification T2 of

T1, in which case T1 is not the first thing that Smith knows. So it seems that

we cannot coherently ascribe a first piece of knowledge. But it also seems

that we cannot coherently not do so, since, if there is no first piece of

knowledge, then one must have had infinitely pieces of knowledge to have a

given one--which is absurd. The way out of this vicious circle lies in the factthat we have  awarenesses of relations of justification that, given what it is

that they concern, are inherently justified, in consequence of which the

regress is halted. 

APR 26, 2:34AM EDT0

LIGHT

Does epistemology have schools of thought, or something like that?

APR 25, 7:10PM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Very much so. Empiricism: All knowledge has a strictly sensory basis.

Rationalism: Some knowledge has a non-sensory, purely intellectual basis.

Foundationalism: We have beliefs that are inherently justified and therefore

justify other beliefs of ours without having to be externally justified

themselves. Coherentism: No belief is self-justifying; justification is a

property of cohereing systems of beliefs, and such a system is knowledge-

bearing in proportion as it coheres in the appropriate way. Those are the big

four; there are others. 

APR 26, 11:02AM EDT0

TZWABBY

Are there any clear or tangible examples that best explain coherentism?

APR 25, 5:52PM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

There are two doctrines that go by the name of coherentism: one is a theory

of knowledge; the other is a theory of truth. The latter is to the effect that for

a perception or judgement to be accurate is simply for it to cohere with otherperceptions/judgements. So that theory is pretty obviously false. The

epistemological doctrine known as 'coherentism' is to the effect that

knowledge is a property not of individual, isolable mental states, but of

systems (coherent collections) of such states. The coherentist denies that

there are any epistemic 'atoms'--any mental states that constitute knowledge

all by themselves. He denies that there are any brute bits of knowledge on

which the totality of our knowledge is build. The coherentist's position is that,

as a given person's mental states accumulate and organize themselves, they

become increasingly knowledge-bearing. So his position is given by three

tenets, namely: (i) the property of being knowledge-bearing comes in

degrees; (ii) it is systems of mental entities that have this property, not

isolable mental entities; and (iii) that a given such system has this property to

a greater or lesser extent depending on how internally coherent it is.

APR 25, 9:09PM EDT0

BEAUTYBLISS07

Are there exceptions to the seemingly catch-all reach of constructivism,

which states that knowledge is contingent on people? Or does this theory

actually hold water?

APR 25, 5:00PM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

The theory most definitely does not hold water. If people construct truths,

then there are truths about that construction-process. And those truths cannot

themselves in all cases be constructed, since they pre-date the end of the

construction-process. Constructivism collapses into the truism that we

understand reality in terms of concepts and schematisms that are a part of our

cognitive framework and are not themselves constitutive of the realities

thereby grasped. Which, though it sounds grand, really just amounts to:

However it is that we understand reality, that's how we understand it. All

forms of subjectivism--indeed all deflationary theories of truth---are easiliy

undermined through reductio-style arguments, similar to the one just putforth. And attempts to meet those arguments end up being so revisionist that

they can't really be taken seriously.

APR 25, 7:04PM EDT0

GRADUBRV

What interests you in the human mind, and the philosophies it creates?

APR 25, 4:09PM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

What interests me about the mind is that how it finds a number of different

ways of expressing the same thing--of encoding, and operating on, the same

information. For example, an interest in purely formal relations can be

understood/expressed musically, graphically, visually, and even athletically.

As for philosophies specifically, I see them not as artistic creations but as

attempts, sometimes successful, to state the truth. Philosophy isn't science,

and philosophical theories are not scientific theories. But philosophy is not

non-science; it is more in the nature of meta-science or proto-science; it is a

'place', as it were, where ideas can be considered non-prejudicially, before

getting crammed into a scientific discipline, with all of the attendant

strictures. But what now interests me about the mind is itself ability to 'map'

itself onto different structures; and I would like to figure out, on the basis of

that idea, how to improve and accelerate the learning-process.

APR 26, 8:03PM EDT0

HASAN203

How do you know what you know? What theory or method does it fall

under?

APR 25, 12:17PM EDT0JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

I believe that we have direct insight into logical relations holding among

concepts and, on that basis, we organize our various sensory experiences into

coherent and therefore (probably) accurate narratives. I suppose my view

would be described as a kind of 'rationalist foundationalism'. I am

foundationalist (as opposed to a coherentist: seemy response to TZWABBY)

in that I believe that the totality of a person's rests on a bedrock of inherently

true beliefs. And I am a rationalist in that I believe this bedrock to consist of

knowledge of non-empirical, purely logical truths.

APR 26, 2:42AM EDT0

ADI PERDANA

How would you describe how we learn, or gain knowledge?

APR 25, 11:42AM EDT0







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

First of all, we are 'wired' to acquire and retain knowledge, in the sense that to

be a human being is to have knowledge of dependence-relations on the basis

of which stimulations of our sensory surfaces are converted into perceptions

and on the basis of which those perceptions are organized into a coherent

narrative, from which, in turn, we deduce additional such organizational

principles, which we refer to as theories, thus refining our ability to know.

This aboriginal knoweldge that I am referring to--this in-built knowledge of

  dependence-relations---is procedural knowledge; it is not so much knowledge

that we 'have' as it is knowledge that is built into the very structure of minds

and that is therefore knowledge that, in effect, we 'are.' As for how we can

know that our beliefs ever amount to knowledge, as opposed to delusion, thisquestion is very much over-rated: Rationality is based on the principle that

something doesn't come from nothing or, at any rate, that, when choosing

between two hypothesis, the one that posits cases of things coming out of

nowhere is worse, other things being equal, than one that doesn't. The skeptic

says that everything comes from nothing; which, even if possible, is a

maximally bad explanation of the data and the negation of which is a

maximally good explanation of the data. 

APR 26, 4:26PM EDT0

KEENAJOTH

Do you teach philosophy anywhere? If so, which philosopher’s work are

you inclined to teach the most?

APR 25, 9:44AM EDT1







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

I used to teach at Bard. And I taught other places, e.g. Virginia

Commonwealth. But, to my extreme dismay, I found that department-politics

made it impossible for there to be meaningful instruction. In any case, when I

teach, I like to teach the works of scientifically minded philosophers, e.g.

Hempel, mainly because the tedium of recycled philosophy is off-set by nifty

scientific tid-bits about measurement--theory and the like. 

APR 26, 2:36AM EDT0

LHYN GREGORIO

What other fields of philosophy interest you, and have you

written/taught any of it in the past?

APR 25, 9:42AM EDT1JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

All fields. I've taught and written about all of them. But epistemology is the

one that has the most potential in terms of having practical applications and

in terms of explaining how people actually behave. Not that philosophy-

professors are capitalizing on these opportunities--they aren't. But that's

where the light is---in find applications for epistemology in dynamic. real-

world settings.

APR 26, 2:38AM EDT0







MARIJA LEKIC

What is your explanation of Rationalism, and why it is of the position

that one does not “experience” knowledge, but intuitively “know” it?

APR 24, 10:01PM EDT1







JOHN-MICHAEL KUCZYNSKI

Rationalism is the doctrine that not all knowledge has a strictly sensory basis,

for the reason that some knowledge is either inherent in our ability to think or

is derived strictly from our own cognitive operations. Empiricism is the

doctrine that all knowledge has a strictly sensory basis. According to

empiricists, we cannot know anything unless our senses provide us with a

complete justification for it. The problem is that in order to learn from the

senses, we need to make inferences, and the relevant rules of inference cannot

be learned from sensory experience, at least not in all cases, since we need

those rules to make sense of our experience in the first place. Rationalists do

hold that we have intuitive knowledge--that there are some cases where we

'just' know such and such--but so do empiricists. But they sometimes (not

always) disagree about what it is that we 'just' know. Rationalists hold that wecan grasp at least some concepts intuitively, e.g. the concept of occupancy,

the concept of temporal priority, the concept of adjacency, the concepts of

less than and more than. And rationalists also hold that our 'just knowing'

certain things (e.g. that entirely distinct objects cannot occupy the same place

at the same time) is constitutive of our having those concepts. Empiricists

would deny this, on the grounds that experience can potentially falsify any

such putative case of knowledge. So they would deny that we 'just know' this.

But both empiricsts and rationalists typically hold that we can 'just know'

about our conscious mental states and that we can 'just know' about facts

about the external world that fall within the scope of sense-perception.

 

Link to Video Version of Book: https://www.youtube.com/watch?

v=oHS_3Jyr9F0

 

 