Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of MindAdvances in Consciousness Research (AiCR)

Provides a forum for scholars from different scientific disciplines and fields of 
knowledge who study consciousness in its multifaceted aspects. Thus the Series 
includes (but is not limited to) the various areas of cognitive science, including 
cognitive psychology, brain science, philosophy and linguistics. The orientation 
of the series is toward developing new interdisciplinary and integrative 
approaches for the investigation, description and theory of consciousness, as well 
as the practical consequences of this research for the individual in society. 
From 1999 the Series consists of two subseries that cover the most important 
types of contributions to consciousness studies:
Series A: Theory and Method. Contributions to the development of theory and 

method in the study of consciousness; 


Editor

Maxim I. Stamenov
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences


Editorial Board 

David J. Chalmers
                              Stephen L. Macknik
Australian National University
                              Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, AZ, 
Gordon G. GlobusUSA
University of California at Irvine
                              George Mandler
Ray JackendoffUniversity of California at San Diego
Brandeis University
                              Susana Martinez-Conde
Christof KochBarrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, AZ, 
California Institute of TechnologyUSA

Stephen M. KosslynJohn R. Searle
Harvard UniversityUniversity of California at Berkeley

Earl Mac CormacPetra Stoerig
Duke UniversityUniversität Düsseldorf


Volume 69

Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind. A defense of 
content-internalism and semantic externalism
John-Michael Kuczynski  Conceptual Atomism and  

  the Computational Theory of Mind

  A defense of content-internalism  

  and semantic externalism





  John-Michael Kuczynski

  Virginia Commonwealth University




















  John Benjamins Publishing Company

    Amsterdam / PhiladelphiaTMThe paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of 
8
  American National Standard for Information Sciences – Permanence of 
  Paper for Printed Library Materials, ansi z39.48-1984.

















Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

  Kuczynski, John-Michael.
  Conceptual atomism and the computational theory of mind : a defense of content-
      internalism and semantic externalism / John-Michael Kuczynski.
       p. cm. --  (Advances in consciousness research, issn 1381-589X ; v. 69)
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
 1.  Philosophy of mind. 2.  Knowledge, Theory of. 3.  Cognitive science. 4.  Atomism. 
      5.  Internalism (Theory of knowledge) 6.  Externalism (Philosophy of mind)  I. 
      Title.
  BD418.3.K83    2007
  128'.2--dc22 2007008592
  ISBN 978 90 272 5205 0 (hb : alk. paper)

© 2007 – John Benjamins B.V.
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form, by print, photoprint, microfilm, or any 
other means, without written permission from the publisher.

John Benjamins Publishing Co. · P.O. Box 36224 · 1020 me Amsterdam · The Netherlands
John Benjamins North America · P.O. Box 27519 · Philadelphia pa 19118-0519 · usa  Table of contents



Introduction ix


Part I 
A defense of content-internalism and of a descriptivist theory of concepts

chapter 1 
Basic concepts 3

chapter 2 
The predicative nature of sense-perception 25

chapter 3 
Uniquely individuating descriptions 41

chapter 4 
Some semantic consequences or our analysis: Tokens versus types, 
semantics versus pre-semantics 69

chapter 5 
Modality, intensionality, and a posteriori necessity 97

chapter 6 
Cognitive maps and causal connections: Why the causal story is an  
important part of the descriptive story 109

chapter 7 
Conception as knowledge of series of interlocking existence-claims 123

chapter 8 
The problem of de re senses 129

chapter 9 
Publicity problems and the nature of linguistic communication 153	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


chapter 10 
Content-externalism and self-knowledge 163

chapter 11 
Why one’s mental content is fixed by one’s epistemic situation 181

chapter 12 
Jackson and Pettit on program-causality and content-externalism 189


Part II 
Fodor, conceptual atomism, and computationalism

chapter 13 
Content-externalism and conceptual atomism 217

chapter 14 
The concept of a symbol 261

chapter 15 
Event-causation and the root-problem with the Computational 
Theory of Mind 285

chapter 16 
Fodor’s first argument for conceptual atomism 293

chapter 17 
Fodor’s second argument for conceptual atomism 315

chapter 18 
Fodor’s third argument for conceptual atomism 327

chapter 19 
Some arguments for the Symbolic Conception of Thought 397

chapter 20 
A positive argument against the Symbolic Conception of Thought 409

chapter 21 
Another argument against the Symbolic Conception of Thought: 
The concept of non-conceptual content 419 Table of contents 


chapter 22 
Propositional structure and the ineliminability of non-conceptual content 429

chapter 23 
Conceptual content and the structure of the proposition 443

chapter 24 
Peacocke on concept-possession 467

chapter 25 
Semantics versus psychology 483

Conclusion 507

Bibliography 509

Index 517  Introduction


A doctrine known as “content-externalism” is widely taken to provide a correct analy-
sis of mental content. A doctrine known as the Computational Theory of Mind (CTM) 
is widely taken to provide a correct analysis of mental operations. These doctrines sup-
port each other.
The present work is divided into two parts. In Part I (Chapters 1–12) it is argued 
that content-externalism is false, but that a related doctrine known as “semantic exter-
nalism” is correct. An alternative to content-externalism is proposed.
In Part II (Chapters 13–25) it is argued that CTM is false. Special attention is paid 
to the concept of syntactic form. It is seen that CTM involves a misunderstanding of 
this concept, and that this misunderstanding is embedded in misunderstandings that 
are reinforced by content-externalism.  part I 


  A defense of content-internalism and 

  of a descriptivist theory of concepts  chapter 1 


  Basic concepts



Content-externalism

Let W and W* be two different possible worlds satisfying the following conditions. In 
W, Max sees rock R at time t. In W*, Twin-Max sees rock R* at the same time. R is 
numerically distinct from R*. But apart from that, there are no differences between 
W at t and W*at t. (It follows that Max and Twin-Max are numerically identical.) So 
even though R and R* are numerically distinct, they nonetheless look the same, and 
have the same mass, shape, and so on. And even though Max is looking at one rock, 
whereas Twin-Max is looking at some other rock, the physiological disturbances that 
result in the one case are qualitatively identical with those that result in the other.
Of course, Max and Twin-Max do not have exactly the same relational properties. 
For example, Max’s visual experience at time t is caused by R, not R*, and Twin-Max’s 
corresponding experience is caused by R*, not R. Nonetheless, Max and Twin-Max are 
obviously extremely similar. So long as we consider the regions of space-time occupied 
by their bodies, there is nothing that distinguishes Max from Twin-Max. If there is an 
electron-jump in the region occupied by Max, there is a qualitatively identical elec-
tron-jump in the region occupied by Twin-Max.
According to a widely held doctrine, Max’s perceptions and subsequent thoughts 
don’t have the same contents as Twin-Max’s corresponding perceptions and thoughts. 
Here is the reasoning behind this claim:

  Max’s visual perception is veridical exactly if R has certain properties, it being ir-
  relevant whether R* has those properties. And Twin-Max’s visual perception is 
  veridical  exactly  if R* has  certain  properties,  it  being  irrelevant  whether  R  has 
  those properties. Similarly when Max thinks that rock is lovely, his thought is cor-
  rect exactly if R is lovely, it being irrelevant whether R* is lovely. And when Twin-
  Max thinks that rock is lovely, his thought is correct exactly if R* is lovely, it being 
  irrelevant  whether  R  is  lovely.  Therefore  Max’s  R-perceptions  and  subsequent 
  thoughts don’t have the same truth-conditions, or therefore the same contents, as 
  Twin-Max’s R*-perception and subsequent-thoughts.
  Leaving aside facts about the origins of their conditions, Max and Twin-Max are 
  qualitatively identical. So it is solely in virtue of the fact that they are embedded in 
  different environments that they have perceptions and thoughts with different con-
  tents. Thus, in at least some cases, a mental state’s content is fixed, at least in part, by 
  facts about the origins of that state. Two brain-states can be qualitatively identical, 
  leaving aside facts about their causal origins, and yet have different contents. Thus, 	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


  what a person (or creature) is thinking is constitutively (and not just causally) de-
  pendent on facts about his environment, the same being true of the information en-
  coded in his sense-perceptions.1

The doctrine just described is known as “content externalism.” The present work is con-
cerned with content-externalism (among other things). We will argue that it is false.
Content-externalism must at all costs be distinguished from another doctrine that 
we will refer to as “semantic externalism.”


Semantic externalism

A continuation of our story about Max and Twin-Max will help us define the term 
“semantic externalism.” Max later tells people about R, referring to it as “Rocko.” Be-
cause Max is an eminent person, “Rocko” becomes part of the English language. So 
people who have never seen R refer to it as “Rocko”, and they say things like: “the rock 
in your backyard is smaller than Rocko” and “Rocko is supposedly the most beautiful 
rock in the world.” Thus, in W, “Rocko” refers to R, i.e. it becomes a semantic rule of 
English that “Rocko” refers to R (just as, in actuality, it is a semantic rule of English that 
“Socrates” refers to Socrates). Everything that we just said about Max is true mutatis 
mutandis of Twin-Max. Thus, in W*, “Rocko” refers to R*.
Here is what semantic externalism says about this situation. In W, an utterance of 
“Rocko  weighs  over  five  lbs”  has  for  its  literal  meaning  the  singular  proposition R 
weighs over five lbs. In general, for any predicate phi, an utterance in W of FRocko has 
phiG has for its literal meaning the singular proposition R has phi. For exactly similar 
reasons, an utterance of FRocko has phiG in W* has for its literal meaning the singular 
proposition R* has phi. Thus, what is literally meant by an utterance in W of FRocko 
has phiG neither entails, nor is entailed by, what is literally meant by a homonymous 
utterance in W*. (Salmon 1986, Kaplan 1989, Soames 1989, 2001, 2005).
Content-externalism and semantic-externalism are distinct doctrines.2 The first is a 
doctrine about what people think. The second is a doctrine about what our words mean. 
As we will see, a failure to distinguish between these two doctrines has led to much con-
fusion in contemporary thought. We will find that semantic-externalism is unqualifiedly 
true, even though content-externalism is unqualifiedly false.
There are many well-known apparent problems with semantic-externalism. For ex-
ample,  if  semantic-externalism  is  right,  then  “Hesperus=Hesperus”  has  precisely  the 
same literal meaning as “Hesperus=Phosphorous.” But surely, it will be said, these sen-



1.  See Burge (1979, 1982), Kaplan (1989b: 322-326), McGinn (1986), Salmon (1986), and  Da-
vidson (2004: 77-86).  

2.  Blackburn (1984: 328-333) makes this point.  Chapter 1.  Basic concepts 


tences must have different meanings, given that one of them is trivial whereas the other 
is non-trivial.
We will find that this problem, and others like it, vanish when we take a few basic 
facts into account – in particular, the fact that one must always exploit background 
semantic and non-semantic knowledge to compute the meanings of the sentence-to-
kens that one encounters.


Some apparent problems with content-externalism

As we have already seen, there is much to be said for content-externalism. It is a datum 
that,  notwithstanding  their  similarities,  Max  and  Twin-Max  are  seeing,  and  subse-
quently thinking about, different rocks. So it seems a datum that the contents of Max’s 
mental  states  are,  to  that  extent,  different  from  the  content’s  of  Twin-Max’s  mental 
states. Finally, there is no way to explain these differences except in terms of the fact 
that Max’s mental states don’t have the same origins as Twin-Max’s. These differences 
have no intra-cranial basis, and must therefore be sought in what is extra-cranial, i.e. 
in what is external.
But there is a problem. So long as we confine ourselves to the regions occupied by 
their bodies, there is nothing that distinguishes Max from Twin-Max. It immediately 
follows that they are physically identical. And unless we take the dubious measure of 
saying that their minds engulf regions of space larger than those encompassed by their 
bodies3, it also follows that they are psychologically identical.4 So to the extent that it 
must be understood along content-externalist lines, mental content is without any psy-
chological significance: what a person is thinks, believes, and doubts is irrelevant to 
how that person is psychologically. But it would seem to be a truism that two people 
differ psychologically if they differ in respect of what they believe, think, or doubt. As 
we will see, some authors reject this supposed truism on the grounds that it conflicts 
with content-externalism. But it is prima facie to the discredit of that doctrine that it 
has such a revisionist consequence.
Before moving on, we should consider a possible externalist rejoinder to the argu-
ment just given:

  You say that Max’s mind is confined to his cranium, and that to think otherwise is 
  “dubious.” But in saying this, you are simply begging the question. The essence of 
    content-externalism is that some facts about Max’s mind are fixed by extra-cra-
  nial facts. So if that doctrine is correct, it is not absurd to say that someone’s mind 
  literally encompasses some remote region of space-time; and it is thus not absurd 


3.  This position is taken by McGinn (1986: 20-30).

4.  Stich (1978: 590-591) powerfully explains why it is not an option, even for the content-ex-
ternalist, to say that Max and Twin-Max are psychologically different. 	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


  to say that Max and Twin-Max have qualitatively different minds. So I don’t see 
  that you’ve made any headway here against content-externalism.5

It is easy to show that this response has consequences too revisionist to accept. Because 
light travels at a finite speed, one often sees stars that went out of existence long ago. 
Given this, suppose that, instead of being nearby rocks, R and R* are qualitatively iden-
tical but numerically distinct stars that went out of existence 100 million years ago. In 
that case, the objector’s response amounts to this: at least some portion of Max’s mind 
was around 100 million years ago. But that is straightforwardly false. There were no 
human minds back then.
This point can be generalized. One sees states of affairs, not objects. You don’t just 
see Smith. Rather, you see a dated situation that has Smith as a component. Because 
light travels at a finite speed, anything that you see has since ceased to exist, and any-
thing that is contemporaneous with your visual perception is, at most, a successor or 
continuation of the state of affairs that you are seeing. Since content-externalism makes 
the thing you are seeing into a veritable constituent of the content of your perception, it 
follows that the objector’s response drains all of your perceptions of any content. Given 
that our perceptions obviously do have content, we may conclude that Max and Twin-
Max are psychologically and physically identical, contrary to what the objector says.


Some apparent problems with content-externalism (continued)

Suppose  that  Max  does,  whereas  Twin-Max  does  not,  believe  that  there  is  a  nearby 
ATM machine that is spitting out hundred dollar bills. There will be an immediate dif-
ference between Max and Twin-Max in regards to what they feel, want, and do. Max 
will,  whereas  Twin-Max  will  not,  experience  a  crisis  of  conscience  (“should  I  take 
money that is not mine?”). Max will, whereas Twin-Max will not, repress feelings of 
guilt that result from committing theft. Max does, whereas Twin-Max does not, de-
velop a feeling of self-loathing, which is defensively cloaked under a veneer of exces-
sive self-confidence. And so on.
Here, we have a situation where Max’s mental content clearly differs from Twin-
Max’s. That initial difference quickly ramifies into others, and Max and Twin-Max for-
ever cease to have parallel lives.


5.  McGinn  holds  that  content-externalism  is  correct  and  that,  consequently,  one’s  mind is 
spread out all over the cosmos. See McGinn (1986: 20-30). McGinn then argues that this conse-
quence of content-externalism is innocuous since the mind is not a “substance.” 
 It is extremely unclear what it means to say that the mind is not a “substance.” But what is clear 
is that there are representational mental events. Once this is granted, it follows (as we will now see) 
that, if content-externalism is right, parts of your mind existed millions of years ago. It follows that 
content-externalism is false, given that your mind came into existence only a few decades ago. Chapter 1.  Basic concepts 


To see why this is a problem for the content-externalist, let us return to the previ-
ous scenario – the one where the only differences between Max and Twin-Max coin-
cide with, or derive from, the fact that the one person saw R while the other saw R*. In 
that scenario, the alleged difference in content doesn’t lead to any lack of parallelism. 
Even if we concede to the content-externalism that Max and Twin-Max have different 
psychological contents, those contents are perfectly parallel.
 For reasons of a purely methodological nature, that perfect parallelism is suspi-
cious. We are reminded of Poincare’s famous thought-experiment. Let W and W* be 
two different universes. (These needn’t coincide with the two homonymously named 
universes previously discussed.) At time t, everything in W undergoes a tenfold in-
crease in size. Apart from that, W and W* are qualitatively identical.
Is there any difference between W and W*? Poincaré famously said “no”, and his 
answer  was  vindicated  by  later  developments  in  both  physics  and  logic.  Because  the 
changes that occurred in W were perfectly uniform, the relational properties of events in 
the one world remain identical with those of events in the other world. Thus, I am twice 
as tall as my niece in W iff I am twice as tall as she is in W*. If my pants are too tight in 
W, then they are too tight by exactly the same amount in W*. It is obvious that these 
points generalize without limit. There is thus no conceivable way of differentiating be-
tween W and W*, and the statement “I am in W, as opposed to W*” is without any ex-
planatory or experimental significance. So we are guilty of making a distinction without 
a corresponding difference if we say that those worlds differ. It follows that the notion of 
absolute size, and therewith of absolute position (and velocity and mass…), are empty.6
The differences between Max and Twin-Max are like those between the worlds in 
Poincare’s  thought-experiment.  Genuine  differences  destroy  parallelism  and  disrupt 
relational facts. But the supposed differences between Max and Twin-Max are com-
pletely non-disruptive. Those two individuals remain in perfect lock-step (Fodor 1987, 
Jackson and Pettit 2004: 45–46).
A content-externalist might respond by saying:

  You are begging the question. Max and Twin-Max don’t remain in lock-step. Max 
  has dreams about R, whereas Twin-Max has dreams about R*. Max wants to build 
  a miniature replica of R, whereas Twin-Max wants to build a miniature replica of 
  R*. And these differences do ramify into others. Given that both Max and Twin-
  Max believe that there are no square circles, Max comes to believe either R weighs 
  over five lbs or there are square circles whereas Twin-Max comes to believe either 




6.  Matters are actually not quite as simple as this. Given only the just-described similarities 
between W and W*, it is still possible that they are dynamically different, even though kinema-
tically they are the same. See Schlick (1919) and Reichenbach (1958). The thought-experiment 
has to be developed further to generate the result that Poincaré wants. But these subtleties are 
obviously not relevant here.  	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


  R* weighs over five lbs or there are square circles. So contrary to what you said, we 
  don’t have one difference: we have a whole pattern of differences.7

The content-externalist wishes to show that, because Max’s perception results from R 
as opposed to R*, his mental content is qualitatively different from Twin-Max’s. All of 
the differences cited by the objector presuppose that this is the case. So the differences 
cited  by  the  objector  in  defense  of  the  content-externalist’s  position  presuppose the 
truth of that position, and thus don’t provide any independent support for it.


Content-internalism versus content-externalism

A theory is a way of modeling data. In philosophy, these data consist of intuitions. For 
example,  we  all  have  the  intuition  that  killing  infants  is  evil;  and  any  viable  ethical 
theory must either validate that intuition or it must show that, relative to intuitions of 
an even more fundamental kind, it can be explained away.
It is a datum that some of Max’s thoughts are made true by facts about R, and that 
Twin-Max’s corresponding thoughts are made true by facts about R*. It is also a datum 
that there are certain apparent similarities between Max’s R-thoughts and Twin-Max’s 
R*-thoughts. Content-externalism provides one model of such data. Content-internal-
ism rejects that model, and must therefore propose an alternative to it.8 (By “content-
internalism” I mean the doctrine that content-externalism is false.) This work will pro-
pose a content-internalist model of the data in question.
These days most philosophers believe that content-externalism is correct. In other 
words, most philosophers believe that, because of the differences between W and W*, 
Max and Twin-Max differ in respect of the identity of the information encoded in their 
sense-perceptions and subsequent thoughts.
For the reasons given a moment ago, it seems very reasonable to believe that there is 
a kind of representational content that Max and Twin-Max have in common, and that 
this common content is not affected by the differences between their two worlds. Follow-
ing convention, we will refer to that kind of content (supposing that it exists) as “narrow 
content” (Loar 1985, Jackson and Pettit 2004c). So supposing that individuals x and y are 
qualitatively identical, leaving aside facts about the origins of their conditions, x and y 
cannot differ in respect of the narrow contents of their perceptions and thoughts.
Of course, all content-internalists believe that there is such a thing as narrow-con-
tent, and so do some content-externalists. Such content-externalists are forced to ad-



7.  This is John McDowell’s position. See McDowell’s commentary on Chapter 6 of Evans’ Va-
rieties of Reference (Evans 1982: 203-204).

8.  It is an open question in the philosophy of science whether there can be two different but 
equivalent ways of modeling the same data.   Chapter 1.  Basic concepts 


vocate a “two-tiered” or “two-dimensional” conception of mental content. We will re-
fer to this position as “soft content-externalism.”9
A number of eminent content-externalists deny that there is such a thing as nar-
row-content. Of these, the most prominent are probably Tyler Burge, Gareth Evans, 
and John McDowell. We will refer to this position as “hard-line content-externalism.”
In this work I will argue that both forms of content-externalism are quite false. I 
will also argue that semantic externalism is entirely correct. We will see that many of 
the grounds for content-externalism vanish as soon as that doctrine is sharply distin-
guished from semantic externalism.
Jerry Fodor (1998) is a hard-line externalist who has proposed a very definite view 
as to the nature of conception, and he has presented a number of powerful arguments 
for that view. Indeed, given an acceptance of hard-line content-externalism, Fodor’s 
analysis of conception follows, as we will see in a moment.
The essence of Fodor’s position is this. For individual x to have a concept of object 
y is for some of x’s states to have been caused, in a certain way, by states of affairs in-
volving y. (In other words, there is some causal relation R such that x has a concept of 
y just in case some state of affairs involving y R-caused x to undergo changes of a cer-
tain kind.) Fodor’s view can be understood in terms of the following scenario. I see 
Fred. This involves some state of affairs involving Fred causing me to have certain psy-
chological  states  (various  sensory  experiences  and  attendant  thought-processes).  In 
their turn, those states lead to my being able to think about Fred, i.e. they lead to my 
subsequently having a concept of Fred. Here we have a case where one thing’s having a 
concept of some other thing involves the second thing’s having some kind of effect on 
the first thing. Since it is an obvious fact that there exist situations like the one just 
described, nobody denies that conception may involve a causal connection between 
subject and object. But Fodor goes a step further, saying that any instance of concep-
tion not only involves, but is identical with, an instance of the kind of causal relation 
just discussed. My having a concept of Socrates not only involves, but is identical with, 
my being on the receiving end of a causal chain that begins with some state of affairs 
involving Socrates.10 Fodor attempts to show that my concepts of theoretical entities 
(e.g. muons) and also of abstract entities (e.g. the property of justice) can be explained 
along similar lines.11
Of course, this conception of conception is not an easy one to accept. But Fodor 
provides  independent  corroboration  for  it.  More  specifically,  he  successfully  shows 
that each of three widely held and independently plausible doctrines implicitly presup-
poses the truth of his analysis (Fodor 1975, 1987, 1994, 1998). Those doctrines are the 
Computational Theory of Mind (CTM), the Symbolic Conception of Thought (SCT), 

9.  Loar (1985) is a soft content-externalist. So are Jackson and Pettit (2004b). Chalmers’ (1996) 
argument for dualism involves a version of soft content-externalism.

10.  Fodor (1998). 

11.  Fodor (1990). 	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


and content-externalism. SCT is the view that we think in symbols and thus in some 
kind of language. CTM is the view that all thinking is computing. In due course, we 
will say more completely what SCT and CTM are.
Given that each of these doctrines presupposes the truth of Fodor’s analysis, it fol-
lows that there is at least as much support for the latter as there is for the best sup-
ported of those three doctrines. Further, there is, as we will see, considerable indepen-
dent  support  for  each  of  these  doctrines.  So  even  though  Fodor’s  analysis  might 
initially seem counterintuitive, there is much to be said in support of it.


Conceptual atomism and content-externalism

As I will be using the word “concept”, x has a concept of y iff x can have thoughts about 
y. Because you are able to think about Socrates, you have a concept of the man.
If correct, Fodor’s analysis warrants the acceptance of a doctrine that we will refer to 
as “conceptual atomism.” Consider your concept of Socrates. It would seem, on the face 
of it, that you can have that concept only because you already have various others. Sup-
posing that X is a creature that has no conception of space or time or corporeality, could 
X have a concept of Socrates? Most of us would say “no.” It seems absurd to suppose that 
a creature so totally lacking in cognitive wherewithal could possibly have a concept of 
Socrates. More generally, it seems absurd to suppose that, for anything x, an otherwise 
conceptless creature could have a concept of x. It seems, therefore, that one’s concept of 
Socrates (or of anything else) is not an “atom”, and is necessarily embedded in a network 
of other concepts. Some kind of conceptual non-atomism seems obligatory.12 One of the 
objectives of this work is to show that conceptual non-atomism is in fact correct.
But if Fodor’s analysis is right, conceptual atomism is not only permissible, but de 
rigueur. According to that analysis, my having a concept of Socrates consists solely in my 
having a certain causal connection with Socrates. Whatever causal connection I have with 
Socrates could presumably be had by an otherwise conceptless being, e.g. a photographic 
plate. So Fodor’s analysis seems to allow that such a being could have a concept of Socrates. 
In general, it seems that if we accept a strictly causal analysis of conception, such as that 
advocated by Fodor, then we are committed to conceptual atomism.
Fodor recognizes this and, true to his own premises, he accepts conceptual atom-
ism. Fodor says that an otherwise conceptless creature could have a concept of Socrates 
– or of my desk or of justice or of the color green. Because he is keenly aware that many 


12.  Sellars (1963) made a strong case for non-atomism. Non-atomism is now generally, but not 
universally,  accepted.  Bonjour  (1985)  discusses  why  non-atomist  must  be  accepted.  Fodor 
(1998) argues that it must be rejected. In Kuczynski (2003, 2004), I provide non-Sellarsian argu-
ments for non-atomism. Elsewhere (Kuczynski 2007c), I have argued that a version of Sellars’ 
argument was given by Berkeley in A Theory of Vision and, in fact, that Berkeley’s version is su-
perior to Sellars’.  Chapter 1.  Basic concepts 


will disagree with this atomism, he attempts to find independent corroboration for it. 
The merits of these attempts will be evaluated in Chapters 16–18.
Fodor’s atomism is easily shown to be at least conditionally correct. (Here we will out-
line an argument that we will give in full in Chapter 13.) Suppose that content-externalism 
is correct. In that case, two people can be qualitatively identical but for the fact that one of 
them has one concept where the other has some different concept. According to the con-
tent-externalist, Max has a concept of R instead of a concept of R*, even though, apart from 
that,  Max  and  Twin-Max  are  qualitatively  identical. If  all  concepts  were constitutively 
linked with other concepts, then it wouldn’t be possible for two people to differ with re-
spect to just one concept. So to the extent that mental content is to be understood along 
content-externalist lines, concepts come one at a time, and not in clusters.
A brief digression may help. Suppose that members of species X don’t have hearts. 
In that case, it won’t be a biological possibility that members of that species are other-
wise just like human beings. Members of that species must differ systemically from 
people – otherwise they would be in the same health-situation as a person without a 
heart, and would thus immediately go out of existence.
According to the non-atomist, what we just said about hearts is true of concepts. If 
Smith  has  the  concept  of  a  conversion-reaction  whereas  Jones  does  not,  then  Smith 
must have other concepts that Jones does not. Jones’ acquiring the concept of a conver-
sion-reaction involves his acquiring other concepts – e.g. the concepts of repression, of 
a punitive super-ego, and of unconscious mental activity. The non-atomist says that any 
acquisition of a single concept involves an acquisition of multiple concepts; and this is 
equivalent to the view, stated a moment ago, that conceptual differences between peo-
ple cannot be confined to a single concept. (We will develop this argument in Chapter 
13.) As we’ve seen, content-externalism presupposes the falsity of that view.
So given content-externalism, Fodor’s atomism follows, as does his strictly causal 
conception of conception, as we will now see. According to the content-externalist, 
Max has a concept of R, this being the one concept that Max has that Twin-Max lacks. 
Max is causally connected to R, this being the one thing that distinguishes Max from 
Twin-Max. Of course, exactly the same points mutatis mutandis hold of Twin-Max. 
The conceptual differences between Max and Twin-Max supervene wholly on the dif-
ferences in their causal liaisons. The fact that Max does, whereas Twin-Max does not, 
have a concept of R is wholly a function of the fact that Max is, whereas Twin-Max is 
not, causally connected to R in a certain way. So to the extent that the content-exter-
nalist account of mental content is the right one, it follows that differences in concepts 
are to be understood in strictly causal terms, and therefore that conception itself is so 
to  be  understood.  So  given an  acceptance  of  content-externalism,  Fodor’s  atomism 
and his strictly causal conception of conception both follow.13


13.  This general line of thought lurks beneath the arguments found in Fodor (1990). But it is 
not explicitly stated there. Nor, to my knowledge, is it explicitly stated anywhere in the externa-
list (or, for the matter, the internalist) literature. 	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


Thus, Fodor is simply being true to his own premises in accepting these two doc-
trines. Most other content-externalists have not gone so far as to say that conception is 
to be understood in purely causal terms or that a strictly atomistic view of concepts is 
correct. But so far as this is the case, the systems advocated by those other content-
externalists are not consistent ones.


The relation of CTM to conceptual-atomism

But Fodor’s primary reason for accepting conceptual atomism is not that content-ex-
ternalism demands it. His primary reason is that he accepts CTM and, as Fodor him-
self  cogently  argues,  the  truth  of  CTM  depends  on  that  of  atomism.  (Fodor  (1968, 
1975) accepted CTM before content-externalism even came into existence.) In Chap-
ters 13–22 we will argue that CTM is not viable and that the arguments for it are falla-
cious. Let us briefly outline what we will say.
For the sake of argument, suppose that CTM is right. In other words, suppose that  
all thinking is “computing.” A question immediately arises: What exactly does the word 
“compute” mean in this context?
Right now, I could compute a sum – I could add 134 to 397. But that kind of com-
putation obviously presupposes various cognitive faculties, and thus cannot underlie 
all cognition.
Fodor is aware of this, and he defines the word “computation” in a way that, he 
believes, does not render CTM viciously circular. A computation, he says, is a “formal 
operation on symbols” (Fodor 1987: 19). It is an operation that is causally driven by the 
forms, not the meanings, of the symbols involved. A machine can respond to the form 
of the expression “23+15” in such a way that it produces the right output. No thinking 
is needed to perform a purely formal operation. Given that computing is a purely for-
mal operation, it follows that there is no vicious circularity in supposing that thinking 
is computing (Fodor 1981: 13–17, Fodor 1987: 18–20).
An immediate consequence of CTM – indeed, the very essence of it – is that think-
ing is not content-driven (Fodor 1987: 19). Of course, such a position initially strikes 
us as very odd. I learn that Bill fell off of a tall building, and I immediately thereafter 
form the belief that Bill is now injured or deceased. Surely my believing the proposi-
tion Bill fell off of a tall building led, or at least might have led, to my believing the 
proposition Bill is now injured or deceased. Thus, at least some sequences of thoughts 
are content-driven. So supposing that we think in symbols, it is very hard to believe 
that the semantic properties of those symbols are causally inert.
But Fodor (1987, 1990) has produced an argument that, if cogent, shows why we 
mustn’t put too much stock in this particular criticism of CTM. The purely formal prop-
erties of symbols can be coordinated with their representational properties in such a way 
that all of the relevant facts are easily explained – e.g. the fact that, if I believe that Bill 
has seven cars, then I am likely to form the belief that Bill has a prime number of cars.  Chapter 1.  Basic concepts 


True – this account does strip the mental per se of causal efficacy. But theories are to be 
evaluated in terms of their degree of concordance with the relevant data, not in terms of 
their concordance with our a priori conceptions. In this case, the relevant datum is that 
certain kinds of thoughts are likely to follow other kinds of thoughts. It is not a datum 
that semantics is what is causally responsible for these patterns.


The concept of syntax: an introduction

 There are a number of points to make in response to the argument just outlined. I will 
now only outline these points, since they will be discussed at length later on.
Supposing that a computation is understood to be a “form-driven” operation, we 
must ask: what is meant by the term “form”? Sometimes Fodor says that what he has in 
mind is syntactic form. So Fodor’s position becomes: a computation is a syntax-driven 
operation. Is this claim feasible?
Before we can answer this question, we must note that the term “syntax” is am-
biguous: what linguists mean by it isn’t what mathematical logicians mean by it. Let us 
now see if either disambiguation of the term “syntax” validates Fodor’s position. Ac-
cording to a linguist, the sentences:

  (*)  “John punched Fred”

and

  (**)  “Larry kissed Mary”

have similar (or identical) syntactical structures. What does this mean? It means that they 
have similar derivation-trees. To say that they have similar derivation-trees is to say that 
the (complex) semantic rule that assigns meaning to the one sentence is structurally sim-
ilar to the semantic rule that assigns meaning to the other. Those sentences are syntacti-
cally similar because of how they are assigned their respective meanings by the semantic 
rules of English. In general, the syntax of a sentence lies not in what it means, but in how 
it means what it means. Syntax is meaning-how. (Semantics is meaning-what.) The con-
cept of syntax is therefore not a meaning-innocent one.
So supposing, as Fodor does, that thinking is an operation on expressions, syntax-
driven  operations are  meaning-driven.  They  are  driven  by  a  sensitivity  not  to what the 
operands mean, but to how they mean what they mean. Sensitivity to meaning-how, no 
less than sensitivity to meaning-what, presupposes a heavy cognitive arsenal. It is therefore 
not tenable to suppose that syntax-driven operations could be cognitively foundational.
Let us give a different version of the argument just outlined. The term “wet” is not 
interchangeable with the expression “the property of wetness.” After all, “one shouldn’t 
drive on wet roads” is meaningful, whereas “one shouldn’t drive on the property of 
wetness roads” is not. If you know only that the term “wet” denotes or expresses a cer-	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


tain property, and do not know the syntactic properties of that expression, then you are 
ignorant of a crucial aspect of its meaning. Syntax is thus an aspect of meaning.
More  precisely,  syntax  is  combinatorial  semantics.  One  knows  the  syntax  of  a 
complex expression when one knows the combinatorial semantic properties of its con-
stituents. Equivalently, one knows the syntax of an expression when one knows how its 
meaning is derived from those of its constituents – when, in other words, one knows 
its derivation tree. Thus, an operation is syntax-driven iff it is driven by a sensitivity to 
combinatorial semantics. Since such an operation can be carried out only where there 
is already an awareness of meaning, it is not an option to hold that such operations 
form the foundation of our cognitive lives.
The  linguist’s  disambiguation  of  the  term  “syntax”  thus  fails  to  validate  Fodor’s 
position. Let us now see if Fodor’s position is validated by the mathematical logician’s 
disambiguation of that term.
First of all, how are the two disambiguations different? Most linguists would say that

  (1)  “Bob is tall or Bob is not tall”

has the same syntax as

  (2)  “Bob is tall and Bob is not tall.”

The linguist sees “or” as being in the same syntactic category as “and.” From his stand-
point, (1) and (2) are no more syntactically different than “Bob is tall” and “Bob is 
short.” But the mathematical logician says that, because (2) has an “or” in the place 
where (1) has an “and”, those sentences are in different syntactic categories. What is the 
basis of this (apparent) disagreement?
When a mathematical logician says that a sentence S, belonging to language L, is 
“syntactically true”, he means that it is a theorem or consequence of the semantic rules 
of L that S is true.14 And when a mathematical logician says that two sentences S and 
S* have the same syntax, he means that they are interchangeable from a proof-theo-
retic standpoint. Equivalently, S and S have the same “syntax” iff….S…is syntacti-
                    121
cally true iff the same is true of…S….(So, for example, if there is some sentence S 
                        23
such that S→S is a semantic theorem and S→S is not, then S is syntactically different 
    13231
from S.) It is a theorem of the rules of English semantics that (1) is true, but not that 
2
(2) is true. (Indeed, it is a theorem of those rules that (2) is false.) And that is why, from 
a mathematical logician’s standpoint, S and S are syntactically different.
                          12
Even though the mathematical logician’s disambiguation of the term “syntax” is dif-
ferent from the linguist’s, the former poses the same problems for Fodor’s analysis as the 
latter. On both disambiguations, a sentence’s syntax lies in how it means what it means.
Of course, the linguist and the logician don’t have quite the same thing in mind 
when they think about how a sentence is assigned the meaning that it has. The latter is 


14.  We will defend this claim in Chapter 13. It is anticipated by Carnap (1937, 1956) and Gödel 
(1953). Chapter 1.  Basic concepts 


concerned  with  non-psychological  notions  such  as  provability;  the  former  is  con-
cerned with psychological notions such as comprehension and learnability. But in both 
cases, a sentence’s syntax lies in a relationship that holds between the semantic rules of 
the relevant language and the sentence’s meaning. So given either disambiguation of 
the term “syntax”, syntax-driven operations are meaning-driven. This immediately en-
tails that Fodor’s position is a non-starter


Indexicality and the impossibility of a syntactic characterization of logical form

There is an entirely different reason why CTM is in trouble if “form” is identified with 
syntax. For CTM to work, it must be possible to coordinate syntax with semantics. But 
there is no disambiguation of the term “syntax” that makes such a coordination pos-
sible. A linguist would say that:

  (^)  “Smith is ill because Smith doesn’t smoke.”

has the same syntax as

  (^^)  “Smith is ill and Smith doesn’t smoke.”

Given  this  sense  of  the  word  “syntax”,  if  some  syntax-driven  entity  accepts  each  of 
“Smith is ill” and “Smith doesn’t smoke”, it is just as likely to transition to (^) as it is to 
transition to (^^). But this clearly doesn’t correspond to the transitions that a rational 
person would make. So the linguist’s definition of “syntax” fails to validate the idea that 
thinking consists in syntax-driven operations.
According to the mathematical logician, (^) and (^^) do have different syntactic 
structures. Indeed, from the mathematical logician’s viewpoint, the “syntax” of a sen-
tence is by definition identical with its logical form. So it would seem that this disam-
biguation of the term “syntax” would validate Fodor’s analysis.
But this is not so. Relative to this reading of the term “syntax”, syntax tracks logical 
form only if the language in question satisfies conditions that would make that lan-
guage useless in the way of mediating rational thought. In that sense of the word “syn-
tax”, an utterance of “that [accompanied by an ostension of Smith] is identical with 
that [accompanied by an ostension of Jones]” has the same syntax as an utterance of 
“that [accompanied by an ostension of Smith] is identical with that [accompanied by 
another ostension of Smith].” So a purely syntax-driven entity wouldn’t be capable of 
registering the profound logical differences between these two utterances. Since it is 
obvious that human beings can do so, it follows that, in this sense of the word “syntax”, 
we aren’t syntax-driven entities (Kuczynski 2006b).
What we just said about “that” is true of “here”, “now”, “this”, “over there”, and any 
other context-sensitive expression. Syntax can be coordinated with logical form only 
where there is no context-sensitivity. So supposing that we think in a language whose 	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


syntactic structures are coordinated with their logical forms, it follows that those sen-
tences have no context-sensitive component and, consequently, that one isn’t capable of 
thinking things like it is now 3:00 p.m. or that guy is Jones. Since we obviously do have 
such thoughts, our thoughts are not mediated by a language of the kind just described.


Syntax as morphology

Sometimes when Fodor talks about sentential “form”, he is referring to the property of 
having a certain shape. He is referring to form in a purely geometrical sense (Fodor 
1987: 18–20).
But this disambiguation of the word “form” doesn’t validate the contention that 
thought  is  syntax-driven  or,  therefore,  that  it  is  meaningfully  described  as 
computational. Syntax is not morphology. Syntax doesn’t supervene on morphology. 
Syntax is no more capable than semantics of being coordinated with morphology. (We 
will argue for these claims in Chapter 14.) So in direct opposition to what Fodor holds, 
thought is not syntax-driven, and is therefore not computational, to the extent that it 
is morphology-driven.
To be sure, there is a long tradition of identifying syntax with morphology. But 
that tradition is mistaken, and it involves erroneous views as to the meanings of ex-
pressions such as “syntax”, “algorithm”, “mechanical procedure”, and “formal truth.” It 
might be appropriate to outline what we will say in defense of these claims. Given two 
sentence-tokens that have the same syntax, there is no limit to how different they can 
be in respect of morphology. And given two sentence-tokens that have the same mor-
phology, there is no limit to how different they can be in respect of syntax. So syntax 
isn’t  morphology,  and  it  isn’t  realized  by  morphology.  It  is  true  that,  within  narrow 
contexts, a “morphological characterization” of syntax is possible, making it appear as 
though morphology-driven processes are syntax-driven. But this appearance is mis-
leading. To say that there is a “morphological characterization” syntax is to say that 
there is a function that assigns syntactic structures to symbol-tokens on the basis of 
their shapes. Given this, it is clear why, even in a context where a morphological char-
acterization of syntax is possible, no process can possibly be syntax-driven in virtue of 
its being morphology-driven. Suppose that, in possible world W, all round wheels are 
red and all square wheels are green. In W, a vehicle with red wheels would ceteris pari-
bus function better than a vehicle with green wheels; and we could say that, in W, there 
is a “chromatic characterization” of what it is to be a good wheel. But the red wheels 
aren’t good because they are red – they are good because they are round. Similarly even 
if all and only those expressions having a certain shape have a certain syntax, they don’t 
have  that  shape because  they  have  that  syntax.  A  corollary  is  that,  even  in  contexts 
where morphology tracks syntax, it doesn’t do so because morphology is (or realizes) 
syntax.  Thus,  morphology-driven  processes  are  no  more  syntax-driven  than,  in  W, 
instances of successful transportation are color-driven. Chapter 1.  Basic concepts 


The idea that formal (morphology-driven) processes are also formal (syntax-driv-
en) involves a failure to see that the term “form” is ambiguous between two totally dif-
ferent meanings. The terms “mechanical procedure”, “algorithm”, and “formal truth” are 
comparably ambiguous and are used in a comparably equivocal manner by CTM. Once 
these equivocations are exposed, that doctrine loses its intuitive appeal and the argu-
ments for it crumble.


The root-problem with CTM and content-externalism

But there is a problem with CTM, and also with content-externalism, more fundamen-
tal  than  any  thus  far  mentioned.  It  is  states  of  affairs,  not  objects,  that  make  things 
happen. It is not the rock that breaks the window – it is the rock’s colliding with the 
window. In light of this point, suppose  that brain-state B realizes a condition of believ-
ing that Socrates was bald. There is no doubt that B has causal properties: it has a cer-
tain shape and a certain mass; it consists of particles with certain charges; and so forth. 
But , for the reasons given earlier, B’s encoding the proposition that Socrates was bald 
is causally inert, at least so far as content is to be understood along externalist lines, 
and B’s having that content thus becomes as explanatorily idle  as its having the prop-
erty of being a thing x such that x is either a circle or not a circle (Jackson and Pettit 
2004: 46–48, Kuczynski 2006c).
It  follows  that  content-externalism  threatens  the  very existence of  mental  content. 
Where the occupants of the spatiotemporal are concerned, existence and causal potency are 
indistinguishable. Fodor (1968) himself makes this point very clearly,15 and so does Jaegwon 
Kim (1993: 348). A state of affairs that has no causal powers is no state of affairs at all. Since 
content-externalism strips mental content of causal powers, it denies its existence.
John McDowell argues that content-externalism is compatible with the causal ef-
ficacy of the mental.16 But McDowell’s argument is a straightforward non-starter, as we 
will see in a moment.
Fodor sees clearly that, if content-externalism is right, no brain-state has causal 
powers in virtue of its representational properties; i.e. he sees that content-externalism 
strips content of causal efficacy. (That is why, in his view, it is the “syntactic structures” 
of brain-states, not their semantic (representational) properties, that do all the causal 
work.) But Fodor seems not to see that this jeopardizes the very existence of represen-
tational, and therefore mental, properties.
Like McDowell, Frank Jackson and Philip Pettit hold that content-externalism is 
consistent with the causal potency of the mental (Jackson and Pettit 2004–2004c). But 
their argument is very different from McDowell’s, and has considerably more merit. 

15.  Of course, spatiotemporal points and lines, and so forth, lack causal powers. But they are 
not occupants of space-time. Rather, they are sets of space-time coordinates.

16.  See McDowell’s commentary in Evans (1982: 203-204).	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


Their argument is based on a distinction between what they call “program-causality” 
and “efficient-causality.” They argue that content-externalism allows representational 
states of affairs (e.g. a brain-state’s being a belief that Plato was wise) to be program-
causes, even though it doesn’t allow them to be efficient-causes.
I believe that the Jackson-Pettit analysis of causality is accurate and that the dis-
tinction  between  program-causality  and  efficient-causality  is  of  the  highest  impor-
tance. But their worthy analysis of causality does not show that content-externalism is 
compatible  with  the  presumption  representational  states  of  affairs  have any causal 
properties: it no more allows mental states to be program-causes than it allows them to 
be efficient causes. This will be shown in Chapter 12.


Thee key distinctions

In this work, it will be argued that, so far as content-externalism appears plausible, that 
is because we are failing to make the following three distinctions:

  (1)  The  distinction  between  what  is  literally  meant  by  our  expressions  and  the 
  information  that  is  imparted  to  us in  the  process  of  computing  their  literal 
  meanings.

  (2)  The distinction between content and truth-maker.

  (3)  The distinction between perceptual and meta-perceptual data (between what 
  is encoded in our perceptions, taken by themselves, and what we infer from 
  our perceptions).

Since much of Part I will be spent delineating (1)-(3), I will now only give an outline of 
what they mean. For the sake of argument, suppose that, as Kaplan (1989) holds, de-
monstrative expressions are “directly referential.” In that case, the proposition literally 
meant by a token of:

  (A)  “that  overbearing  and  generally  unsavory  man  standing  over  there  next  to 
  that atrocious painting is a professor of anthropology”

is simply:

  (B)  x is a professor of anthropology,

for some value of x. But obviously what is communicated by a token of (A) will not be 
so threadbare. What is communicated is (inter alia) that somebody is overbearing and 
generally unsavory and is also standing next to some atrocious painting. Thus, what is 
communicated by a token of (A) will involve concepts like painting, overbearing, unsa-
vory that are quite absent from (B). How is this to be reconciled with Kaplan’s thesis 
that (B) is the literal meaning of (A)? Chapter 1.  Basic concepts 


There is no problem. We need only take into account the fact that people typically 
understand the expressions that they encounter on the basis of their knowledge of the 
semantic rules that assign them meaning. The semantic rule for the demonstrative ex-
pression “that overbearing and generally unsavory man standing over there next to 
that atrocious painting” is:

  (C)  For any context C, and any predicate phi, if somebody x in C is uniquely a 
  salient overbearing and generally unsavory man standing next to a uniquely 
  salient painting, then a token in C of Fthat overbearing and generally unsa-
  vory man standing over there next to that atrocious painting has phiG means: 
  x has phi.

The rule for (A) specifically is:

  (D)  For any context C, if somebody x in C is uniquely a salient overbearing and 
  generally unsavory man standing next to a uniquely salient painting, then a 
  token in C of “that overbearing and generally unsavory man standing over 
  there next to that atrocious painting is a professor of anthropology” means: x 
  is a professor of anthropology.

When one hears a token of (A), one has to work through (D). Anyone who knows (D) 
will know that an utterance of (A) will not be true unless, in the context of utterance, 
somebody x is a uniquely salient overbearing and generally unsavory man standing 
next to a uniquely salient atrocious painting and, moreover, x is a professor of anthro-
pology. So even though what a token of (A) literally means is (B), and thus doesn’t in-
volve the concepts of being unsavory or overbearing, what such a token communicates 
to someone does concern these very concepts. Because of the information that one 
must work through in order to assign the right proposition to a token of (A), what such 
a token communicates is very different from what it literally means.
I will refer to information conveyed in this way as “pre-semantic implicature.” We 
will find that what we just said about tokens of (A) is true, to some degree or other, of 
all sentences. In connection with this, we will find that pre-semantic implicatures are 
exponentially more powerful than the post-semantic implicatures studied by Grice.
Let us now briefly say what is meant by (2) and (3). Consider the sentence:

  (S)  “Somebody invented bifocals.”

This sentence is true because Benjamin Franklin invented bifocals. So Franklin’s in-
venting bifocals is the truth-maker of (S). But the meaning of (S) obviously isn’t: Frank-
lin invented bifocals. After all, even though it is false, “somebody invented bifocals, but 
Franklin did not do so” is not self-contradictory.17 What we just said about sentences is 
true of perceptions and thoughts. When I look at an ice-cube, what makes my percep-
tion veridical is that there are various HO-molecules in a certain configuration in a 
                          2

17.  I am borrowing an argument given by Russell (1919: 165).	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


certain region of space-time. So the truth-maker of my perception is given by some 
proposition having the form: in region R, there are various molecules consisting of hy-
drogen and oxygen atoms, and those molecules are interrelated in such and such a man-
ner. But what my perception tells me isn’t given by such a proposition. So the content of 
my perception doesn’t involve the concepts molecule, oxygen, or hydrogen. 
Distinction  (3)  is  easily  understood  in  terms  of  these  points.  Given  my  sense-
perception, along with my knowledge of chemistry, I can infer that there are various 
molecules of a certain kind in front of me. But, as we just saw, the concepts molecule, 
oxygen, and so on, are no part of the content of my perception. We mustn’t confuse 
what, given one’s background knowledge, one can infer from a given perception with 
what  that  perception  itself  tells  one;  we  mustn’t  confuse  perceptual  data  with  post-
perceptual meta-data.
In his landmark work the Varieties of Reference, Gareth Evans put forth deep and 
original  analyses  of  conception,  semantic  content,  and  the  relationship  between  the 
two. I believe that, by combining Evans’ insights with (1)-(3), we are able to produce 
models of both semantic and cognitive content that satisfy two important requirements. 
First, those models enable us to hold onto all of the pre-theoretic intuitions that are 
prima facie inconsistent with consent-externalism. For example, those models enable 
us  to  hold  onto  our  intuition  that,  in  at  least  some  cases,  our  beliefs  about  our  own 
minds are characterized by a kind of certainty and incorrigibility that could not possi-
bly characterize our beliefs about the external world. (As we will see, content-external-
ism cannot accommodate this datum.) Second, those models enable us to account for 
the important fact, stressed (but misunderstood) by content-externalism, that our con-
cepts of spatiotemporal objects have an ineliminable causal component.
 Evans’ notion of a “cognitive map” is going to play a crucial role in our analysis of 
conception. We will also find important applications for Evans’ distinction between 
“conceptual” and “non-conceptual” content. Evans’ idea of a de re sense (Evans 1985: 
Chapter 10) – which came to have an important place in McDowell’s work (McDowell 
1998: Chapters 10–13) – will also be discussed at length. We will find that it is an inco-
herent synthesis of a number of deep insights.


McDowell on mental causality

We will end this chapter by substantiating a point made earlier. As previously noted, 
John  McDowell  holds  that  content-externalism is  consistent  with  the  fact  that  the 
mental is causally efficacious. McDowell’s position can be understood in terms of the 
following story. Let w* be a world that is just like ours except that w* contains XYZ, 
instead of HO. Let Smith be a person in our world, and let Smith* be Smith’s doppel-
    2
ganger in w*. In our world, Smith’s perception of a certain glass of HO causes him to 
                                                  2
reach for that glass. In w*, Smith*’s perception of a certain glass of XYZ causes him to 
reach for that glass. Chapter 1.  Basic concepts 


Here is what McDowell says about this situation. Smith’s perception has a different 
content from Smith*’s. There is some glass x such that the content of Smith’s perception 
does, whereas the content of Smith*’s perception does not, have x has a constituent. And 
there is some glass y such that the content of Smith*’s perception does, whereas the con-
tent of Smith’s perception does not, have y has a constituent. Further, there is some natu-
ral kind N – namely, HO – such that the content of Smith’s perception does, whereas the 
            2
content of Smith*’s perception does not, have N has a constituent. Finally, there is some 
natural  kind  N*  –  namely,  XYZ  –  such  that  the  content  of  Smith*’s  perception  does, 
whereas the content of Smith*’s perception does not, have N* has a constituent.
(Before we continue, we should note that we’ve already seen some reason to believe 
that the contentions just stated are wrong, as they involve a conception of perceptual 
content that is rendered incoherent by its failure to recognize some key distinctions – 
in particular, the distinction between data and meta-data, between literal and cogni-
tive  meaning,  and  between  content  and  truth-maker.  But  let  us  leave  that  aside  for 
now, and continue with our exposition of McDowell’s analysis.)
According to McDowell, it is obvious why content-externalism is consistent with 
the fact that the mental has causal powers. In virtue of having glass x, as opposed to 
glass y, for its content, Smith’s perception has causal powers not had by Smith*’s per-
ception. Smith’s perception does, whereas Smith*’s perception does not, cause some-
body to reach for glass x. And in virtue of having glass y, as opposed to glass x, for its 
content, Smith*’s perception has causal powers not had by Smith’s perception. Smith*’s 
perception does, whereas Smith’s perception does not, cause somebody to reach for 
glass y. Similar remarks explain why, in virtue of having HO, as opposed to XYZ, for 
                                          2
part of their contents, Smith’s post-perceptual mental states (e.g. his intention not to 
make loud slurping noises when drinking the contents of the glass in question) have 
causal powers not had by Smith*’s post-perceptual mental states. 
But contrary to what McDowell says, the scenario just described is consistent with 
the view that the causal properties of Smith’s perception and post-perceptual states are 
identical with those of Smith*’s corresponding states. Magnet A is attracted to magnet 
B. Magnet B happens to be green. But ceteris paribus if B were red or purple or orange, 
A would still be attracted to it. It is true that, because B is green, A is behaving in a way 
that it would not behave if B were some other color. (A is drawn towards a green mag-
net, instead of a red one.) But it doesn’t follow that B’s color has anything to do with A’s 
behavior. A’s behavior wouldn’t ceteris paribus be different in a world where B were 
some other color. In other words, A’s behavior wouldn’t be relevantly different. This 
shows that B’s being green has no effect on what A does, notwithstanding that, because 
B  is  green,  A  is  doing  something  (namely  moving  towards  a  green  magnet)  that  it 
wouldn’t be doing if B were red.
Similarly, given only that Smith’s behavior is caused by HO, as opposed XYZ, it 
                                            2
doesn’t follow that the glass’s containing HO has any effect on Smith’s behavior and 
                            2
mentation that the glass’s containing XYZ would not have had.	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


And it is easily shown that, indeed, Smith and Smith* coincide in respect of their 
causal properties. Let C…C be Smith’s causal properties. Given that Smith has those 
              1n
properties, it follows that he will act just like Smith* if he is embedded in a situation 
exactly like the one in which, in the scenario described a moment ago, Smith* is em-
bedded. The same thing mutatis mutandis is true of Smith*. It would therefore be ab-
surd to conclude from the differences between Smith’s behavior and Smith*’s behavior 
(viz. that Smith reaches for a glass of HO whereas Smith* reaches for a glass of XYZ) 
                          2
that they have different causal powers.
This argument is basically identical with one given by Fodor (1987b). Let S be the 
situation described by McDowell. Now suppose that Smith and Smith* switch places, 
but that otherwise w* and our world remain the same. Let S* be the situation that results. 
Obviously Smith and Smith* are going to act differently given that they are confronted 
with numerically different objects. But that doesn’t mean that one of them is causally 
different from the other. Two individuals are causally different just in case, were they to 
switch places but all other factors were held constant, they would act differently from how 
they in fact act. Smith and Smith* don’t satisfy this condition. Nor, for exactly similar 
reasons, do any two individuals who differ only in respect of how their current condi-
tions originated. It follows that mental content is without causal powers to the extent 
that it is to be understood along content-externalist lines. And from this it follows that 
content-externalism strips mental content of causal potency and thus of existence itself.
An object’s causal properties are to be understood not strictly in terms of its behav-
ior in actual circumstances, but in terms of those aspects of its behavior that are invari-
ant with respect to counterfactual changes in those circumstances (Fodor 1987b). Mc-
Dowell’s argument involves a failure to appreciate this fact, and that is why it crumbles.
McDowell’s analysis also involves a failure to distinguish causal properties from 
instances of such properties. On Monday, Jones beats Aaronson in a boxing match. On 
Tuesday, Jones beats Brown in a boxing match. Jones uses the very same boxing tech-
niques  on  both  days.  So  Jones’  boxing  capabilities  are  instantiated  on  Monday,  and 
those same capabilities are instantiated again on Tuesday. Of course, what Jones is do-
ing on Monday is different from what he is doing on Tuesday: on Monday, he is defeat-
ing Aaronson; on Tuesday he is defeating Brown. But this is because some one set of 
causal powers is instantiated in two different contexts.
Smith’s causal properties are instantiated in one context, and Smith*’s causal prop-
erties are instantiated in a qualitatively different context. But it obviously doesn’t follow 
that the properties being instantiated are different. Each of Smith and Smith* is behav-
ing in exactly the way in which, were the two to switch places (but everything else was 
held constant), the other would behave. This is consistent with their being identical in 
respect of their causal properties. So if, as the content-externalist alleges, Smith and 
Smith* differ in respect of the contents of their mental states, those differences have no 
causal  significance.  Once  causal  properties  are  distinguished  from  their  instances, 
there ceases to be any temptation to say that Smith and Smith* are causally different. Chapter 1.  Basic concepts 


Content-externalism is the view two individuals may have different mental con-
tents even though, leaving aside facts about the origins of their conditions, those indi-
viduals are qualitatively identical. But we’ve seen that those alleged differences in men-
tal content are causally inert. In other words, there are no differences in causal properties 
without differences in intrinsic properties. (How a given set of causal properties is ex-
pressed is a function of what is in the environment of the individual whose properties 
we are considering. But that is irrelevant, as we have seen.) Mental properties are not 
Cambridge properties; instance of them are not causally inert or explanatorily trivial. If 
they are anything at all, mental properties are causal properties. So a difference in men-
tal properties must mean a difference in causal properties.18 If Smith’s mental content 
really is different from Smith*’s, then Smith’s thoughts must be causally different from 
Smith*’s. The supposed differences between Smith and Smith* turn out to be causally 
inert, and this means that those differences don’t exist.
Let us sum up. Differences in mental content are causally inert, and therefore non-
existent,  so  far  as  they  are  to  be  understood  along  externalist  lines.  A  corollary  is  that 
content-externalism is inconsistent not only with the causal potency of the mental, but 
with its very existence.
Stephen Stich (1978, 1983) sees that content-externalism is inconsistent with the 
presumption  that  instances  of  representational  properties  can  do  any  causal  or  ex-
planatory work. (As Stich puts it, content-externalism is inconsistent with the “auton-
omy of the mental.”) At the same time, Stich takes it for granted that content-external-
ism  provides  a  correct  analysis  of  the  concept  of  representational  content.  On  this 
basis, Stich holds that we must reject the idea that our mental states are to be under-
stood in terms of the concept of representation or in terms of any concepts that involve 
that concept (e.g. the concepts of belief, hope, doubt, desire, and so on). Stich con-
cludes that “folk-psychology” in its entirety must be thrown out and replaced with an 
entirely different kind of psychology.
Stich is right to say that content-externalism strips representational properties of 
any causal or explanatory significance. But Stich is guilty of a major non-sequitur in 
inferring from this that folk-psychology must be jettisoned. For, as we will see, folk-
psychology is easily reconciled with content-internalism and thus with the fact that 
psychological properties are causally and explanatorily important.









18.  See Kim (1993: 339-367).  chapter 2 


                                                          1
  The predicative nature of sense-perception



Let us begin by considering a statement made by Jon Barwise (1989: 26):

  When I look around I cannot see a single thing-it-itself, some sort of ideal physi-
  cal object stripped of its properties and its relations with other objects. What I do 
  see is a scene, a complex of objects having properties and bearing relations to one 
  another. The properties and relations are every bit as important to what I see as the 
  idealized thing-in-itself. In fact, what really counts is the whole complex of ob-
      jects-having-properties-and-bearing-relations which constitutes the scene.

One sees states of affairs. One does not see objects simpliciter. This must be understood 
aright. Obviously one does see objects. That is a datum. But one sees objects by seeing 
the states of affairs in which they are embedded. You don’t just see Fido. You see an 
object with certain properties (e.g. it has beige fur and a certain number of legs) in a 
certain location. That location is, in its turn, visually represented to you in relational 
terms. Your seeing a given place consists in your being given visual information that 
describes  that  place.  Your  seeing  the  place  occupied  by  Fido  consists  in  your  being 
visually told that there is a place L such that Toonces the cat is next to L and such that 
L is underneath the piano, and so on.
Everything that we just said about Fido is true mutatis mutandis of each of the 
objects  in  terms  of  which  Fido  is  visually  represented  to  you.  One  doesn’t  just  see 
Toonces.  One  sees an object  with  certain  morphological,  chromatic,  and  kinematic 
properties. One sees a four-legged creature with black with white spots, moving about 
in such and such a manner.
Before drawing what I believe to be some of the consequences of these points, I 
would like to make a distinction. Barwise rightly says that you don’t ever see a bare 
thing-in-itself: whenever something is given to you in visual perception, it is given to 
you as having various properties and standing various relations vis-à-vis other objects. 
But there are two ways to interpret this point. We can take it to mean:

  (*)  You see a bare thing-in-itself plus various instances of various properties and 
  relations.




1.  Stroud (2001) describes sense-perception as “predicative.” I am using this term in the same 
way as Stroud.   	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


Or we can take it to mean:

  (**)  You don’t see a bare thing-in-itself at all. Your seeing a given thing consists in 
  instances of various properties and relations being given to you. It does not 
  consist in your seeing some bare thing which is, so to speak, surrounded by 
  various instances of properties and relations.

(*) and (**) are inconsistent with each other. If there is any possibility of a thing’s being 
visually represented to one as a bare particular – even as a bare particular that happens 
to be surrounded, so to speak, by various instances of properties and relations – then 
it is ipso facto false to say that things must be represented as being propertied and inter-
related. So if (*) is right, then (**) is false. Given that sense-perception is necessarily 
predicational, it follows that there is no prospect of a thing’s being visually represented 
as a bare particular and that (**) is therefore the right thesis. In perception you are not 
given  a  bare  particular  alongside instances  of  properties  and  relations.  You  are  just 
given those instances.
Sense-perceived particulars are represented to you in terms of instances of proper-
ties and relations. When you see Fido, the content of your visual perception (so far as 
it can be put into words) is not given by a noun (“Fido”), but by a sentence (“at this 
point in time there is, in a certain place, a creature that has four legs and beige fur…”). 
For you to see Fido is for Fido to be described to you. Perception is description.
Here an anticipation is in order. Later we will find that the content of a perception 
is not a proposition, even though the content of any perception can, at least up to a 
point,  be  given  by  a  proposition.  But  this  doesn’t  affect  the  substance  of  our  points 
about perception. The information encoded in any sense-perception is descriptive and 
existential in nature. The content of that perception is given by information that af-
firms  the  existence  of  situations  satisfying  certain  conditions  and  that,  in  so  doing, 
describes objects. A consequence is that, so far as that information can be verbalized, 
it  is  given  by  existence-claims  (“there  is  a  four-legged  animal  with  beige  fur,  sitting 
underneath the piano…”), and not by mere nouns (“Fido”). We will often refer speak 
of  this  information  as  consisting  in  “propositions.”  But  this  is  simply  an  expository 
device – the word “information” can always be substituted for “proposition”, provided 
the needed grammatical changes are made – and it mustn’t be supposed that we are 
taking it for granted that perceptual content is propositional in nature. On the con-
trary, we will later go to great lengths (Chapters 22–23) to show that it is not, this being 
one of the reasons why SCT crumbles.


Some consequences of the predicative nature of sense-perception

We’ve seen that perception is description – that a perception of an object gives one a 
description of that object. This fact, taken in conjunction with a platitude of semantics, 
has far reaching consequences as to the nature of representational content. That se- Chapter 2.  The predicative nature of sense-perception 


mantic platitude is this: expression-types must be distinguished from expression-to-
kens. The expression-type “I” doesn’t refer to anyone; but any given token of it does 
refer (to the person who produced it). The expression-type “I am tired” isn’t true or 
false, but particular tokens of it are.
Given these points, consider the following semantic rule:

  (S)  Tokens of “Smith” refer directly to Smith. In other words, there is some object 
  x such that x is identical with Smith and such that, in virtue of having the form  
  FSmith has phiG, a sentence-token is true exactly if x has phi, it being irrelevant 
  what other properties x might have.

At the moment, we may set aside the question whether natural languages in fact contain se-
mantic rules like (S). (Our discussion of (S) will itself help us settle that empirical question.)
The import of (S) is this. Tokens of “Smith” are not “connotative” or “descriptive.” For 
a token of “Smith is tall” to be true, it is necessary and sufficient that Smith be tall; and it 
is irrelevant whether Smith has any properties other than that of being tall. Put more 
formally, there is some individual x such that x is identical with Smith and such that a 
token t of “Smith is tall” is true iff x is tall, it being entirely irrelevant what other proper-
ties x may or may not have. So, for some x such that x is identical with Smith, a token of 
“Smith is tall” has for its literal meaning the singular proposition x is tall.
But we must distinguish (S) itself from one’s knowledge of (S). First of all, (S) is a 
primitive  semantic  rule,  i.e.  it  is  a  rule  that  assigns  meaning  to  an  expression  that 
doesn’t decompose into other expressions. It must therefore be assumed that people 
know (S). There can be unknown derived semantic rules. There are semantic rules of 
English that assign meaning to sentences that are 27,000 words long. Nobody knows 
those rules. But matters are different with primitive semantic rules. If nobody knew 
that “red” meant red, then “red” wouldn’t mean red. An unknown primitive semantic 
rule is no semantic rule. (Astonishingly, some philosophers, e.g. Soames 2001, have 
denied that any semantic rules, whether primitive or derived, need be known. In the 
course of this book, we will see many reasons to reject this view, and we will identify 
the  fallacies  in  the  arguments  of  those  who  have  thought  otherwise.)  No  unknown 
semantic rule can assign meaning to any sentence that people understand or to any 
part of any sentence that people understand. People therefore know (S), given that they 
understand sentences of the form form F…Smith…G Considering how fundamental a 
knowledge of semantic rules is to communication, it is not unreasonable to expect that 
a high-resolution understanding of this knowledge will shed light on the relationship 
between literal and communicated meaning – between semantics and pragmatics.
Such high-resolution knowledge is not hard to obtain. We need only answer a very 
basic question: How does one learn (S)? There are a few of different ways, and we will 
soon discuss all of them. But right now we may focus on the most fundamental one.	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


Smith is right in front of you. Your companion points to him and says “that guy – 
the one picking up a tennisball – is Smith.” Here there is some x such that the semantic 
rule that you are learning is simply this:

  “Smith” refers to x [or, more precisely, tokens of “Smith” refer to x].

Now that you know (S), you can understand and meaningfully produce sentences of 
the form F…Smith…G Your knowledge of (S) is thus implicated in your being able to 
understand and intelligently use expressions of that form. (By an “intelligent” use of an 
expression I mean one that embodies an understanding of what it means. People do, 
whereas parrots do not, intelligently say “it’s cold out today.”)
But here we come to a crucial point. In order for you to know (S), you have to be 
able to affix that label to the right person, and you thus have to know who Smith is, at 
least on one delineation of that expression. Of course, you do know who Smith is, and 
you do know whom the word “Smith” labels. You know this on the basis of the osten-
sive  definition  discussed  in  the  last  paragraph:  you  saw  Smith,  and  were  told  that 
“Smith” labels him. But what was the content of the visual experience through which 
Smith was represented to you?
For reasons that we discussed a little while ago, you didn’t just see Smith. You didn’t 
see a “bare thing in itself.” Of course, you did see Smith. But what was visually repre-
sented to you, in your seeing him, was not a bare thing-in-itself, but was rather an object 
having a certain morphology (e.g. it had a certain number of limbs), certain kinematic 
properties (e.g. it was picking up a tennis-ball), certain spatiotemporal properties (e.g. it 
was next to a certain water-fountain near a certain tennis-court in a certain park…).
So  even  though  (S)  itself  is  descriptively  threadbare,  the  information  through 
which (S) was made known to you was replete with descriptive content. Consequently, 
you  must  access  (S) through such  information.  Semantically,  “Smith”  simply  labels 
Smith.  But  you grasp (S)  by  having  a  mental  state  whose  content  is  given  by  some 
proposition of the form:

  (#)  there is an individual x such that x had such and such morphological, spatio-
  temporal, kinematic…properties, and such that I saw x on such and such an 
  occasion, and such that “Smith” labels x.

As (#) indicates, you know that, for some x, “Smith” is a mere label of x. But given the 
truth of (#), it follows that there is no x such that what a token of “Smith is tall” conveys 
to you is confined to the bare proposition x is tall. What follows, in fact, is that what 
such a token conveys to you has the form:

  (##)  there is an individual x such that x had such and such morphological, spatio-
  temporal, kinematic…properties, and such that I saw x on such and such oc-
  casion, and such that “Smith” labels x; moreover, x is tall.

Let us put all these points together. For some individual x, what is literally meant by a 
token of “Smith is tall” is the bare proposition x is tall. But because of how you up- Chapter 2.  The predicative nature of sense-perception 


loaded the relevant semantic rules, what such a token conveys to you is at least ap-
proximately like (##).


Why this analysis is consistent with our modal intuitions

For the sake of argument, suppose that, as I am proposing, (##) is what is communicated 
to you by tokens of “Smith is tall.” That is consistent with the fact that you know that 
Smith – the person who in fact is named “Smith” – might not have had the properties in 
terms of which he was initially given to you and in terms of which you therefore think 
about him. He might not have been picking up a tennis ball at the relevant time. He 
might never have been in that park. He might not have been named “Smith.”
For some object x, both (#) and (##) are consistent with the fact that “Smith” is a 
mere label of x. Notice that, in both cases, the occurrence of the word “labels” is well to 
the  right  of  all  the  descriptive  information  regarding  the  circumstances  relating  to 
your first seeing Smith. Those propositions are to the effect that there is some x who in 
fact has these various properties, and that “Smith” labels x. Both of those propositions 
are consistent with the idea that x – the one who in fact is picking up a certain tennis 
ball in a certain park – might never have picked up a tennis ball or been to a park in his 
life. Further, your knowing this last fact is consistent with the fact that you access (S) 
through (#) and also with the fact that you access the meaning of a token of “Smith is 
tall” through (##).


Mental content not object-involving

Let us extend these points by telling a story. In terms of appearance, Mary and Twin-
Mary are completely indistinguishable. (Here we are supposing that Mary and Twin-
Mary are actual twins, and thus live in the same world.) Thus, to know that you were 
in the presence of the one as opposed to the other, you would either have to converse 
with her or study her behavior for an extended period of time. You are acquainted with 
both of them and thus have concepts of both. One day you see someone whom you 
know to be either Mary or Twin-Mary. There is, of course, nothing in your visual per-
ception that tells you whether you are seeing the one as opposed to the other. But, let 
us suppose, the person you are seeing is in fact Mar y.
Here  the  content-externalist  takes  a  bold  position.  He  says  that  Mary  herself  is 
part of the content of your visual perception (Burge 1982, McGinn 1986, Kaplan 1989). 
Given  this,  suppose  that,  holding  everything  else  constant,  it  had  been Twin-Mary 
whom  you  were  seeing.  In  that  case,  says  the  content-externalist,  your  perception 
would have had a different content.	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


Let us begin by articulating the reasoning behind the content-externalist’s posi-
tion. Suppose that you see Mary (as opposed to Twin-Mary) sipping tea from a porce-
lain cup. Let V be this perception. V is veridical exactly if Mary has the relevant prop-
erties (i.e. exactly if Mary is sipping tea from a porcelain teacup …), it being irrelevant 
what Twin-Mary or any other Mary look-alike is doing. Since pieces of information are 
individuated by their truth-conditions, it follows that any visual perception with dif-
ferent truth-conditions wouldn’t encode the same information as V, even if the two 
sense-perceptions were otherwise identical. It also follows that there is no perception 
with the same content as V in any possible world where Mary doesn’t exist. Since men-
tal  states  are  individuated  by  their  contents,  it  follows  that  V  exists  only  in  worlds 
where Mary exists. Thus, the relationship between V and Mary is constitutive. Mary is 
a constituent of V’s content and her existence is therefore metaphysically necessary for 
V’s existence. V is no more capable of existing in a Mary-free world than water can 
exist in an oxygen-free world. This suggests that Mary herself – the flesh and blood 
object, not some Fregean concept thereof – is a component not only of the content of 
your visual experience, but of that experience itself. Given obvious analogues of this 
argument, it follows that anything of which one has a sense-perception is a constituent 
of the content of that perception and, indeed, of that perception itself. If we accept any 
form  of  content-externalism,  McGinn  (1986:  15)  turns  out  to  be  entirely  right:  the 
mind is spread out all over the cosmos, the reason being that everything that you see 
– every comet, every star – is a veritable constituent of your mind.
Here is what I will now argue. Mary is not a constituent of V’s content. Mary is 
described by that content, but she is not a component of it. V does exist in worlds where 
Mary does not. V occupies, at most, a sub-region of the region of space-time occupied 
by your cranium.
Etymologically, “content” means “contained in.” The word “content” is still used in 
this sense: “the contents of your carry-on bag must be securely in place before take-
off.” But, of course, visual experiences and beliefs do not contain anything, at least not 
in the sense in which your wallet contains your cash. As it is used by philosophers, the 
word “content” is a technical term.
Let us start with a platitude that will help fix the meaning of that term. Whatever the 
word  “content”  means  in  this  context,  the  content  of  an  experience  cannot  be  distin-
guished from what it tells you. (Of course, in this context, the word “tell” isn’t meant to 
have any linguistic overtones.) If your visual experience doesn’t tell you that p, then p isn’t 
part of the content of that experience. If your visual experience doesn’t tell you that Mary 
has phi, for some property phi, then Mary is no part of the content of that experience.
A corollary is that if what your visual experience tells you is no less consistent with 
Twin-Mary’s having phi than it is with Mary’s having phi – if Mary can be replaced 
with any phenomenal impostor without altering what your visual experience tells you 
– then we cannot say that Mary is any more a part of the content of that experience 
than Twin-Mary or any other Mary-imposter. Chapter 2.  The predicative nature of sense-perception 


Given  only  these  points,  we  can  begin  to  see  cracks  in  the  content-externalist’s 
position. Once again, consider V (your visual perception of Mary sipping tea). By itself, 
does V tell you whether you are seeing Mary as opposed to Twin-Mary (or some other 
Mary-impostor)? No. V leaves that quite open, as a bit of fiction easily shows. While 
having V, you are told “you are seeing somebody who isn’t Mary but looks just like her.” 
You  say  in  response:  “given  only  what  my  current  visual  experience  is  telling  me,  I 
know that you are quite wrong.” Your response is a text-book case of fallacious reason-
ing. Given only what your eyes are telling you, you have no way of knowing the truth-
value of what you’ve just been told. Of course, you are in fact seeing Mary: she is the 
one off of whom the relevant light-rays – the ones causing your visual perceptions – are 
bouncing. But by itself V is quite silent as to whether you are seeing Mary or Twin-
Mary or some other Mary look-alike.
For you to know whether you are seeing Mary, as opposed a Mary-imposter, you 
need to consult information additional to that given you by V itself. You need to con-
sider, for example, the fact that Twin-Mary hates tea and would never drink it; or the 
fact that Twin-Mary is now giving a lecture in Amsterdam (whereas you are now in 
Delaware); or the fact that Twin-Mary, unlike Mary, has a medical condition which 
renders her incapable of holding a teacup. So by itself your visual experience doesn’t 
tell you that it is specifically Mary that is in front of you drinking tea. What tells you 
this is your visual experience plus background knowledge of the kind just described.
Of course, given V, you will probably not consciously have to go through an elabo-
rate  string  of  inferences  to  know  that  you  are  seeing  Mary.  Maybe  that  background 
knowledge operates by way of Chomskyan subpersonal inferences (this is my own view). 
Maybe it does not (this is what McDowell (1998: Chapter 15), Searle (1994) and Evans 
(1985: Chapter 11) would say). What is certain is that, by itself, the information encoded 
in your perception is no less consistent with Twin-Mary’s being in front of you drinking 
tea than it is with Mary’s having those same properties. It wouldn’t be reasonable to deny 
that the relevant differential information must be found outside that perception.
The contrary position would telescope into your visual perception various pieces 
of information that obviously don’t belong there, e.g. your knowledge that Twin-Mary 
is now in Amsterdam. It is clearly more reasonable to say that the relevant differential 
information interacts with the information that is encoded in your perception than it 
is to say that it is itself a part of that information.
Before moving on, we should address one possible misgiving that might arise with 
regard to the argument just given. Sellars (1963) made a compelling case that knowl-
edge of background facts is needed assign a precise representational content to phe-
nomenology. Given only the purely phenomenological aspects of your sense-percep-
tion, you could be seeing a square or a diamond, a patch of green or a patch of red, a 
small nearby object or a large distant one. It is your background knowledge that as-
signs a determinate content to this phenomenology: you know that you are looking at 
the object from above, and not from an oblique angle – that is why you see it as a dia-
mond, and not as a square. (The same point mutatis mutandis explains why the object 	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


appears red, not green; small and nearby, not large and far off; and so on.)2 So it might 
seem that, contrary to what I just said, background knowledge is telescoped into per-


2.  As I said previously, I believe that Berkeley’s (1935) argument for this is in some ways supe-
rior to Sellars: it is more lucid and more general. See Kuczynski (2007c) for a discussion of this 
 I would also like to point out that, given Sellars’ insight, it immediately follows that a now 
extremely popular doctrine known as «intensionalism» is quite false. Intensionalism is the view 
that  two  experiences  cannot  differ  in  phenomenology  without  differing  in  representational 
content. This entails that phenomenal content is inherently and non-derivatively representatio-
nal. Thus, for any phenomenal state S, there is some representational content R such that S bears 
R regardless of what the relevant subject’s background knowledge is. So given, for example, the 
sensation mediating your perception of the stop-sign in front of you, the phenomenology of that 
sensation completely fixes what it tells you about the world (leaving aside the strictly post-per-
ceptual inferences that you can make on the basis of that perception).
 But this doctrine is plainly false. It is at least in part (though, to be sure, not entirely) be-
cause of your background knowledge that your current visual sensation tells you that there is a 
medium sized object (a post with a heptagonal sign attached to it) ten feet away from you as 
opposed to a mile-high object ten thousand feet away from you. In general, intensionalism is 
inconsistent with Sellars’ insight that the subject’s background knowledge obviously does deter-
mine what content, if any, is borne by a given bit of phenomenology. And that doctrine is no-
thing more than a recrudescence of the epistemological foundationalism that modern epistemo-
logy,  rightly  convinced  by  Sellars’  arguments,  has  rejected.  (Curiously,  many  contemporary 
epistemologists accept both intensionalism and Sellarsian anti-foundationalism.) 
 The  falsity  of  Fodor’s  conceptual  atomism  follows  from  that  of  intensionalism  and  also, 
therefore,  from  that  of  foundationalism.  There  is  no  denying  that  phenomenology does  have 
representational content. It is at least partly in virtue of the fact that I am having a visual sensa-
tion with a certain phenomenology that I see the apple as red. But, as we know from Sellars, that 
phenomenology bears that content only because it operates in concert with various other repre-
sentation-bearing mental entities. What we just said about that bit of phenomenology is true 
mutatis mutandis of any content-bearing bit of phenomenology. Thus, whole networks of repre-
sentations are needed to have, and thus to upload information from, any one perception. Our 
perceptions do not merely generate our post-perceptual knowledge: the former, and the bodies 
of knowledge implicated therein, are constitutively, and not merely causally, related to the bodies 
of knowledge that we develop in consequence of our perceptions. Therefore, post-perceptual 
knowledge  and  conception  partake  of  the  non-atomistic  character  of  perceptual  knowledge. 
Thus, since intensionalism is false, so is conceptual atomism. And since intensionalism is false, 
so is content-externalism, the reason being that, as we saw earlier, content-externalism is a form 
of conceptual atomism. 
 These  points  show  that  the  the  Fodor-Dretske  photograph-model  of  conception  is  false. 
(The term «photograph-model» is due to Evans 1982.) For x to see y, it is obviously necessary 
that light-rays reflected by y disturb x’s sensory surfaces in certain ways. But, given Sellars’ point, 
this is not sufficient: for x to have a content-bearing, or therefore perceptual, response to those 
disturbances, x’s knowledge of the conditions of perceptions, and therefore any concepts impli-
cated in that knowledge, must mediate between sensory input and representational output. This 
shows that, contrary to what Dretske (1982) and Fodor (1990, 1998) hold, the relation between 
the perceiver and the thing perceived is not comparable to the relation between a photograph  Chapter 2.  The predicative nature of sense-perception 


ceptual content – that, indeed, this is typically the case. If that is right, then the argu-
ment put forth in the previous paragraph implodes.
There is an obvious fallacy here. The kind of information of which Sellars is speak-
ing  is  confined  to  facts  about  the conditions  of  perception. The  fact  that  Twin-Mary 
takes a yearly trip to Amsterdam doesn’t fall into this category. Of course, Sellars’ in-
sight does show  that  the  information  encoded  in  a  perception  isn’t  neatly  separable 
from background information. But blurry though the line between the two may be, it 
is clear that facts about Twin-Mary’s travel-habits are well on the other side of it.3
Taken by itself, what does your visual perception tell you? What is given to you in 
that perception is that a person (or, at least, a person-shaped object) is sitting next to a 
cat (or at least a cat-shaped object) that is on a sofa that is a certain distance in front of 
you….So far as the content of your perception can be “propositionalized”, that content 
is existential: there is an object x of such and such a shape sitting next to an object y of 
thus and such a shape…Perceptual content is existential.
Here we must reaffirm a caveat that was stated earlier. To say that perceptual content 
is existential is not to say that perceptual content consists of propositions or any other 
para-sentential  (or  sentential)  entities.  Intuition  resists  the  idea  that  the  content  of  a 
perception can be exhausted by any series of propositions; and later we will find demon-
strative support for our intuitions here. But given only that visual content isn’t necessar-
ily propositional, it doesn’t follow that it isn’t existential. Plainly it is existential. For even 
if that content is not itself propositional, it obviously entails some proposition along the 
lines of: there is a man over there, next to a car that is near a tall building…


Content-externalism and the content-internal character of entailment

Consider a world W* satisfying the following conditions. W* is just like our world ex-
cept that,  at  the  relevant  time,  it  is  Twin-Mary,  and  not  Mary,  who  is  sitting  on  the 
couch in front of you sipping tea. Let V* be the visual experience that you have under 
those circumstances. Given only this much, it would seem arbitrary to say that V (as 
previously defined) and V* are numerically different visual experiences; for given only 
this much, it is perfectly possible that V* arises in the same way as V from the very same 
physiological processes, and that (leaving aside what the content-externalist says about 
those perceptions) both are qualitatively identical in all relevant respects. But the con-
tent-externalist is forced to say that V* is numerically different from V. After all, he says 
that V and V* have different contents, since the one does, while the other does not, have 
Mary as part of its content. So given the reasonable assumption that content-bearing 


and the thing photographed. Thus, photograph-model of perception is false, and so, therefore, is 
the photograph-model of conception.

3.  See Fodor (1983) for a classic discussion of the “modular” nature of sense-perception. 	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


entities are individuated by their contents, the content-externalist is compelled to adopt 
the dubious position that V and V* are numerically distinct.
It should be pointed out that no less an externalist than Tyler Burge (1982) insists 
that mental entities have their representational contents essentially and that it is there-
fore absurd to suppose that a perception could have had a content different from the 
one it actually has. On this matter, I am in complete agreement with Burge, and I will 
henceforth operate on the assumption that Burge is indeed right.
The content-externalist’s position is inconsistent with basic facts about what it is 
for one piece of information to entail another. The statement X and Y are the same in-
formation is equivalent with the statement for any piece of information Z, Z can be in-
ferred from X in manner M iff Z can be inferred from Y in manner M. V and V* satisfy 
this condition: nothing can rationally be inferred from the one perception unless (ce-
teris paribus) it can rationally be inferred from the other; and, in addition, nothing can 
be rationally inferred from the one perception in a given manner, i.e. by way of a cer-
tain series of deductions, unless (ceteris paribus) it can rationally be inferred from the 
other in the very same manner. 
Permit  me  to  elucidate  this  last  point.  The  proposition Frank  is  tall  is  different 
from the proposition Mary is short because there are propositions that can be inferred 
from the one that cannot be inferred from the other. In general, for P and P* to be dif-
ferent propositions, it is sufficient that there be some proposition P** that can be ind-
ferred from the one but not the other. But it is not necessary. The proposition 1+1=2 is 
distinct from the the proposition triangles have three sides, even though neither propo-
sition entails anything not also entailed by the other. But those propositions still differ 
in  respect  of  their  entailment-relations.  Given  any  proposition  P  that  is  implied  by 
both triangles have three sides and 1+1=2, the way that the one implies P is different 
from the way that the other does so. Supposing that one’s starting point is that 1+1=2, 
one need only apply the rule of existential generalization a single time to prove that, for 
some n, n+1=2. But that is not the case if one’s starting point is that triangles have three 
sides. So even though 1+1=2 and triangles have three sides coincide in respect of what 
they entail, they differ in respect of how they entail it, and they therefore differ in re-
spect of their entailment-relations, that being why they are numerically distinct propo-
sitions.  In  general,  propositions  differ  just  in  case  their  entailment-relations  differ. 
Given  obvious  extensions  of  the  argument  just  presented,  the  same  is  true  of  non-
propositional pieces of information, supposing that there are such things. (This topic 
will be revisited in Chapter 11.) 
As we’ve seen, anything that can reasonably be inferred from V can also reasona-
bly be inferred from V*, and vice versa. And whatever can be inferred from the infor-
mation encoded in the one perception is obviously to be inferred in the same way from 
the information encoded in the other perception. It follows that V and V* are identical 
in respect of what they entail, and also in respect of how they entail it. Therefore, it 
cannot coherently be said that V and V* encode different information. Thus, the con-
tent-externalist is wrong to say that V and V* have different contents. Chapter 2.  The predicative nature of sense-perception 


The content-externalist’s typical response to this sort of point is as follows:

  If the content-externalist is right, V tells you that Mary is now sipping tea, where-
  as V* tells you that Twin-Mary is now sipping tea. So this last argument of yours 
  simply begs the question against the content-externalist.

But we’ve already seen why this point is a non-starter, as it involves a failure to distin-
guish the information encoded in our perceptions from the information that, with the 
assistance of background knowledge, we derive from our perceptions.
A related point is that the content-externalist’s position involves a failure to distin-
guish  between  content  and  truth-maker.  V  is  a  perception  of  Mary,  as  opposed  to 
Twin-Mary, not because Mary is a constituent of V’s content, but because some fact 
about Mary is V’s truth-maker. As we’ve discussed, V tells you not that Mary is sitting 
in a certain place sipping tea, but that some woman (or, at any rate, some entity with 
the  morphology  characteristic  of  a  woman)  has  those  properties.  There  is  indeed  a 
woman satisfying that description and, under the present circumstances, that woman 
is  Mary.  But  there  are  counterfactual  scenarios  where  some  fact  about  Twin-Mary 
would be the truth-maker of that same content.


The relationship between causality and content

For a visual experience to be a perception of x, x must be part of the state of affairs that 
causes that experience. But given only that x satisfies that condition, it doesn’t follow 
that x per se is a constituent of the content of that experience. The content of a visual 
experience is, as we’ve emphasized, indistinguishable from what that experience tells 
you. And what that experience tells you is indistinguishable from what you can ration-
ally infer from it, taken by itself. By itself, no visual experience can tell you that it is x 
specifically – as opposed to some x-look-alike – that caused it; there is no way that, by 
itself, any perception could encode such differential information. This is easily estab-
lished on generically logical grounds.
What your visual experience, taken by itself, tells you is a function solely of facts 
about the physical properties of the situation right in front of you. (Indeed, it is going 
to be a function of a small subset of those facts.) So if one of constituents of that situa-
tion is replaced with something numerically distinct but qualitatively identical, there 
is no way for your experience to register that substitution. Suppose that x, ….x are all 
                                                    1n
qualitatively identical but numerically distinct objects and that, at this moment, you 
are seeing exactly one of those objects. The character of your visual experience reflects 
only  those  aspects  of  the  situation  that  are  preserved  in  the  light-rays  that  hit  your 
retinas; and, for any i and any j, those aspects are invariant with respect to intersubsti-	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


tutions of x and x. Thus, your visual experience, taken by itself, cannot possibly regis-
    ij
ter the fact that it is x, as opposed to x, that you are seeing.4
            324
There is thus no way that your visual experience, by itself, could discriminate be-
tween its being Mary in front of you and its being Twin-Mary in front of you. So if we 
plausibly identify the content of your visual experience with what that experience tells 
you; and if we plausibly identify what it tells you with what you may logically infer 
from it (or, at least, with a certain proper part of what you may logically infer from it); 
then we must say that Mary is no more a part of your visual experience than Twin-
Mary or any other Mary-impostor. Given this last point, if we are to avoid theoretical 
arbitrariness, we must say that none of Mary or Twin-Mary or Robo-Mary…is a con-
stituent of that content. All of this is consistent with the fact that your perception is of 
Mary specifically, and all of this is consistent with the fact that Mary – or, rather, some 
state of affairs involving Mary – is necessarily the cause of any perception of Mary.


Content-externalism and disjunctivism

We can show how radical and counterintuitive the content-externalist’s position is by 
following his own reasoning to its logical conclusion.5 Once again, let V be a visual 
perception of Mary sitting on a couch holding a teacup. The essence of the content- 
externalist’s view is that Mary herself is a constituent of V’s content. But, of course, the 
same is supposed to be true each of the individual objects in the situation that you are 
seeing. So if content-externalism is right, the just mentioned sofa is a veritable compo-
nent of V’s content, and so is the cat sitting on that sofa – and so on.
Given this, let V be a perception that is just like V (as defined a few pages back) with 
          1
this one qualification: the sofa represented by V has been replaced with a qualitatively 
identical, but numerically distinct, sofa. Now let V be a perception that is just like V 
                                  21

4.  Russell (1927: 94) makes a similar point when he writes: “Prejudice tells you that you see 
the same [Russell’s emphasis] table on two different occasions; you think that experience tells 
you this. If it really were experience, you could not be mistaken; yet a similar table may be subs-
tituted without altering the experience…there is nothing to show that one identical entity causes 
the two sensations.” See also Russell (1948: 271-294). 

5.  See Evans (1982: chapter 5). In his discussion of Evans (1982), Rick Grush writes:  “Evans 
then discusses the appropriate way to specify the content of informational states. His primary 
point is that in specifying the content of an informational state, one need not, and one should 
not, mention any specific objects. Rather, it should be specified by mentioning properties and 
objective-variables (in an open sentence). This does mean that we cannot perfectly well speak of 
the information being of this or that specific object. Two identical photographs might be such 
that one is of Bob and the other is of Rob, Bob’s twin brother. But in specifying the content of the 
photograph, we should not mention Rob or Bob, but should rather say something like “a tall 
person with a red hat”, a specification that both photographs would share.” See the chapter of 
Grush (1999) entitled “Guide to Chapter 5 of Gareth Evans’ Varieties of Reference.”   Chapter 2.  The predicative nature of sense-perception 


except that the teacup represented in V has been replaced with a qualitatively identical, 
                        1
but numerically distinct, teacup. Repeat this procedure until each of the objects repre-
sented by V – each bit of yarn, each carpet-fiber – has been replaced with a qualitatively 
identical, but numerically distinct object, and let V be the resulting perception.
                                  n
The similarity between V and V is not purely phenomenological. An artist who 
                        n
experienced V and painted what he saw would ceteris paribus produce a painting qual-
itatively identical with that produced by an artist who experienced V and then painted 
                                                n
what he saw. Further, there is some one description D such that, in virtue of having 
either V or V, one would be warranted in affirming D. (D would be along the lines of: 
    n
there is a woman with such and such properties sitting on a sofa holding a teacup…) It is 
clear that V and V have a great deal of representational content in common.
        n
But content-externalism cannot accommodate this obvious fact. For the content-
externalist, every one of the replacements we described would constitute a change in 
representational content. Numerically different objects, qualitatively different contents. 
A corollary is that two perceptions have the same content only to the extent that the 
objects represented by the one are numerically identical with those represented by the 
other. So, according to the content-externalist, V and V have no content in common. 
                                        n
But intuition recoils at such a view and, as we’ve just seen, it is demonstrably false.
John  McDowell  recognizes  that,  if  content-externalism  is  right,  then  V  and  V 
                                                              n
have no representational content in common. Because he is a content-externalist, he 
accepts that V and V have no common content. This position, appropriately general-
            n
ized, is sometimes referred to as “disjunctivism”, since it is given by the thesis that the 
content of the one perception is completely “disjoint” from the content of the other 
(McDowell 1998: Chapters 10–13).
Of course, McDowell concedes that V and V are identical in terms of phenome-
                                  n
nology. But, in his view, that is where the similarity ends. McDowell does not address 
the fact that V and V have a great deal of existential information in common and that, 
          n
consequently, the content of the one does at least overlap with that of the other.
A content-externalist might take the position that V and V do have some content 
                                            n
in common – that they have a purely “qualitative” or “general” content in common.6 So 
each of them would be to the effect that some object having such and such properties is 
sitting on a sofa…But, at the same time, V would be to the effect that X is sitting on sofa 
Y, whereas V would be to the effect that X* (≠X) is sitting on sofa Y*(≠Y). The idea 
    n
would be that representations have both a purely “qualitative” or “identity independ-
ent” content, and that they also an “identity-dependent” content.7
This view is either false or amounts to nothing more than a proposal that we make 
what would inevitably be a fruitless and confusing change in terminology. What the 


6.  See  Blackburn  (1984:  317-322).  I  should  make  it  clear  that  Blackburn rejects hard-line 
content-externalism. Indeed, many of our criticisms of content-externalism are anticipated by 
Blackburn (1984: Chapter 9).

7.  This terminology is borrowed from Blackburn (1984). 	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


content-externalist  is  referring  to  as  “identity-dependent  content”  is  identical  with 
what  we  have  seen  to  be,  not  content,  but meta-content.  A  related  point  is  that  the 
“content” that V and V don’t have in common is of a very different kind from the con-
            n
tent that they do have in common. The latter has inferential and causal powers that the 
former lacks. (In virtue of having different identity-independent contents, two visual 
perceptions  or  beliefs  have  different  causal  powers,  and  they  also  warrant  different 
inferences, But, as we have seen, two perceptions or thoughts that have different iden-
tity-dependent contents do not necessarily differ in respect of what they cause or what 
can be inferred from them.) Consequently, the externalist is using the word “content” 
to denote two very different things and, once this equivocation is exposed, his view 
loses whatever plausibility it might initially appear to have.
I would like to address a possible objection to the analysis just outlined (I will put 
it in the voice of an imaginary spokesperson for content-externalism):

  As you yourself have insisted, if a perception, or any other content-bearing entity, 
  has  content  C,  then  it necessarily has  that  content.  If  B  is  someone’s  belief  that 
  snow is white, then it is nonsense to suppose that B might have been a belief that 
  1+1=2. Given this point, it obviously follows that, if p is a perception of Mary, it is 
  necessarily a perception of Mary. After all, in this context, it is a matter of simple 
  semantics that the verbiage to the right of the word “of ” denotes the content of the 
  perception in question. In English, if I wish to indicate that X is a constituent of 
  the content of some perception of mine, I say that I had a perception “of ” X. Deny-
  ing this would be like saying that “Socrates” doesn’t denote Socrates. For reasons 
  that  you  yourself  have  given,  it  follows  that  Mary  herself,  as  opposed  to  some 
  Fregean sense thereof, is a constituent of the content of that perception.

On a number of occasions, philosophers have drawn extravagant epistemological and 
metaphysical conclusions on the basis of innocent facts about language.8 This is one of 
those cases.
In almost all contexts, what is of interest to others, and even to yourself, is not what 
is encoded strictly in your visual experience, but is rather what you know on the basis of 
that experience. Most of what we wish to say would be virtually incommunicable if our 
locutions were faithful to the division of labor characteristic of our information-gather-
ing. Suppose that language forced one to make it clear exactly what was due to perception 
and what was due to extra-perceptual background knowledge. In other words, suppose 
that if one wished to explain how one knew that Mary had gone to the airport, one had 
to produce a statement of the form:

  (#)  “I had a visual experience such that what was given to me in that experience 
  was an individual  x  having  a  distinctively  female  morphology…  and  such 


8.  The stock example of this is Meinong’s view that “the square circle” and “Pegasus” do refer 
to objects, albeit ones that “subsist” and do not “exist.” See Russell (1905).  Chapter 2.  The predicative nature of sense-perception 


  that, given my background knowledge, it was evident to me that Mary unique-
  ly satisfied the just stated existence-claim.”

In that case, one would need extreme cognitive and linguistic virtuosity to make and, 
to a lesser extent, to understand even the most pedestrian of statements. In narrow 
philosophical contexts, (#) is an informative and relevant statement. But in most con-
texts, the stratifications that (#) so faithfully preserves are of no interest. What we want 
to know is whether you have information about Mary (or Fred or Ethel…). The micro-
structure of the cognitive processes by which you attained that knowledge is irrelevant 
and, given the philosophical and psychological obstacles involved, would also be ex-
traordinarily difficult to learn about in the first place.
For this reason, language does us a great service by telescoping (#) into “I saw Mary”, 
or “I had a perception of Mary”, and by effecting other, comparable condensations across 
the board. Were it not to do this, language could be used and understood only by a few 
prodigies, and could convey only in the most circuitous manner the information that all 
of us (including the aforementioned prodigies) typically wish to know. So given only 
that I must report what I saw by saying “I had a perception of Mary” (or, more idiomat-
ically, “I saw Mary”), it doesn’t follow that Mary is a constituent of the content of the 
visual experience itself. The primary purpose of language is to convey what is pragmati-
cally (not philosophically) relevant. There is thus no reason to expect that our locutions 
will always reproduce the delicate distinctions to which we must look for solutions to 
recherché questions of logic and epistemology. Indeed, given the practical nature of lan-
guage, it is to be expected that language will obscure those distinctions.  chapter 3 


  Uniquely individuating descriptions



We’ve seen a number of reasons to accept the following three views:

  (1)  Conception is essentially descriptive in character.

  (2)  Expressions like “Socrates” and “Plato” are not descriptive to any degree: they 
  are “directly referential.”

  (3)  There is no difficulty reconciling (1) and (2) with each other.

In his landmark work Naming and Necessity, Kripke made a strong case for (2). (Like 
most contemporary philosophers, I believe that Kripke’s arguments are decisive.1) On 
this basis many have rejected (1), believing it to be incompatible with (2). In this chapter, 
I would like to provide reasons additional to those already put forth to believe that (1) 
and (2) are compatible with each other.
Let us start with a quick summary of some of the relevant points in Naming and 
Necessity. According to Russell (1918, 1948), “Socrates” is synonymous with a definite 
description; this might be “the greatest philosopher to have died of hemlock poisoning.” 
To understand the word “Socrates”, and thus to understand sentences of the form F…
Socrates…G, one must obviously know the semantics of “Socrates”; and one must there-
fore know that “Socrates” is synonymous with that definite description. Consequently, 
anyone who uses the word “Socrates” with understanding is able to identify a descrip-
tion that is satisfied by Socrates and Socrates alone. In other words, such a person knows 
some true and non-trivial proposition of the form: Socrates uniquely has phi. (An exam-
ple of a trivial proposition of that form would be: Socrates uniquely has the property of 
being identical with Socrates. An example of non-trivial proposition of that form would 
be: Socrates was uniquely a greatest philosopher to die of hemlock-poisoning.)
In general, if one knows the semantics of a referring term, then one knows some 
description that applies uniquely to the referent of that term. (By “applies to”, I mean 
“is satisfied by.” I will also use “singles out” as a synonym for both of these locutions.) 
Supposing that x is the referent of “Gilgamesh”, if I understand what is meant by sen-
tences like “Gilgamesh was wise” or “Gilgamesh lived a long time ago”, then I know of 
some description that singles out x. If I know of no such description, then I cannot 
really know what is meant by such sentences.
Supposedly,  Kripke  demolished  this  view.  Consider  any description that Socrates 
uniquely satisfies. Here is an example: “the greatest philosopher to have died of hemlock-
poisoning.” One can understand sentences of the form F…Socrates…G without knowing 

1.  See Soames (2001, 2005). 	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


that the referent of “Socrates” consumed hemlock. One can therefore understand “Soc-
rates was wise” without knowing that “Socrates” picks out somebody who uniquely satis-
fies the description: greatest philosopher to have died of hemlock-poisoning.
This point (mutatis mutandis) holds for any description that singles out Socrates. 
Consider the description: “the person who figures as the protagonist in most of the 
platonic  dialogues.”  One  can  understand  the  sentence  “Socrates  was  wise”  without 
having the slightest idea that he was a protagonist in any philosophical dialogues. Giv-
en any description D that applies uniquely to Socrates, one can understand F…Socra-
tes…G without knowing that D applies to the referent of “Socrates.”2
This point has many apparent consequences. Some of these are semantic in nature. 
Others are epistemological.
Here is one of the semantic consequences. “Socrates” is not synonymous with any 
definite description. Given any description D (with a few trivial exceptions), one can 
know that “Socrates was wise” is true without knowing that somebody uniquely in-
stantiated D and that any such person was wise. (The trivial exceptions have to do with 
descriptions like person who was identical with Socrates. More explicitly, they relate to 
descriptions the grasping of which presupposes a concept of Socrates.) So it isn’t tenable 
to maintain that “Socrates” is synonymous with “the greatest philosopher to have died 
of hemlock-poisoning” or with any other definite description.
Here is one of the supposed epistemological consequences. One can think about 
Socrates without knowing of any description that singles him out – without knowing a 
uniquely individuating description (UID) of the kind just described.


The causal theory of reference and conception

Kripke’s argument has other apparent consequences, both for semantics and episte-
mology. Let us start with a question: Why does “Socrates” refer to Socrates and not (for 
example) to Plato? Russell’s answer was this: “Socrates” is synonymous with a descrip-
tion that is true of Socrates and Socrates alone. Kripke made a powerful case against 
this answer. So how does Kripke answer our question? His answer is that “Socrates” 
refers  to  Socrates  because  a  certain  kind  of causal relation  holds  between  tokens  of 
“Socrates” and Socrates himself (or, more exactly, states of affairs involving Socrates).3
The  following  story  will  help  us  further  explicate  Kripke’s  views  on  this  topic. 
Smith personally saw Socrates. (We may set aside as irrelevant the fact that none of 
Socrates’ contemporaries were named “Smith.”) Socrates’ presence thus caused Smith 
to have certain visual experiences. Smith then gave a name to Socrates. (Let us idealize 
away from the fact that, for cultural reasons, that is probably not how Socrates was 
named.) Smith was able to pass that name along to people who did not themselves see, 

2.  Kripke (1972: Lecture I).

3.  Kripke (1972: Lecture II).  Chapter 3.  Uniquely individuating descriptions 


or otherwise sense-perceive, Socrates. Of course, for Smith to pass along that name to 
someone, that person had to be causally connected to Smith and, therefore, to Socra-
tes. The process just described is repeated over and over. Let us suppose that I am the 
521st installment in a sequence of events like the one described.4
Smith’s original term for Socrates may well have undergone phonetic distortion. 
What I have been left with is the sound (or sound-type) “Socrates”, which may be very 
different in terms of phonetics from the term that Smith used. But that is not relevant 
here. What is relevant is that, when I produce instances of that sound-type, my words 
refer back to Socrates precisely because I am connected to Socrates by way of a chain 
like the one just described. When I say “Socrates”, my utterance refers to Socrates be-
cause it is causally connected to him in a certain way. In general, if an expression E 
refers to an object O, that is in virtue of the fact that tokens of E stand in a certain 
causal relation to states of affairs involving O.


Why the causal story is only a chapter in the descriptive story

Let us now evaluate the various claims just put forth. How do you learn what a given 
word refers to? At first, there appear to be two ways: you can learn it by description or 
by ostension. (Soon we will see that there is a third.)
Let  us  illustrate  these  points  with  a  story.  You  are  young,  and  have  thus  never 
heard the name “Socrates.” Somebody says to you:

  (*)  “Socrates” is the name of the most famous philosopher to die of hemlock poi-
  soning.

Here the word “Socrates” has been defined for you in a descriptive manner. In effect, 
you were told that somebody O uniquely satisfies a certain description (viz. most fa-
mous philosopher to die of hemlock poisoning) and that “Socrates” names O.
On the face of it, there seems to be a second, entirely distinct way of learning what a 
term refers to: you can be given an ostensive definition. Here is an illustration. You are in 
a crowded market place. You and a companion are watching a man haranguing a crowd. 
While pointing to that man, your companion says:

  (**)  That person over there is named “Socrates.”

But, in a certain class of cases, one is able to acquire the ability to use a referring term 
without ever having been given either an ostensive or descriptive definition of it. Sup-
pose that you and two other people (Smith and Jones) are talking. All of a sudden Smith 
and Jones start talking about somebody named “Argo.” They never say who “Argo” re-
fers to. They never say: “Argo was the president of our fraternity back in college” or 
“Argo was my divorce lawyer; and by sheer coincidence he’s Smith’s racquetball part-

4.  Kripke 1972: Lecture II.	Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind


ner.” And they do not ostensively define “Argo”, since he is not present. Smith and Jones 
simply prattle on about “Argo”, and you are too polite to ask them who that person is.
Nonetheless, as Gareth Evans (1985: Chapter 1) pointed out, it seems that, even 
under these circumstances, you can use the word “Argo” in a meaningful way. You can 
say “it sounds as though Argo is a text-book case of somebody with borderline-per-
sonality disorder”; and you can ask questions like “did Argo mean to do that to you, or 
was it just an accident?”
So, on the face of it, it seems that you can acquire the ability to use “Argo” in a 
meaningful way without ever having been given an ostensive or descriptive definition 
of that term. When you say “it sounds as though Argo is an evil person”, you are using 
the expression “Argo” with understanding: you are not in the same category as a parrot 
that mindlessly produces those same sounds. It thus appears that you can simply “pick 
up” the ability to use “Argo”, and names generally: there needn’t be an ostensive or de-
scriptive definition.5
Let us take stock. There seem to be three ways that a proper name N can be in-
ducted into one’s lexicon:

  (i)  one can be given an ostensive definition of N;

  (ii)  one can be given a descriptive definition of N; or

  (iii)  one can just “pick up” the use of N.

It is easily shown that that one’s learning what an expression refers to always involves 
one’s learning some description that singles out its referent. This is because all of (i)-
(iii) collapse into (ii).




5.  Of course, one could say this: 
 Because you haven’t been given any kind of definition of “Argo” you cannot really use that term with un-
derstanding, and you cannot really know what is meant by sentences containing it. When you produce the 
sounds “Argo sounds like a bad person”, you are really making some kind of metalinguistic statement, some 
statement like: “ ‘Argo” refers to somebody who is bad.” And when you hear sentences like “Argo was a cad”, you 
cannot really understand them; what you understand is some related meta-linguistic claim like: “ ‘Argo” refers 
to somebody who was a cad.”
 This position cannot be summarily dismissed; and I will not dismiss it. But, for our purpo-
ses, it is enough to note that the objector’s point seems quite false. Cases like the one just descri-
bed are pervasive. There are many cases where no ostensive or descriptive definition is involved 
in our appropriation of a proper name. We hear the term being used and – presto! – can use it 
ourselves. If the objector’s point is correct, we are not really using any of these terms: we are 
merely mentioning them. When we produce sentences containing them, we are talking not about 
people, but about symbols denoting people. But this seems false. I have never been given a des-
criptive or ostensive definition of the term “Charlemagne.” But it certainly appears as though I 
can make statements about Charlemagne, and not just about “Charlemagne.” I am thus going to 
operate on the assumption that I can make statements about Charlemagne himself.