                                Emotivism


 


 


 

 

                        John-Michael Kuczynski, PhD

 

                                Fellow, Bard College

 

 

 

 


 


 


 


 


1.0 Are value-judgments expressions of emotion?


 


2.0 Why value-judgments are not expressions of emotion


 


3.0 The most basic problem with emotivism: the doxastic nature of


emotion


 4.0 Geach’s anti-emotivist argument

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

1.0              Are value-judgments expressions of emotion?

 

       According to some[1], it is inherent in the nature of ethical

pronouncements that, when made sincerely, they express feelings or emotions

of some kind. Given only that you’ve sincerely said “that rock weighs over

100 pounds,” nothing can be concluded about how you feel about the rock’s

weight. It’s unknown whether you’re happy about it, sad about it, or neither.

But, so it is said, if you say “Larry is a bad man,” your statement, if sincere,

must embody feelings of some kind concerning Larry’s deeds or character. If

you feel nothing either way, you’re guilty of insincerity in uttering that

sentence, and are in the same category as somebody who hates opera who

says “I absolutely adore opera.”

       If correct, these points suggest that moral “judgments” are nothing more

than expressions of sentiment. If you say “Larry is a bad man,” you’re just

venting  your  negative  feelings  about  Larry,  and  you’re  no  more  saying

something true or false than you would be if you scowled at Larry. By the

same logic, when you say “Mother Teresa was a good person,” you are no

more saying something true or false than you would be if you gave Mother

Teresa a loving hug.

       The position just described is known as emotivism. Thus, emotivism is

the doctrine that ethical statements are nothing more than emotional effusions

and therefore do not express judgments. “Stealing is wrong” is just a way of

saying “boo stealing!” and saying “giving money to charity is good” is just a

way  of  saying  “hurray  giving  money  to  charity!”  So-called  moral

“judgments” thus turn out to be nothing more than expressions of feeling and,

therefore, to say nothing at all about the world. Consequently, there are nomoral truths and no moral falsehoods.[2]

 

2.0              Why value-judgments are not expressions of emotion

 

       “x is good” is clearly not tantamount to saying “hurray x!” A competent

speaker of English can sincerely say “Cotton Mather[3] was a good man”

without personally having any emotion in connection with Cotton Mather.

It’s clear that people can coolly make moral judgments. In fact, an emotion-

driven judgment is, to that extent, not an ethical judgment—or, in any case,

not an unbiased one.

        One often makes positive moral judgments about people and things that

bring  them  displeasure.  There  are  people  who  I  dislike  whose  noble  acts

make me want to wretch. But, when not clouded by personal sentiment, I do

judge that those acts are good. And when I say “in doing X, so and so did the

right  thing,”  I’m  not  saying  “hurray  X.”  In  all  likelihood,  I’m  wearing  a

frown when I grudgingly express this positive judgment.

But how is this to be reconciled with the emotivist’s contention that ethical

statements  express  emotion?  David  Hume  (1739,  1751)  provided  a

compelling answer to this question, which may be summarized as follows:

 

                (HA[4])  The  nature  of  moral  judgment  can  be

              understood in terms of a fact about art. In general,

              people  regard  artistic  works  that  bring  them

              pleasure as “good” and they regard works that fail

              to bring pleasure, or bring displeasure, as “bad.”

              This suggests that, when said of a work of art, “x

              is good” means “x gives me pleasure,” and “x is

              bad” means “x fails to give me pleasure.” To be              good, in the artistic sense, is to bring pleasure.

      But this analysis cannot quite be right. People

              can, without self-contradiction, judge that works that

              don’t bring them pleasure are “good” and works that

              don’t do so, or bring them displeasure, are “bad.”

              This happens when people know that they would

              like a given work were it not for the inhibiting

                influence of some plainly irrelevant factor.

        A  story  may  help.  Smith  is  a  marvelous

                composer, and you know this. But you also detest

              Smith. One day you hear a performance of one of

              his works, and the experience is torture. But you

              know that, were it not for the fact that you don’t

              like  Smith,  hearing  that  work  would  be

                exquisitely  pleasurable.  So  you  know  that  it’s

              good, even though, because of this random fact

              about your past, it doesn’t bring you pleasure.  

     You also know that, so far as other people’s

              music appreciation isn’t similarly blunted by such

                person-specific idiosyncrasies, they would derive

              pleasure from listening to this work of Smith’s. In

              general, when people describe a work of art as

                “good,” they mean that, setting aside irrelevancies

              of  the  sort  just  described,  it  brings  people

                pleasure.

       The same thing mutatis mutandis holds in the

              moral sphere. In general, people regard acts that

              bring them happiness as “moral” and regard acts              that bring them unhappiness as “immoral.” People

              act “immorally” when they beat you, and they act

              “morally”  when  they  help  you.  But,  of  course,

              people sometimes regard things that bring them

              no pleasure, or even displeasure, as “moral”; and

              they  sometimes  regard  things  that  bring  them

              acute pleasure as “immoral.” Many a person has

                committed heinous crimes and then commended

              the government for putting him in jail. In many

              such  cases,  if  not  all  of  them,  the  person  is

                condemning  acts  that  he  obviously  committed

              because  doing  so  was  itself  enjoyable  or  was

              expected to bring him happiness down the line,

              and  he  is  also  commending  an  act  on  the

                government’s  part  that  will  bring  him  untold

              misery.

     But how is this possible, if, as we’ve seen

              reason  to  believe,  for  x  to  be  good  is  for  x  to

                increase happiness? Because “x is good” means

              “x  makes  people  happy  to  the  extent  so  far  as

                individual-specific,  non-transferable  facts  about

              them aren’t a factor.” So the condemned prisoner

              who praises the government for putting him away

              knows  that,  were  his  circumstances  not  so

                abnormal,  the  government’s  putting  him  away

              would let him sleep easier at night (and its not

              doing so would keep him awake in terror).

       Hume’s powerful argument shows that, if it is to be credible, emotivism

must be changed; and it also makes it clear how to change it. Since, as Hume

points out, a person can judge that something is good even if that thing brings

him misery, it follows that, in direct opposition to what the emotivist holds,

saying “x is good” cannot possibly be the same thing as expressing one’s

happiness  about  x.  But  “x  is  good” is plausibly  seen  as  expressing  the

speaker’s  belief  that  x  is  happiness-conducive  (i.e.,  that ceteris paribus x

brings happiness). So, when modified along these lines, emotivism would be

the view that “x is good” means “x is happiness-conducive.”

      Thus modified, however, emotivism is blatantly false. If it expresses any

belief, “x is good” is either true or false. A fortiori it’s either true or false if it

expresses the speaker’s belief that x makes him happy to the extent that his

idiosyncrasies aren’t getting in the way. The essence of emotivism is that “x

is good” expresses a feeling, as opposed to a judgment, and therefore doesn’t

say anything true or false. So emotivism collapses into its opposite if it’s

modified along the lines suggested by Hume.

Notice that, thus modified, emotivism coincides with utilitarianism. (This is

the doctrine that an act is good to the extent that it maximizes happiness and

bad to the extent that minimizes it.)

       What is more, HA is viciously circular. If I hear a beautiful piece by

Chopin and I judge that others would take pleasure in it, I am assuming that

others, were they to hear it, weren’t drunk when they did so, and that the

parts of their brain responsible for musical enjoyment hadn’t been destroyed.

Any piece of music might fail to elicit a pleasurable response from any given

person, provided that the latter were damaged in some such way. Thus, in

assuming that others would like a given piece of music, what I’m assuming is

that others would enjoy it provided that they weren’t damaged—provided, in

other words that they weren’t for some reason incapable of seeing its merits.     “But you are quite wrong," it will be said. "In saying that drunkenness or

injury  or  some  such  made  somebody  incapable  of  enjoying  the  piece  is

different from saying that it made them incapable of seeing its merits.”

        Is it? Suppose that a blow to the head makes Smith incapable of enjoying

music but doesn’t otherwise change him. We’d say that Smith had been damaged

by the blow. But if his previous enjoyment of music had no basis in the music

itself—if  it  didn‘t  derive  from  his  being  sensitive  to  it  actual  virtues—it

would be wrong to say that Smith had been damaged in any way. On the

contrary, we’d have to say that the blow had made him better. If his previous

enjoyment of music had nothing to do with anything inherent in the music,

his enjoyment of it was pure projection. But now, thanks to the blow, he

doesn’t respond to music in this delusional way. But since Smith obviously

wasn’t enhanced by the blow, and since he obviously was diminished by it,

we have to say that his previous enjoyment of it did involve some awareness

on his part of its merits.

    It is crucial to distinguish between enjoying something, on the one hand,

and being caused by it to experience pleasure, on the other. Given only that

my hearing Chopin’s ballad in G-minor gives me pleasure, it doesn’t follow

that I’m enjoying it. Maybe I know that my arch-nemesis Jones, who is in the

room, hates it and, to my extreme delight, is in agony because it’s blaring

from the speakers. Here the G-minor ballad is causing me joy; but I’m not

enjoying it.

     There is a difference between being caused to feel good by X, on the one

hand, and enjoying X, on the other. When this distinction is given its due,

emotivism collapses, and so does every form of value-nihilism. (By “value-

nihilism” I mean any doctrine to the effect that “x is good” either means

nothing or means that x is liked or otherwise looked upon favorably by some

person or group.) There are a lot of reasons why some object might make youfeel good. Not all of those reasons are of an aesthetic nature.

      A story will help make this clear. Smith owns a Picasso. He hangs it in

his front hall, where visitors are bound to see it. The fact that it’s there makes

him feel good. It makes him feel good not because it’s a great work of art, but

because he believes that having it will improve his status and, therefore, his

professional  and  romantic  prospects.  Smith  neither  likes  nor  dislikes  the

painting per se. In general, Smith neither likes nor dislikes art in general. He

doesn’t understand it. As far as he can tell, paintings are just discolorations

on a canvas.

       The Picasso makes Smith feel good. So his reaction to it is “hurray

painting by Picasso that’s hanging on my wall!” But this reaction isn’t an

aesthetic reaction. In other words, supposing that X is that painting, it isn’t

X’s being a work of art that makes him feel good. What makes him feel good

is  X’s  being  something  that  will  get  him  a  promotion,  and  X’s  being

something that will improve his social status, and so on.

Here a couple of points about causality may be helpful. No thing does any

causal  work.  What does do  causal  work  is  some  thing’s  having  some

property. The stovetop’s being hot is what burns my hand; the stovetop per se

does nothing.

         Bearing this in mind, let us turn our attention back to Smith’s painting,

which we’ll continue to call “X.” X per se does nothing. X’s having this or

that property is what does the causal work. It is X’s being impressive to

employers  that  gets  Smith  the  promotion.  X  per  se  does  nothing.  And

supposing that Jones has a genuinely aesthetic reaction to X, what makes

Jones feel good is X’s having certain artistic merits.

       An aesthetic reaction is one that is driven by a thing’s being a work of

art. In other words, it is one that is driven by a thing’s having such and such

aesthetic properties. So to the extent that there are aesthetic reactions, thereare aesthetic facts—there are cases of things having such and such aesthetic

properties. But once it’s granted that there are aesthetic facts, the theory that

“for x to be good is for me (or someone else) to like it” collapses. If there are

aesthetic facts, we can be wrong about them, just as we can be wrong about

anything else. If there are aesthetic facts, our feelings may or may not do

them justice. So if there are aesthetic facts, value-nihilism is false, at least as

far as aesthetic properties are concerned.

       “But that’s preposterous,” it will be said. “Everyone knows the old

saying: ‘there’s no disputing taste.’ Your position embodies a failure to see

the deep wisdom in that saying. In saying that there are aesthetic facts—that

some paintings are better than others, that some musical works are ‘more

correct’  than  others,  and  so  on—you  are,  in  effect,  saying  that  there  are

paintings,  works  of  music,  novels,  and  so  on,  that  people should like.  In

addition to being ludicrous, that view is potentially very dangerous.”

      This viewpoint embodies several confusions. First of all, given only that

there  are  aesthetic  facts,  it  doesn’t  follow  that,  given any two  works  of

musical  works,  it  doesn’t  follow  that  one  is  better  than  the  other  or  that

they’re equally meritorious; in other words, it doesn’t follow that they are

capable of being meaningfully compared. (In this context, take my use of the

term “musical work” to be short-hand for “musical work or novel or painting,

etc.”) Musical works have to be understood on their own terms. Beethoven’s

24th piano sonata (in F# major) is good; so is Tchaikovsky’s violin concerto;

so is “Dark Side of the Moon,” by Pink Floyd.

          But  given  any  two  of  those  musical  works,  they  are  good  in  non-

comparable ways. (The goodness of any one of them is “incommensurable,”

as some ethicists put it, with the goodness of either of the others.)

      But that doesn’t mean that every musical work is as good as every other

musical work. “Dark Side of the Moon” isn’t supposed to be good in thesame way as Beethoven’s 24th Sonata; and that sonata is supposed to be good

in the same way as Tchaikovsky’s violin concerto. But there are works that

are supposed to be good in the same way as Beethoven’s 24th sonata but, at

the same time, aren’t good in that way, at least not to the same degree. (Any

one of Clementi’s piano sonatas would be an example.) There are musical

works that, given the genre to which they belong, are supposed to be good in

the same way as “Dark Side of the Moon”, but aren’t good in that way, at

least to the same degree. (An example would be “Beast of Burden” by the

Rolling Stones, which even the Rolling Stones themselves would admit isn’t

one of their better songs and isn’t as good as “Dark Side of the Moon.”)

       In any case, it’s patently obvious that some composers are better than

others. I used to compose. I was better at it than the other people in my high

school. But when I moved beyond the pathetically narrow horizons of my

high school existence, I found that I was seriously outclassed. I wish I could

compose  like  Mozart  (or  Roger  Daltry);  but  I  cannot.  Many  a  musician

wishes that he were a better composer than he is. And no such musician can

coherently believe that no musical work is better than any other. For if all

musical works were equal merit, then ex hypothesi all composers would be of

equal merit.

      Moral nihilism fails for much the same reasons that aesthetic nihilism

fails. I see wealthy person X give money to poor person Y. Let’s refer to this

situation as S. S makes me feel good. It makes me feel so good, in fact, that I

go so far as to say “hurray S!” Given only that S makes me feel good, it

doesn’t follow that I’m having a moral reaction to S. Maybe I just happened

to like the way that the crisp green of X’s money contrasts with the cool blue

of  the  sky.  Maybe  some  fact  about  X’s  posture  shows  me  that  some

anatomical  theory  of  mine  is  correct.  Given  only  that  I like S, it doesn’t

follow that I’m having a moral response to it. It’s only if S’s having such andsuch moral properties is what brings me joy that my liking S is a moral

reaction to it. So my exclaiming “hurray S!” expresses a moral reaction to S

only to the extent that S’s being a moral fact is what evokes the emotion

thereby expressed. In general, there are moral reactions only to the extent that

there are moral facts. If there are moral facts, our feelings may or may not do

them justice; and emotivism completely collapses.

      But we have yet to state the most basic problem with emotivism.

 

3.0              The most basic problem with emotivism: the doxastic nature

of emotion

 

       Our sense-perceptions represent the world as being a certain way. Some

are accurate; some are not. But, whether accurate or not, sense-perceptions

always depict or represent the world as being a certain way; they always “say

something  about  it.”  By  this  I  mean  only  that,  like  a  spoken  or  written

statement,  they  have  “truth-conditions”:  they’re  accurate iff the  world

satisfies certain conditions.

The same thing is true of thought. Some of our thoughts are true; some are

false; some are a mixture of truth and falsehood. But, whether true or false,

our thoughts always represent things as being a certain way; they always say

something about the world.

Do emotions say anything about the world? Are they, in this respect, like

perceptions and beliefs? “Surely not!” it is said:

 

     Emotions can be healthy or unhealthy, but they cannot be true

    or false. It’s not as though, by virtue of being happy or sad, you’re

    right or wrong about anything. You can be happy that Tim left

      home, sad about it, or neither. But none of these feelings is any    more accurate than any of the others, even though some may be

    more pleasant or more adaptive. In general, emotions are neither

    true nor false, neither accurate nor inaccurate.

      Of course, emotions typically involve presuppositions about

    how the world is. You cannot be angry that Tim stole your bicycle

      unless  you  believe  that  Tim  stole  your  bicycle.  You  cannot be

    happy that Sally got married unless you believe that Sally got

      married. And, of course, your belief that Tim stole your bicycle is

    either true or false, as is your belief that Sally got married. But

    your anger at Tim’s (supposed) act of theft isn’t true or false, and

      neither is your happiness about Sally’s nuptials.

     Emotions presuppose beliefs; but emotions aren’t themselves

      beliefs. If you’re happy, you’re happy that such and such is the

    case. So you’re happiness presupposes that you believe that such

    and such is the case. But, while that belief is either true or false,

    your happiness about it is neither. The same is true of all other

      emotions. If you’re worried, you’re worried that such and such

    might happen and you therefore believe it possible that such and

    such might happen. This belief may or may not be correct. (Your

    worry  is  “well-grounded”  if  that  belief  is  correct,  and  it’s

      otherwise not well-grounded. But your worry itself is not true or

      false.) So, whatever it is that your being worried adds to your

      belief,  it  isn’t  something  true  or  false.  What  it  adds  may  be

      important  from  a  personal  viewpoint;  but  it’s  neither  here  nor

    there as far as your knowledge of the world is concerned.

 

       The position just described was advocated by David Hume, and we’ll

henceforth refer to it as “Hume’s view.” Hume’s view, we will now see, istotally false. Emotions are true or false. The reason is that, counterintuitive

though it may seem, emotions are beliefs.

     If you have a headache, you’ll happily take a pill to get rid of it. We don’t

see it as strange for someone to take a pill to get rid of an unpleasant feeling.

We don’t feel that they’re self-lobotomizing. But that is how we’d regard

somebody who took a pill that wiped away all his unpleasant emotions.

      Your child has been kidnapped. You suspect that he’s still alive. You

don’t  know  who  the  kidnapper  is  or  where  he’s  keeping  your  child,  and

neither do the police. The police are not pursuing obvious leads and seem not

to be doing much to find your child. You are angry at them, but you’re 10

times angrier at the kidnapper.

            By  sheer  coincidence,  a  friend  of  yours—a  physician  and  world-

renowned biochemist—has invented a pill you can take that will get rid of

your anger. The pill has no side effects and it won’t cost you anything.

      Would you take it? Probably not. Would your attitude towards taking it

be  comparable  to  your  attitude  towards  taking  an  aspirin  to  get  rid  of  a

headache? Definitely not. What you want isn’t to get rid of the emotion.

What you want is for the police to find your child. It’s true that, if they find

him,  your  anger  will  vanish  or  assume  other,  milder  forms.  But  it  isn’t

because you want to get rid of your anger that you want the police to find

your child. For if it were, then their finding the child would just be a means to

that end, in which case you’d just as soon take the pill as you would have

them find your child. But that isn’t what you’d do. If you had to choose

between taking the pill and having the police find your child, you would,

without any doubt, choose the latter. You’d even be willing to endure an

intensification of your anger if you thought it might make it more likely that

your child would be found. So your desire to find your child is not a desire to

make your anger go away.      In general, what people want isn’t to extinguish the unpleasant emotions

they have. What they want is to change their circumstances in such a way that

their unpleasant emotions no longer have a basis in them. People don’t want

to “zap” their anger or hate or pessimism. They want the world to change in

such a way that those emotions cease to be appropriate to it.

      In this respect, the attitude that people have towards their emotions is

similar to the attitude they have towards their senses. People want to see

beauty, not ugliness. But they want to see beauty because it’s really there—

not because they took a pill that made them see a pristine forest-stream where

there was actually a rivulet of septic gutter water. And people want to feel

joy.  But  they  want  to  feel  it  because  their  circumstances  warrant  it—not

because  they  took  a  pill  that  tricked  them  into  feeling  joyous  in  sorrow-

warranting circumstances.

       Like a sense-perception or thought, an emotion must have an object. You

can’t just be angry. You’re angry at your boss for giving someone else the

promotion.  You’re  angry  at  Tim  for  stealing  your  bicycle.  Your  anger  is

therefore about something—it’s about your boss’s snubbing you or Tim’s

robbing you.

    The same thing mutatis mutandis is true of all emotions. You’re not just

remorseful; you’re remorseful that you sold your wife’s jewelry to buy drugs.

And you’re not just relieved; you’re relieved that she’s not pressing charges.

 

3.1              The contentfulness of emotions qua emotions

 

       As previously stated, emotions have propositional complements. You’re

not just angry; you’re angry that Tim stole your bicycle. Your anger at Tim

isn’t identical with your belief that he stole your bicycle. After all, you could

have that belief without being angry at him. At the same time, you’re beingangry at him for doing this necessarily involves your having that belief. So

one component of your anger at Tim is your belief that he stole your bicycle.

But there’s some second component to your anger. What is it?

              Since  it  is  obviously  this  second  component  that  separates  simply

believing something from emoting about it, it’s tempting to think that this

second component, unlike the first, isn’t true or false and, therefore, that it is

nothing more than a feeling of some kind. So, according to this view, your

anger at Tim consists in (1) your belief that he stole your bicycle plus (2) a

negative feeling associated with his doing so.

But how is the second thing “associated with” the first? First of all, the mode

of association cannot be purely causal. If, because of some anatomical quirk

of yours, your belief that you had decent and loving parents caused you to

have  gastric  distress,  it  wouldn’t  follow  that  you  were angry  that  your

parents were loving ones.

     To generalize this point: Given only that x is what caused so and so to be

distressed, it doesn’t follow that x is what so and so is distressed about. Even

more generally, given only that x is what caused so and so to have emotion y,

it doesn’t follow that x is what, by virtue of having y, so and so is emoting

about. The statement:

 

(A) x caused so and so to have emotion y

 

doesn’t say the same thing as

 

(B) in having emotion y, so and so is emoting about x.

 

3.2              What emotions are

                 Taken  in  conjunction  with  the  last  point,  a  story  from  my  own

adolescence  will  help  make  it  clear  what  emotions  actually  are.  When  I

played soccer in high school, one of my team-mates, who we’ll call “Ben,”

had a rather serious respiratory disorder, which caused his lungs to fill up

with fluid whenever he did vigorous exercise for more than a few minutes.

But Ben was an ardent soccer player, and he played as much as his condition

would permit. During a match, he’d play for as long as he could, and then

he’d have to take a time out to let his lungs drain, during which time he

experienced painful, wracking coughs.

           During these time-outs, Ben was upset. He was upset about his

symptoms,  about  his  inability  to  breathe  properly,  etc.  Of  course,  it  was

playing soccer that set off these symptoms. But he wasn’t upset that he had

played soccer. That was the one thing he was happy about. This confirms that

having a negative emotion about X isn’t the same thing as being caused by X

to have a negative emotion. What upset Ben was that his doing something

which didn’t upset him caused him such unpleasantness. Another thing he

was upset about was that his illness prevented him from playing soccer as

much as he wanted to.

       Ben would obviously be happy if he were cured of his illness and could

therefore play soccer without any problems. But he wouldn’t just be happy.

He’d be happy that  he  could  play  soccer  without  any  problems; he’d be

happy that he was no longer prevented from doing what he wanted to do.

      I therefore propose that Ben’s being happy under that circumstance

would be identical with his recognizing that he could do something he wanted

to do.

      Consider an alternative universe W where Ben is exactly as he is here,

except that  he  doesn’t  have  any  desire  to  play  soccer  (or  to  do  or  have

anything for which playing soccer is a necessary prerequisite). In W, Ben hasthe earlier-described malady and he’s unhappy about it, but he isn’t unhappy

that it prevents him from playing soccer. In W, he never wanted to play

soccer in the first place. In W, there’s no desire that he has that, in not being

able to play soccer, he cannot gratify. So when he finds out that he’s cured

and, therefore, can now play soccer, he won’t realize that he can now gratify

a previously frustrated desire to play soccer. The reason he won’t realize it is

that there’s nothing to realize, since he doesn’t have that desire to begin with.

Thus, a necessary condition for Ben’s being happy that he can play soccer is

that he knows himself to have some desire that, in now being able to play

soccer, he is able to gratify.[5]

       It is also a sufficient condition. To see this, let’s turn our thoughts back to

the real world, where, sadly, Ben has an ardent desire to play soccer that his

illness prevents him from gratifying. If, in actuality, Ben were suddenly cured

of his illness, and he thus realized he could fulfill his life’s dream of playing

soccer, could he possibly not be happy? No, and it would be incoherent to say

otherwise.

     Thus, a necessary and sufficient condition for Ben’s being happy that he

can now play soccer is he knows himself to have some desire that, in now

being able to play soccer, he is able to gratify. Ben’s being happy that he can

play soccer is his recognition that, in now being able to play soccer, he can

now gratify an otherwise ungratifiable desire.

 

3.3              What emotions are (continued)

 

     This analysis is easily extended to apply to all emotions. Another story

will help us do this. You’ve invited your father to come visit you. But there’s

a chance that your malignant, sociopathic step-mother (his second wife) may

come along with him. (If she comes, you won’t kick her out, since doing sowill alienate your father, which you don’t want to do.) You thus fear that she

will come.

    Why is her coming bad? Why do you fear it? You wouldn’t fear her

coming  if  there  were  nothing  that  you  wanted  that,  so  you  believe,  her

coming would be likely to prevent. Imagine that you were totally convinced

that her coming wouldn’t jeopardize anything that you hoped to happen—that

it wouldn’t prevent you from having bonding moments with your father, or

having a beer with him while talking about the good old days, etc. Under that

circumstance, could you fear that your step-mother would come?

      No. You could believe it, but not fear it. This is because to fear her

coming is to believe that something you want is jeopardized by the, in your

view, distinct possibility of her coming. So, to fear her coming is for you to

believe that her coming would frustrate some desire of yours.

      Of course, you may be wrong about this; it could be that she does come

and everything turns out fine. But that’s consistent with our point that your

fearing her possible visit involves your believing, not necessarily correctly,

that her coming would make something you want impossible and would thus

thwart a desire of yours. And it actually bears out our main point, this being:

emotions are true or false, since emotions are beliefs of sorts.

Emotions, then, are beliefs about the prospects of gratifying desires that one

has. If the belief is that the prospects are good, the emotion is a positive one

(e.g., jubilation, relief). If the belief is that those prospects are bad, it’s a

negative one (e.g., anger, remorse).

 

4.0              Geach’s anti-emotivist argument

 

       Peter Geach put forth the following, very clever argument against

emotivism (“GA” stands for “Geach’s argument”): 

              (GA) Suppose that emotivism is correct. Suppose

              that  saying  “stealing  is  wrong”  is,  as  far  as  its

              content  is  concerned,  no  different  from  saying

              “boo stealing!” and that saying “giving money to

              the needy is good” is the same as saying “hurray

              giving money to charity!” In that case:

 

              (1) “If stealing is wrong, then getting your little

              brother to steal is wrong”

 

              has the same meaning (or lack thereof) as:

 

              (2)  “If boo  stealing!, then  getting  your  little

              brother to steal is wrong.”

 

      Here’s the idea. (2) is just like (1), except that (2)

              contains the expression “boo stealing!” in the place

              where  (1)  contains  the  expression  “stealing  is

              wrong.” The emotivist says the underlined part of

              (1) has the same meaning (or lack thereof) as the

                underlined  part  of  (2).  Replacing  an  expression

              with  a  synonymous  expression  doesn’t  turn

              meaning into nonsense; replacing the occurrence

              of “enemy” in “Smith is Brown’s enemy” with

              the word “foe” results in “Smith is Brown’s foe,”

              which is as meaningful as the first sentence and,

              in  fact,  has  the  very  same  meaning  as  it.  But                whereas  (1)  is  obviously  meaningful—not

              necessarily true, but meaningful—(2) is complete

                nonsense.  Thus,  the  underlined  expressions  are

              not synonymous, and the emotivist is wrong to

              say otherwise. Given any emotivist “translation”

              of  any  moral  statement,  an  exactly  analogous

              argument shows that translation to be wrong.

 

4.1              Evaluating Geach’s argument

 

     I’ve argued that emotions are beliefs. Let’s suppose that, after 10 years of

your being an unremittingly good friend to him, Smith turns his back on you.

He does this to curry favor with his boss. You’re outraged and appalled; your

contempt for Smith is boundless. These emotions, I have argued, are beliefs.

Like all emotions, they are, I have argued, beliefs about desires of yours.

Your outrage, for example, might be identical with your belief that Smith’s

behavior thwarted your desire for a relationship in which certain rules of

decency were observed. For expository reasons, let’s suppose this to be the

case.

          Let’s  also  suppose  that  your  outrage  is  initially  expressed  by  your

throwing  a  chair  across  the  room  while  yelling  “aarrr!”  Finally,  let  us

suppose, if only for argument’s sake, that my analysis of emotion is correct. I

wish to make it clear that, given this supposition, your yelling “AAARR!”

while throwing a chair across the room expresses the aforementioned belief.

     Question: Given all of these suppositions, does it follow that, when they

are uttered by you, the following two sentences have the same meaning?

 

              (3) “If I believe that Smith’s behavior thwarted              my desire for a relationship in which certain rules

              were  observed, then  I  believe  that  Smith’s

                behavior thwarted at least one desire of mine.”

 

              (4)  “If  AAAARRR!  [accompanied  by  you

              throwing a chair across the room], then I believe

              that Smith’s behavior thwarted at least one desire

              of mine.”

 

     No it does not. A belief can be expressed in a lot of different ways. Your

belief that 1 + 1 = 2 can be expressed by your choosing to buy certain stocks

as opposed to others, by your deciding not to jog an extra mile in the rain, by

your saying “1 + 1 = 2,” by your pounding your chest with pride (after it’s

announced  on  television  that  your  staggering  mathematical  insight  was

verified  by  M.I.T.  mathematicians),  and  in  any  number  of  other  ways.

Similarly,  your  belief  that  Smith’s  conduct  thwarted  your  desire  can  be

expressed by your uttering certain sentences (e.g., the underlined part of (1)),

or by your throwing chairs and bellowing.

       Any given attitudes can be expressed in many different ways. One’s love

for another is expressed in many ways; and the same is true of anything else

that one might feel for a person or thing—hatred, admiration, contempt, fear,

envy, respect, and so on. If, as I’m proposing, emotions are beliefs, they can

be expressed through grammatical utterances and meaningless gesticulations

and facial contortions. Which makes it obvious that Geach’s argument fails if

emotions  are  beliefs.  Which,  in  its  turn,  shows  that  it  makes  a  strong,

unargued,  and  probably  false  assumption.  Which,  finally,  shows  that  it’s

spurious. 


  [1].              Examples are David Hume (1739, 1751), C.L. Stevenson (1937), R.M. Hare (1952),
  and Simon Blackburn (1984, 1998).

  [2].              See Stevenson (1937).

  [3].              A 19th century pontificator.

  [4].              “HA” stands for “Hume’s argument.”

  [5].              Why must he know himself to have such a desire? Why can’t he just have it, without
  knowing that he has it? Because if he wanted to play soccer and, all of a sudden could do so, he
  obviously wouldn’t be happy unless he knew he could do so. If he still thought his lungs would fill
  up with fluid when playing, he obviously couldn’t be happy that he could play soccer without his
  lungs filling up with fluid. Since he’d believe, albeit wrongly, that his lungs would fill up, he’d be
  unhappy that (so he thought) he couldn’t play soccer. So, I repeat, a necessary condition for Ben’s
  being happy that he can play soccer is that he know himself have some desire that, in now being
  able to play soccer, he is able to gratify.