  

  

  

                        Originalism 

  

                by J.-M. Kuczynski PhD 

  

    First of all, the moment we speak of “the 

intentions of the framers”, we are already 

committed to some sort of idealization, as 

opposed to an empirical actuality. There were 

various different framers – Adams, Jefferson, 

Washington…These people had numerically and 

qualitatively different minds. Surely Jefferson’s 

intentions weren’t exactly the same as 

Washington’s. When we talk about the intentions 

that they had in connection with the future 

governance of the nation, we are already speaking 

in institutional, non-psychological terms (or, if you prefer, we are speaking in terms of institutional 

rather than personal psychology). 

        Whenever it is part of an expression that 

is meant to denote a collective attitude, the word 

“they” is in the same category as “the average 

man” or “frictionless planes.” In other words, in 

such a context, the word “they” denotes an 

idealization, not an empirical reality. From a 

psychologist’s viewpoint, there is no they. There 

are only various individuals whose numerically 

and qualitatively distinct psychologies may 

converge in certain respects at certain junctures.  

       When we talk about “the intentions of 

the framers”, we obviously don’t mean the 

intentions of the framers taken severally. 

Originalism is thus exceedingly dubious if the term 

“intentions” is understood in purely 

individualistic, psychological terms.        So if originalism is to hold water, we must 

take the expression “the intentions of the 

framers” to refer to the intentions of some kind of 

collective entity. But how are the intentions of 

that entity to be understood? Since, as we have 

seen, we cannot understand those intentions 

strictly in terms of the psychologies of the 

framers, it seems not out of the question that 

those intentions must be understood in terms of 

their social, and perhaps even their historical, 

role. But the socio-historical role of those 

intentions is inseparable from the socio-historical 

role of the Constitution. This suggests (though, I 

admit,  it hardly establishes) that the originalist’s 

position collapses into circularity (or, if you prefer, 

triviality): Constitutional interpretations are to be 

evaluated in terms of the intentions of the 

framers, but the intentions of the framers are to be understood in terms of the historical and social 

role of Constitutional interpretation.  

         Here is a related argument. For the 

reasons noted a moment ago, the expression “the 

intentions of the framers” denotes an idealization. 

An idealization is, by definition, something that 

has no precise counterpart in the spatiotemporal 

world. So when we talk about “the intentions of 

the framers”, we are not talking about an 

empirical reality, but about some kind of 

theoretical construct. Of course, the theory 

embodied in one person’s use of that expression 

may be different from that embodied in some 

other person’s use of it. But it seems likely that, as 

a rule, the theories in question will themselves 

concern the role that the Constitution should 

have. If this is right, then it follows that originalism 

is guilty of vicious circularity or, if you prefer, of 

triviality.           A concrete example may help make it 

clear what this last argument amounts to. It is 

reasonable to predict that, at some point in the 

future, the Supreme Court will have to decide 

whether gay marriage (marriage between two 

people of the same gender) is protected by the 

Constitution. Suppose that, in connection with 

this issue, one of the members of the Court 

reasons thus:  

                                          

    (*) If Jefferson had been asked whether the 

Constitution protected gay marriage, he would 

have said “no”; and the same is true of 

Washington and Adams… 

  

    

      (*) is surely correct. I very much doubt 

that, during his lifetime, Jefferson would have 

condoned homosexual marriage. He might not even have acknowledged the coherence of the 

concept of such a marriage. But this proves 

nothing that is of relevance to Constitutional 

interpretation. For if, during their life-times, we 

had asked Jefferson or Washington whether 

African Americans should be allowed to vote or 

hold higher office, those luminaries might well 

have given us answers that wouldn’t correspond 

even remotely with later Supreme Court decisions 

– with decisions that even originalists regard as 

paradigms of sound jurisprudence. The same 

point holds in connection with the question 

whether the government should have the power 

to break monopolies, whether corporal 

punishment should be permitted in schools, and 

so on. 

        So when we talk about what Jefferson 

(or Adams or Washington…) would have said 

about such an issue, we are not talking about the actual Jefferson – the person who lived at a time 

when there was slavery and when it would have 

been unheard of for women to hold higher office. 

We are talking about what would be said by some 

idealization of Jefferson -- by somebody who had 

Jefferson’s basic values, but whose own 

interpretation of those values wasn’t distorted by 

the temporal and cultural parochialism to which 

Jefferson, like all other mortals, was inevitably 

subject. So when legal theorists talk about “what 

Jefferson would have said”, they are not making 

an empirical statement about what the actual 

Jefferson would have said, but rather an a priori 

proposition about what he should have said, given 

his values (or what we believe to be his values).  

        But the originalist’s intention in running 

counterfactuals like (*) is to derive or expose 

Jefferson’s values, so as to generate an 

appropriate conception of Constitutionality. The originalist is thus caught in a vicious circle. He 

must use a counterfactual to identify the values 

on which his conception of Constitutionality is 

based. At the same time, he cannot run the 

counterfactual in question until he has identified 

those values.  

  

An objection to this argument    

  

     As you point out, the idiosyncrasies of 

Jefferson’s psyche are irrelevant to issues relating 

to Constitutional interpretation. For this reason, I 

agree with you that, when discussing 

Constitutional issues, we must idealize away from 

those idiosyncrasies and must therefore speak of 

what Jefferson should have said, given his values, 

as opposed to what he actually might have said, 

given his peculiarities and limitations as a human 

being. But I disagree with your point that this 

exposes some kind of circularity in the originalist’s position. Jefferson’s values are definable 

independently of any views of Constitutional 

interpretation. Jefferson believed in certain 

things. For example, he believed that, with some 

obvious qualifications, people should be allowed 

to do as they wish and that, consequently, 

government should have a minimal regulatory 

role. While such views have obvious 

consequences as regards Constitutional 

interpretation, they can (and probably must) be 

understood independently of any such views. 

After all, the concept of small government is one 

that a person can fully grasp even if she has never 

heard of the U.S. Constitution. So your charge of 

circularity is under-argued.  

  

Why this objection fails 

        

        This line of thought simply displaces the 

problem onto an analogous problem. This, I will now argue, is because the expression “Jefferson’s 

values” itself denotes an idealization, as opposed 

to a psychological reality. Consequently, talk of 

“Jefferson’s values” in this context involves a 

circularity parallel to that discussed a moment 

ago. 

         Some science fiction will make this 

clear. We go back in time and ask Jefferson: 

“Should women be allowed to vote?” Jefferson 

                                      st
says “no.”  Being creatures of the 21 century, we 

disagree with Jefferson. At the same time, we are 

(let us suppose) originalists; so we wish to 

reconcile his response with our belief that the 

Constitution should be interpreted in light of his 

intentions (along with those of Washington, 

Adams…who, we may suppose, gave the same 

answer as Jefferson in response to our 

question).  We effect this reconciliation by telling 

ourselves that, in answering that way, Jefferson was not being true to his core values. It wasn’t the 

true Jefferson speaking. Rather, it was a Jefferson 

whose inner goodness was marred by cultural 

baggage that was extrinsic to his character. 

(Compare: “The Smith I know wouldn’t ever say 

such a thing -- that was the bottle talking.”)  

       But, like many complex human beings, 

Jefferson had many values; and while some of 

them may well have been fair-minded and 

egalitarian, others may have been retrograde and 

misogynist. So when we say that, in answering as 

he did, Jefferson was not being “true to his 

values”, the word “his” doesn’t denote the 

Thomas Jefferson the human being. Sadly, 

Jefferson’s answer may have reflected who he 

really was. Rather, the word “his” denotes a 

Thomas Jefferson who has been purged of his ugly 

th
18 century prejudices. But in that case, we are 

using the term “Jefferson” not to refer to the actual Jefferson, but to some idealization of 

Jefferson that corresponds to a certain conception 

of how the country should be run and therefore, 

presumably, of how Constitutional issues are to be 

settled. For analogues of the reasons given a 

moment ago, this entails that the originalist’s 

position collapses into a vicious circularity (or an 

innocuous tautology). 

        Let us sum up. In discussions of 

Constitutional interpretation, one often hears 

claims about what Jefferson (or Adams or 

Washington…) would have said about such and 

such, e.g. the issue of gay marriage. But it is 

irrelevant what Jefferson the actual person would 

have said. Even the finest minds are marred by 

ugly biases. For all we know, Jefferson might have 

thought that any expression of homosexuality 

should be illegal or, on the contrary, he might 

have secretly thought that men should be legally required to abstain from relations with women 

and to marry other men. So when we talk about 

what Jefferson would have said, we are talking 

about what some kind of idealization of Jefferson 

would have said – some Jefferson who didn’t 

suffer from the cultural limitations and random 

        [1]
neuroses that mar even the best of minds, 

including his. But it is more likely than not that the 

relevant idealization is going to incorporate a 

certain conception of Constitutionality, and this 

condemns to vicious circularity any attempt to 

derive a correct conception of Constitutionality 

from such counterfactuals. Once we start dealing 

with an idealization of Jefferson’s psyche, as 

opposed to his actual psyche, we have replaced 

empirical propositions about the Jefferson’s 

psychology with a priori propositions about 

values. The result is, at least plausibly, that such 

counterfactuals presuppose certain conceptions of Constitutionality, and thus cannot substantiate 

any such conception.  

  

 