96  Book reviews


References

Frith, C. D. 1992. The Cognitive Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Spence, C. and Driver, J. Crossmodal Space and Crossmodal Attention. Oxford: OUP.

Reviewer’s address

Dr. Jonathan Cole
Clinical Neurophysiology, Poole Hospital
Longﬂeet Road
Poole, BH15 2JB
United Kingdom

Email: jonathan.cole@poole.nhs.uk

About the reviewer

Jonathan  Cole  trained  in  medicine  in  Oxford  and  at  The  Middlesex  Hospital.  After  two 
periods of neurphysiological research in the University Laboratory of Physiology, Oxford, 
he moved to Southampton. He is now Senior Lecturer at the University of Southampton and 
Consultant in Clinical Neurophysiology at Poole Hospital. His research interests have fo-
cussed on movement after sensory loss and he has published many papers. He has also been 
interested in the phenomenology of neurological illness and has written three biographical 
books (on sensory loss, facial problems and spinal cord injury): Pride and a Daily Marathon 
(1995), About Face (1998) and Still Lives: Narratives of Spinal Cord Injury (2003).

                          

    Marga Reimer and Anne Bezuidenhout (eds), Descriptions and 
    Beyond. Oxford: Clarendon, 2004, 668 pages. ISBN 10: 0-19-927051-1

    Reviewed by John-Michael Kuczynski (University of California, 
    Santa Barbara)

Descriptions and Beyond is a collection of articles concerning Russell’s “theory 
of descriptions”. Before we can evaluate that collection, Russell’s theory must 
be put into some context. 
If  our  pre-theoretical  intuitions  are  correct,  occurrences  of  “the  current 
U.S. President” (in 2005) refer to George W. Bush. In general, deﬁnite descrip-
tions  seem  to  be  singular  terms,  like  proper  nouns  and  demonstratives.  But 
Russell argued that they are quantiﬁers. *The phi* is to be deﬁned thus: *…the 
phi…* means: exactly one thing x has phi, and…x…So 

  (#)  “the current U.S. president smokes”  Book reviews  97


means: 

  (##)  Exactly one thing x is a current U.S. President, and x smokes.

Thus (#) is synonymous with: 

  (###)  “Exactly one thing x is a current U.S. President, and x smokes”.

The same point is meant to hold (mutatis mutandis) for any deﬁnite descrip-
tion.1
Let us now discuss the primary motivation for this theory.2 Consider the 
expression “George W. Bush”. The cognitive value of 

  (*)  “George W. Bush smokes” 

is obviously diﬀerent from that of (#). (By the “cognitive value” of a sentence, I 
mean what is communicated by utterances of it.) And of 

  (^)  “the current occupant of the most important governmental post in the 
    country with the world’s largest economy smokes” 

has a diﬀerent cognitive value from each of the other two sentences just men-
tioned.
Why does (#) diﬀer in cognitive value from each of (*) and (^)? The reason is 
clear. The concept current U.S. president is a constituent of what is communicated 
by sentences of the form “…the current U.S. president…”. For example, if I utter 
(#), part of what is transmitted to you concerns that concept. But that concept is 
not part of what is communicated by (^) or by (*). That is why a perfectly logical 
speaker of English could assent to (#) without assenting to either of (^) or (*).
Given  this,  it  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  proposition literally 
meant by sentences of the form “…the current U.S. president…” have the con-
cept current U.S. president as a constituent. Supposing this is the case, what do 
such sentences say about that concept? For example, what does 

  (#)  “the U.S. President smokes”

say about that concept? The word “the” obviously indicates existence (unlike 
the word “no”) and also uniqueness (unlike the word “a”). So if (#) is to be true, 
there must be at least one U.S. president, and there must also be at most one. 
Further, if that one thing should not smoke, then (#) will be false. But if that 
one thing does smoke, then (#) will be true. So (#) is true exactly if: 

  (##)  Exactly one thing x is a current U.S. President, and x smokes.98  Book reviews


So it seems that (##) must be the proposition meant by (#).Given any other 
deﬁnite description, an exactly similar argument seems to establish that it is a 
quantiﬁer, not a singular term.3 To sum up: in order to accommodate the obvi-
ous fact that the proposition communicated by a sentence of the form *…the 
phi…*4 has the concept phi as a constituent, we must suppose that *the phi* is 
a quantiﬁer of the kind just described. So the primary motivation for Russell’s 
theory lies in facts about what is communicated by sentences containing deﬁ-
nite descriptions.
There are some fairly obvious problems with Russell’s theory and also with 
Russell’s argument for it. For the sake of argument, suppose that “the current 
U.S.  president”  is  what  it  appears  to  be:  a  singular  term  that,  at  this  time  in 
history, refers to George W. Bush. The semantic rule for “the current U.S. presi-
dent” is not going to be: 

  (*)  “the current U.S. president” refers to Bush. 

Rather, it is going to be: 

  (**)  If there is a unique U.S. President x, then “the current U.S. president” 
    refers to x.5

So the semantic rule for: 

  (#)  “the current U.S. president smokes” 

is not going to be: 

  (i)  “the current U.S. president smokes” means: Bush smokes. 

It is going to be: 

  (ii)  If there is a unique U.S. President x, then “the current U.S. president 
    smokes” means: x smokes. 

A comparison might be appropriate. If Fred says “I am tired”, he is attributing 
fatigue to himself; his token of “I” refers to Fred. But the semantic rule respon-
sible for that assignment is obviously not: tokens of “I” refer to Fred. Rather, it 
is: if somebody x tokens the word “I”, then that token refers to x. Similarly, even 
if (in 2005) a token of “the current U.S. President” is a singular term that refers 
to Bush, the semantic rule responsible for that assignment is not: “the current 
U.S. President” refers to Bush. It is: if there is a unique U.S. President x, then 
“the current U.S. President” refers to x. 
In general, whenever one hears a sentence, one computes its meaning on 
the basis of the semantic rules that give it meaning. So when one hears a token  Book reviews  99


of (#), one computes its meaning on the basis of the semantic rules that give it 
meaning, one of these being (ii). Anyone who grasps (ii) will know that, if (#) 
is true, then there is exactly one U.S. president x, and x smokes. So to anyone 
capable of understanding it, an utterance of (#) will convey the existence claim: 
there is exactly one current U.S. president x, and x smokes.
Notice that (#) does not have that existence claim for its literal meaning: 
but it still conveys it. Notice also that it doesn’t convey it by way of the normal, 
Gricean,  post-semantic  implicatures.  It  conveys  it  by  way  of  what  we  might 
call pre-semantic  implicature:  that  existence  claim  is  conveyed  to  somebody 
in the process of that person’s computing the relevant semantic content. In this 
reviewer’s  opinion,  the  phenomenon  of  pre-semantic  implicature  has  been 
grossly  undervalued  in  contemporary  semantics.  Many  theories  —  those  of 
Russell  and  Frege  among  them  —  constitute  displacements  of  pre-semantic 
implicature onto semantics proper. In any case, given only that (#) communi-
cates a certain kind of existence claim, it doesn’t follow that “the U.S. president” 
is a quantiﬁer. This point applies to all deﬁnite descriptions. The just mentioned 
facts about what is communicated by sentences containing such expressions to 
no degree favor the view that such expressions are anything other than singu-
lar terms. This point — or one quite close to it — was made long ago by John 
Searle (1970: 160–161; see also Searle 1958). In fact, it is made (if obliquely) in 
Strawson’s landmark (1950) paper. It is nowhere even mentioned in Descrip-
tions and Beyond. 
Noises and ink-marks don’t interpret themselves. Speakers must interpret 
them. They do so, in part, by applying their knowledge of semantic rules. The 
process of computing literal meaning — as distinguished from literal meaning 
itself — is a rich source of information. Much of what an utterance tells one is 
pre-semantic. When we take pre-semantic implicature into account, it mini-
mizes the burden that must be placed on semantics itself. In light of what was 
said a moment ago, there is no need to deny that “the current U.S. president” 
refers to Bush. When we attend to pre-semantics, it turns out that we can hold 
onto the presumption that “the current U.S. president” refers to Bush, while 
accommodating the data about cognitive signiﬁcance (about what is commu-
nicated) that motivate Russell’s theory. 
Let us consider the second main problem with Russell’s view: it embodies a 
failure to distinguish semantic from conceptual analysis. A conceptual analysis 
of a sentence does not give the linguistic meaning of a sentence; rather, it gives 
the meaning of that meaning, so to speak; it produces a proposition that is logical-
ly equivalent with that meant by the sentence, but is more transparent in respect 
of its inferential structure. Consider the sentence: “x is a circle”. The linguistic 200  Book reviews


meaning is simply: x is a circle. But to give the proposition literally meant by 
that sentence is not to give a conceptual analysis of that sentence. A conceptual 
analysis is given by a proposition like: x is a closed planar ﬁgure of uniform curva-
ture. The latter proposition more perspicuously displays its inferential structure 
than does x is a circle. But the two propositions are logically equivalent.
Russell is clearly doing either semantic or conceptual analysis. Given this, 
it is clear that his theory is really a piece of semantic analysis. For the sake of 
argument, suppose Russell is not doing semantic analysis. In that case, he is 
doing  conceptual  analysis.  His  theory  then  amounts  to  this:  the  proposition 
literally meant by (#) is logically equivalent with exactly one thing x is a current 
U.S. President, and x smokes. But any proposition logically equivalent thereto 
will  itself  be  a  quantiﬁed  generalization  of  some  kind.  So if Russell  is  doing 
conceptual analysis, then the proposition literally meant by (#) must itself be a 
quantiﬁed generalization. In that case, deﬁnite descriptions must, at the level 
of literal meaning, be quantiﬁers. On the other hand, if Russell is not doing 
conceptual analysis, then he is doing semantic analysis; and he is straightfor-
wardly saying that, in terms of their literal meanings, deﬁnite descriptions are 
quantiﬁers. Either way, his theory entails that, at the level of literal meaning, 
deﬁnite descriptions are quantiﬁers. So in the end, his theory concerns the lit-
eral meanings of deﬁnite descriptions — it is a piece of semantic, as opposed to 
conceptual, analysis (see Kuczynski 2004a).
Given this, there is an obvious problem with Russell’s theory. Since Rus-
sell is giving a semantic analysis of (#), it follows trivially that he is giving its 
semantics, and is therefore saying what is literally meant by it. So he is saying 
that (#) has the same linguistic meaning as: 

  (###)  “exactly one thing x is a current U.S. President, and x smokes”.

So, if that theory is right, then (#) and (###) are synonymous. “Synonymous” 
means “having the same meaning” or “semantically the same”. So if, as Russell’s 
theory requires, (#) and (###) are synonymous, they ipso facto do not diﬀer in 
any semantically signiﬁcant respects: the diﬀerences between them must be as 
innocuous as those between a Southerner’s pronunciation of a sentence and 
Northerner’s. But the diﬀerences between (#) and (###) are not innocuous. If 
somebody asked you whether there was exactly one U.S. president, you would 
display  a  lack  of  linguistic  competence  by  uttering  (###)  as  a  reply;  but  you 
would display no such lack of competence were you to utter (#). Russellians 
invoke principles of pragmatics to explain the fact that pairs like (#) and (###) 
are seldom, if ever, interchangeable (see Blackburn 1984: 308–310). But if, as 
Russell’s theory requires, they were synonymous, then it wouldn’t be necessary  Book reviews  20


to invoke such principles in the ﬁrst place. Synonymous sentences are ipso facto 
interchangeable.6 So (#) and (###) are not synonymous, and Russell’s theory 
would seem to be wrong.
The question whether Russell was doing semantic as opposed to concep-
tual analysis is not even raised in Descriptions and Beyond, even though, as we 
just saw, if Russell’s theory is a piece of semantic analysis, it is committed to 
some very strong, and doubtful, claims about synonymy.
Virtually every article in Descriptions and Beyond defends Russell’s theory. 
They all defend it on the grounds that the alternative theory — the view that 
deﬁnite  descriptions  are  singular  terms  —  cannot  accommodate  facts  about 
the cognitive signiﬁcances of sentences containing such expressions. But as we 
saw above, and as the present author argues in many places, that is simply not 
true: such a position simply ignores the enormity of information conveyed to a 
person in the process of computing literal meaning; it ignores the power of pre-
semantic implicature. Though all written by ﬁne and estimable scholars, the 
articles in the anthology under review defend Russell’s theory against arcane 
and  minor  objections,  and  do  not  even  address  the  obvious  and  non-trivial 
objections to it, such as those stated in the present review, and those stated long 
ago by John Searle and, in fact, by Peter Strawson. (Michael Devitt’s ﬁne article, 
“A Case for Referring Descriptions” is an exception to these points. Another 
exception is R.M. Sainsbury’s penetrating paper “Referring Descriptions”.)
The contents of Descriptions and Beyond ignore another important seman-
tic datum. David Kaplan (1989) argued persuasively that tokens of indexicals 
are  “directly  referential”.7  So  if  Fred  says  “I  am  tired”,  his  words  encode  the 
proposition Fred is tired. And if, while pointing to an image of himself on a T.V. 
screen, Fred says “I am that man”, what is literally encoded in his words is: Fred 
is identical with Fred. If Kaplan’s widely accepted analysis is correct, then there 
is  a  massive  deviation  between,  on  the  one  hand,  what  is  literally  meant  by 
sentences containing indexicals and, on the other hand, the propositions that 
they literally mean. These divergences are not generally taken to be grounds 
for rejecting Kaplan’s theory. So it is curious that exactly similar divergences 
are  taken  to  be  grounds  for  rejecting  the  view  that  deﬁnite  descriptions  are 
singular terms. In fact, this is doubly perplexing given the fact that deﬁnite de-
scriptions are regarded by some semanticists as complex demonstratives. Over 
ﬁfty years ago, Strawson himself likened deﬁnite descriptions to indexicals. It is 
worth pointing out that, etymologically, “the” is a truncated form of “that”. This 
whole avenue of inquiry is simply ignored in Descriptions and Beyond.
Further,  exactly  similar  divergences  between  literal  and  communicated 
meaning occur where proper names are concerned. Given what Kripke (1972) 202  Book reviews


says,  we  have  good  reason  to  believe  that  “Hesperus”  and  “Phosphorus”  are 
directly referential, so that, for some object O, “Hesperus is Phosphorus” has 
for its literal meaning the trivial proposition O=O. But that sentence obviously 
communicates  a  non-trivial  proposition.  So  consideration  of  proper  names8 
and indexicals provides us with abundant evidence that, where singular terms 
are concerned, there can be massive deviations between literal and commu-
nicated meaning. (Above, we saw how to explain these deviations in the case 
of deﬁnite descriptions. Indexicals submit to a similar treatment. The case of 
proper  names  is  more  involved.9)  It  is  curious  that  these  facts  about  proper 
names and indexicals, which we know to be singular terms, are not even men-
tioned in Descriptions and Beyond or, for that matter, anywhere else in the pro-
Russell literature (see, for example, Neale 1990). And yet they were discussed 
(though somewhat obliquely) by Strawson in his article of over ﬁfty years ago, 
and also by Searle almost forty years ago.
In  his  celebrated  (1905)  paper,  Russell  gives  four  arguments  purporting 
to show that deﬁnite descriptions are quantiﬁers. Exact analogues of those ar-
guments “show” — what we now know to be false — that proper names and 
tokens of indexicals are quantiﬁers. Those very arguments (mutatis mutandis) 
can be made to “demonstrate” that “Hesperus” is a quantiﬁer.10 We know it is 
not; so those arguments must involve a non-sequitur. For reasons of brevity, we 
cannot pursue this issue here. But it is noteworthy that none of the articles in 
Descriptions and Beyond and, so far as the present reviewer knows, none of the 
literature regarding deﬁnite descriptions acknowledges that fact.
One last note: Russell’s theory is decidedly implausible when it comes to 
deﬁnite  descriptions  occurring  in  questions  and  imperatives.  Searle  (1970: 
161–162) made this point long ago. If Russell’s theory is correct, then when you 
say “is the maid coming?”, your utterance is synonymous with: “is it the case 
that we have exactly one maid x, and that x is coming?”. But this seems wrong, 
and it conﬂicts with the presumption that synonymous expressions should be 
interchangeable. Elsewhere (Kuczynski 2004b), the present author has argued 
that  consideration  of  non-indicative  sentences  clearly  warrants  the  rejection 

of Russell’s theory. Whether or not this is the case, any anthology concerning 
that theory should deal with this issue. Regrettably, Descriptions and Beyond 
ignores it. With the exceptions of the papers by Devitt and Sainsbury, it instead 
focuses on technical minutiae that are peripheral to the rich semantic and epis-
temological issues brought together by Russell’s important, but ﬂawed, theory.  Book reviews  203


Notes

.  See Russell (1905) and the introduction to Whitehead and Russell (1912).

2.  Russell gave several arguments for this theory. But the following gives the conceit un-
derlying most of the various arguments that have been given for it over the years (including 
most  of  those  given  by  Russell);  and  it  is  also  the  most  compelling  reason  to  adopt  that 
theory.

3.  I am prescinding from the fact that many deﬁnite descriptions — so-called “improper” 
ones, like “the dog”, “the man over there” — are probably subject to context-based restric-
tions.

4.  The asterices are meant to be quasi-quotes. 

5.  Strictly speaking, the right rule would probably involve context-based restrictions. Also, 
for reasons that I haven’t space to discuss here, the right rule would make a distinction be-
tween types and tokens. So the right rule would be something like this: If, in context C, there 
is exactly one salient U.S. president x, then tokens of the sentence-type “the U.S. president 
smokes” that occur in C encode the proposition: x smokes. In Literal Meaning and Cognitive 
Content (unpublished), I discuss the need for a complete “tokenization” of many semantic 
rules. 

6.  See Mates (1952). Grice and Frege would deny this. In their view “Bob is tall and he was 
malnourished as a child” is literally synonymous with “Bob is tall but he was malnourished 
as a child”. Intuition recoils at this view. In Literal Meaning and Cognitive Content, I argue 
that diﬀerences in what Frege called “tone” or “coloring” — or, as Grice put, in “conven-
tional implicature” — are actually semantic diﬀerences. They do not reﬂect diﬀerences in 
truth-conditions, but (as I put it) in truth-preconditions. So they reﬂect the operativeness of 
diﬀerent background assumptions.

7.  Kaplan’s (1989) work is anticipated by Strawson (1950). 

8.  See Kuczynski 2004a, especially the section entitled “Conceptual versus Semantic Analy-
sis”. 

9.  I deal with these problems at length in Literal Meaning and Cognitive Content and Inten-
sionality (both unpublished). 

0.  I must leave it to the reader to verify that, in fact, analogues of Russell’s four puzzles 
show that “Hesperus” and tokens of demonstratives are quantiﬁers. 


References

Blackburn, S. 1984. Spreading the Word. Oxford: Clarendon. 
Kaplan, D. 1989. “Demonstratives”. In Themes from Kaplan. J. Almog, J. Perry, and H. Wet-
tstein (eds). Oxford: Oxford University Press, 481–565. 204  Book reviews


Kripke, S. 1972. Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Kuczynski, J.M. 2004a. “Why deﬁnite descriptions really are referring expressions”. Grazer 
  Philosophische Studien 68: 45–79.
Kuczynski, J.M. 2004b. “Non-declarative sentences and the theory of descriptions”. Principia 
8(1): 119–154. 
Martinich, A.P. (ed). 1990. The Philosophy of Language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mates, B. 1952. “Synonymity”. In L. Linsky (ed), Semantics and the Philosophy of Language. 
Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 111–138. 
Neale, S. 1990. Descriptions. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Russell, B. 1905. “On Denoting”. In Martinich, 203–211.
Searle, J.R. 1958. “Proper Names”. Mind 67: 273–277. 
Searle, J.S. 1970. Speech Acts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Strawson, P. 1950. “On Referring”. In Martinich, 219–234.
Whitehead, A.N. and Russell, B. 1912. Principia Mathematica (to *56). Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Reviewer’s address

John-Michael Kuczynski
2665 South Bayshore Drive, Suite 1101
Coconut Grove Florida
33133 Florida
U.S.A. 

Email: jsbach@jps.net

About the reviewer

John-Michael Kuczynski is a PhD candidate in philosophy at the University of California, 
Santa Barbara. He has published a book advocating an anti-realist view of sense-perception 
(Elements of Virtualism, 2003), and has several articles forthcoming, or already published, 
in the Journal for Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology, Cognition and Communication, 
Kriterion, Teorema, and other journals.












 