                          What Does Kant Conceive God to Be?


 


        What does Kant conceive God to be?


        The answer is that Kant accepts a form of pantheism, with the


qualification that, in Kant’s view, the world seems to be inanimate because


we have knowledge not of its inner (‘noumenal’) essence but only of its outer


(‘phenomenal’) exterior. Thus, whereas Spinoza’s pantheism is a form of


atheism, the reason being that Spinoza does not distinguish between


phenomenal and noumenal reality, Kant’s pantheism is a form of theism, the


reason being that he does make this distinction.


        Kant arrived at this conception of God because rightly saw it to


represent a defensible way of dealing with the following paradox. If God


caused the world to exist, then, since cause and effect are distinct, he does not


constitute it; and if he does not constitute it, then is just one more occupant of


it, in which case, he falls short of being what God is supposed to be. At the


same time, if God didn’t cause the world to exist and, moreover, he does


constitute it, in which case God isn’t anything over and above the bits of


matter and energy that make up reality, in which case the assertion that God


exists collapses into its own negation.


        Spinoza’s solution to this paradox is to say that God is the universe.


But that position collapses into atheism. Kant wanted to solve this paradoxwhile still allowing God to have sapience. Kant does this in two steps.


        Step 1: God is to be regarded not as the cause of the world but as its


ground. He is responsible for the world not by virtue of creating but by virtue


of constituting it. Thus far, Kant is in agreement with Spinoza and is


therefore open to the charge of being an atheist posing as a pantheist. This is


where Step 2 comes in.


        Step 2: Kant grants that, to the extent that it can be known on the


basis of observation, the universe is indeed what scientists believe to be—


dead matter, sprinkled with the occasional drop of consciousness, dispersed


throughout empty space. But, says Kant, there is more to the universe than


what observation and hypotheses based thereupon disclose. According to


Kant, reality is divided into noumena and phenomena. Phenomena are what


we can observe, along with we can legitimately posit on the basis of


observation (e.g. microparticles). Noumena are inner essences that are


inherently inaccessible to observation and extrapolations based thereupon.


And, so Kant reasons, although God is identical with the Universe, that is


compatible with God’s being sapient, since the universe is ‘crypto-sapient’,


meaning that its noumenal interior is sapient, even though its phenomenal


exterior is not.


        Is there way any to interpret this line of thought in such a that it has


substance? Yes. First of all, observation and observation-based hypothesesdisclose only the structural properties of reality. They do not, and cannot


possibly, provide information as to the nature that which bears these


properties. Our knowledge of reality, in Kant’s view and in actuality, is


similar to my knowledge of you. I can your observe bodily movements and


on that basis I can after a fashion have a kind of knowledge of your mind. But


my knowledge of your mind is second-hand and, for that reason, purely


formal. It is not comparable to your knowledge of your own consciousness,


which first-hand and informal in nature---substantive, in other words, as


opposed to schematic. In Kant’s view, according to this reading of him, our


knowledge of the universe is like my knowledge of you: it includes externals


but excludes the realities underlying them. But were we to grasp these


underlying realities, in the way that a given person grasps the psychological


realities underlying his own bodily movements, we should see that the


universe was animated by sapience in much the same way as a living human


body, this sapience being God.


        Kant repeatedly says that states that human psyches are noumena


and, moreover, that they are the only noumena knowable to us. Kant also


says that God is a noumenon. Relative to our reading of Kant, these otherwise


unintelligible remarks make perfect sense. A given person can know the


noumenon that he himself his, precisely because his knowledge of himself is


not confined to externalities. On the basis of such knowledge, coupled withone’s knowledge as to the mental states one knows oneself to have are


expressed by changes in one’s own body, one can know, albeit in a second-


hand and therefore purely formal way, that bodies similar to one’s own are


animated by minds similar to ones own. And, so Kant concludes, if we


simply extend this analogy-based reason to the universe as a whole, we have


no choice but to conclude that there is sapience beneath its seemingly purely


physical exterior, as there is sapience between the seemingly purely physical


exterior of a living human body.


 


 


 