            Papers on Accounting, Business, Economics, Politics, and Psychology
                              College Papers Plus 2019-2019
 

Table of Contents
 
The Altman-Z Bankruptcy-Prediction Algorithm
Application of Cobit-framework (July 24, 2019)
Microsoft Financial Analysis 2016-2018 (June 23, 2019)
      Introduction
      Operating Cash Flow
      Common Equity
        Profitability
      Return on Equity
      Net Profit Margin
      Asset Turnover
      Leverage
      Return on Assets
        Liquidity Ratios
      Current Ratio
      Quick Ratio
      Ebit Interest Coverage
        Average Days to Collect Receivables
      Conclusion
      Works Cited
Microsoft Five Forces Analysis
      Introduction
      Industry Competition (Strong Force)
      Bargaining Power of Customers (Weak Force)
      Bargaining Power of Suppliers (Moderate Force)
      Threat of Substitutes (Weak Force)
      Threat of New Entrants (Moderate Force)
      Conclusion
Reflection Paper: Harvey on Commodity Fetishism (Politics/Economics)
Reflection Paper: Defending Marxist Economist (Politics/Economics)
Outline of Economics Paper on Contradictions in Free Market (Economics)
Some Reflections on the Virtues of the Free Market (Economics/Politics/Current Events)
When is wealth-redistribution legitimate? (Economics/Philosophy)
An Economic Argument for Drug-legalization (Economics)
Hobbes, Marx, Rousseau, Nietzsche: Their Central Themes (Politics/Philosophy/Intellectual
History)
De Tocqueville on Egoism (Politics/History/Philosophy)
Would the Founding Fathers Approve of Trump? (Politics/Current Events)
The Most Basic Principles of Knowledge Management
The ‘Free’ Market Isn’t Always So Free
An Analysis of Barry Deutsch’s ‘Really Good Careers’ (Economics/Current Events)
Knowledge Management and Information Economics in Relation
to the Optimization of Instruction-markets (Economics/Business/Graduate Work)
        Chapter 1 Introduction to the Study
      Introduction
        Background to the Study        Problem Statement
      Purpose of the Study
      Research Questions
      Advancing Scientific Knowledge and Significance of Study
      Rationale for Methodology
      Nature of the Research Design for the Study
      Research Questions
        Definitions of Terms
        Assumptions, Limitations, Delimitations
        Summary and Organization of the Remainder of the Study
        References
Goldman, Rousseau and von Hayek on the Ideal State (Politics)
Take-home Exam on Russian History (Politics/History/Current Events)
Did the founding fathers support or oppose democracy? Was the Constitution a democratic
document or an anti-democratic document? (History/Politics)
The Two Faces of China’s Negative Soft Power:
China’s Belt and Road Initiative as a Case of Negative Soft Power (Politics)
Interest Groups and Political Parties (Politics/Current Events)
What led to the collapse of the Soviet Union? (Politics/History/Current Events)
Plato’s Republic as Pol Potist Bureaucracy (Politics/Philosophy)
Politics and Contemporary France and Russia (Politics/Current Events)
Politics in the USA, Russia and France
      Political Parties in the United States: A Brief History
      France’s Political System
        Russia’s Geography in Relation to its Political Development
      The Collapse of the Soviet Union?
        Russia’s Current Political System
        Russia’s Dependence on Strong Leaders
Summary of Politics of Economic Growth in the States (Economics)
Should the US have entered WWI? (History)
Mill and von Hayek on Free-market Economics (Economics/Philosophy)
How is Colonialism different from Imperialism? Short Version (Politics)
How is Colonialism different from Imperialism? Long Version (History/Politics/Economics)
Was the US a World Leader Between 1946-1991? Long Version (History/Politics)
A Case for Environmental Regulation and against Carbon Taxes (Economics/Politics)
Wollstonecraft vs. Marx on Religion (Intellectual History)
Carbon Taxes vs. Standing Regulations (Economics/Politics)
Culture and Creativity (Sociology)
The American Dream (Politics)
Knowledge-capital (Politics/Economics/Philosophy)
Four Essays on Modern History (History/Politics)
Why is the United States so Energy-inefficient? (Sociology)
Stalin’s Nationalism vs. Putin’s Nationalism (History/Politics)
Why Minimum Wage is Wrong
Pot Legalization in California: Prop 64 (Current Events)
Zara’s Supply-chain Efficiency (Business)
Microsoft Financial analysis 2016-2018 (Business/Accounting)
      Introduction
      Operating Cash Flow
      Common Equity        Profitability
      Return on Equity
      Net Profit Margin
      Asset Turnover
      Leverage
      Return on Assets
      Conclusion
      Sources
Case Studies in Corporate Fraud (Accounting/Fraud Examination)
      The Fraud Triangle
        Forensic Accounting Post-Enron (Business/Accounting)
      Using the Fraud Triangle to Prevent Fraud
      Money Laundering: Basic Principles (Business/Accounting)
      The Valeant Fraud
      An Actual Case of ID Theft
      A Case of Financial Fraud at a University
      The Olympus Fraud
      The Dixon Fraud
        Multinationals in Relation to the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act in Relation
      The ARCP Fraud
      The Basia Skudrzyk Fraud
      The Liberty Bell Fraud
      A Hypothetical Skimming Case
      Fraud Risk Factors in a Hypothetical Multinational Company
      Cybercrime: How to Spot It and Stop It
      Fraud Interview Techniques
      Some Key Obstacles to Effective Fraud Risk Assessment
      Five Characteristics of Reliable Employees
The “So What?” About your Industry Analysis (Business)
Analytical Assessment of Greg Toppo’s “Do Video Games Inspire Violence?”
Why Barings Fell (Business/Economics)
Internet Crime (Computer Security)
Privatization in African Telecommunications
Ethio Telecom Being Privatized (Business)
The Economic Justification for America’s Involvement in WWI (Economics/History)
The Economics of Higher Education in the 21st Century (Economics/Business)
      The Economics of Higher Education in the 21st Century
      Part I
      Introduction to Part I
        Retention-rates and Graduation-rates: Introductory Remarks
      Do Graduation- and Retention-rates Matter?
        Open-market Companies (OMC’s): How they Differ from Universities
        Colleges Sell Degrees, not Instruction
        Enrollment-rates Matter: Retention- and Graduation-rates Don’t
        Universities: Their Distinctive Business-model
      How Useful Do Students Really Want Their Educations To Be?
      The Paradox of Macroeconomic Efficiency
      When in Doubt, Drop Out: Dispelling the Myth that Only Losers Drop Out
          Knowledge-management: Introductory Remarks
      Why Knowledge-management Cannot be of Assistance to Universities      Key Points
      Conclusion of Part 1: How to Maximize Revenue by Optimizing Education
      The Economics of Higher Education in the 21st Century Part II
      Introduction to Part II
      What is Knowledge-management (KM)?
      An Actual Company that Could Benefit from KM
      Who Exactly Sounds the KM-alarm?
      KM as Preventative Measure
      KM in Relation to Organizations that Sell Results
      KM in Relation to Organizations that Sell Services
        Service-organizations Depend on Poor KM
      KM Impossible Unless Employment and Pay are Performance-dependent
      No KM without Financial Transparency
        Expense-padding in Relation to KM
      A Corollary: Education Must be Digitized Whenever Possible
      DMO: A New and Better Kind of University
      All Accreditations Examination-based
      How DMO Turns Non-STEM Students into STEM Students
        Emphasis on Instruction as Opposed to Selection
      More Degree-levels at DMO
      Instructors Never to Function as Gatekeepers
        Payments to Go Straight from Student to Instructor
      The Inverted Payment Pyramid
      25 Desiderata that DMO Must Satisfy
      Conclusion of Part 2
      Conclusion of the Present Work
United Airlines vs. Alaska Airlines (Business)
Four Papers on Business-theory: Marketing Strategy, Joint Venture, Counter-trade,
Ethnocentric Staffing
      What is strategy? How does strategy relate to a firm's profitability?
      What is a joint venture? What type of joint venture is most common? Provide an
example of a joint venture.
        Explain countertrade and its purpose
      Why should a firm pursue an ethnocentric approach to staffing? What are the
disadvantages of this approach? Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of a polycentric
approach to staffing.
The Secret of IKEA’s Success (Business)
Strategy and Profitability (Business)
Facebook: Why and How it Makes Money (Business)
Gret Satell on Marketing (Business)
An Exercise in Rational Decision-making (Business)
Organizational Analysis of McDonals
Including SWOT Analysis (Business)
Analysis of Case 2: Why the Candidate Should Decline the Job Offer (Business/Ethics)
Internal vs. External Stakeholders: An Analysis of Three Companies (Business/Finance)
Variables in a Marketing-study (Business)
Target:  Corporate Case-study (Business)
Prejudice as Psychological Resistance (Psychology)
A Freudian Analysis of Prejudice (Psychology)
Freud on Sublimation: Why His Analysis is Still Relevant (Psychology)Failure to Sublimate: A Freudian Analysis of the Peter Pan Syndrome (Psychology/Current
Events)
Psychology Assignment (Psychology)
Attachment Theory and Mental Illness (Clinical Psychology)
Why We Lie (Psychology/Evolutionary Theory)
Unconditioned Stimuli (Psychology)
Goring and Lombroso on Criminality (Psychology)
Legal Brief (Law School)
      TABLE OF AUTHORITIES
        STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION
        QUESTION PRESENTED
        STANDARD OF REVIEW
        STATEMENT OF THE CASE
        SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT
        ARGUMENT
        CONCLUSION
      Motion to Quash
Legal Negotiation Exercise Reflection Paper 2: The Negotiation – Clients (Law School)
Adverse Possession
I am more than my LSAT Scores (Law School Application)
Describe Your Background (College Application)
Personal Statement (Law School)
My Career as a Computer Security Expert (Job Application)
Business School Application
How I Benefited from this Course (Sociology)
Personal Statement (Law School Application)
Supplementary Essay (Law School Application)
The American Dream (College Application)
Geico Job Application (Application Essay)
Personal Statement (Law School Application)
Breaching Patriarchal Throwness with a Hatpin (Feminist Theory/Politics)
A Feminist Breaching Experiment
Cornell West on Malcolm X (Politics)
Fork etiquette (Anthropology)
McClatchey on Race and IQ (Current Events)
Freedom of Speech: Its Scope and Limits (Politics)
Defending Freedom of Speech (Ethics/Politics)
Why College Admissions Should Continue to be Based at least in
part on Standardized Test Scores (Public Policy)
Being a Voter in Texas (Current Events)
Three Takeaways from The Young Turks’ ‘Iceland does the Unimaginable’ (Current Events)
Summary and Analysis of Tomatoland (Politics/Current Events)
A Demographic Analysis of Dropout-likelihood and Dropout-rationality
      List of Figures
        Chapter 1: Introduction to the Study
      Introduction
        Background of the Study
        Problem Statement
      Purpose of the Study
      Research Questions and/or Hypotheses      Advancing Scientific Knowledge and Significance of the Study
      Rationale for Methodology
      Nature of the Research Design of the Study
        Definitions of Terms
        Assumptions, Limitations, Delimitations
        Summary and Organization of the Remainder of the Study
        Chapter 2: Literature Review
      Introduction to the Chapter
        Identification of the Gap
        Identification of the Gap (Continued): The Statistical Data
        Theoretical Foundations and/or Conceptual Framework
      Review of the Literature
      Literature Review: Vocational Careers
      Literature Review: Earnings on the Part of Non-vocationally trained Non-graduates
      Literature Review: Financial Costs and Benefits of Low IQ Degree
        Summary
        Chapter 3 Methodology
      Introduction
        Statement of the Problem
      Research Questions and Hypotheses
      Research Methodology
      Research Design
        Population and Sample Selection
        Instrumentation
        Validity
        Reliability
      Data Collection and Management
      Data Analysis Procedures
      Ethical Considerations
        Limitations and Delimitations
        Summary
Is the Turing Test a good test of intelligence? (philosophy)
Is the Turing Test a good test of intelligence? Second Version (philosophy)
Should Caffeine be a Controlled Substance?
Who started the Cold War?
Who was a better President? Eisenhower or JFK?
Who was a better President? Nixon or LBJ?
Technology-caused Job-shortages and the Need for Universal Welfare
Ideas as Networks: Reflecting on Steven Johnson’s
“Where Good Ideas Come From”
Are we born good? Response to: “Born Good?” (http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=FRvVFW85IcU)
An Exercise in Legal Interpretation
Posts for Business Ethics Class
Can you think of an example where someone has been honest but not ethical, as Carter (assigned
reading) says?
What was your decision in "Desperate Air?" Sell? Not sell? Why?
How far would YOU have gone in the obedience experiment?
Reactions to the Jones Day report on the rankings scandal at the Fox School
Can you apply ideas from the Bazerman and Tenbrunsel article to McCoy's dilemma in theParable of the Sadhu?
Will it be possible for you to maintain your ethical values yet succeed in the business world?
Have you ever been in the "Endgame" scenario?
What is your "home base" ethical theory? (from the Deckop chapter)
Is THE social responsibility of business to increase its profits? -- Who's right: Friedman or
Mackey?
Were WalMart to increase its pay and benefit level to those of Costco (Stone article) or TJ's
(Wilke article), or LaColumbe (Carmichael article) would it be more or less financially
successful?
Have you ever had a "Sadhu" dropped at your feet (so to speak). If so, what did you do?
Do you think corporations are living up to their original purpose in society?
Identify an argument in an article, book etc. that does poorly on TWO or more of the 7 standards
Paul & Elder say help assess critical thinking. Briefly discuss.
Response to Posts about Descartes’ Evil Demon (my material in italics)
Economics Quiz on Elasticity
Summary of Video about Milgram Experiment https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=f97VYdkHZK8
Racism and Sexism
Answers to (somebody else’s) Questions about Orwell’s “Shooting and Elephant” (My content in
italics)
When is it a good for a company to decentralize?
A Tough Business Decision
An Ethical Quandry
Legitimate Line Extensions as an Alternative to Front-businesses
The Solution to the Pizza Puzzle
Legal vs. Substantive Freedom and the Paradox of the Free Market
Reflections on works by Hall, Debord, and Morgan & Tierney
QUANTITATIVE Dissertation Research Plan
Discussion Post #8 (worth 30 points; at least 200 words):  Due by Saturday, Oct 26th, by 11:30
p.m.

 


 


 


 


 


 The Altman-Z Bankruptcy-Prediction Algorithm


 


      Question 1 (15 Points)


 


      What are the benefits of utilizing a bankruptcy prediction model such


as Altman’s Z score and how would you apply it to a company? (Use a


specific company such as Microsoft to apply it). Read the appropriate


portions of Module 4 of our Textbook for this Question.


 


      A company’s Altman Z-score provides a reasonably good indication


of a company’s health and, in particular, of its likelihood of going bankrupt


within the next two years. If X is a company, X’s Altman Z-score is the sum


of the following numbers:


 


 


        3.3x(EBIT/total assets)


        1.4x(retained earnings/total assets)


        1.2x(working capital/total assets)


        .99x(sales/total assets)


        0.6x(market value of equity/total liabilities) MVE/TL


  


      In each case, we have a financial ratio multiplied by a coefficient that,


in effect, assigns a certain degree of importance to that ratio. For example,


EBIT/total assets is the ratio of a company’s total earnings (before interest


and taxes) to its assets and is therefore a measure of the amount of work that


those assets are doing. (EBIT is ten times larger than total assets, then total


assets are operating with 1000% efficiency; if ten times smaller, then


operating with 10% efficiency.) Because this is obviously such an important


ratio, it is given a high degree of weight in the form of a large (3.3)


coefficient.


      The next three ratios are similar to EBIT/total assets, but not as


important, since they take into account taxes and interest and other factors


that, although relevant to a company’s health, do not reflect how much work


its assets are doing. As for market value of equity/total liabilities (MVE/TL ),


this represents total value of stock divided by company-debt---in other words,


the real value of equity, after debt is taken into account. This is obviously


important, but it is not as important as the other ratios, since, unlike them, it


says nothing about how much work company assets are doing---it speaks


only to their current value.


      The higher a company’s Altman Z-score, the less likely is imminent


bankruptcy, with a score of 3.0 considered the minimum score of afinancially healthy company. Right now, Amazon’s Altman Z-score is 6.2---


meaning very little chance of bankruptcy. BlackBerry’s current score is


negative, meaning that bankruptcy is highly possible. In 2012, Sears’ score


was 2.3 which is low but almost acceptable. In 2017, it had a score of zero


and declared bankruptcy that years. Historically, bankruptcy predictions


based on Altman Z-scores have been accurate 90% of the time.


 


 


      Case Analysis (85 Points)


 


        Problems in bond ratings and the firms issuing them have led to both


Standard and Poor’s as well as Moody’s modifying their ratings criteria.


Included in these changes is an attempt to capture more risk elements in the


rating process and to more comprehensively quantify potential areas of


concern.


 


      The 2015 document issued by Moody’s explains their ratings


criteria and the ratings they have assigned to the software industry.  It


can be found in the Final Exam Module. This document can be combined


with corporate reporting data to apply these ratings criteria to specific


companies covered by Moody’s. For this examination please use the 201810K for Microsoft provided earlier in the Mid-term Exam Module to


apply bond ratings criteria to that company. In other words, utilize the


analytics Moody’s applies to the software industry including any metrics


that help in identifying and applying both the qualitative and


quantitative criteria noted in the Moody’s Report on Software


Companies.  Please answer the following questions pertaining to the


report.


 


      1)              Discuss the five key factors important to Moody’s in


assessing credit ratings for the industry. (15)


 


      Those five factors are:


 


      Scale


        Business Profile


        Profitability


      Leverage and Coverage


      Financial Policy


 


      Scale is cash flow, including free cash flow (cash flow minus


expenditures). Obviously the bigger the cash flow, especially of free cashflow, the more robust the company.


      A company's business profile refers to its market-share and its range


of goods and markets. A company that has a 100% market share is the only


game in town, so to speak, and is therefore in a good position, and one that


has a 0% market share is not doing any business at all. Obviously the larger a


company's market share, the better. As for diversity of products/services (i.e.


range of products/services), this is important because a company that offers


only one product/service will go out of business if demand for that


products/service dries up. That said, successful companies tend to specialize


(consider A1, Goodyear, Microsoft, Coca Cola), and over-diversification of


products/services can hurt a company. (This happened to A1 when it started


selling seafood sauce, instead of just sticking to steak-sauce.)


        End-market diversity is the number of different markets where goods


are sold. Obviously, the more such diversity, the better, other things equal,


since a company whose eggs (products) are in one basket (market) is


vulnerable to changes in that market. (The ‘other things equal’ rider is


important, since the cost of doing business in a given market might exceed


the benefits.)


        Geographic diversity is the range of venues (economically distinct


areas) where it creates its products/services. As a general rule, some diversity


in this respect is desirable as a hedge against contingencies. For example, if acompany has all its operations in one place, then a single change could ruin


it. (A tornado could destroy its facilities; a new president might decide to


nationalize the corresponding industry; a new mayor might raise taxes; etc.)


        Profitability is the ratio of income to expense (‘bang for buck’,


essentially). The higher this number, the better, for obvious reasons. 


      A company’s leverage is the extent to which it is debt-financed, as


opposed to asset-financed; and a company’s coverage is the extent to which it


is able to services, in most cases, its debt. Insufficient coverage is a sign of


poor financial health, as is excessive leverage.


      A company’s financial policy is the manner in which it deals with its


own assets and liabilities. It is a bad sign if management is overly bearish


(risk-averse), and shies away from all investment-opportunities, but it is no


less a bad sign if it is overly bullish (risk-affine) and invests indiscriminately.


It is a very bad sign if a company is slow to pay off its debts, and a good sign


if it pays them off ahead of schedule, especially if its timeliness has to do


with its having invested the borrowed assets profitably. All of this falls under


the rubric of ‘financial policy.’


 


 


 


      2)              Why is it necessary for Moody’s to apply different weightsfor these factors?  How are these factors measured? (10)


 


      Moody’s weights for these five factors are as follows:


 


      Leverage and Coverage 30%


        Business Profile 25%


 


 


      Financial Policy 20%


      Scale 15%


        Profitability 10%


 


 


      If a company cannot service its debt, it will, for purely legal reasons,


immediately go out of existence (absent a government-bailout or some other,


similarly improbable event). Of the five factors, leverage/coverage is the only


one that relates to a company's legal obligations; the others relate to its


economic viability. There are no laws against investing unwisely or selling


mediocre products; there are laws against not repaying loans, and the penalty


is typically liquidation. Consequently, leverage/coverage is weighted the


most heavily (30%).      A company’s business-profile includes its market-share and also


includes its ability to survive changes in markets. Being so important, it is


weighted the second most heavily (25%).


      A company’s financial policy includes the financial savviness of its


management, along with the ability, or inability, to manage debt and to seize


opportunities. Financial policy is therefore key to a company’s willingness


and ability to grow. Financial policy is key to growth, but not as key to


survival as the first two factors, and it is therefore weighted the third most


heavily (20%).


      A company's scale is its total cash flow, which reflects the amount of


business it is doing. Obviously, a company that is doing a lot of business is,


other things equal, better off than one that is only doing a little business. The


reason scale is so low on the list, with a weighting of only 15%, is that other


things are not always equal. In particular, costs of materials, payroll, interest


on debts, not to mention the abilities of key executives, may have critical


positive or negative effects on a company’s feasibility.


      A company’s profitability is obviously important, since an


unprofitable company is not worth investing in and won’t survive, this being


why profitability is on the list. At the same time, it is long-term profits, not


short-term profits, that matter. A company can be a pump-and-dump scheme


and therefore briefly be very profitable. Consequently, profitability is not tobe weighted too heavily, this being why it is ranked last, with a weighting of


10%.


 


      3)              What are some of the assumptions, limitations and other


considerations noted by Moody’s in employing this methodology? Are


accounting adjustments an issue for Moody’s in applying their criteria?


Please note that if so you are not required to make them but please


discuss briefly what they consist of. (10)


      The most important such assumptions relate to the discount rate that a


company uses when evaluating its own assets. First of all, it cannot be know


with certainty at the present time how the value of money will fluctuate in the


future; so discount-rates are always assumed, as opposed to known. That


said, some discount-rates are more reasonable than others; and when a given


company’s financials are based on overly optimistic discount-rates, Moody’s


looks into the matter and, if the numbers don’t pan out, asks the company in


question to revise its financials accordingly.


              One limitation that Moody’s must adjust for is that accounting


and reporting requirements vary from country to country. Another is that


even the most conservative financial statements are based on assumptions


about interest-rates and markets in general that may prove false.


              There are two kinds of accounting adjustments, standard andnon-standard, each of which is relevant to how Moody’s evaluates company-


financials. Standard-adjustments include securities, pension-plans, R&D


costs, and non-recurring expenses. Non-standard adjustments include debts


reported at ‘fair value’ (market value), as well as likely benefits-obligations


to future former employees of the company.




 


 


      4)              Utilizing the data in the 10K for Microsoft please discuss


the individual factor mapping results using the company’s own data


(financial statements, etc.) and state whether you agree with the


individual ratings assigned by Moody’s for each factor.  (50)


 


      For the 2018 fiscal year, Microsoft’s profitability was 15%. This is


considered a respectable degree of profitability.


      Its current ratio was 2.9. This figure is high, meaning that, at that time,


Microsoft had a high degree of ability to meet its short-term obligations.


      Its quick ratio was 2.86. This figure is high, suggesting that Microsoft


was holding to too much cash and therefore was not using its resources as


efficiently as possible.


        Microsoft's cash flow was about $5 billion (extremely high), and itsnet income was about $16.5 billion (extremely high).


      Its total liabilities were just under $95 billion.


      Moody’s gave Microsoft AAA ratings (the highest possible) in every


category, except for end-market diversity, geographic diversity, and free cash


flow to debt, in which Microsoft received AA ratings.


      In every possible category, without exception, Microsoft was ranked


higher than every single one of its competitors.


      In my judgments, these ratings are most part accurate, with some


tentative qualifications. The first is that a AA FCF/debt ratio may be too high,


given that Microsoft's total liabilities were $95 billion and its free cash flow


in December 2018 was about $5 billion. Microsoft being the juggernaut that


it is, this rating may well be justified; but if an assessment of Microsoft's


FCF/debt were made strictly on the basis of its cash flow and debt, and not on


the basis of anything else, an AA rating might be too high.


      As for end-market diversity and geographic diversity, an AA rating


seems too low, given that Microsoft has a worldwide customer-base and also


has operations on every continent, except for Africa. (This changed in May


2019, when it launched a $100 million facility in Kenya.) 


 


 


  


 Application of Cobit-framework (July 24, 2019)


 


 


      To whom it may concern:


 


      There are many components of the COBIT framework that could be


improved upon at RutgersCo. I will discuss the three that I believe to the


most important. To quote my professor: “There are various components that


assist with IT-governance: Culture, Ethics, and Behavior; People, Skills, and


Competencies; and Services, Infrastructure, and Applications”


(19_06_23_22.19.06.mp4). In this report, I will show that, in the case of


RutgersCo, each of these components needs to be improved.


      Processes: One major problem is a lack of well-defined processes and


procedures for carrying out tasks, especially—ominously---accounting


related tasks. When I first met with the Assistant Controller (in other words,


the second-in-command when it comes to managing RutgersCo’s finance’s),


the first words out of his mouth were: “Boy, am I glad to see you. We need to


get these books closed. The previous controller made a lot of entries himself.


I have been trying to follow his work, but I just can’t quite figure out how he


worked up some of the entries” (RiderCo’s Acquisition of RutgersCo). This


means that procedures for keeping and sharing financial records areinsufficiently defined, which is likely to lead both to loss of revenue,


excessive or insufficient payments in taxes, and regulatory or even criminal


sanctions. Also, the lack of such procedures in this respect leads to extra


work for employees, as this quotation indicates, and also disorients


employees and diminishes their respect for the company.


      This brings me to another component of the COBIT framework that


could be improved at RutgersCo: People, Skills, and Competency. The


accounting team at RutgersCo is feeling frustrated, because some of their best


people were recently fired, making it hard for them to do their job (RiderCo’s


Acquisition of RutgersCo). The purpose of the firings was to free up money


for an ad campaign that totally failed, further angering RutgersCo employees.


The firings diminished net competency as well as overall morale, and the ad


campaign appears, at least to people in RutgersCo accounting department, to


have been a callous attempt on the part of management to make quick money


at the expensive of fundamentals. “People skills and competencies,” my


professor observed, are integral to people “making good decisions” and


thereby keeping the business going (19_06_23_22.19.06.mp4).


      Another Cobit-component that needs work here is Services,


Infrastructure, and Applications. The accounting system is divided into a


number of different modules, each with its own data-base and unable to


communicate with one another in simple user-friendly way (RiderCo’sAcquisition of RutgersCo). This necessitates the use of ad hoc methods of


communication, which require effort and increase the chance of human effort.


Because of the problems with the accounting system, reporting cannot be


automated and has to be done by hand, which is labor-intensive and which


increases the likelihood of human error—and also increases the likelihood of


deliberate falsification on the part of employees, either to minimize effort on


their part or in order to commit fraud.


      These problems relate largely to poor IT-control at RutgersCo. Good


IT-control requires that all employees involved in either the keep or reporting


of finances be using the same system. Right now, this is not the case. There


appear to be independent systems, each with its own database. The fact that


multiple databases are used is likely to lead to multiple sets of company


books, resulting in management having to arbitrarily choose between


different sets of financial records, leading to loss of revenue and possible


legal problems.


      Another IT-related problem is that there are unclear protocols relating


to the cashing of checks. There should be one person or group of persons who


cash checks. But right now, this is not the case, and checks are cashed by


employees who happen to be in possession of them. Since these employees


are in many cases not formally required to do this, the result is likely to that


checks from clients simply are not cashed. Another possibility is that theseemployees embezzle by endorsing the checks to themselves instead of the


company. There should be a well-defined company treasurer, which, at


present, there is not.


      Another IT-related problem is that there are poor policies and poor


communications relating to the commission-levels of sales personnel.


According to one member of the accounting team, practically every single


salesperson had a different agreement with management as to how much he


was to receive in bonuses and as to what his commission-levels were


(RiderCo’s Acquisition of RutgersCo). In fact, it appeared that different


salespersons had simply gone rogue and were simply deciding for themselves


what their commissions should be. This could lead to embezzlement on a


large scale and, at the very least, could least to money-wastage. Also, if, as I


likely under the current scenario, a given salesperson gave inconsistent


reports concerning his commissions and bonuses to different members of the


accounting, the result would be inconsistent records, wasted revenue, and


possible regulatory and even criminal sanctions. “The culture, ethics, and


behavior of individuals”, my professor said, has a significant effect on the


“success of government and management activities”


(19_06_23_22.19.06.mp4), and in the case of RutgersCo, the culture is one of


low morale, there is a lack of internal possibly leading to loose ethics, and


employee-behavior is correspondingly erratic, with an ‘every-man-for-himself’ mentality prevailing.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


             Microsoft Financial Analysis 2016-2018 (June 23, 2019)


 

Introduction

Operating Cash Flow

Common Equity

Profitability

Return on Equity

Net Profit Margin

Asset Turnover

Leverage

Return on Assets

Liquidity Ratios

Current Ratio

Quick Ratio

Ebit Interest Coverage

Average Days to Collect Receivables

Conclusion

Works CitedIntroduction


 


      This present work is a financial analysis of Microsoft during the years


2017-2018. 2016 is included when the necessary data is available in course-


documents. Other years are excluded. This analysis is not complete and it


focuses only on the absolutely crucial financial indicators. Microsoft’s


financials are compared to Oracle’s, so as to provide information as to


Microsoft’s performance relative to its competitors.


      Our main source of information about Microsoft is Microsoft’s 2018


10-K form (specifically pages 50-53). Our main source of information about


Oracle is Oracle’s income statement, accessed at


  http://financials.morningstar.com/income-statement/is.html?


  t=ORCL&region=usa&culture=en-US. The financial data provided in those


documents rounds figures to the nearest thousandth. All specific financial


data relating to Microsoft and Oracle come from these sources unless there is


an indication otherwise.


        Microsoft’s performance during this time-period is positive in absolute


terms. Microsoft also marginally outperforms Oracle. That said, the one


companies financials parallel each other to a striking degree: Microsoft has


more total assets, but its performance relative to its total assets is similar to


(though marginally better than) Oracle’s performance relative to its totalassets. Between 2017 and 2018, there are dips in Microsoft’s performance,


but those are corresponding dips in Oracle’s performance, indicating that the


issue is not with Microsoft itself but with the industry as a whole.


 Operating Cash Flow


 


      When conducting a financial analysis of a company, the first step is to


determine its cash flow from operating activities, or operating cash flow


(OCF), this being the amount of money that it generates from its activities,

                                      [1]
excluding long-term investments. In 2016, Microsoft’s OCF was


$33,325,000; in 2017, $35,507,000; and in 2018, $42,884,000. It is a good


sign that Microsoft's OCF was positive during each of these years since this


indicates that its products and services were generating income. A company


whose OCF is zero or negative can still profit since it can make money from


investments and assets, but its products and services are failing to generate


income, and its position is therefore unstable. Also, Microsoft’s OCF grew


over 30% during this period---also a positive sign.


        Microsoft’s net income (revenues minus expenses, i.e. profits) in 2016


was $20,539,000; in 2017, $25, 489,000; and in 2018, $16, 571,000. During


each year, Microsoft’s net income was positive, but its net income fell by


$8,918,000---a drop of over 34% (10K p. 52).


      Oracle’s OCF in 2016 was $13, 561, 000; in 2017, $14,126,000; and


in 2018, $15,386,000. Oracle’s net income in 2016 was $8,901,000; in 2017,


$9,335,000; and in 2018, $3,825,000. Oracle’s OCF was positive during each


of these years, and also increased during this time period by around 13%.Between 2017 and 2018, Oracle’s net income plummeted, falling by over


50%. Since its OCF grew during this period, the fall does not indicate a


decline in demand for Oracle products and services. 


 Common Equity    


 


      In 2016, Microsoft’s common equity (the amount invested by


shareholders) was $68, 465, 000; in 2017, 68, 178,000; and in 2018,


$69,315,000. There was therefore modest growth in Microsoft common


equity during this period. In 2016, Oracle’s common equity was $164, 950,

                                                                  [2]
000; in 2017, $209, 937, 000; and in 2018, $175,569,000. Oracle’s


performance here is more jagged than Microsoft’s but also better on the


whole. 


 Profitability


 


      The next few sections focus on financials relating to Microsoft’s


degree of profitability. We will see that Microsoft is ‘in the black’, so to


speak, and also compares better than Oracle, a representative competitor.


 Return on Equity


 


      In 2015, Microsoft’s return on equity (net income divided by


shareholder’s equity, this being the change in the value of the shareholder’s


equity) was 15.3%; in 2016, 26.9%; in 2017, 31.8%; and in 2018, 19.4%


During each year, ROE is positive. At the same time, there was a decrease


from 2017 to 2018.


      Oracle’s ROE in 2015 was 12.8%; in 2016, 10.3%and in 2017, 9.7%;


and in 2018, 3.4%. In each year, ROE is positive, but much smaller than with


Microsoft. Also, with Oracle, as with Microsoft, we see a 2017-2018 drop.


This parallel suggests that in both cases the drop is a consequence not of


anything company-specific but rather of some larger economic phenomenon.


 


 


 


 2015201620172018


  Microsoft15.3%26.9%31.8%19.4%


  Oracle12.8%10.3%9.7%3.4%


 


 Net Profit Margin


 


      In 2015, Microsoft’s net profit margin (net income divided by total


revenue, i.e. percentage of revenue that Microsoft retained after paying


expenses) was 13.9%; in 2016, 22.5%; in in 107, 26.3%; and in 2018, 15%.


The profit margins are all positive, though there is a (now familiar) 2017-


2018 drop.


      Oracle's net profit margin in 2015 was 27.9%; in 2016, 23.7%; in


2017, 25.3%; and in 2018, 10.2%. Again, profit margins are positive, with a


2017-2018 drop. Microsoft's profit margin appears to track Oracle's,


suggesting that changes in them are due not to company-specific but rather to


industry-wide factors.


 


 


 2015201620172018


  Microsoft15.3%26.9%31.8%19.4%


    Oracle27.9%23.7%25.3%10.2%


 


 


 Asset Turnover


 


      Asset turnover is significant because it is a good measure of a


company’s health. A company with low-asset turnover is not using its assets


efficiently, and a company with high-asset turnover is using them efficiently.


      In 2015, Microsoft’s asset turnover (total revenue divided by total


assets) was 53%; in 2016, 44%; in 2017, 37%; and in 2018, 43%.  In 2015,


Oracle’s asset turnover was 34%; in 2016, 33%; in 2017, 28%; and in 2018,

    [3]
29%. We are seeing parallels—increases in both cases, albeit higher ones in


Microsoft’s case.


 


 


 


 


 2015201620172018


  Microsoft53%44%37%43%


Oracle34%33%28%29%


 


 


 


 Leverage


 

 
      In 2015, Microsoft’s leverage (debt/equity) was 34.7%; in 2016,


56.6%; in 2017, 86.7%; and in 2018, 87.3%. In 2015, Oracle’s asset turnover

 [4]
was 81%; in 2016, 84%; in 2017, 110%; and in 2018, 230%. Both


companies are highly leveraged, but Microsoft’s debt/equity ratio is always


less than one, meaning that it has more assets than debts, and Oracles


debt/equity is greater than one, meaning that is liabilities exceed its assets. A


high degree of leverage can be a bad sign, since it can indicate deficit


financing, but here it is not a bad sign, as it seems to indicate aggressive and

                                                              [5]
successful investments in a growing economic sector.


 


 


 201520620172018


  Microsoft.347.566.867.873


  Oracle.81.841.12.3


 


 


  


Return on Assets


 


      In 2015, Microsoft’s return on assets (ROA), i.e.net income divided by

 
total assets, was 6.9%; in 2016, it was 8.6%; in 2017, 8.8%; and in 2018.

 
6.4%. In 2015, Oracle’s asset turnover was 8.8%; in 2016, 6.9%; in 2017,

                            [6]
7.1%; and in 2018, 3.1%  Both ROA’s are low but positive.


 


 2015201620172018


  Microsoft6.9%8.6%8.8%6.4%


  Oracle8.8%6.9%7.1%3.1%


 


 Liquidity Ratios


Current Ratio


 


      The current ratio measures a company’s ability to pay its short-term


obligations. The higher the ratio, the lower the likelihood of defaulting on


such debts. Ratios above 1:1 (100%) are considered good, and lower ratios


are considered bad. Microsoft’s current ratio is low, whereas Oracle’s is high


as of 2018, though low before then.


 


 2015201620172018


Microsoft2.52.32.92.9


  Oracle3.74.83.95.1


 


 Quick Ratio


 


      The quick ratio is like the current ratio except that non-liquid assets


are excluded from this figure. As with current ratio, a ratio of 1:1 (100%) or


higher is considered good, and anything lower is considered bad. Again,


Oracle’s quick ratio is better than Microsoft’s.


 


 2015201620172018


Microsoft2.32.32.22.7


  Oracle3.54.43.65.5


 


 


 Ebit Interest Coverage


 


      The Ebit Interest Coverage ratio determines how capable a company is


paying the interest on its debt. Obviously should be a least one, since it will


otherwise be unable to service its loan-debt. The higher the number, the


better. We see here that Microsoft’s numbers compare favorably to Oracles


and are also much higher than one.


 2015201620172018


  Microsoft24.716.811.414.4


Oracle7.47.48.912.3


 


 Average Days to Collect Receivables


 


      Average days to collect receivables is the average number of days that


it takes a company to collect payment for services rendered. The number for


Microsoft is conspicuously high, which is ambiguous but which could


correspond to the fact that Microsoft’s customers are ‘captives’ who


Microsoft knows will eventually pay up.


 


 2015201620172018


Microsoft73727780


Oracle14171113


 


 Conclusion


 


      Microsoft and Oracle are both vigorous companies with high operating


cash flows and asset-turnovers. They are highly leveraged, but this seems to


be because they have thus far profited from aggressive investments in their


own growth.                                      Works Cited


 


Morningstar: Oracle Corp. Accessed at:


  http://financials.morningstar.com/income-statement/is.html?


  t=ORCL&region=usa&culture=en-US


Stock Analysis on Net: Oracle Corp. April 2019. Accessed at:


      https://www.stock-analysis-on.net/NYSE/Company/Oracle-


  Corp/Valuation/Enterprise-Value


Calculating Cashflow from Operating Activities. March 2019. Accessed at:


      https://www.sapling.com/8370027/calculate-cash-flow-operating-activities


Oracle Net Income 2016-2019. May 2019. Accessed at:


    https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/ORCL/oracle/total-assets


Investopedia: Leverage Ratio Definition. May 2019. Accessed at:


      https://www.investopedia.com/terms/l/leverageratio.asp


"Microsoft Form 10-K." SEC. June 2018.


 


 


 


 


 


                           Microsoft Five Forces Analysis


 


Introduction


 


      Microsoft is the world’s two leading supplier of software products, the


other being Apple, with the two companies being nearly equal in terms of net

      [7]
worth. Microsoft is best known for the Windows Operating System, used


on all PC’s, which has a 90% market-share in the digital operating system


market. Microsoft is also known for, and derives enormous revenue from, a


number of other products, including Microsoft Word, Excel, Skype, Bing,

                                                                    [8] 
OneDrive, Minecraft, LinkedIn, Cortana, and PowerPoint.Microsoft’s


annual revenue (as of 2018) is $110 billion, its annual profits are $16 billion,

  
and its market capitalization (overall value) is $775 billion (10K 62).Apple’s


annual revenue (as of 2018) is $230 billion, its profits are $10 billion, and its

                                          [9]
market capitalization is $700 billion. The third largest player in the software


is IBM, with annual revenue of $15 billion, net profits of $3 billion, and


market capitalization of $110 billion (IBIS 22).


      The present study is a Porter’s Five-forces analysis of Microsoft. A


Porter’s Five-forces analysis examines a company in terms of the following


parameters: competition within its industry, potential of new entrants into that


industry, power of suppliers, power of customers, and threat of substitutes.Each of these forces, whether favorable or unfavorable to the company being


analyzed, is ranked as either ‘strong’, ‘moderate’, or ‘weak.’


 Industry Competition (Strong Force)


 


        Competition within the software industry is fierce. There is intense


rivalry on the part of Apple to switch to its operating system. Also, Apple, as


well each of the many lesser players, are highly innovative and are rapidly


developing products that could chip away at Microsoft’s position. Apple, for

 [10]
example, is known for its smart phone, iPods, and computer-tablets.


Microsoft’s versions of these products were not successful, although it did


stave off the potential economic losses by establishing lucrative partnerships


with successful players in these markets, notably Samsung, whose Android


phone operating system is the leading smart-phone operating system and


from the sales of which Microsoft is now the largest beneficiary.


        Switching costs for existing Microsoft customers are high. It is


inconvenient and expensive for users of Windows and related applications to


switch to non-Microsoft products. This is because such products are easy to


use and tend to be bundled together in ways that are highly functional and


that are difficult or impossible to replicate with non-Microsoft products. This


force favors Microsoft.


      Other firms in this industry, including but not limited to Apple, are


extremely innovative and are also aggressive in marketing their products.


Microsoft is not as innovative as Apple or as many of its much smallercompetitors. Microsoft counters this, with some success, by buying up


patents and buying into companies that offer innovations that it is not itself

 [11] 
providing. 


      There is a high degree of product-diversity in the software industry,


which is a strong force that works against Microsoft, since it could lead, and


in some cases has led, to substitutes for Microsoft products and also to


products that simply render them obsolete.


 Bargaining Power of Customers (Weak Force)


 


      Switching costs for Microsoft customers are high, as previously stated,


mainly because Windows, Microsoft’s highest earning product, is easy to use


and also bundled with a number of applications in a way that can be


replicated only with difficulty using non-Microsoft softwares. Microsoft’s


great strength is that it offers products (e.g. Excel, Microsoft Word,


PowerPoint) at least one or two of which many simply have no choice but to


use, and then links that product’s functionality with those of other products


for which those same customers are likely to have at least some use. For


example, all people who do anything involving writing for a living need to


use a product functionally similar to Microsoft Word. If they choose an


alternative to Microsoft Word, they find, first, that those products tend to be


bug-infested and, second, that if they want to convert them into PDF format


or embed photos in them, they are simply out of luck.


      Also, many businesses use Microsoft products and also rely on their


high degree of co-functionality with one another with non-Microsoft


products. This would make it difficult, and in many cases impossible, for


Microsoft’s numerous existing business customers to switch brands.


 Bargaining Power of Suppliers (Moderate Force)


 


      Microsoft offers a range of different products, and it also relies on


many different products and technologies for its own R&D. This makes it


vulnerable to shifts in prices in the corresponding raw materials (IBIS 32). In


particular, Microsoft is vulnerable to shifts in copper (for the copper wiring in


the operating systems that it manufactures) and in petroleum (use for the


plastic in the casing, which it also sells). These are both price-volatile


commodities, potentially posing a problem for Microsoft.


 Threat of Substitutes (Weak Force)


 


      It is often difficult and sometimes impossible for Microsoft customers


to switch to other brands. Non-Microsoft versions of Word and Excel do not


work very well and have lower functionality than their Microsoft


counterparts. Also, Microsoft makes its products easy to use with one another


and with related Non-Microsoft products. For example, Microsoft Word


documents are easily saved to OneDrive, which is Microsoft’s Cloud Storage


service; and Microsoft Word documents can easily be saved as Adobe PDF

 [12]
files (and vice versa).  Also, Microsoft makes it easy to import numbers


into Excel Files, and it has loaded Excel with extremely useful and easy to


use accounting features. These products and integrated functionalities are not


offered by other companies, making switching a non-option in most cases.


      Also, Microsoft aggressively litigates would-be rival purveyors of


alternatives on patent-grounds, helping to perverse its position. At the same


time, Microsoft products can be cloned and pirated. Because the technology


involved in cloning Microsoft products is still rather unwieldy, people are


better off simply buying them from Microsoft. But as those products get


easier to use, this could potentially change. But this is not likely to happen


any time soon, given that these pirated products, though functional on their


own, cannot be used in conjunction with Microsoft products. So for example,while it not hard to clone Microsoft Word software, documents made with


Word-clones cannot be converted into Adobe PDF’s; nor could numerical

 [13] 
data on them imported into Microsoft Excel files.Replicating cross-


application functionalities would involve systematic pirating of Microsoft-


technology, which would not be easy to do.


 Threat of New Entrants (Moderate Force)


 


      Any given Microsoft product can be replicated, either legally or


illegally, and any such product could, on its own, be mass-produced


relatively inexpensively. The problem for would-be competitors is that


Microsoft products are co-functional with many non-Microsoft products and


these Microsoft has exclusivity agreements with these other companies,


which limit the amount of functionality that non-Microsoft products can


have. For example, Microsoft word documents have a feature whereby users


can dictate words, instead of having to type them. This feature is easily


replicated, but it couldn’t be used on PC’s made by any existing company,


since they have contracted with Microsoft  to block use of such application

                                    [14] 
with any non-Microsoft product. 


      At the same time, there are many small companies that already create


analogues of Microsoft-products, and such a company would be a threat if it


had the financing needed to market itself and to establish legally protected


Microsoft-style product-integrations with related companies. The chances of


this are small but not negligible. 


 Conclusion


 


      Microsoft’s position is relatively secure. It offers useful and easy to use


products for low prices, and those products have useful integrations with one


another and with non-Microsoft products. In addition, Microsoft protects


itself against rivals either by contracting with them, as it did with Samsung,


effectively buying them out, or entering into exclusivity agreements that limit


the extent to which non-Microsoft products can have the range of uses as


Microsoft products. Microsoft’s vulnerability is its current lack of


innovativeness. But because Microsoft hedges against this problem by simply


buying out would-be competitors, it is likely to retain its position as one of


the top two software providers for the foreseeable future.


 


                                      Works Cited


Hadad, Jonathan. "IBISWorld Industry Report 51121 Software Publishing in


the US." IBIS World. September 2018.


"Microsoft Form 10-K." SEC. June 2018.


 


                   Reflection Paper: Harvey on Commodity Fetishism


                                  (Politics/Economics)


 


      Tech specs: 2-3 pages, double spaces, worth 20 points (does not need


to be a classically structured essay i.e. no need for intro and conclusion). You


must engage with Harvey’s discussion and concepts from chapter 1 of


Seventeen Contradictions.


 


      Commodity Reflection: Use-value vs. exchange-value


      Pick a commodity (suggestions: medication, education, food, housing,


computers)


      Analyze it in terms of its use-value and its exchange-value


      Where does the contradiction arise? How are these in tension with one


another?


      How might tension or contradiction create inequality? Here you need


to connect it to what you have learned about inequality from Milanovic,


Therborn, and the lectures from week 1.


 


      Evaluation: You must engage with Harvey’s concepts and discussion


from the Introduction and Ch. 1 and you must use some ideas from


Milanovic, Therborn, and week 1 lectures for part 1.4. You will lose points ifyou do not. You will be evaluated on accuracy of information and concepts,


depth of your analysis and grammar and spelling.


 


 


      In a broad spectrum, user-value of a commodity is the material used


such a commodity can be put into and the human needs it can satisfy while


exchange-value of a commodity is the universal equivalence as well as the


qualitative valuation usually monetary. As we examine the role a commodity


plays in the capital market, these two facets of a commodity become more


antagonistic. The antagonism, also known as the contradiction, breed


inequality whether vital existential or material. The essay below evaluates


how housing as a commodity portrays the user-value, exchange-value and


how the tensions or contradictions emanating from these two-sided values


breed inequality.


      A decent house according to the US act is a basic right where each


citizen is entitled to. The use-value of a house is determined by the ability to


satisfy social needs. For instance, a father builds a house to shelter his family


and offer them security and privacy from the unstable world. Another user-


value of housing is for a symbol of status quo where the house is used as an


example in architectural design size and other outstanding features of


admiration. However, such famous houses which act as landmarks can be putinto myriad uses like housing immigrants and conversion into workshops


among others. The Frank Lloyd Wright’s falling water house had an elegance


and beauty that attracted tourists. Nonetheless, the famous which was used as


a workshop for innovation became the epicenter of what nowadays termed as


the Silicon Valley.


      On the other hand, according to Marx’s theory of value, the exchange-


value of a house as a commodity entails production for monetary valuation or


exchange. The Logic of profit rather than the logic of usefulness tends to


dominate in a society where exchange-value is prevalent. Moreover, any


acquisition of a house must follow the required procurement process that


demands giving out money. This occurs through renting, leasing or buying


fully furnished apartments at a cost. In advanced capitalist societies, houses


are built to be sold to whoever requires it or whoever can afford it. The


renowned Georgian terraces of Bath, Bristol, and London were built for the


working class at the end of the eighteenth century. Furthermore, the ability of


a house to appreciate in value with time makes individuals purchase house


only to resell at a profit.


      The user-value and exchange-value of housing surface tensions which


are also known as contradictions. According to (JOHNSTON, 2014), these


contradictions can either be mitigated or spilled over to cause a crisis. Such


tensions include for example according to the American charter, every citizenis entitled to a decent home and majority cannot afford which the government


to chip in and subsidize the houses for them to acquire. However, some


contradictions which spilled over include, the Scandinavian property market


collapse, the fall of Loans and savings in the USA and the great recession


where instead of appreciation of houses, there was falling of prices which led


where owners sold at a loss of their buying price as illustrated in


(JOHNSTON, 2014). Apart from this, gentrification which is an


improvement of the neighborhood can raise the mortgage fee of the house


where the owner has not spent anything to improve it. Moreover, the eruption


of a bad vice like theft which discourages developers will lower the price of


the house despite any renovations to keep it at a cutting edge. Such market


crashes like in America led to 4 million individuals to lose their homes.


Elsewhere in New York, 60% of house owners are renters who during the


great recession went bankrupt making tenants to live in foreclosed houses.


Indeed, the ruthless pursuit aimed at maximizing housing exchange values


has reduced access to housing use values for a bigger portion of the


population, a trend that is prevalent in the society nowadays.


        According to (Therborn, 2012) there are tangible inequalities


emanating from the user-value housing and exchange-value housing. The


vital inequality of health and death is prevalent where individuals who


endeavor in exchange-value housing and end up being frustrated end uphaving a shorter lifespan than those who endeavor in user-value housing.


Moreover, existential inequality is also portrayed where the poor can neither


access the exchange-value housing nor the user-value housing. This is due to


the heavy capital intensity accompanied by such endeavor which their


poverty outlaws them from accessing them. In addition, Material inequality is


predominant where these housing values exclude the poor and favor the rich


only. Material inequality is classified into the inequality of access, inequality


of opportunities and the inequality of rewards where a particular caliber of


people majorly the rich have an upper hand compared to the poor who can do


nothing to reverse the situation. These inequalities are destructive to human


lives and societies. In fact, there is none beneficial.


      In conclusion, housing is a commodity which manifests both user and


exchange values. These values when examined deeply reveal tensions or


contradictions where some can be managed by the government while others


run out of control thus making them risky endeavors. Furthermore, the


contradictions make lead to inequalities which are disastrous to human life


and societies.


 


 


      References


      Therborn, G. (2012). The Killing Fields of Inequality. InternationalJournal Of Health Services, 42(4), 579-589. doi: 10.2190/hs.42.4.a


        JOHNSTON, R. (2014). David Harvey (2014), Seventeen


Contradictions and the End of Capitalism. London: Profile Books. £14.99,


pp. 336, hbk. Journal Of Social Policy, 43(04), 850-852. doi:


  10.1017/s0047279414000440


         Reflection Paper: Defending Marxist Economist (Politics/Economics)


 


      Tech specs: 2-3 pages, double spaces, worth 20 points (does not need


to be a classically structured essay i.e. no need for intro and conclusion). You


must engage with Harvey’s discussion and concepts from chapter 1 of


Seventeen Contradictions.


 


      Commodity Reflection: Use-value vs. exchange-value


      Pick a commodity (suggestions: medication, education, food, housing,


computers)


      Analyze it in terms of its use-value and its exchange-value


      Where does the contradiction arise? How are these in tension with one


another?


      How might tension or contradiction create inequality? Here you need


to connect it to what you have learned about inequality from Milanovic,


Therborn, and the lectures from week 1.


 


      Evaluation: You must engage with Harvey’s concepts and discussion


from the Introduction and Ch. 1 and you must use some ideas from


Milanovic, Therborn, and week 1 lectures for part 1.4. You will lose points if


you do not. You will be evaluated on accuracy of information and concepts,depth of your analysis and grammar and spelling.


 


      The commodity that I will study is housing. We will see that the use-


value of housing diverges enormously from its exchange value and that this


divergence is illustrative of the central conceits of the readings and lectures.


      Let us begin by defining terms and clarifying foundational concepts.


      The use-value of X is X’s degree of utility. Thus, air and water have a


maximally high degree of use-value, since they have a maximally high


degree of utility. Diamonds have a very low degree of use-value, since they


have a low degree of utility.


      The exchange-value of X is how much X sells for on the market. Thus,


air and water usually have a low-degree of exchange value, and diamonds


typically have a high degree of exchange value.


      Why are exchange-value and use-value capable of diverging so much?


There are several reasons.


      First, a given commodity’s use-value is not a function of how much of


that thing there is, but its exchange-value is a function of how much it there


is. The fact there is an unlimited amount of air means that air has no


exchange value, but it does not affect air’s use-value. So to the extent that


exchange-value reflects use—value, it reflects marginal use-value: it reflects


the use-value of the next installment of that commodity—the next pair ofsneakers, the next glass of water, the next parcel of air---which, in cases


where that commodity is unlimited supply approaches zero.


      Second, exchange value is not hewed to marginal use-value per se;


rather, it is hewed to its perceived use-value. If people think that a given car


is useful, even though it useless, that will inflate its exchange its exchange-


value; and if people think that a given car is useless, even though it is useful,


that will deflate the car’s price.


      There is a tendency for perceived use-value to coalesce with actual


use-value. (If a car doesn’t work, people will know it sooner or later.) But


this tendency is indeed just a tendency. And beliefs about utility can diverge


from actual utility by an arbitrarily wide margin for an arbitrarily long period


of time. People spend enormous amounts of money college educations that


appear not only to have no actual use-value (they don’t make people smarter


or more competent and actually seem to detract from both intelligence and


competence). But people believe otherwise, and so it is that the exchange-


value of a college degree may be, even if, as is often the case, its use-value is


zero or negative.


      Also, a college degree has a kind of conventional value---a value that


is determined not by its utility (or marginal utility), but is to some extent


assigned to it by convention---in much the way that paper currency, which


has no intrinsic value, has a kind of conventional value. Which brings us tothe third reason why use-value and exchange-value can coalesce.


      Third, in some cases, objects can be assigned significances of a


conventional or semi-conventional kind. Art-work—even when not


particularly good—can become ‘fashionable’ and can thus have enormous


exchange-value. A lock of Justin Bieber’s hair, though useless in every way,


might well have great exchange value. It isn’t that people wrongly believe it


to have use-value—they don’t. But they do believe it to have value of some


kind---and that fact by itself gives it exchange-value.


        Use-value is reality-based, not perception-based. Exchange-value is


perception-based, not reality-based. For this reason, there is no limit to how


much they can diverge. For reasons that we will soon discuss, this tends to


inflate the value of the assets of the wealthy and to deflate the value of the


assets of the poor, which in turn exacerbates pre-existing inequalities.


      Let us illustrate these points in connection with housing. Smith is a


woodsman who lives in the Yukon. He has discovered a plot of land where


there is oil, but has no intention of telling anyone about it. He builds a sturdy


and functional cabin on that plot land. The use-value of that cabin is


extremely high. But its exchange-value is, at present, nil. And the reason is


the perception of its use-value is horribly off.


      Now let us consider a different scenario. Jones lives in an area where


there is no oil but where there is believed to be oil. He builds a flimsy housethere. That house has almost no actual use-value, but it has tremendous


perceived value and therefore has great exchange-value.


      But when there is a particularly large gulf between the exchange-value


of housing and its use-value, it is not usually because of faulty perceptions


about use-value; it is because the housing in question has been positively or


negatively stigmatized. I myself had a very nice house that cost very little,


simply because it was located in a ‘bad’ part of town. In actuality, that part of


town was perfectly safe and it was also conveniently located. But it was


‘uncool’, causing housing-values to plummet.


      Similarly, there are houses in unsafe and inconveniently located


neighborhoods that are ‘cool’, causing the exchange-values of those houses


to soar.


      When people have large quantities of valuable assets, they are able, it


seems, to inflate the values of those assets through a kind of fiat on their part.


In fact, they don’t have to do much of anything. If certain kinds of paintings


or clothing or personal accessories are common to the wealthy class, their


exchange-values rise in relation to their use-values, which widens the already


wide chasm between the wealthy and the non-wealthy. (If Gucci handbags


are seen as indicative of wealth, then their exchange-value rises, even though


their use-value is fixed and possibly quite low.) Similarly, if certain


commodities are common to the poor, even if they have significant use-value,their exchange-values tend to fall in relation to their use-values, which also


widens the already wide chasm between the wealth and the non-wealthy. (If


clothes from K-mart are seen as indicative of poverty, then their exchange-


value falls, even if their use-values are fixed and possibly quite high.)


      If wealth were hewed to the use-values of assets, this would have a


levelling effect on wealth-distributions: the poor would not be so poor in


relation to the rich, nor would the rich be so rich in relation to the poor. But


because exchange value diverges from use-value, and because exchange-


value is perception-based, the opposite happens: the rich are made richer by


the mere fact of their wealth, and the poor are made poorer by the mere fact


of their lack of it.


      Therborn points out that during the 2008 crisis, people who already


had money (investment-bankers) were able to create wealth for themselves by


creating securities that people believed to have value but in fact had none.


This point is worth elaborating on. The crisis of 2008 wasn’t just preceded by


securities’ being over-valued: that is what caused the crash. Second, the


securities in question were not just any securities; they were housing-backed


securities. So there were two distinct ways in which divergences between


use-value and exchange-value caused the crash. First, worthless housing was


made to seem valuable (its exchange-value was inflated relative to its use-


value). Second, worthless housing-backed securities created the falseappearance of yet additional value, causing a further inflation of exchange-


value in relation to use-value---and creating a kind of purely ‘perception-


based’ capital for those who owned those securities.


      Harvey points out that during this same period, fund-managers were


routinely raking in hundreds and sometimes billions of dollars annually.


Fund-managers make money by dumping over-valued assets and buying


under-valued assets. So their income depends entirely on their detecting


discrepancies between use-value and exchange-value. And their activities


may themselves enlarge those discrepancies: if Warren Buffet dumps the


stock of Company X, the will deflate X’s stock and therefore the exchange-


value of X’s goods, even if those goods hold their use-value; and if he buys


X’s stock, the will inflate X’s stock and therefore the exchange value of its


goods, even if those goods hold their use-value.


      To sum up: Exchange-value is about the perception, not the actuality,


of value, and those who already have wealth are in a uniquely good


perception to skew such perceptions to their own advantage.


             Outline of Economics Paper on Contradictions in Free Market


                                      (Economics)


 


      It is inherent in the free market that it lead to inequalities of wealth


and income that cannot resolved within a free market framework.


 


              1.            Three or more sentences...


 


      The average income for the top 1% in New York City was $3.6


million.


      The average income for everyone in the city was $30,000.


      The minimal per capita cost of living in New York City is $30,000.


 


              2.            Three or more sentences...


 


      In the immediate aftermath of the financial crisis of 2008, it was not


uncommon for hedge fund managers to have annual salaries in the hundreds


of millions and even billions of dollars.


      During that period, people in first-world countries were experiencing


food- and housing shortages.


      The state rewarded the bankers responsible for the meltdown bybailing them out, thereby compounding the disparities.


 


              3.            Three or more sentences...


 


      The free-market cannot expected to diminish the wealth-disparities


that it itself creates.


        Therefore, the government is responsible for diminishing these


disparities.


      There are capitalist countries, such as Sweden, that, through heavy


progressive income-tax schemes, enjoy the benefits of capitalism while being


spared the unjust wealth-disparities.


 


        Questions and/or comments


              1.            Question and/or comment


 


      Could Swedish-style super-heavy progressive taxation be


implemented in the United States without destroying the entrepreneurial spirit


needed for economic growth?


 


              2.            Question and/or comment


       What exactly is the author proposing? Heavier taxes? As a general rule


those stifle economic activity?


 


              3.            Question and/or comment


 


      What is something that the government could do to alleviate wealth-


and income-inequality that (i) it is not doing, (ii) that neither of the two major


political parties even claims that it should be doing and (iii) that would not


simply turn the United States into a full-blown communist (and therefore


economically non-functional) state?


                   Some Reflections on the Virtues of the Free Market


                          (Economics/Politics/Current Events)


 


      In California, in 2016, Proposition 64 passed, making recreational


marijuana use legal in the state of California.[15] This seems to have many


upsides, and few downsides. The likely upsides include:


 


      *Revenue to the state of California from taxes on the sale of


Marijuana,


      *An improved economy, owing to the new economic vistas opened up


by the possibility of legally growing, marketing, and distributing marijuana,


        *Decreased contempt for the law, owing to the removal of unpopular


and hard-to-enforce (and impossible-enforce-in-an-equitable-manner)


marijuana laws


        *Shrinkage of a criminal justice system bloated with so-called ‘drug-


offenders’, many of whom have spent years in jail or on parole or probation


for marijuana-related offenses,


        *Freeing up of funds now dedicated to zero-sum bureaucracies


relating probation, parole, and incarceration of pot-offenders, and


      *Improved morale, owing to decreased contempt for the law, owing to


all of these factors. 


      A possible downside is that California will become a state of ‘dope-


fiends.’ But this seems unlikely, given that even though anti-marijuana laws


led to the incarceration of many, they did little or nothing in the way of


preventing people from actually using marijuana. Indeed, there is some


evidence that anti-drug laws increase drug use, or at least have done so in the


United States.[16]


      But one rather serious problem does arise in connection with


California’s Legalization of Pot: What is to happen to people in California


who are currently incarcerated for marijuana-offenses or who, although not


incarcerated, have criminal records because of such offenses?


      One possible answer is: Reverse those convictions: free those


incarceration for such offenses and clear the records of all those, whether


incarcerated or not, who have been convicted of such offenses.


      And this is the solution that is currently being implemented, with little


opposition. San Francisco[17], Los Angeles[18], and other municipalities


have already gone this route , and it looks as the state of California as a whole


will follow suit.[19]


      Within the state of California, there is relatively little opposition to


pot’s (now) legal status, and there is also relatively little opposition to the


reversal of pot-related convictions. The interesting issues here are ones thatare not being debated because they are not even being discussed. Let me


explain.


      In legalizing pot, the state of California has effectively admitted that


the War on Drugs—at least the part of it that was concerned with pot—was a


complete failure. This means that the millions of man-hours on the part of


educators, parole and probation officers, lawyers and judges, and prison-


personnel were all for naught: that they were nothing but a waste of time,


resources and opportunity.


      That in its turn means that much the same is likely true of many other


drug-laws. It means, in other words, that the vast state-apparatuses relating to


the ‘education’ of (prospective and actual) ‘drug-offenders’ is so much


brainwashing, done in furtherance of ruinous polices, and, therefore, that the


juggernaut legal apparatus relating to the enforcement of such laws are


equally misconceived. And this in turn would seem to constitute a very major


victory for a libertarian conception of the rightful role of the State. The


libertarian holds that the state should confine itself to preventing the


commission of clear crimes (e.g. assault, rape, theft, fraud, and the like) and


should refrain from criminalizing acts for reasons of a purely moral as


opposed to pragmatic nature. The War on Drugs had—so it turns out, and so


it was always suspected—very little practical justification, its only possible


justification being that, for reasons of morality, people simply shouldn’t dodrugs. (In the 19th century, there were no anti-drug laws in the United States,


and drug use was considerably lower than it was after the War on Drugs went


into effect. In fact, with each attempt on the government to criminalize drug-


use, drug use went up. The first great example of this was prohibition, which


only increased drinking and also led to wide-spread organized crime.)


      A related point is that, now that pot is legal, the so-called ‘educators’


and other ‘authority figures’ who were involved in the War on Drugs are now


seen as so many bureaucrats who, in addition to being useless, are mere


parasites, contributing nothing and being paid for it, at the expense of the


very tax-payers penalized by their activities.


      It should be pointed that, although right-wing politicians and political


commentators have tended to be anti-drug-legalization[20], right wing


economists—hard-core free-marketeers, in other words—have always been


pro-drug-legalization, their reasons being that anti-drug-laws paralyzed the


free market, encouraged cartelism, and depleted the economy. To quote


Milton Freedman: “See, if you look at the drug war from a purely economic


point of view, the role of the government is to protect the drug cartel. That's


literally true.” https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/18583-see-if-you-look-at-


the-drug-war-from-a


      And in this context, right-wing economists were completely


vindicated. And left wing economists---who are all in favor of government-created jobs, of precisely the kind created by the invidious war on drugs---


have been proven completely wrong.


      The real ‘elephant in the room’, therefore is: How can those who are


(rightly, in my view) in favor of the legalization of drugs be (wrongly, in my


view) opposed to the free-market? When will this cognitive dissonance be


seen for and what it is, and once it is so seen, how will it affect people’s


political thinking?


         When is wealth-redistribution legitimate? (Economics/Philosophy)


 


Can wealth legitimately be spread equally among the people of a nation


based on the philosophers (namely, Kant and W.D. Ross) that you have been


introduced to?


 


      Ross and Kant are both deontologists. In their view, the ends do not as


general rule justify the means. Acting morally, in their view, is not about


being a vigilante who rights social wrongs; it is about treating people with


respect and, in Kant’s case, allowing them to exercise their autonomy freely.


In order for there to be any appreciable wealth, there must be free enterprise.


(The state can take wealth, but cannot generate it.) So in order for there to be


wealth to redistribute, there must be agents who in commercial contexts are


freely exercising their autonomy. And supposing for argument’s sake that


Kant and Ross believed that it would be good if wealth were distributed


equally, they would regard it as morally wrong to try to attain that end by


coercing people and they would regard it as doubly wrong to try to do so by


preventing people from freely exercising their autonomy. And there would be


no way without thwarting people’s autonomy to ensure that ever came to be


evenly distributed. Moreover, there would be no way to keep wealth evenly


distributed except through a coercive, and therefore rights- and autonomy-undermining, government-apparatus. So no—neither Kant nor Ross would


regard there as being any ethical way of seeing to it that wealth came to be, or


continued to be, evenly distributed. Also, it is not clear that, even if there


were some morally innocuous way of getting wealth to be, or to continue to


be, evenly distributed, either philosopher would regard that as a particularly


desirable state of affairs: they would regard it as desirable only to the extent


that it was necessary for people to treat one another with respect—and it is


not entirely clear that it would be particularly conducive to that end.


             An Economic Argument for Drug-legalization (Economics)


 


      My topic is the decriminalization of drugs (in other words, whether


drugs should be made legal). My position is: Yes—they should be made


legal: all of them, unconditionally. Usually when it is argued that drugs


should be legalized, it is argued on the grounds that it is a violation of


people’s personal and civil liberties to punish people for using drugs. And


this may well be true. But in this paper, I will argue that for reasons of a


strictly economic nature, it is necessary to make drugs legal.


      The war on drugs is extremely expensive in many ways. According to


the Bureau of Labor Statistics, 90% of people who are in jail are there for

                                                                                  [21]
drug offenses---because they had drugs on them or were selling drugs. It is


expensive to imprison people. Guards have to be paid, along with contractors,


prison physicians, and so on. And people who are in prison are not able to


contribute to the economy (except in insignificant ways, e.g. by making


license plates or picking up trash on the side of the road). Drug-offenders are


non-violent offenders, and they are also not guilty of theft or fraud or of


anything else that abridges other’s people’s freedoms. When society


imprisons someone who is violent or who steals, it more than gains in


security what it is losing in the way of that person’s potential economic


output. But when society imprisons a so-called ‘drug-offender’, the resultingloss of economic output is in no way counterbalanced by a gain in security.

[22]


      Also, in order to service the ‘war on drugs’, the police force has to be


expanded dramatically. This is expensive; these police officers had to paid,


and so do the associated judges, prosecutors, lawyers, bailiffs, and social


workers. These people would be out of a job if people were not locked up for


‘drug offences’. The more ‘drug offenders’ there are, the more work there is


for these lawyers, social workers and so on. These people depend for their


living on other people thrown in jail and denied the ability to contribute to


society. The police officers, prison guards, social workers and public-sector


lawyers are paid by the government and are therefore simply leaching off of


the tax-payer. The private-sector lawyers are paid by the ‘drug-offenders’


themselves and are therefore no less of an economic liability than their

                              [23]
public-sector counterparts. 


      Laws are expensive. These expenses are justified when they prevent


conduct that is even more expensive than they are. But drug dealing is not


expensive. It is simply a form of commerce and actually contributes to the


economy.


      In fact, if it were legal, it could do much more to contribute to society.


First of all, it could be regulated. The government could make sure that the


drugs being sold were non-toxic and of high quality, which would preventdrug-overdoses, the medical and personal costs of which are astronomical. It


could also prevent drugs from being sold to children. Most importantly, the


legalization of drugs would prevent the sale of drugs from involving actual


criminals. It wouldn’t be violent street gangs selling drugs; it would be


Walgreens.


      Also, most ‘drug-offenders’ are youthful, and they are locked up and


denied education and opportunity precisely when they can most need them.


So not only is society losing their economic output during the time they are in


jail; by depriving of them education, it is diminishing their ability to be


economically productive when they get out of jail.


      This is not to mention that the war on drugs has turned society into a


police state. The war on drugs inflated the criminal justice by a factor of ten.


These people won’t be paid unless there is a corresponding increase in the


number crimes, and they have an extremely strong incentive to ‘manufacture


crime’, which they do by lobbying for extraneous laws that people are likely


to run afoul of, and also by turning people into criminals, which they do by


saddling people with criminal records, making it hard for them to get jobs or


contribute to the economy in any non-criminal way. Also, because drugs are


illegal, drug users who are not otherwise criminals are forced to transact with


criminals; and the war on drugs therefore tends to cause non-criminals to be


absorbed into the underworld---much to the delight of defense prosecutorsand defense-lawyers. Write Nobel Prize winning economist Milton Friedman:


“Addicts are driven to associate with criminals to get the drugs, become


criminals themselves to finance the habit, and risk constant danger of death

                                  [24]
and disease” (Friedman 1972). This is not to mention the staggering health


costs resulting from overdoses and other by-products of the illegality of

      [25]
drugs.


      When it is argued that drugs should be illegal, the argument is simply


that if they were legal, we would be a nation of junkies. But is that true?


Drugs used to be legal. Heroin was created by the same company that makes


Bayer Aspirin and was sold over the counters. Were we a nation of junkies


back then? Less so than now, going by the numbers. A possible explanation


for this is given by Milton Friedman (1972):


 


      Consider first the addict. Legalizing drugs might increase the number


of addicts, but it is not clear that it would. Forbidden fruit is attractive,


particularly to the young. More important, many drug addicts are deliberately


made by pushers, who give likely prospects their first few doses free. It pays


the pusher to do so because, once hooked, the addict is a captive customer. If


drugs were legally available, any possible profit from such inhumane activity


would disappear, since the addict could buy from the cheapest source.


      The more aggressively the ‘war on drugs’ is fought, the more peopleuse drugs. And the reason is that the ‘war on drugs’ isn’t meant to be won; it


is meant to go on in perpetuity, so as to provide easy income for lawyers,


probation officers, and others economic parasites.


 


 


      Friedman, Milton, “Prohibition and Drugs”, 1 May 1972, p. 104


 


Sowell, Thomas. 2014 Why Prohibition Failed And Drugs Should Be


Legalized Retrieved from


      https://debbieswindow.wordpress.com/2014/05/23/thomas-sowell-why-


  prohibition-failed-and-drugs-should-be-legalized/


 


Ostrowski, James. 1989. “Thinking about Drug Legalization.” Originally


published in Policy Analysis. Retrieved from


    https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/pubs/pdf/pa121_1.pdf


 


Thornton, Mark. (2002) “Milton Friedman, Drug Legalization, and Public


Policy: Contributions to Economics and Public Policy.” Retrieved from


                      https://www.researchgate.net/publication/306303392_Milton_Friedman_Drug_Legalization_and_Public_Policy_Contributions_to_Economics_and_Public_Policy


           Hobbes, Marx, Rousseau, Nietzsche: Their Central Themes


                        (Politics/Philosophy/Intellectual History)


 


      Hobbes, Marx, Rousseau, Nietzsche: Each of these thinkers had very


definite views as to how society actually functions and as to how it should


function. Hobbes believed human beings to be inherently barbaric and


therefore that the central purpose of society should be to prevent people from


being barbaric towards one another. Nietzsche believed human beings to be


driven exclusively by a lust for power and that a society’s purpose should to


some extent be to provide people with outlets for this power-lust. Rousseau


believed society to be inherently unjust and exploitative and that its purpose


should be to provide people with the equality of opportunity that people


supposedly had prior to society’s existence while also giving them the


protections that they lacked. Marx believed society to be a way of allocating


resources and that its purpose should be to allocate them fairly.


      In the case of each of these thinkers, there are a number of secondary


themes. For example, Hobbes is extremely concerned with language, since he


believes it to be integral to the formation of the ‘social contract’ that creates


society and thereby saves human beings from one another’s innate savagery.


For this very reason, Hobbes is also concerned with use of deceptive or


misleading language, since, given the significance that he ascribes tolanguage in the formation of society, he believes deception and obfuscation


to be threatening to the social contract. So even though Hobbes’ main point


in Leviathan is that autocracy is needed to save people from themselves, a


secondary point is that the use of language must be carefully regulated, lest


language become a way for man’s savagery to insinuate itself into society.


Similarly, even though Marx’s main theme is capitalist exploitation, a


secondary theme is what he calls ‘alienation’, this being the condition of


someone whose labor belongs to someone else and whose has therefore been


drained of meaning.


      Each of the papers below will discuss a principal theme from the work


of each of these thinkers, and in each case it will be shown on the basis of


textual evidence what the thinker in question believes the political


significance of that theme to be.


 


        Nietzsche: According to Nietzsche: We forget because we want to


forget; in other words, to forget is to repress:


 


              Forgetting is no mere vis inertiae as the superficial imagine; it is


      rather an active and in the strictest sense positive faculty of repression,


    that is responsible for the fact that what we experience and absorb


      enters our consciousness as little while we are digesting it (one might    call the process “inpsychation”) as does the thousandfold process,


      involved in physical nourishment—so-called “incorporation.” To close


    the doors and windows of consciousness for a time; to remain


      undisturbed by the noise and struggle of our underworld of utility


      organs working with and against one another; a little quietness, a little


      tabula ras4 of the consciousness, to make room for new things, above


    all for the nobler functions and functionaries, for regulation, foresight,


      premeditation (for our organism is an oligarchy)—that is the purpose of


      active forgetfulness, which is like a doorkeeper, a preserver of psychic


      order, repose, and etiquette: so that it will be immediately obvious how


      there could be no happiness, no cheerfulness, no hope, no pride, no


      present, without forgetfulness. The


 


      Why do we want to forget? Because when we remember how we used


to be, before we developed pretenses, we see how we still are, beneath all of


our pretenses:


 


              The worse man’s memory has been, the more fearful has been


    the appearance of his customs


 


              Nietzsche then goes to illustrate this point: 


              [T]he severity of the penal code provides an especially


      significant measure of the degree of effort needed to overcome


      forgetfulness and to impose a few primitive demands of social


      existence as present realities upon these slaves of momentary affect and


      desire...one has only to look at our former codes of punishments to


      understand what effort it costs on this earth to breed a “nation of


        thinkers”...Consider the old German punishments; for example, stoning


      (the sagas already have millstones drop on the head of the guilty),


      breaking on the wheel (the most characteristic invention and speciality


    of the German genius in the realm of punishment!), piercing with


      stakes, tearing apart or trampling by horses (“quartering”)...Ah, reason,


      seriousness, mastery over the affects, the whole somber thing called


      reflection, all these prerogatives and showpieces of man: how dearly


      they have been bought! how much blood and cruelty lie at the bottom


    of all “good things”!


 


      In a word, how we used to be is how we still are, beneath our


pretenses, and the genealogy (origin) of a society makes it clear what the


forces are that are still driving it.


      Instances of this theme pervade Nietzsche’s writing. For example, wenow regard contractual relations as being ‘strictly business’, in other words,


as being unemotional ways of serving strictly pragmatic objectives. But


Nietzsche says that when we trace the genealogy of the such relations, we


find them to be replete with emotions of the most savage kind, the


implication being that this is what they continue to be:


 


      When we contemplate these contractual relationships, to be sure, we


feel considerable suspicion and repugnance toward those men of the past who


created or permitted them. This was to be expected from what we have


previously noted. It was here that promises were made; it was here that a


memory had to be made for those who promised; it is here, one suspects, that


we shall find a great deal of severity, cruelty, and pain. To inspire trust in his


promise to repay, to provide a guarantee of the seriousness and sanctity of his


promise, to impress repayment as a duty, an obligation upon his own


conscience, the debtor made a contract with the creditor and pledged that if


he should fail to repay he would substitute something else that he


“possessed,” something he had control over; for example, his body, his wife,


his freedom, or even his life (or, given certain religious presuppositions, even


his bliss after death, the salvation of his soul, ultimately his peace in the


grave: thus it was in Egypt, where the debtor’s corpse found no peace from


the creditor even in the grave—and among the Egyptians such peace meant agreat deal). Above all, however, the creditor could inflict every kind of


indignity and torture upon the body of the debtor...Let us be clear as to the


logic of this form of compensation: it is strange enough. An equivalence is


provided by the creditor’s receiving, in place of a literal compensation for an


injury (thus in place of money, land, possessions of any kind), a recompense


in the form of a kind of pleasure—the pleasure of being allowed to vent his


power freely upon one who is powerless, the voluptuous pleasure “de faire le


mal pour le plaisir de le faire,”2 the enjoyment of violation.


 


      We now regard politics as having the purpose ensuring that people live


cooperatively and rationally. But Nietzsche would say our contemporary


‘liberal’ and ‘democratic’ political values are merely disguised forms of the


lust for power brazenly exemplified by primitive, autocratic political systems.


 


      Marx: According to Marx, the bourgeoisie (this being the class that


“owns the means of production” and engages in trade) “has resolved personal


worth into exchange value”---in other words, it has stripped people any value


that they have other than their economic value---with the result that he is


“alienated” from his work (meaning that he no longer identifies with it and it


has no meaning for him):


               What, then, constitutes the alienation of labor? First, in the fact


    that labor is external to the worker, that is, that it does not belong to his


      essential being; that in his work, therefore, he does not affirm himself


    but denies himself, does not feel well but unhappy, does not freely


      develop his physical and mental energy but mortifies his body and ruins


    his mind. The worker, therefore, feels himself only outside his work,


    and feels beside himself in his work. He is at home when he is not


      working, and when he is working he is not at home. His work therefore


    is not voluntary, but coerced; it is forced labor. It is therefore not the


      satisfaction of a need, but only a means for satisfying needs external to


    it. Its alien character emerges clearly in the fact that labor is shunned


    like the plague as soon as there is no physical or other compulsion.


      (Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts)


 


        According to Marx, profiting from others involves getting them to do


what you want them to do, not they want to do, and it therefore involves their


engaging in work from which they are ‘alienated.’ Since capitalism is about


profiting from others, alienated labor is the very foundation of capitalism. For


this reason, Marx’s position is not that everybody deserves wealth; for one’s


level of wealth, according to Marx, really only reflects how much one has


benefited from the exploitation of others. Rather it is that wealth (how muchproperty one has) itself shouldn’t exist people should not alienated from their


labor and that private property must be abolished.


      Marx regards capitalist society as doing overtly and systematically


what previous societies did covertly and unsystematically. All societies thus


far have been based on exploitation (“The history of all hitherto existing


societies is the history of class struggles”). The difference is that capitalism


doesn’t even try to hide the fact that it is exploitation-based and for this


reason exploits that much more efficiently. Consequently, capitalism


 


              has left remaining no other nexus between man and man than


      naked self-interest, than callous "cash payment." It has drowned the


      most heavenly ecstasies of religious fervour, of chivalrous enthusiasm,


    of philistine sentimentalism, in the icy water of egotistical calculation.


    It has resolved personal worth into exchange value, and in place of the


      numberless and indefeasible chartered freedoms, has set up that single,


      unconscionable freedom—Free Trade. In one word, for exploitation,


      veiled by religious and political illusions, naked, shameless, direct,


      brutal exploitation.


 


      Since all societies that have existed thus far are exploitation-based,


Marx does not want a return to some older form of society. He wants anentirely new kind of society, which, because it is so different from what has


existed thus far, will be attained only through revolution, this being why


Marx ends the Communist Manifesto by saying that “communists” (which, in


this context, means those agree with Marx) “openly declare that their ends


can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing social


conditions.”


 


      Rousseau: According to Rousseau, people are “free, healthy, honest


and happy” when each person has enough to satisfy his own needs but when


nobody has enough for more than one person:


 


              So long as men remained content with their rustic huts, so long


    as they were satisfied with clothes made of the skins of animals and


      sewn together with thorns and fish-bones...in a word, so long as they


      undertook only what a single person could accomplish, and confined


      themselves to such arts as did not require the joint labour of several


      hands, they lived free, healthy, honest and happy lives.


 


      But when it became possible for the individual to have more than he


needed, people began to coerce and enslave one another, and human


existence came to be largely about either exploiting or being exploited: 


              But from the moment one man began to stand in need of the


      help of another; from the moment it appeared advantageous to any one


      man to have enough provisions for two, equality disappeared, property


      was introduced, work became indispensable, and vast forests became


      smiling fields, which man had to water with the sweat of his brow, and


      where slavery and misery were soon seen to germinate and grow up


      with the crops.


 


      On this basis, Rousseau makes the striking point that much of the


mutual antagonism that political theorists regard civil society as being


necessary to prevent is actually caused by the state, his argument being in


civil society, the individual can have more than what he needs, leading to an


inflated sense of self-importance and thus to hatred of those who do not defer


to his inflated self-image:


 


              Thus, as every man punished the contempt shown him by others,


    in proportion to his opinion of himself, revenge became terrible, and


      men bloody and cruel. This is precisely the state reached by most of the


      savage nations known to us: and it is for want of having made a proper


      distinction in our ideas, and see how very far they already are from the    state of nature, that so many writers have hastily concluded that man is


      naturally cruel, and requires civil institutions to make him more mild;


      whereas nothing is more gentle than man in his primitive state, as he is


      placed by nature at an equal distance from the stupidity of brutes, and


    the fatal ingenuity of civilised man.


 


      So in Rousseau’s view, people are best off when nobody has too much


more than anybody else, and people are worst off when some people have


much more than others. Rousseau’s view is that they are best off when they


are “placed by nature at an equal distance from the stupidity of brutes, and


the fatal ingenuity of civilised man”, meaning that the optimal form of


existence is tribal. For Rousseau, people are fundamentally decent to one one


another until they become unequal, and the only purpose of civil society is


not so much to protect people from one another as it is to liberate them from


the stupidity of a completely animalistic, survival-oriented existence.


 


 


      Hobbes: According to Hobbes language has four purposes, these


being:


 


              First, to Register, what by cogitation, wee find to be the cause of    any thing, present or past; and what we find things present or past may


      produce, or effect: which in summe, is acquiring of Arts. Secondly,


              Secondly, to shew to others that knowledge which we have


      attained; which is, to Counsell, and Teach one another. Thirdly, to


      make known to others our wills, and purposes, that we may have the


      mutuall help of one another. Fourthly, to please and delight our selves,


    and others, by playing with our words, for pleasure or ornament,


      innocently.”


 


      In other words, we use speech to record, communicate, instruct, and


amuse.


      Hobbes then goes on to say that for each of these uses of language,


there is a corresponding abuse of it, to wit:


 


              First, when men register their thoughts wrong, by the


      inconstancy of the signification of their words; by which they register


    for their conceptions, that which they never conceived; and so deceive


      themselves. Secondly, when they use words metaphorically; that is, in


      other sense than that they are ordained for; and thereby deceive others.


      Thirdly, when by words they declare that to be their will, which is not.


      Fourthly, when they use them to grieve one another: for seeing nature      hath armed living creatures, some with teeth, some with horns, and


      some with hands, to grieve an enemy, it is but an abuse of Speech, to


      grieve him with the tongue, unlesse it be one whom wee are obliged to


      govern; and then it is not to grieve, but to correct and amend.


 


      In other words, misuses of language involve people either using it


inconsistently (e.g. using “billion” to refer to different numbers), using it to


lie or mislead, using it to misrepresent their intentions, or using it to hurt.


(Incidentally, the third misuse seems to be a special case of the second.)


        According to Hobbes, unless people are compelled to keep their word,


they will fail to do so:


 


              If a Covenant be made, wherein neither of the parties performe


      presently, but trust one another; in the condition of meer Nature, (which


    is a condition of Warre of every man against every man,) upon any


      reasonable suspition, it is Voyd; But if there be a common Power set


      over them bothe, with right and force sufficient to compell


      performance; it is not Voyd. For he that performeth first, has no


      assurance the other will performe after.


 


      In other words, contracts are null and void unless there is government,and governments are therefore needed to enforce contracts. This helps make


it clear why Hobbes discusses language in a treatise on political theory.


People can be trust one another only if they are under the authority of a


common government, one manifestation of this mutual trust being that they


can make credible promises to each other, another being they will not harm


each other.


      Of course, even though governments can enforce contracts, they


cannot miscommunication or deception (deliberate miscommunication). At


the same time, miscommunication and deception have much the same effect


as breach of contract: they undermine the mutual trust needed for civil


society. And this is presumably why Hobbes focuses so much on language,


and its abuses, in a treatise whose purpose is to argue that authoritarian


system of the government is the right kind.


               De Tocqueville on Egoism (Politics/History/Philosophy)


 


      Alexis de Tocqueville wrote of Americans that individualism is just


egotism in a new form. How might the philosophers and architects of the


Enlightenment’s famous political documents have responded to this charge?


Does Tocqueville have a point?


 


      All enlightenment philosophers would agree with what de Tocqueville


is saying, but they would disagree sharply as to whether


egotism/individualism was a bad thing. According to and J.J. Rousseau it


would be a bad thing. According to John Locke, Adam Smith, and David


Hume, it would be a good thing


      The reason Smith, Locke, and Hume would disagree with de


Tocqueville is that they are all free-marketeers. (Another term for ‘free-


marketeer’ is ‘classical liberal.’) A free-marketeer is someone who believes


that society benefits if people are free to pursue their own economics


interests. The idea is that if people who have medical skill are allowed to


profit from their trade, and people who have engineering skill are allowed to


profit from their trade, and so on, then naturally occurring market-pressures


will tend to make the best products and services available at the lowest price.


Free-marketeers regard ‘ego’ as the driving-force of a healthy economy, andthey also regard a healthy economy as the backbone of a healthy culture. So


while they might well agree with de Tocqueville that ‘individualism’ was just


egoism, they would not have regarded that as being to the discredit of


American society.


      For free-marketeers, freedom, including economic freedom, is the


most natural condition possible; and provided that freedoms are reigned in


just enough to allow everyone maximal economic freedom, there should, in


the free-marketeer’s view, be no additional restrictions on freedom.


      So the classical liberal would agree with the factual component of de


Tocqueville’s statement but disagree with the value-judgment implicit in it.


      The opponent of the free-market regards the free-market as being the


basis of an unnatural social order. He regards it as being the basis of horrible


inequalities of wealth and correspondingly intolerable deprivations. And the


anti-free-marketeer regards the solution to these inequalities to be tight


government controls on wealth and its acquisition. For Marxists and proto-


Marxists, such as J.J. Rousseau, what Smith and Locke regard as healthy


individualism is psychopathic egoism and greed. And what we need to do,


according to Rousseau and his successors, notably Marx, is return to the


moral purity of the pre-capitalist person, this being Rousseau’s ‘noble


savage’, who knows nothing of property or of the, in Rousseau’s eyes,


immoral exclusiveness inherent in what property is.      To sum up, those who are liberal in the classical sense would disagree


with the value-judgment implicit in de Tocqueville’s statement; those who


are classical in the contemporary sense would agree with that value-


judgment; and all parties would agree with the non-valuative part of that


remark.


           Would the Founding Fathers Approve of Trump? (Politics/Current


                                        Events)


 


      The politically correct thing to say is that the Founding Father’s would


not approve of Trump. It is also politically correct to take the position that


Trump’s behavior is not in line with the Founding Fathers’ conception as to


how the President ought to behave.


      This is in fact the exact opposite of the truth. Consider Trump’s stance


on immigration. This is one of the most criticized of Trump’s may positions,


and it is perhaps the one that is most often singled out as evidence of his


failure to behave or think in a duly ‘presidential manner.’


      But exactly what is Trump’s stance on immigration? Basically this---


that if people want to become American citizens, they must do so through the


proper legal channels. In other words, if people wish to become American


Citizens, their first act as American citizens (or would-be citizens) must not


be to violate American law. Looked at this way, Trump’s position on


immigration amounts to nothing more than a just and proper defense of


American sovereignty, not to mention territorial integrity.


      Trump isn’t closing the borders; he is merely conditionalizing passage


through those borders on non-violation of American law.


      This doesn’t mean that Trump is right to want to close the borders.Perhaps a lot of good comes from having highly porous borders.


Undoubtedly, there are many fine people in this country who would not be


here if the borders were more secured, just as there are many find people who


are not in China because their borders are secured.


      But a President’s job is to uphold the integrity of the country in a


manner that is consistent with its system of government. And having a policy


of open-immigration, in violation of American law and in violation of the


wishes of a majority of the electorate, would not be to thus uphold the


integrity of the country.


      There is another component to Trump’s immigration policy: he is


attempting to restrict the influx of immigrants from places that are brimming


with anti-American sentiment. The idea is people coming the to USA form


such places might come with the intention of harming the USA.


      First of all, most people who come to the United States, no matter


where they come from, come with the intention of making a live for


themselves here. So obviously most, if not all, immigrants from war-torn hot-


beds of anti-Americanism would not harm the country, and many would


surely enrich it.


      But it is not out of the question that there might be a few bad actors


among the ranks of such people, and it does not take too many bad actors to


cause a massive amount of damage to a country. And Trump is surely notwrong to have a wait-and-see attitude on immigration from such places


pending a cooling off of anti-Americanism in such regions. Indeed, were


Trump not to take such an approach, he would be in violation of his most


basic mandate as President, this being to keep the country safe.


      I rather doubt that the Founding Fathers, varied as they were in their


political views, would regard Trump’s behavior as being inconsistent with


their conception of what the President should do. Trump is simply upholding


the law—and not doing so for invidious reasons. It seems that Trump’s


opponents seem to be advocating a relationship to the law that is as elastic as


their political views demand that it be, which is decidedly unconstitutional


and unpresidential.            The Most Basic Principles of Knowledge Management


 


        What follows is a brief statement of the most basic principles of the


discipline of Knowledge Management (KM).


        Without knowledge, nothing can be accomplished. But it is not


enough to have knowledge: knowledge must also be organized. And there are


two quite different ways in which knowledge must be organized. First, it


must be organized within a given individual’s mind. If Smith is to accomplish


what he wants to accomplish, or if he is to know what it is worth his while to


try to accomplish, it is not enough that he have various bits of knowledge: he


must also know how those bits of knowledge bear on one another. If his


desire is to eat, it is not enough that Smith know there to be wild boar nearby:


Smith must also know that, if he kills and then appropriately prepares the


flesh of those boars, he can gratify his desire to eat.


        Second, bits of knowledge that are had by different people must be


organized. Suppose that Smith and Jones are both hungry. Also suppose that


Smith knows the location of some nearby boar but does not know how to


hunt and kill them, and that Jones knows how to hunt but doesn’t know the


whereabouts of any boars. In that case, each of Smith and Jones is powerless


to gratify his desire for boar-meat; but if they share information with each


other, they can both gratify their respective desires for boar-meat. In general,bits of information had by different people must often be shared if those


various people are to achieve their respective objectives.


        Knowledge Management (KM) is the discipline that studies how


knowledge is to be acquired and then organized if individuals and pluralities


thereof are to achieve their goals. KM is concerned with the acquisition of


knowledge by individuals and with the subsequent organization of knowledge


within the minds of individuals; and KM is also concerned with the


acquisition of knowledge by organizations and with the subsequent


organization of knowledge within organizations. KM is also concerned with


exchanges of information between individuals, between individuals and


organizations, and between organizations.


      Let us now state some of the basic principles of KM. We will begin


by stating some obvious but important truths.


        Individuals have knowledge. (I know that 1+1=2. I know how to tie


my shoes.)


        Individuals can share knowledge. (I can apprise you of the fact that


1+1=2; I can teach you how to tie your shoes.)


      An institution is an organized, goal-oriented plurality of individuals.


      In order for an institution to function, its members must share


knowledge with one another.


      Let us state some important but non-obvious truths.        There appears to be such a thing as collective knowledge. Here is an


example. Consider the computer (or electronic reading device) on which you


are reading this very document. There isn’t necessarily any one human being


who knows how to build that device. And even if there happens to be some


one individual who does happen to know exactly how to assemble that


device, he personally almost certainly was not responsible for building it, and


his having that knowledge very possibly was not to any degree at all


responsible for the construction of that device. What was responsible for the


construction of that device was the fact that various different people at


Microsoft, along with various other corporations, each had little bits of


knowledge that, when appropriately integrated with one another through


various channels of communication, guided various manufacturing processes


and company-decisions in such a way that, in due course, a reading-tablet


came into existence.


        There thus seems to be a sense in which the Microsoft Corporation


knows more than any given one of the people composing it.  Thus, Microsoft


as an institution is more knowledgeable, in at least some respects, than any


given person composing it, and there is thus such a thing as institutional


knowledge. Moreover, institutional knowledge, though obviously in some


way or other derivative of various instances of individually had knowledge,


cannot in any straightforward way be identified with individual knowledge.        Knowledge-sharing of the just-described sort is a form of Adam


Smith’s division of labor. Indeed, wherever there is division of labor, there is


institutional knowledge. (No single one of the workers on the Ford Assembly


line necessarily knows how to build a Ford. But collectively they have the


requisite knowledge, and that collective knowledge, by virtue of being


embodied in the appropriate institutional protocols, leads to the production of


Ford cars.) And it also seems likely that institutional knowledge exists


wherever there is a division of labor.


      But even though there is a sense in which an institution tends to know


more than its members, there is also a sense in which an institution tends to


know less than its members. Suppose that Smith is some brilliant medical


researcher at Company X who has discovered a cure for cancer. Given only


that Smith knows how to cure cancer, it doesn’t follow that anyone else at


Company X knows how to do so. Smith may not have told anyone. Or he


may have told some people, but they didn’t believe him or they didn’t


understand what he was saying. But even if Smith did tell other people at X


and those other people did both understand and believe Smith, it still doesn’t


follow that X as an institution has knowledge of how to cure cancer. In order


for there to be a significant sense in which X, as a corporation, knows how to


cure cancer, it isn’t enough that some, or even all, of the people within X


know how to cure cancer. Unless that knowledge has led to the appropriatemanufacturing protocols and, more generally, to the appropriate organization-


internal protocols, there is no significant sense in which X has institution-


level of knowledge of how to cure cancer.


      By the same token, echoing what we said a moment ago, even if no


one person at X knows how to cure cancer, it may still be that X-internal


protocols organize the various bits of knowledge that the individuals at X do


have in such a way that X is able to manufacture a cancer-cure. So it may be


that if X suitably organize the various bits of knowledge had by X-


employees, then knowledge of how to cure cancer may be embodied in X-


practices, even if no single person at X knows how to cure cancer.


      So in order for X to function properly, information needs to be


exchange between X-members, on the one hand, and X-itself, on the other. X


must be so organized that the various bits of knowledge had by individual X-


associates conduce to X’s corporate objectives.


      In general, if an organization is to function properly, it must be


possible for the individuals within that organization to exchange information


with that organization as a whole.


      And in order for that to be possible, the members of the organization


must exchange knowledge with one another. It is also necessary, however,


that when information is exchanged between organization-members, it be


exchanged in a way that allows it to be operationalized in a way thatadvances that organization’s objectives.


 


 


                         The ‘Free’ Market Isn’t Always So Free


                An Analysis of Barry Deutsch’s ‘Really Good Careers’


                              (Economics/Current Events)


 


      Of the various visuals and readings that we have done in connection


with this particular assignment, the one that I found the most striking was


Really Good Careers by Barry Deutsch. In this visual, there is a cut-out in a


wall that has exactly the shape of an adult male businessman. Above the cut-


out is a sign that says Really Good Careers, and to the left there is another


that reads An Equal Opportunity Employer. A woman with a young child is


standing outside the cut-out, clearly hoping to be able to pass through it and


be on her way to the ‘really good careers’ in question. But she clearly cannot


pass through. The cut-out is has a very specific shape: the shoulders, waist,


height, and general posture are those of a normal sized adult male who has


the proportions and the gait of a stereotypical accountant, lawyer, or doctor.


So if one is a trim 6,2 male with a ramrod stiff posture, one can easily pass


through the hole. But the job-seeking woman doesn't have that build: she is


too short, too wide where she would have to be narrow, too narrow where she


would have to be broad; and, most importantly, she has a young child in tow.


      The obvious way to read this visual is to see it as being an indictment


of the ‘patriarchy’ (the rule of white males). But I think it has a broader andless partisan significance. We are often told about the glories of ‘the free


market’ and, in conjunction therewith, of ‘the American Dream.’ These two


ideas are two sides of the same coin: the American Dream is the idea that


anyone can live well in the United States, provided that he or she


appropriately engages the economy. The supposed reason is that in the


United States, it is not government policy but rather the law of supply and


demand determines what career-opportunities there are for people; in other


words, it is Adam Smith's invisible hand—also known as ‘the free market'---


that decides who does what.


      Within limits, this idea has merit. But as almost anyone who has gone


job-hunting quickly finds out, the free market isn’t so free. Sure—there is


great demand for computer-programmers and telemarketers. But is that isn’t


necessarily who one is or what one wants to do. Also, if someone has


responsibilities—a child, for example, a child on the way---the business


world can be extremely cruel. For a single male, going to work in an office is


a pretty simple proposition; but for a pregnant woman, the story is very


different. She needs time off for medical needs, and many employers and


companies are surprisingly inhumane about allowing this, often deducting


pay and making the woman jump through innumerable bureaucratic hoops,


just so that she can meet with a doctor. Much the same is true of a woman,


especially a single woman, with a child, like the woman depicted in thecartoon, who, so it is strongly suggested, is indeed a single mother.


        Universities are important because within them there is a great amount


of many different kinds of diversity: there are different viewpoints, different


cultures, different aspirations---and all of these differences are not only


permitted but allowed to flourish. The actual working world is very different:


employers don’t care about what you think or who you are; they care only


about what you can do for them---which, in most cases, is rather soul-


crushing. If you have medical concerns, such as pregnancy, or responsibilities


to children, then you not only to do deal with a boring yet demanding job;


you also have to coordinate your job responsibilities with your other


responsibilities, which isn't easy to do with a meager paycheck, a long


workday, an insensitive boss, and a long commute.


      What I have learned here at CU-Boulder is that the world would be a


better place if the economy were a bit more like a university. CU-Boulder


celebrates people’s differences and finds a place for them. The ‘free market’


does not: unless you can give it what it wants, you are invisible to it; and


what it wants is usually labor of some variety or other. People are rarely paid


to think; they are paid to work—to make phone calls, to fix machines, and the


like.


      I have spent time within the academy, and I have also spent time


working. And granting that I am far from being an expert on laboreconomics, my time in these two different universes has given me a rather


more nuanced attitude towards ‘the free market’ and ‘the American Dream’


than I would otherwise have had. The ‘free market’ is indeed free in many


ways: somebody who wants to start a trucking company and has the capital


(or ability to raise capital) necessary to do so is indeed free to start his


business. And that is important: we need people to provide vital services,


such as shipping and transportation. But there is much that a person can offer


in which the economy has little interest. And there are many kinds of justice


that ‘free trade' and ‘free markets' fail to provide—and may even undermine.


We are told time and again what a failure the Soviet Union was and how


socialism is doomed to fail—and I personally am inclined to agree. But even


having to work for a giant government bureaucracy may not always ideal,


neither is having to work for McDonalds or Amazon. Moreover, whereas


socialist bureaucracies tend to make some allowances for single and


expectant mothers, the ‘free market' seems to care not a whit for people's


lives outside of work.


      In conclusion, the free market, though free in many important ways, is


rather forbidding and unfree in others; and participating in it usually involves


a lot of drudgery, and a lot of sameness, that feels decidedly unfree. Two


extremely different people, each with great ideas and a great spirit, may sit in


neighboring cubicles for years, doing the same job—a job that a computercould probably do (and probably will)—without every learning about each


other. Deutsch’s cartoon is a concise and accurate indictment of this lack of


freedom and diversity within the ‘free’ market; and because I have


experienced true diversity here at CU-Boulder, while also having spent some


time in the ‘real’ world of the ‘free’ market, I have some idea just how spot-


on Deutsch’s point it.


        How might Freud’s ideas help explain the existence of prejudice


(racism and/or other forms of bias)?


       Knowledge Management and Information Economics in Relation


to the Optimization of Instruction-markets (Economics/Business/Graduate


                                        Work)


 


                                            Abstract


      The discipline of Knowledge Management (KM) attempts to identify


the ways that organizations can optimize the flow of information within


themselves. The discipline of Information Economics (IE) studies the


economics of knowledge-markets, these being markets in which knowledge


is what is bought and sold. Each discipline is less than thirty years old. Given


that schools and universities are purveyors of knowledge, one of IE’s


responsibilities is to study the economics of education and on that basis to


identify ways that they can do their job better, faster, and cheaper. Given that


schools and universities are organizations, one of KM’s responsibilities is in


principle to make it clear how they can optimize the flow of information


within themselves. Indeed, schools and universities should be of special


interest to KM, since, their very purpose being to organize and transmit


information, poor internal communications on their part are not only a threat


to their ability to their job, but themselves constitute a failure to do it.


Strikingly, neither discipline has paid serious attention to educational


institutions. During the twenty years or so of its existence, IE has focusedfinancial institutions, such as banks and brokerage houses, and on the


consequences for them of the internet. KM is even more remiss in this


respect. So far as it hasn’t concerned itself with purely theoretical questions,


it has focused on ways for companies to improve internal communications


without undergoing massive structural changes. Consequently, there is no


evidence either that schools or universities have at any point tried to use


results from either discipline to improve themselves or that they have


benefited from any such attempts that they may have made. At the same time,


each discipline has generated results that bear on education and can be used


to improve it. In this study, those results will be identified and their


implications for education will be delineated. We will examine several actual


cases where organizations or industries self-optimized by using principles of


KM, and we will consider several actual cases where entire markets self-


optimized by using principles of IE. In each case, we will how similar


changes can be used to eliminate education-related suboptimalities.


 


                                      Table of Contents

Chapter 1 Introduction to the Study

Introduction

Background to the Study

Problem Statement

Purpose of the Study

Research Questions

Advancing Scientific Knowledge and Significance of Study

Rationale for MethodologyNature of the Research Design for the Study

Research Questions

Definitions of Terms

Assumptions, Limitations, Delimitations

Summary and Organization of the Remainder of the Study

References                            Chapter 1 Introduction to the Study


                                           Introduction


 


      Thanks to the internet, it is dramatically easier than it used to be for


consumers to know what is supplied and for suppliers to know what is


demanded. Prices have dropped; quality has increased; selection has grown


exponentially; efficiency has increased exponentially. The internet makes


information easy to acquire and easy to send, and that is why it has


revolutionized commerce (Bauer & Latzer, 2016).


      One of the few economic sectors that the internet has not benefited is


education (Slimp, 2019). Since the world went online in the late '90s, tuitions


have increased, and quality of instruction has fallen. This is deeply


paradoxical. Educators are information-providers; so the internet should in


principle be driving tuitions down and drive quality of instruction up.


      There are two different academic disciplines---Knowledge


Management (KM) and Information Economics (IE)—that should both


explain and solve this problem (Hawamdeh, 2007). KM is the study of how


institutions can improve internal communications and, on that basis, self-


optimize (Dalkir 2018). IE is the study of knowledge-markets (Stiglitz 1985),


a knowledge market being a market in which information is what is bought


and sold. Each of these disciplines is young, with IE coming into existence in


the '80s and KM coming into existence in the '90s. Neither discipline has saidmuch of anything about the failure of the internet to improve education


(Birchler & Butler, 2007). Further, neither has to any degree improved


education or even tried to do so, there being no documented cases of any


school self-optimizing or even trying to self-optimize on the basis of results


from each discipline.


      At the same time, each discipline is rich in results that can be used to


optimize education. The basic tenet of IE is that markets must be transparent


in order to function; in other words, the values of assets must be known and


those assets must be priced accordingly (Stiglitz 1985). The basic tenet of


KM is that organizations must be transparent in order to function; in other


words, the values of employees must be known and those employees must be


positioned accordingly (Dalkir 2018). How these tenets are to be


operationalized depends on the context. But each has been successfully


operationalized in several different contexts, and prima facie there is nothing


about the field of education that would make it especially difficult to figure


how to operationalize them in that context (Friedman, 2012). The only reason


it has not yet been figured out is, evidently, that nobody has tried (Law,


2020).


                                   Background to the Study


 


      In traditional economic theory, it is assumed that all market


participants have equal access to information. This is, of course, false, as


Hayek (1945) observed. People differ radically in respect of what they know.


According to Hayek, these differences will help society, rather than hurt it, so


long as governments don’t manipulate prices. When prices are set by the


market, Hayek reasoned, they correctly degrees of supply and demand, and


anyone who knows what prices are, no matter how ignorant he might


otherwise be, can service demand and profit.


      This model is known as Efficient Market Theory (Arrow, 1999).


Efficient Market Theory (EMT) embodies two distinct contentions: first, that


markets are efficient when assets are appropriately priced; second, that assets


are appropriately priced when governments don’t alter prices. The first


contention has proven to be unqualifiedly accurate (Friedman 2012, Sowell


2016). The second has proven to be true of some markets (Lo 2017) and false


or only partly true of others (Arrow 1996, Sen 2006, Tirole 2017). What


matters in this context is that it is an attempt to figure out how markets must


be arranged if assets, including information, are to be generated and


distributed with maximal efficiency. According to Milton Friedman (1955), a


corollary of EMT is that education cannot be efficient without beingcompletely deregulated.


      In his (1963) paper “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of


Medical Care”, Kenneth Arrow proved that it is impossible for knowledge to


be equitably distributed in healthcare markets and that such markets therefore


tend to be inefficient. George Akerlof (1970), Michael Spence (1970) Joseph


Stiglitz (1975) proved the same to be true of information-markets: in other


words, information is not and cannot possibly be equitably distributed in


markets in which information is itself what is bought and sold, a corollary


being that such markets therefore naturally tend to be inefficient. It was with


the work of these three authors that IE became an autonomous subdiscipline


of economics.


      The discipline of information economics has had virtually nothing to


say about education (Akinyemi, 2013). This is surprising for many reasons.


First, the education industry is a textbook case of a knowledge-market. Also,


given how large the US Education Industry is, the macroeconomic


consequences of inefficiencies in it, especially of inefficiencies resulting from


inequitably distributed information, are virtually incalculable. (According to


Bryant and Sarakatsannis (2015) “US education is a $1.5 trillion industry

 
and growing at 5 percent annually.”)Finally, American education is both


highly regulated and highly inefficient, making it an ideal testing ground for


the very kinds of deregulation that economists so vehemently advocate inother industries.


      Like IE, KM has been curiously silent about education. KM came into


existence in the earlyv90's, when companies began hiring Chief Knowledge


Officers. A CKO’s job is to organize and optimally deploy a company’s


‘intangible assets.’ An intangible asset is simply one that is not physical, and


knowledge itself is one of the most important kinds of intangible assets.


Ikujiro Nonaka’s (1991) article “The Knowledge Creating Company”,


published in the Harvard Business Review, introduced the concept of


Knowledge Management to the academic community. In 1998, Thomas


Stewart, editor of the Harvard Business Review, published his book


Intellectual Capital: The New Wealth of Organizations. This helped give


additional credibility to KM, both inside and outside of academia. Within a


few years, it became customary for universities to offer courses in KM.


      The central tenet of KM is that companies gain by treating knowledge


as a veritable asset, comparable to machinery or land, and lose when they


treat it as a mere asset-precursor (Gupta 2004, Dalkir 2018). Exactly what is


involved in treating knowledge as a veritable asset depends on the context.


      Within practically any large company outside of academia, there is at


least one person whose job title is ‘knowledge manager.' But this position


simply doesn't exist in schools and universities, and KM-theoreticians have


said quite literally nothing about how schools and universities can improveinternal communications (Yueh, 2018).


      In this work, we will map what KM and IE have already said and done


onto universities and instruction-markets. But there is an important


preliminary point. There are two very different kinds of Knowledge


Management: Reactive and Proactive (Hunter, 2016). Reactive KM involves


improving communications within an organization that is already mature and


whose structure is therefore largely fixed. Proactive KM involves creating


organizations whose structures guarantee good internal communications. A


consequence of this distinction is that there are two ways of measuring the


efficacy of KM: first, by considering reactive cases of KM, i.e. by


considering the consequences on the part of an already existing and mature


organization to implement principles of KM; second, by considering cases of


proactive KM, i.e. by studying the difference between companies that applied


KM to themselves only after they were mature and companies that were so


designed as to avoid having KM problems in the first place. Some examples


will help clarify these points.


      The Lehman Brothers investment bank was founded in 1844 and by


the early 2000s had become so large that nobody within it, including


management, had more than a fragmentary knowledge of its various


operations. Management became concerned about its lack of knowledge of


Lehman’s operations, fearing that it might be overexposed, and hiredknowledge managers to help make its operations more internally transparent


(Ball, 2018). This proved impossible, since Lehman’s various different


departments enjoyed the autonomy that Lehman’s poor internal


communications allowed them to have and actively fought attempts to expose


their workings. As a result, Lehman invested more than it could afford to lose


and collapsed when, in 2008, those investments proved to be bad ones.


Lehman tried to use reactive KM to solve its problems, but by then its


problems were intractable.


        Compare Lehman with E-trade. Founded in 1982, e-trade offers many


of the same services offered by Lehman. But it was so designed to be


lightweight, with transactions being automated whenever possible and all


digitally logged in a centralized database. Because it is well-organized and


has minimal overhead, E-trade is easy to use and charges its clients a fraction


of what its brick-and-mortar counterparts charge. By practicing proactive


KM, E-trade avoided Lehman-type communications blockages, and its


market share has grown steadily since its inception (Moschella, 2017).


      In general, reactive KM yields only modest results, while proactive


KM often yields spectacular results (Buffet, 2015). E-trade, Amazon,


Microsoft, Apple, Airbnb, and Uber are companies whose success derives


from proactive KM, and these are the very companies that we will discuss


when investigating how KM can benefit education.        KM-based cases of optimization are organization-internal, whereas IE-


based cases of optimization involve whole markets and are therefore


company-external. But IE-based optimization often results from KM-based


optimization, and we will discuss several cases of this. For example,


Amazon, E-trade, and Airbnb are both models of good KM and, partly for


that reason, also led to efficient exchanges of information within markets,


thereby optimizing those markets. But it must be kept in mind that no case of


KM-based optimization is ever actually identical with a case of IE-based


optimization, even though both may involve a single organization. Having


good internal communications is a cause of, but is not identical with,


Amazon’s making it easier for people to exchange information and products


within many different markets (Keiding, 2017).


                                       Problem Statement


 


      The problem here is how to use accepted principles of KM and IE to


optimize education. Information economists have proposed ways to optimize


finance and healthcare, and in some cases those proposals have been


implemented with good results, but they have maintained a veritable wall of


silence as to how their discipline can be used to optimize education (Stankov,


2019).


      This is deeply perplexing. The very purpose of economics is to study


how variations in inputs affect outputs. When more is spent and less is


produced, economists are quick to sound the alarm. In education, costs have


steadily grown over the last fifty years and yet outputs have declined (Busch,


2017). And yet economists have said nothing. The situation is doubly


perplexing, given how much the internet could have optimized education and


given how little it has done so (Pratt & DeDionisio, 2019). Similar points


hold of KM.


      At the same time, these disciplines have created the intellectual


instruments necessary to solve this problem. IE has made it clear how to


optimize information-markets, and KM has made it clear how to optimize


organization-internal communications. Universities are organizations, and


instructions-markets are knowledge-markets. The purpose of this study is tomap what IE has said about knowledge-markets in general onto instruction-


markets specifically and to map what KM has said about organizations in


general onto universities (Bootle, 2019).


                                       Purpose of the Study


 


      The purpose of this work is to show that IE and KM can be just as


successful at optimizing instruction-markets and institutions of learning as


they have been at optimizing knowledge-markets in general and


organizations in general.


      We will discuss several cases of KM being used to optimize


businesses and several cases of IE being used to optimize markets. It will be


shown that each case involved the elimination of a suboptimality similar to


one that vitiates American higher education, and it will then be shown how to


implement the corresponding optimizations thereto.


      When discussing KM-based cases of optimization, we will focus on


four companies: Amazon, E-trade, Uber, and Airbnb. Each of these KM-


success stories corresponds to an IE-success story. This is because good


internal communications allowed each of these companies to improve


communications with its respective market and, on that basis, to improve


those markets. We will describe the structure of each of these companies,


making it clear how that structure conduces to good internal communications.


We will then discuss how these companies were able to dominate and


optimize their respective markets. In each case, it will be made clear how


these companies optimized communications within their respective marketsand how their doing so was responsible for their both dominating and


optimizing those markets.


      We will find that, as each of these companies came to dominate its


respective market, the structure of that market and that company’s internal


structure increasingly mirrored each other. Before these companies came into


existence, those markets were opaque and inefficient. After they came into


existence, they began to become transparent and efficient, like those


companies themselves.


      We will find that these companies have several structural similarities,


in particular:


 


      *Small staff in relation to their business-volumes,


      *Heavy reliance on contract labor,


      *High degree of automation,


      *High employee turnover,


      *High degree of willingness to employ and to fire,


        *Well-defined performance-benchmarks,


      *Minimal middle-management,


      *An emphasis reducing consumer-costs, rather than on justifying high


consumer-costs,


      *An emphasis on minimizing the amount of time between purchaseand receipt of products/services,


      *Minimal reliance on public funding,


        *Non-adversarial relationship to independent and small operators,


      *An emphasis on helping suppliers and consumers find one another,


and


      *Each enables people to do for themselves what they previously had to


pay others to do (Boyd, 2019).


 


      Each of these companies benefits from market-transparency and


deregulation. Their predecessors benefited form market-opacity and


protectionism. E-trade by makes money by allowing people to act as their


own brokers. Its predecessors made money by forcing people to go through


their brokers. Uber makes money by allowing anyone to give a ride to


anyone. Its predecessors made money by contracting with local governments


to restrict would-be competitors from operating. Airbnb makes money by


allowing any given person to rent out his home for a night. Its predecessors


made money by offering lodging to people who simply didn't know that they


had alternatives. Amazon makes money by giving consumers and suppliers


access to each other. Amazon is the first company of its kind, and the markets


that it now services were opaque and inefficient prior to its existence. Each of


these companies makes money because the internet makes informationavailable, and their predecessors made money because the absence of the


internet made it unavailable (Rutherford, 2017).


      When examined, universities prove to be the very antithesis of the


just-described companies, being characterized by high:


 


      *High degree of organizational opacity,


      *Minimal turnover,


      *Low degree of willingness to employ or to fire


      *Complete non-enforcement of economically meaningful


performance-benchmarks,


      *Focus on justifying ever-increasing customer-expenses, instead of


reducing them,


      *Minimal automation,


      *Heavy reliance on incumbent status,


      *Heavy reliance public funding,


      *High degree of exposure to costly labor regulations,


        *Adversarial relationship to independent operators, and


      *Fierce opposition to allowing customers to self-service (McDonald,


2010).


 


      Despite these facts, universities are not struggling financially. On thecontrary, they are flourishing. This is because universities, though often


nominally private, are parastatal organizations that do not compete on the


open market (Cubberly, 2017). This point will be elaborated in Chapter 3.


      It might be surmised that there are formidable legal and regulatory


barriers to creating universities, or university-substitutes, that embody the


transparency and efficiency of an Amazon or an E-trade. This is not the case.


The government is remarkably willing to grant the requisite licenses and is


remarkably slow to regulate licensees out of existence (Mazzucatto, 2017).


We appear to be dealing with a true market vacuum: a case where would-be


suppliers have been slow to notice demand, and the already-mentioned


success-stories strongly suggest ways to service this demand. This will be


discussed in detail in Chapter 4.


                                       Research Questions


 


      An ‘instruction-provider’, as we will be using this term, is an


organization whose purpose is to sell instruction. Thus, a university is an


instruction-provider, as is an online tutoring agency.


      Our primary research question is:


 


      RQ1: What kind of an internal structure must an instruction-provider


if it is to benefit from a transparent instruction-market?


 


      We will find that companies cannot benefit from transparent markets


without themselves helping to make them transparent. For this reason, the


answer to RQ1 is identical with the answer to:


 


      RQ2: What kind of an internal structure must an instruction-provider


if it is to help make instruction-markets more transparent?


 


      Other questions that we will address are:


 


      RQ3: In what ways are existing instruction-providers succeeding and


in what ways are they failing? 


      RQ4: To what extent can be they be so restructured as to stop failing


in those ways, and to what extent does their continued financial well-being


depend on their being so restructured?


 


      RQ5: Are there markets that existing instruction-providers are


systemically incapable of servicing, and if so, how could they be serviced?


 


      RQ1-RQ5 are all practical questions, but the answers to them will help


us answer some important theoretical questions, the main one being


 


      RQ6: Granting that information is necessarily unevenly distributed in


instruction-markets, how can the resulting inefficiencies be minimized?


 


      RQ6 is a specialized form of an open question of Information


Economics, namely:


 


      RQ7: How can information-markets be efficient?


 


      In an information-market, information is ipso facto unevenly


distributed. In an efficient market, information is ipso facto evenlydistributed. Hence the raison d’être for RQ7.


               Advancing Scientific Knowledge and Significance of Study


 


      The primary significance of this study is that it will show how to make


education better by making it profitable. A secondary significance is that it


will show how to make knowledge-markets efficient. The first significance is


practical; the second is theoretical.


      The idea that education is corrupted by being monetized is deeply


entrenched in the popular psyche, despite there being no empirical evidence


to that effect (Busch, 2017). Also, educational institutions, unlike businesses,


are often treated as cultural icons. If a business fails to perform, no one for a


second believes that it should be allowed to hold onto its market share. There


were cries of outrage when the big three automakers were bailed, even


though they employ hundreds of thousands of Americans and are veritable


cornerstones of Americana (Tilleman, 2016). But universities receive more


and more public money as they charge their students more and more for


educations that benefit them less and less; and yet it is seldom so much as


hinted that universities should explain where that money goes. The


underlying conceit seems to be that research and instruction are sacred and


must therefore be insulated from market forces, lest they be ‘bought’


(Samuelson, 2011).


      This conceit is false and injurious. It is not selling out to provide non-defective products and services for an agreed upon price. It is selling out to


take money for defective products and services. The open market doesn’t


allow people to take money for defective or undesired products and services.


If I try to sell paintings that nobody wants or I try to sell cars that don’t work,


I will go out of business. But if my money comes from someone other than


the people who need my services, I can provide defective or useless services


and continue to be funded (Sowell, 2016).


      In any case, it is a fact that monetized information-exchanges are more


efficient non-monetized information-exchanges (Hazlitt, 1985). People who


are financially motivated to avail others of information, they do more quickly


and inexpensively than those who are not and also provide more accurate


information. This insight has been used to optimize many different kinds of


markets, including information-markets, and the present work will show how


it can be used to optimize instruction-markets.


                                   Rationale for Methodology


 


      The basic contention of this work is that information-markets,


including instruction-markets, are transparent when to the extent that they are


monetized and opaque to the extent that they are not, a corollary being that


education is optimized by being monetized.


      This proposition can be established on strictly econometric grounds.


Information, as well as information-quality, can be quantified. Therefore, it is


possible to identify and measure the factors that conduce to information-flow.


Entrepreneurs do this implicitly, and recently mathematicians and economists


have done this explicitly (Roe, 2019). Further, monetary inputs and outputs


can obviously be quantified and can therefore correlated with other


quantifiable inputs and outputs, such as labor, time, and information


(Hayashi, 2011).


        Inevitably, there will be theoretical puzzles relating to the


quantification of information, but they will not affect the contexts that we


will be considering.


        Consequently, our methodology is quantitative; more specifically,


econometrics-based, econometrics being the branch of economics that


quantitative dependencies of economics outputs on economic inputs


(Hayashi, 2011).      The mathematics involved in econometrics can be very simple or very


complex, depending on the context, and fortunately are simple in the contexts


that concern us.


                       Nature of the Research Design for the Study


 


      We will start by comparing our target-companies---Amazon, E-trade,


Uber, and Airbnb---with unsuccessful companies in similar markets. We will


assign an information-efficiency quotient (IEQ) to each company, a given


company’s IEQ being high if it is likely to capitalize on information and low


if it is unlikely to do so. On this basis, we will then identify the structural


characteristics of companies, including instruction-providers, with high


IEQ’s.


      We will then compare information-efficient markets with information-


inefficient markets. The efficient-markets will be those that were made


efficient by our target companies, and the inefficient ones will be those same


markets prior to their being thus optimized. We will then assign IEQ’s to


those various markets, on that basis identifying the structural properties of


high-IEQ markets, including information-markets.


                                       Research Questions


 


      What organizational structure must an instruction-provider have if it is


to provide the best possible instruction at the lowest possible price?


 


      What organizational structure must an instruction-provider have it is to


be sensitive to changes in the kinds of instruction that are demanded and is


also to be able to service those changes?


 


      Is it possible for a profitable instruction-provider to sell results as


opposed to services? If so how?


 


      When does research have to be insulated from market-forces in order


to be good, and when does it have to be exposed to market-forces to be good?


 


      Does tenure lead to transparency or to opacity in instruction-markets?


 


      Why are universities increasingly expensive, despite being an


increasingly bad investment?


 


      Under what circumstances does the information-asymmetries inherentin information-markets, including instruction-markets, drive down the price


of information?


 


      Are there certain kinds of information-providers that benefit from


data-protectionism and market-opacity? Does a company that sells


information about bond markets benefit from a lack of public access to data


about such markets?


 


      What kind of organizational structure must a company have if it is to


benefit from selling instruction that enables people to self-instruct?


 


      Can governments help make instruction-markets more transparent, or


does government-intervention tend to make such markets less transparent?


 


      Are information-providers necessarily put out of business if they do


their job too well?


      Is there a definition of the term ‘rational actor’ that accommodates the


fact that what a person wants changes as he acquires more knowledge and


more intelligence?


 


      We will put forth and defend answers to each of these questions. Hereare some anticipations of what we will find.


        Properly structured instruction-providers benefit from transparency in


their respective markets and are harmed by its absence. At the same time, a


belief to the contrary is embodied in the very structures of most existing


instruction-providers, a consequence being that instruction is more expensive,


less available, and of lower quality than it need be (Friedman, 1993).


        Instruction-providers benefit from market-transparency to the extent


that they provide good instruction and are harmed by it to the extent that they


don’t.


        Information-providers that are not instruction-providers fall into two


very different categories: information-hoarders (companies that make money


by blocking the flow of information and then charging people for it) and


information-seekers (companies that make money by finding information that


would be hard to obtain even in transparent markets), with information-


seekers benefiting from market-transparency and information-hoarders being


harmed it (Seward, 2016).


      The concept of a ‘rational actor’ is a coherent one, and has operational


economic significance, despite the fact that desires vary with changes in


knowledge and intelligence. The reason is that economically rational actor


necessarily desires the information needed to acquire more resources, and this


desire only grows as he acquires more such knowledge (Gawronski, 2016).                                       Definitions of Terms


 


      Parity: A situation in which economic competitors are equally


competent (Hazhimzade, 2017).


 


        Information-parity: A situation in which economic competitors are


equally informed (Clapham, 2014).


 


        Market-transparency: Equal availability of market-relevant


information to all market-participants (Hazhimzade, 2017).


 


        Market-opacity: Absence of market-transparency (Clapham, 2014).


 


      Structural market-opacity: Market-opacity due to deliberate attempts


on the part of governments or market-actors to obstruct the flow of


information (Blackburn, 2016).


 


        Non-structural market-opacity: Market-opacity due to differences in


luck, intelligence, and effort on the part of market participants, and not to


deliberate attempts on anyone's part to obstruct access to information


(Hazhimzade, 2017). 


        Information-provider: Organization whose business is to sell


information (Blackburn, 2016).


 


        Information-hoarder: Information-provider whose business involves


its restricting access to information that would otherwise be available and


then charging for access to said information (Ferguson, 2016).


 


        Information-seeker: Information-provider whose business is to obtain


information that is unavailable only because of limitations on time, effort,


and ability on the part of those want it (Rutherford, 2019).


 


        Data-protectionism: Policy adopted either by governments or private


entities of sequestering otherwise publicly available information for the


purpose of inflating its market-value and of protecting market-positions, not


for the purpose of guaranteeing organizational or public security. Data-


protectionist policies are often represented as serving the interests of national


or organizational security, the distinction between security-driven and


protectionist-driven data-sequestration tends to be clear. Data-protectionism


undermines commerce; security-driven data-sequestration does not (Upton,


2014). 


        Instruction-provider: Organization whose business is to sell instruction


(Upton, 2014).


 


        Parastatal organization: An organization that is nominally private but


functions as a governmental organization. The main difference between


parastatal and genuinely private organizations is not that the former are more


powerful than the latter; sometimes parastatal organizations have very little


power, and sometimes genuinely private organizations are very powerful.


Rather, the difference is that parastatal organizations are insulated from


market-forces and persist despite a failure to provide goods or services for


which there is any obvious demand (Reddy, 2005).


 


        Equilibrium: A market in which prices equal values is said to be in


equilibrium. Disequilibrium leads to inefficiency, since it involves


somebody’s either paying too much or not being paid enough. When prices


are above equilibrium, consumers pay too much; and when prices are below


equilibrium, suppliers are not paid enough (Ferguson, 2017).


 


      Rigid labor market: A labor market in which slow job turnover inflates


labor-costs and diminishes labor-quality (Reddy, 2005). 


      Efficient Market Theory (EMT): The principle that market-relevant


information tends to be equitably distributed, leading to equilibrium, in the


absence of government policies preventing the flow of information


(Hazhimzade, 2017).


                           Assumptions, Limitations, Delimitations


 


      People often have beliefs for which they do not have good evidence.


Such a belief is a hypothesis when it is one’s objective to prove it true, and an


assumption when one has no such objective (Kuczynski, 2009). This work


will be rich in hypotheses but relatively free of assumptions. We will make


relatively few assumptions as the truthfulness of descriptions of markets or of


organizations, since our starting-point will be that opaque markets and


organizations inherently lack credibility. As for transparent markets and


organizations, statements about them are readily verified or falsified and


therefore need not be assumed true or false.


      The discipline of economics is proverbially rich in assumptions, and


those assumptions often prove to be false or irrelevant to real-world


conditions, with the result that the theories based on them prove to be false or


useless. An extreme but otherwise quite standard example of this is EMT.


The crash of 2008 was a consequence of market-opacities resulting from


data-hoarding on the part of private institutions, coupled with credulity on the


part of the public (Soros, 2009).


      In this work, economic principles will be used, but no economic


models or theories will be assumed true. A guiding principle of the present


work is that unregulated commerce tends to be more efficient than regulatedcommerce. But this is never simply assumed in the present work; in some


cases, it is argued for, and in others, it is argued to be false.


      The main assumption that the present work makes is that what is true


of non-information markets, and also of information-markets that are not


instruction-markets, will also hold of instruction-markets. That said, there are


cases of instructions being made more efficient by being monetized, and no


cases of them being made inefficient by being monetized. So this


‘assumption’ of ours is not a pure assumption (Clarey, 2011).


      The most questionable assumption that we will make is that


instruction-markets are not in any way ‘special’---that emotional and cultural


resistances to monetizing instruction, though possible, are not inevitable. This


assumption is questionable given the iconic status that the ‘Academy’ has in


present-day culture, along with the obvious affection people have for their


‘alma maters’, despite exorbitant tuitions and minimal returns-on-investment


(Clarey, 2009).


               Summary and Organization of the Remainder of the Study


 


      In Chapter 2, the histories and structures of our target-companies---


Amazon, E-trade, Uber, and Airbnb---will be given. It will be said how their


structures differ from those of their predecessors and few remaining


competitors. It will be shown our target-companies are more aware of and


able to capitalize on market-data than their predecessor-competitors, and it


will also be explained why. It will also be explained how our target-


companies affected markets. This will involve explaining what these markets


were like before and after the inception of these companies, especially how


information-flow within changed after their inception. In some cases, notably


Amazon, these companies created new markets, the nature and effects of


which we will discuss.


      In Chapter 3, the structures of existing instruction-providers will be


compared with those of our target-companies, and the structures of existing


instruction-markets will be compared with the markets optimized or created


by those companies. Tentative conclusions as to how to optimize existing


instruction-markets will be drawn. Finally, actual examples of efficient


instruction-providers, along with the corresponding markets, will be


discussed and shown to bear out these conclusions.


      In Chapter 4, we will delineate some of the theoretical implications ofthe previous chapters. We will develop the distinction between reactive and


proactive KM. We will also discuss the distinction between normative and


descriptive IE, descriptive IE between the study of how information flows


within existing markets and normative IE being the study of how it should


flow. In relation to this, it will be discussed what both private actors and


governments can do to improve transparency within information-markets. We


will also discuss the threat of parastatal organizations to market-transparency,


especially in relation to information- and instruction-markets, and will


discuss how those can be managed. We will find reason to believe that, in the


United States at the present time, the government is not much of a threat to


transparency within such markets and that, so far as they are opaque, it is


only because private organizations have not made it a priority to make them


transparent.


                                             References


 


 


      Akerlof, George. 1970. "The Market for 'Lemons': Quality Uncertainty


and the Market Mechanism," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3), pp.


488–500


 


      Akinyemi, Samuel. 2013. The Economics of Education. Houston:


Strategic Book Publishing.


 


        Antonelli, Cristiano, ed. (1992). The Economics of Information


Networks. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers.


 


      Arrow, Kenneth. 1963. The American Economic Review, Vol. 53,


No. 5. (Dec., 1963), pp. 941-973


 


      Arrow, Kenneth. 1996. "The Economics of Information: An


Exposition," Empirica, 23(2), pp. 120–21.


 


 


      Arrow, Kenneth. 1999. "Information and the Organization ofIndustry," ch. 1, in Graciela Chichilnisky Markets, Information, and


Uncertainty. Cambridge University Press, pp. 20–21


 


      Arrow, Kenneth. 2012. Social Choice and Individual Values. New


Haven: Yale University Press.


 


      Arrow, Kenneth. 2017. The Limits of Organization. New York: W.W.


Norton & Company.


 


      Ball, Laurence. 2018. The Fed and Lehman Brothers: Setting the


Record Straight on a Financial Disaster (Studies in Macroeconomic History).


Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


 


      Bauer, Johannes & Latzer, Michael. 2016. Handbook of the


Economics of the Internet. Cheltenhan, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.


 


      Blackburn, Simon. 2016. The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy. New


York: Oxford University Press.


 


      Birchler, Urs & Butler, Monika. 2007. Information Economics


(Routledge Advanced Texts in Economics and Finance). London: Routledge 


      Bootle, Roger. 2019. The AI Economy: Work, Wealth and Welfare in


the Age of the Robot. London: Nicholas Brearly.


 


      Boyd, Brian. 2019. Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: Traditions


and Innovations in Research Methodology. Knoxville, TN: Emerald


Publishing.


 

 
      Bryant, Jake & Sarakatsannis, Jimmy. 2015.Why US education is


ready for investment. Retrieved from


      https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/social-sector/our-insights/why-us-


  education-is-ready-for-investment?reload


 


      Buffet, Warren. 2015. Lessons for Corporate America. Durham, NC:


The Cunningham Group & Carolina Academic Press.


 


      Busch, Lawrence. 2017. Knowledge for Sale: The Neoliberal


Takeover of Higher Education. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


 


      Clapham, Christopher, 2014. The Concise Oxford Dictionary of


Mathematics. New York: Oxford University Press. 


      Clarey, Aaron. 2009. Worthless. Seattle: Createspace.


 


      Clarey, Aaron. 2011. Behind the Housing Crash. Seattle: Createspace.


 


      Cubberly, Ellwood, 2017. Public Education in the United States. San


Francisco: Forgotten Books.


 


      Dalio, Ray. 2018. The Big Debt Crisis. Westport, CT: Bridgewater.


 


      Dalkir, Kimiz. 2018. Knowledge Management in Theory and Practice.


Cambridge MA: MIT Press.


 


      Ferguson, Thomas. 2016. A Dictionary of Logic. New York: Oxford


University Press.


 


      Friedman, Milton. 1993. Why Government Is the Problem Palo Alto:


Hoover Institute Publications.


 


      Friedman, Milton. 2002. Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago:


University of Chicago Press. 


        Gawronski, Bertram. 2018. Theory and Explanation in Social


Psychology. London: Guilford Press.


 


      Hashimzade, Nigar. 2017. A Dictionary of Economics. New York:


Oxford University Press.


 


        Creating collaborative advantage through knowledge and innovation.


2006. Hawamdeh, Suliman. Greenwich, London, England: International


Conference on Knowledge Management.


 


      Hazlitt, Henry. 1985. Economics in One Lesson. Wilmington, DE:


Laissez Faire Books.


 


      Hayashi, Fumio. 2011. Econometrics. Princeton: Princeton University


Press.


 


      Hayek, F.A. (September 1945). "The Use of Knowledge in Society"


(PDF). The American Economic Review. 35 (4): 519–530


 


      Hayek, F.A. 2011. The Fatal Conceit. Chicago: University of ChicagoPress.


 


      Hunter, Bruce. 2016. The Power of KM: Harnessing the Extraordinary


Value of Knowledge Management. Los Angeles: Spirit Rising Publications.


 


      Keiding, Hans. 2017. Theoretical Health Economics. Singapore:


World Scientific Pub Co Inc


 


        Kuczynski, John-Michael. 2009. Analytic Philosophy. Dubuque, IN:


Kendall Hunt.


 


      Law, Gordon. 202o0. A Guide to Sources of Information on the


National Labor Relations Board (Research and Information Guides in


Business, Industry and Economic Institutions). London, Routledge.


 


        Mazzucato, Mariana. The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking Public vs.


Private Sector Myths. Bethesda, MD: Public Affairs Publishers.


 


        McDonald, Lawrence. 2010. A Colossal Failure of Common Sense:


The Inside Story of the Collapse of Lehman Brothers. New York: Random


House. 


      Moschella, John. 2017. Financial Modeling For Equity Research: A


Step-by-Step Guide to Earnings Modeling. New York: Gutenberg Research


Press.


 


      Nonaka, Ikujiro. "The knowledge creating company". Harvard


Business Review. 69 (6): 96–104.


 


      Nonaka, Ikujiro & Takeuchi, Hirotaka. 1995. The Knowledge-


Creating Company: How Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics of


Innovation. New York: Oxford University Press.


 


      Pratt, Shannon & DeDionisio, David. 2019. Valuing Professional


Practices. Columbus, OH: McGraw-Hill Education.


 


      Reddy, Ram. 2005. Government and Public Enterprise. New York:


Routledge.


 


      Ries, Eric. 2017. The Startup Way: How Modern Companies Use


Entrepreneurial Management to Transform Culture and Drive Long-Term


Growth. New York: Random House. 


      Roe, John. 2019. Mathematics for Sustainability. New York: Springer.


 


        Rutherford, Albert. 2019. Learn To Think in Systems: Use System


Archetypes to Understand, Manage, and Fix Complex Problems and Make


Smarter Decisions. Seattle: Createspace.


 


        Rutherford, Tristan. 2017. Room for Profit: Make Airbnb and the


short rent revolution work for you. Seattle: Createspace.


 


        Samuelson, Ayn. 2010. Exposing the Public Education System:


Understanding & Transforming the Failure of Education's Political


Bureaucracy. Seattle: Createspace.


 


      Sen Amartya. 2006. Conceptualizing and Measuring Poverty.


Stanford: Stanford University Press.


 


        Seward, Jeff. 2016. The Politics of Capitalist Transformation:


Brazilian Informatics Policy, Regime Change, and State Autonomy. New


York: Routledge.


       Slimp, Mickey, & Bartels, Roy. 2019. How the Internet of Things is


Changing Our Colleges, Our Classrooms, and Our Students. London,


Rowman & Littlefield.


 


      Soros, Graham. 2009.The Crash of 2008 and What it Means: The New


Paradigm for Financial Markets. New York: Public Affairs.


 


      Sowell, Thomas. 2016. Wealth, Poverty and Politics. New York: Basic


Books.


 


      Michael A. Spence, 1973. "Job Market Signaling," Quarterly Journal


of Economics, 83(3), pp. 355–377.


 


      Stankov, Petar. 2019. Economic Freedom and Welfare Before and


After the Crisis. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.


 


      Stewart, Thomas. 2010. Intellectual Capital: The new wealth of


organization. New York: Random House.


 


      Stiglitz, J.E., 1985. "Economics of information and the theory of


economic development," Brazilian Review of Econometrics, SociedadeBrasileira de Econometria - SBE, vol. 5(1), April.


 


      Tilleman, Levi. 2016. The Great Race: The Global Quest for the Car


of the Future. New York: Simon & Schuster.


 


      Tirole, Jean. 2017. Economics for the Common Good. Princeton:


Princeton University Press.


 


      Upton, Graham. 2014. A Dictionary of Statistics. New York: Oxford


University Press.


 


      Yueh, LInda. 2018. What Would the Great Economists Do?: How


Twelve Brilliant Minds Would Solve Today's Biggest Problems. New York:


Macmillan.


 


             Goldman, Rousseau and von Hayek on the Ideal State (Politics)


 


 


      What kind of state would exist in a free and just society, and why?


Goldman and Rousseau give similar answers to this question; Hayek gives a


very different answer.


      Goldman’s answer is---none. A free and just society is one in which


there is no government and therefore no state. Goldman’s position is that


government is inherently unjust--a bully that exploits and coerces and does


no good: “Just as religion has fettered the human mind, and as property, or


the monopoly of things, has subdued and stifled man’s needs, so has the State


enslaved his spirit, dictating every phase of conduct.” (Anarchism: What it


Really Stands For, p. 4)


      Of course, the question arises: If there is no government (no state),


then what will keep order? Goldman’s answer is that the very crime that it is


supposedly the state’s purpose to prevent is itself a product of the state: “The


most absurd apology for authority and law is that they serve to diminish


crime...So long as every institution of today, economic, political, social, and


moral, conspires to misdirect human energy into wrong channels; so long as


most people are out of place doing the things they hate to do, living a life


they loathe to live, crime will be inevitable, and all the laws on the statutescan only increase, but never do away with, crime.” (Anarchism: What it


Really Stands For, p. 4)


      The idea here seems to be that human beings are inherently


cooperative and, left to their own devices, engage in constructive rather than


mutually antagonistic activity.


        Rousseau’s views are similar to Goldman’s. According to Rousseau,


people are not naturally antagonistic towards one another: “So long as men


remained content with their rustic huts.....they lived free, healthy, honest and


happy lives, so long as their nature allowed, and as they continued to enjoy


the pleasures of mutual and independent intercourse.” (Discourse on


Inequality, p. 9)


      People became antagonistic, according to Rousseau, with the advent of


civilization. Civilization made it possible for people to have more than they


needed. When this happened, people became wealth- and status-driven and,


in order to maximize their wealth and status, took to mutual exploitation:


“[F]rom the moment it appeared advantageous to any one man to have


enough provisions for two, equality disappeared, property was introduced,


work became indispensable, and vast forests became smiling fields, which


man had to water with the sweat of his brow, and where slavery and misery


were soon seen to germinate and grow up with the crops.” (Discourse on


Inequality, p. 8) In other words, human beings are best off living in tribes,tribalism being intermediate between anarchy and civilization.


      There is a serious problem with Rousseau’s position. While there may


be some advantages to a tribal (or pre-civilizational) mode of existence, there


are some serious disadvantages: lack of choices in regards to profession and


lifestyle, lack of medical care, lack of education, confinement to a small


geographical area, lack of technology, and the need to work for every single


meal that one consumes. Also, it is unlikely that tribal life is as placid and


carefree as Rousseau suggests. Tribes attacked one another and were


certainly capable of behaving cruelly towards their own members. And if


tribal life is so idyllic, why don’t people opt for it today?


      Goldman’s thinking is similarly flawed. Goldman may be right that


the state is responsible for some of the crime that it claims to exist to prevent,


and she is surely right that states often behave very unjustly. But without the


state, contracts wouldn’t be enforced and there would be no economies of


scale; and the state is therefore necessary for all of the improvements to life


resulting from economies of scale.


      Rightly taking it for granted that the state is necessary for crime-


prevention and contract enforcement, Hayek advocates what he refers to as


‘liberalism’, this being the view that the state should protect people but


should otherwise not interfere with their lives: “Liberalism is opposed,


however, to supplanting competition by inferior methods of guidingeconomic activity. And it regards competition as superior not only because in


most circumstances it is the most efficient method known but because it is the


only method which does not require the coercive or arbitrary intervention of


authority. It dispenses with the need for ‘conscious social control’ and gives


individuals a chance to decide whether the prospects of a particular


occupation are sufficient to compensate for the disadvantages connected with


it.” (Road to Serfdom, pp. 45-46)


      Is Hayek right that good government is minimal government? There is


certainly considerable evidence for that claim: over-regulated economies (e.g.


the Soviet Union) tend to fail and minimally regulated ones (e.g. the US in its


early days) tend to flourish. More importantly, people should within reason


be allowed to live the way they want to live, and overly invasive


governments make that impossible. This does not mean that Hayek is


unqualifiedly correct, which he probably isn’t, but it suggests that his position


is likely to be a respectable first approximation to the truth.


      By contrast, the views of Goldman and Rousseau are not realistic,


since, as previously explained, anarchy and tribalism fail to avail people of


the freedoms and amenities that they want.    Take-home Exam on Russian History (Politics/History/Current Events)


 


      Discuss the sources of the revolution initiated by the Bolsheviks in


1917. Address all relevant political, social, and economic causes. Was the


revolution avoidable? Did the tsar's reforms after the 1905 Revolution have


any chance at preventing the revolution? Explain.


 


      The Bolshevik Revolution per se had little popular support. But the


Tsar’s government was weak, and towards the end of World War 1, and


largely because of it, more or less just collapsed, at which point the


Bolshevik’s simply ‘picked up’ power. The relevant question isn’t so much


“what caused the Russian Revolution?” as it is “what caused the Tsarist


system of government to lose power and credibility?” And the answer to the


latter is as follows. Russia was largely poor; it was divided between a small


group of very wealthy people and a vastly larger group of very poor people.


Also, there was a growing urban intellectual class that (with some legitimacy)


saw Tsarism as antiquated and unprogressive. The Tsarist system was


proverbially bureaucratic and autocratic (though not, ironically, anywhere


nearly as much as the Soviet system that would replace it). Tsar Nicolas’s


reforms had a ‘too little, too late’ quality. WWI decapitalized Russia and


made it defenseless against the numerically small but determined BolshevikParty, which, as previously stated, was not at that point met by strong


resistance to its (successful) 1917/1918 power-grab.


 


      Describe and discuss Stalin's Five-Year Plans. What was the goal of


these plans? Did Stalin achieve his goals? Were there any negative


consequences? Explain and provide examples.


 


 


      Stalin, though in some ways a ‘strong leader’, was really just an inept


bungler whose methods of statecraft were crude. And his infamous ‘Five


Year Plans” were prime examples of this. The Five-Year Plans were attempts


to modernize and industrialize Russia, by building damns, factories, and the


like, and in this way supposedly modernizing Russia’s economy. It should be


pointed out that much of the labor for the Five Year Plans was slave labor,


supplied by Stalin’s burgeoning Gulag population, which, though initially


created by Stalin’s attempting to hold onto power by incarcerating actual,


possible and conceivable political opposition, soon became (to some extent)


about providing the labor-force for Stalin’s expensive Industrialization


efforts. In any case, the Five Year Plans were successful in some respects;


they did turn the Soviet Union into an industrial and military power. But they


were grand failures in other respects, in that, even though they made theSoviet Union militarily powerful, they made the Soviet people poor and they


also decapitalized the country, which led its collapse 50 years later.


 


 


      Describe the distribution of power under the Soviet model. What


institutions were most powerful? How did this differ from the way power is


supposed to be distributed? Make sure that you provide examples and


address the concept of democratic centralism.


 


      The Communist Party of the Soviet Union would elect a Central


Committee, this being a kind of ‘board of directors’ of the Soviet Union. The


Central Committee would elect a Politburo, this being comparable, within


limits, to the President’s ‘Cabinet.’ The politburo would elect a General


Secretary, who was the Supreme Leader of the entire Soviet Union. The


outcomes of these ‘elections’ were, at least during the Stalin years and to a


lesser extent later, pre-determined by existing political alliances. But that is


the way in which those alliances were given official force. The Central


Committee and Politburo, under the direction of the General Secretary, would


issue edicts/recommendations to local Party Central Committees, which, in


their turn, would run their respective geographical territories.


       What is civil society? Do you agree that civil society is necessary for


the formation of democracy? Explain. How did the Soviet Union deal with


civil society? Has Russia under Putin's leadership been any different? Do


you think Russia can become democratic based on its experiences with civil


society?


 


 


      Civil Society is the totality of institutions and practices and values in a


given country that are not either political or strictly commercial in in nature.


Thus, family, religion (except for state-imposed religion), private morality,


and personal conduct (e.g. one’s conduct outside of political contexts or


commercial exchanges) are aspects of civil society. Civil society is not


technically necessary for democracy. In a society of economic actors---none


of whom had any existence apart from their business interests—there would


still be a need for, and a possibility of, democracy. In fact, democratic


institutions are especially important when it comes to the protection of


economic interests, mainly of one’s right to engage in trade. Under the Soviet


Union, civil society was fiercely repressed. Under Putin, civil society is not


particularly repressed, contrary to what it is chic to say. Russians under Putin


can recreate as they wish and they are free to engage in commerce (even


though they often have to deal with organized crime). 


      How has Putin managed to consolidate power in Russia? Has he


obtained the support of the population and the Duma? If so, how? Evaluate


whether there is any chance at democracy developing under Putin.


 


      Putin began in the KGB. After the Soviet Union fell, he became a


protégé of Boris Yeltsin and was appointed Prime minister by Yeltsin in


1999. Putin later pardoned Yeltsin, thereby indebting the latter to him. Putin


showed strength and decisiveness throughout his career. He began by


imprisoning Oil Oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovsky, which sent a message to


the other Oligarchs—who threatened to dilute Putin’s power by having a


share of it—to cease to vie for political power. Putin also handled a number


of crises, including the Chechen War and also the seizure of a Moscow movie


theatre by Chechen rebels—in a decisive manner, thus earning the respect, or


at least the fear, of the Russian populace. Putin is in fact popular with the


Russian people (even after allowances are made for likely fabrications on the


part of a Putin-controlled media) because he is seen as having stabilized the


country. And for similar reasons (and with similar qualifications), Putin is


popular with the Duma, having recently won a ‘super-majority’ of support


therein.


       What are the primary problems with the Russian economy? Provide


explanations that engage economic and political factors. Based on this


information, what changes need to occur for the Russian economy to improve


and stabilize? Are these changes likely? Why or why not?


 


      Russia has three major economic problems. First, it relies too much on


energy-exports. Technology is making many economic sectors less energy-


dependent, and Russia’s reliance on a global energy-demand therefore does


not bode well for it.


      Also, Russia suffers from political corruption, which negatively


affects entrepreneurs and also discourages foreign investment in Russia.


      Finally, Russia, partly for the two reasons just mentioned, is suffering


from a ‘brain-drain’: many talented members of intelligence-heavy


professions are leaving Russia for greener pastures.


      In order to hedge against these problems, Russia would need to


diversify its economy, which will be difficult to do unless political corruption


is reigned in. It should be pointed out that there have been relatively non-


corrupt autocracies and there have been, and are, highly corrupt democracies.


So it isn’t necessarily the case that the demise of Putin-style autocracy is a


sine qua non for the improvement of Russia’s economy. (Putinites would


argue that the opposite is the case.) In any case, it doesn’t seem particularlylikely that the needed changes will happen, mainly because no one—not


Putin, not his opponents—seems to have any clear ideas as to how to make it


happen. Nor are there are any obvious ideas as to how to do this. Nor, indeed,


does there seem to be the requisite political will. My personal feeling is that


there were incentive-programs for small businesses in Russia—programs that


incentivized the Russian equivalent of Facebook (which, incidentally, does


exist)---this might lead to the needed sort of economic diversification. But


any views on these matters are necessarily speculative at this point.          Did the founding fathers support or oppose democracy? Was the


    Constitution a democratic document or an anti-democratic document?


                                    (History/Politics)


 


      The US Constitution is at its core a democratic document, and since


the US Constitution is the embodiment of the political views of its framers,


these being the Founding Fathers, it follows that the Founding Fathers


supported democracy. In this paper, it will be shown, largely on the basis of


direct quotes from the original (1789) US Constitution, that the latter is a


largely if not a completely democratic document. Then we will show that


some apparently undemocratic provisions of the Constitution are in fact


democratic. Finally, we will discuss the fact that during the early years of the


republic, only propertied white males could vote, and we will show that this


obviously undemocratic practice does not prove the Constitution or the


Founding Fathers to be undemocratic.


      A democracy is a society in which the people elect their officials. In


the system of government described in the 1789-Constitution, key


government officials are elected and those that are not elected are appointed


by those who are. First of all, provisions are made for the election of


representatives, Senators and a chief executive (or President). In Article I,


Section 2 of the 1789-Constitution says: “The House of Representatives shallbe composed of Members chosen every second Year by the People of the


several States, and the Electors in each State shall have the Qualifications


requisite for Electors of the most numerous Branch of the State


Legislature….”


      This quote makes it that “the People”, this being some subset of the


general population, choose who their governmental representatives will be, at


least within limits.


      Later in Article I, Section 2 it is written that: “Representatives and


direct Taxes shall be apportioned among the several States which may be


included within this Union, according to their respective Numbers, which


shall be determined by adding to the whole Number of free Persons,


including those bound to Service for a Term of Years… When vacancies


happen in the Representation from any State, the Executive Authority thereof


shall issue Writs of Election to fill such Vacancies.”


      The first sentence of this quotations indicates that the degree of


representation given to a state is a function of the number of people in that


state, and the second sentence indicates that it is the citizens of that state who


decide who will represent them.


      The last sentence of Article I, Section 2 states that: “The House of


Representatives…shall have the sole Power of Impeachment.” In other


words, these representatives have the power to remove the President fromOffice (or at least to initiate proceedings to the effect), this being a way of


keeping the President under the control of elected officials.


      The 1789-Constitution intends for the House of Representatives to be


unqualifiedly democratic, since it provides both that the people in a given


state elect their representatives and also that the number of representatives


per state is proportional to that state’s population.


      In Section III of the 1789-Constitution, it is written that: “The Senate


of the United States shall be composed of two Senators from each State,


chosen by the Legislature thereof, for six Years; and each Senator shall have


one Vote.” Thus, the 1789-Constitution intends for the Senate to be a


qualifiedly democratic institution, since although it provides that the people


of a given state shall elect their own Senators, it does not provide that the


number of Senators per state is proportional to that state’s population.


      In Article II, Section 1, it is written that: “The executive Power shall


be vested in a President of the United States of America. He shall hold his


Office during the Term of four Years, and, together with the Vice President,


chosen for the same Term, be elected, as follows.” Each state has a number of


‘electors.’ The number of electors per state is proportional to the population


of that state. The electors for a given state unanimously vote for the


Presidential candidate voted for by a majority of the people in that state. So it


is these electors who directly vote for President; the people only indirectly doso. But these electors always vote in line with the votes cast by the majority


of their constituents.


      Basically, a state’s citizens do not directly vote for President. Rather,


their state directly votes for the President, and they vote for who their state


will vote for.


      This system makes it possible for a Presidential candidate who loses


the popular vote to win the election, and some might regard this system as


undemocratic or only imperfectly democratic. But that is not the only


possible view of the matter. The electoral system gives the vote to states, and


it therefore preserves all of the democratic functions carried out by states.


      There is an important respect in which the United States in 1789 was


not democratic. Only white, male land-owners could vote. Women could not.


Native Americans could not. African-Americans could not. And,


significantly, unpropertied while males could not. (Be it noted that the 1789-


Constitution does not itself restrict the vote to propertied while males. The


Constitutions was silent on the matter, it being the culture at large that limited


suffrage in this way.)


      Why was this? Although an element of racism, sexism and snobbism


may have played a role, this system was primarily about restricting suffrage


to people who had an economic stake in the welfare of the country.


Obviously, slaves did not want the country to be an economic success, sinceit was denying them their freedom, and if given the right to vote, they might


well have voted for its destruction. As for Native Americans, even though the


United States did not enslave them and even though they had commercial ties


to it, their welfare did not depend on its welfare, and for this reason they


could not be counted to vote for its welfare. As for women in this time


period, they were not engaged in commerce and, however positive their


intentions towards the United States, might have been, they could not be


counted upon to vote in an informed manner. The same is true of white males


who had no property: however positive their intentions might have been, they


could not be counted upon to vote in an informed manner.


      Finally, the 1789-Constitution did not prevent anyone from voting,


and it has proved easy to amend so as to grant suffrage to people who did not


previously have it. This was by design. The Founding Fathers designed a


system that had a fundamentally democratic structure. That system has not


always been implemented in a maximally democratic way, but that is only


because it has not always been implemented as it was meant to be.


      In conclusion, the 1789 US-Constitution describes a highly democratic


system of government. Although it contains some apparently undemocratic


provisions, these provisions prove upon analysis not to be undemocratic or to


be only qualifiedly so. As for the fact that only white propertied males could


vote during the early years of this country’s existence, that had no basis in theConstitution, which did not prevent anyone from voting, and was instead a


consequence of the way in which the Constitution was implemented.


                     The Two Faces of China’s Negative Soft Power:


          China’s Belt and Road Initiative as a Case of Negative Soft Power


                                        (Politics)


 


      There are two kinds of power that a nation can have: hard power and


soft power. Hard power is the ability to coerce using military or economic


means. Soft power is about influencing, as opposed to coercing. A nation’s


soft power lies in the appeal of its culture, the sentiments that others have


about its practices, and its general countenance.


      Just as there are two kinds of power, so there are two kinds of soft


power: positive and negative. Positive soft power is the power to influence


other nations to engage in a constructive or affirmative endeavor, e.g. to build


a dam. Negative soft power is the power to influence other nations to engage


in a negative or privative endeavor, e.g. to refuse to transact with some nation


or to withdraw support from


      There are two kinds of negative soft power: the deliberate kind and the


inadvertent kind. In other words, negative soft power can sometimes, be used


deliberately, but it can also just ‘happen’, without its being intended by the


nation in question. An example of deliberate negative soft power would be


the U.S.’s boycotting the Soviet Olympics in 1980: this was not a case of the


US’s coercing anybody, militarily or otherwise. But it sent a message to othernations that the United States took a dim view of the Soviet Union, which


message in turn reinforced those other nations’ existing misgiving about the


Soviet Union.


      A case of inadvertent negative soft power would be the detestation for


the US in the Islamic world that have resulted from the US’s attempts to


grace the Islamic world with its pop culture, which attempts were seen in the


Islamic world not as acts of kindness but as acts of cultural imperialism and


of religious intolerance.


      In this study, I am going to show that China, through its Belts and


Roads Initiate (BRI), is exercising a number of different forms of soft power:


positive, deliberate negative, and inadvertent negative. On the one hand, as


we will see, some see this initiative as a sincere attempt on China’s part to


build economic (and literal) bridges between nations: so to this extent, it is a


case of positive soft power. On the other hand, some see it as attempts on


China’s part to infiltrate other nations: so to this extent it is inadvertent


negative soft power. Finally, China has deliberately represented BRI as being


a conscious attempt on China’s part to rally Asian and African nations


against the US and other Western powers: so to this extent, it is deliberate


negative soft power.


             Interest Groups and Political Parties (Politics/Current Events)


 


        Describe the evolution of political parties in the United States.


      The United States is technically a multi-party system, but in practice,


it is and always has been a two-party system. When the United States was


founded, there were no political parties, in the United States or anywhere


else. The Founding Fathers did not see American as being party-based, and


the Constitution does not even refer to political parties. But political parties


quickly came into existence, quickly stabilizing into the two-party


configuration that we still have today. The first two parties were the


Federalist Party and the Democratic-Republican Party. The Federalist party


concerned with the country’s macro-economic well-being, and the


Democratic-Republican Party was concerned more with the individual’s


welfare and quality of life. The Federalist party corresponded (with some


qualifications) to today’s Republican Party, and the Democratic-Republican


Party corresponded to today’s Democratic Party. (The qualifications relate to


the fact that the Federalist Party was focused mainly on economic matters


and, unlike today’s Republican Party, had little or no interest, or even


negative interest, in ‘religious values’ and ‘family values’ and the like.)


      In fact, for the entirety of the USA’s existence, politics has been


dominated by two parties, one corresponding to today’s Democratic Party,the other corresponding to today’s Republican Party.


      The actual Democratic Party came into existence in the 1830s and was


founded by Andrew Jackson, as an attempt to transfer wealth away from


plutocrats and into the hands of the masses, and the actual Republican Party


was founded in 1854, largely as an attempt to end slavery but also as an


attempt centralize power and unify the country under sustainable macro-


economic policies.


      As the just-stated facts make clear, there have been pronounced shifts


within and between the parties. Someone with Andrew Jackson’s values


would now being seen as the antithesis of a democratic; in fact, Jackson’s


positions were strongly in line with those of current President Donald Trump.


(Trump, though wealthy and though in some ways a supporter of the wealthy,


is also an arch-populist, just as Jackson was.) And Lincoln, though a


Republican, probably had values at least in some ways more in line with


those of contemporary democrats. (That said, Lincoln was in other respects


quite representative of modern Republicanism, mainly in that, despite his


progressive views on race-relations, he represented the interests of the


Corporatistic North over the more agrarian and in some ways pre-capitalist


South.)


      But even more striking than what has changed the American Party


Politics over the last 250 years is what hasn’t changed. During any givenelection cycle, there is one party that focuses on macro-economic policy, and


another that focuses on ‘the little guy’; there is one party that wants to


centralize power and another that wants to decentralize it; there is one party


that wants to cleave to the Constitution, and another that regards the


Constitution as being contraindicated. In some contexts, in some respects, the


Republican Party represents, or is seen as representing, the interests of small


businesses; in other words, the Democratic Party has that role. At certain


junctures, the Republican Party is relatively isolationist and relatively


uninclined to go to war, and the Democratic party, being less isolationist, is


relatively inclined to do so; and at the other junctures, the roles are reversed.


      Despite the differences between the two parties, there was a kind of


equilibrium or stalemate between the Republicans and the Democrats. They


agreed to disagree on certain issues and to agree on others, and their back-


and-forth had a rather automated, kabuki-like quality to it. But with Donald


Trump that changed (whether for better or worse is obviously a matter of


debate). What is distinctive about Trump is that he came into politics from


the outside. He is not a politician; he is a businessman who went into politics.


And this is reflected in his views, which are in some ways more disruptive to


Republican orthodoxies than to Democratic orthodoxies. (Trump actually


conforms quite well to Democratic presumptions about the Republican Party,


and for that same reason Trump does not conform well to Republican effortsto mollify the Democratic Party.) In any case, though, American party


politics was quick to come into existence and assume a form barely


distinguishable from its contemporary form. Be it noted that, in his book


Propaganda, Edmund Bernays, the father of modern advertising, claimed


that, for reasons of psychology, people need political parties and, at the same


time, that they cannot have more than two. And it would seem that Bernays


was right.


                                               France


 


      France has a semipresidential system. What exactly does this mean?


Specifically, address the roles of the executive and legislative branches in


this system. Would you recommend the semipresidential system for other


countries? Explain why or why not


 


      Much like Russia, France has a semi-presidential system of


government, meaning that there is a prime-minister as well as President, both


of whom are answerable to the nation’s legislature. A semi-presidential


system differs from a parliamentary republic in that in the case of a


parliamentary republic the president is a mere figure head, whereas in the


case of a semi-presidential republic has real power. And semi-presidential


system differs from a presidential system in that, whereas in a presidential


system the cabinet is appointed by the president and can also be dismissed by


him, in a semi-presidential system the cabinet is appointed by the legislature


and cannot be unilaterally dismissed by the president. In France, the President


names the Prime Minister.


        France’s government, like the USA’s, is divided into executive,


legislative, and judicial branches. And the judicial branch, like the USA’s, is


divided into a National Assembly, corresponding to the US House ofRepresentative, and a Senate, corresponding to the US senate.


      The legislative process in France, though basically similar to its


American counterpart. In the United States, the Supreme court does not


determine the constitutional of a prospective law; it merely determines the


constitutionality of pre-existing laws, and then only under when their


constitutionality is made salient by criminal or civil litigation. But in France,


in order for a bill to become law, its constitutionality must be determined in


advance (by the Constitutional Adviser) and so must its consistency with


existing National and European laws (by the Conseil d’état). But the largest


difference between the American and the French system is that, whereas the


American system is presidential, the French system is semi-presidential, so


that the French system has a ‘dual executive’ branch.


      The advantage of a semi-presidential over a presidential system is that


it tends to prevent political gridlock, mainly by making it impossible for the


President to exercise power without the support of both the Prime Minister


and the legislature. So the legislature and the executive have trouble drifting


far enough apart from each other for there to be insuperable disagreements


between them. At the same time, this is also, at least in some contexts, a


disadvantage, since it prevents the President taking the bold initiatives that


may be necessary to deal with crises.


      My personal view is that, while there should be checks and balancesand that Presidential authority must be restricted, the presidential has more


than enough checks and balances on the President’s power. By the same


token, the semi-presidential arraignment over-limits the President and


(unless, as is the case in Russia, which is really an autocracy and only


formally a semi-presidential system) and prevents him from taking bold and


(in some contexts) necessary action.


                                               Russia


 


      How has geography influenced Russian political development over the


centuries?


 


      The Russian Empire was physically extremely large. Also, much of it,


being Arctic or Sub-arctic, is very cold. Further, even though it has the


largest coastline of any country, that coastline is on the Arctic Ocean and is


therefore of limited use for either commerce or for Russia’s self-


management. Russia’s size, though in some respects a strength, left it


exposed to invaders and made it difficult to protect, this being why, over the


centuries, it sustained a series of nasty blows at the hands of numerous


Central Asian and East Asian countries.


      Also, whereas the United States is replete with high-quality arable


land, the land in Russia is relatively non-arable and the climate is


inhospitable to many forms of agriculture. Russia’s geographical isolation,


coupled with enormous size and the difficulties involved in Russia-internal


(and therefore largely land-based) travel, had the result that Russia as a whole


was in some ways more backwards than other European nations, being


slower than most other European nations (including some Eastern European


nations) to receive the benefits of political enlightenment. Also, thedifficulties involved in traveling from Russia’s urban centers (e.g. St.


Petersburg and Moscow)—all of which are located in the far West of the


country and in which Russia’s aristocracy as well as its intelligence tended to


reside---created an unusually large cleavage in outlook and in standard of


living between the elite and the non-elite of Russia, which helped make


Russia vulnerable to the 1917 Revolution.


        Additionally, Russia, being large and being difficult to travel within,


was (and is) difficult to govern and to control, which is probably part of what


made Russia slow to adopt democratic rule and which, in turn, was part of


what it made relatively easy for the Bolsheviks to take over. To this day,


Russia is ruled in a semi-autocratic manner, and its lack of arable manner has


resulted in an economy that over-relies in petrol exports.


      Further, its harsh climate and vast internal distances make it difficult


(but not impossible) to develop medium sized business.


   What led to the collapse of the Soviet Union? (Politics/History/Current


                                        Events)


 


      The proximal cause of the collapse of the Soviet Union was the


lowering of gas prices that occurred in the late 80s. Russia, being a defunct,


bureaucratic communist nation had very little economy, and its revenue came


almost entirely from petroleum exports. So when petroleum prices fell in the


late 80s, Russia was completely decapitalized, and its economy literally


ground to a halt: trains containing food didn’t even leave the station, since


worker’s weren’t being paid.


      The fall in prices was deliberate, being the workmanship of strongly


anti-Soviet US President Ronald Reagan, who had already done much to


deplete Soviet coffers by engaging in it a Nuclear Arms Race. (It was unclear


whether it was Reagan’s intention in engaging in the Arms Race to


decapitalize the Soviet Union. Some believe Reagan’s motivations were of a


knee-jerk anti-Communist kind. Others believe that, indeed, Reagan was


deliberately driving the Soviet Union to poverty and subsequent collapse.)


      Because Russia had no legitimate free market on the basis of which to


generate funds, a return to Communism was not an option. At the same time,


Russia had a vast grey-market economy and—as the next few years would


make clear—no shortage of entrepreneurial talent. So (after a years ofeconomic catastrophe, courtesy of Jeffrey Sachs and other Western Economic


advisers) the Iron Hand of State-planning quickly made way for the Invisible


Hand of the free market.


 


      What kind of political system does Russia have now? Is it effective?


Legitimate? Explain.


 


      Russia is a Constitutional (constitution-based) Federal, Semi-


presidential Republic. It is Federal in that, like the United States, it consists


of a plurality of states that have their own individual governments but that are


in their managed by a single (Federal) government. It is semi-Presidential, as


opposed to presidential, in that, although the President is the de jure head of


government, he shares power with a Prime Minister. (In actuality, the Prime


Minister, Vladimir Putin, has more power than the President, Dmitry


Medvedev.)


      In practice, Russia is a semi-autocratic state with democratic elements


—but more of an autocracy than a democracy. This configuration is


legitimate in the Russian people, though far from happy with every aspect of


the job Putin is doing, seem to prefer strong, centralized governance, as


opposed to decentralized, democratic governance.


      So relative to the awesome tasks faced by any possible government ofRussia, the semi-autocratic, semi-democratic approach seems indicated, in


that it combines the decisiveness and crisis-reading of a strong, autocratic


government with the responsiveness to the people’s needs of a democratically


elected government.


 


      Is it possible for Russia to break its dependence on strong leaders? If


so, how will it get rid of Putin? And should it?


 


      While it is an article of faith in the West that ‘democracies’ are good


and ‘autocracies’ are bad, autocracies can sometimes function better. An


example is China: China’s massive economic growth and economic


liberalization over the last 30 years were consequences of sapient, but strong


centralized management. Russia’s economic growth during the last few


decades, though not quite as good as China’s, has still been considerable.


And this seems, at least in part, to have been made possible by the political


stability created by Putin’s rather autocratic ruling style.


      Also, Russia, consisting as it does of a plurality of oftentimes mutually


belligerent nationalities, might be better off, at least for the time being,


having decisive strong rulers, instead of politically driven weak ones. Be it


noted that, whereas only 1/5th of Russians express support for the democratic


leaders they have had (basically Gorbachev and Yeltsin), ½ of Russians still                                                          [26]
have positive feelings about Brezhnev and Stalin!


      So while Putin’s future is unclear and while there is legitimate


disagreement as to his merits, it seems unlikely that Western style democracy


in Russia is particularly likely or desirable any time soon.


           Plato’s Republic as Pol Potist Bureaucracy (Politics/Philosophy)


 


      For Plato, justice is identical with people staying in their ‘rightful


place.’ (“[T]o do one’s own business, in some shape or other, is justice.” [433


b] ) Plato has a very narrow and hierarchical conception of what a person’s


‘rightful place’ is. He believes that a person’s social position should be


determined by his ‘nature.’ He further believes that one’s ‘nature’ cannot in


any relevant respects change. (“You are, all of you in this community,


brothers. But when god fashioned you, he added gold in the composition of


those of you who are qualified to be Rulers (which is why your prestige is


greatest); he put silver in the Auxiliaries, and iron and bronze in the farmers


and other workers.” [412 e] )


      A corollary is that, for Plato, social strata should be rigidly defined, it


being necessary that the barriers between them be virtually impenetrable.


(““If they [the non-ruling classes] follow these rules, they will be safe


themselves and the saviors of the city; but whenever they come to possess


lands, and houses, and money of their own, they will be householders and


cultivators instead of guardians, and will become hostile masters of their


fellow-citizens rather than their allies.” [416 b] )


      Further, Plato doesn’t acknowledge the legitimacy of a person’s


private life. For him, the entirety of a person’s life should be subordinate tothe interests of the state. Marriages should be arranged. (“We must arrange


for marriage, and make it as sacred an affair as we can. And a sacred


marriage is one that produces the most beneficial results.” [458 e]) And


people must never marry or reproduce with people outside of their social


classes. (“Guardians must ‘mate the best of our men with the best of our


women as often as possible, and the inferior men with the inferior women as


seldom as possible, and bring up only the offspring of the best.’” [459 e] )


      In Plato’s ‘ideal republic’, life is so micromanaged by the state that


there is practically no such thing as private life. Every aspect of each citizen’s


life must be in alignment with the interests of the state, and existence is


completely collectivized. (“Our men and women Guardians should be


forbidden by law to live together in separate households, and all the women


should be common to all the men; similarly, children should be held in


common, and no parent should know its child, or child its parent.” See also:


“They shall have no private property beyond the barest essentials. Second,


none of them shall possess a dwelling-house or storehouse to which all have


not the right of entry. Next, their food shall be provided by the other citizens


as an agreed wage for the duties they perform…” [416 d] )


      Plato correctly states that such a rigidly hierarchical social


arrangement cannot be


      sustained unless the masses are kept ignorant and constantly lied to.(“And no one but the rulers must know what is happening, if we are to avoid


dissension in our Guardian herd.” [459 a] )


      So with respect to the question “To what extent does justice (for Plato)


depend upon the state propagation of falsehoods?”, the answer is:


Completely. For Plato, justice depends on the state’s constantly lying to its


own citizenry. Not only that. It depends on its keeping them ignorant and also


in the resulting gaps in its citizens’ knowledge with carefully constructed


propaganda. Plato himself says this. Plato clearly states that the state must


constantly subject its own citizenry to propaganda (pro-state lies) if the state


is to remain intact and unified, it being Plato’s contention that nothing is


more important than unity and intactness of the state. (“Is there anything


worse for a state to be split and fragmented, or anything better than cohesion


and unity?” [462 b] )


      As for the question “Insofar as deception is necessary to maintain


justice, can Plato’s distinction between benign or beneficial lies and improper


or dangerous ones be sustained?”, the answer is: No--not at all. Of course, the


answer to this question is tautologously ‘yes’ if one accepts Plato’s


conception of ‘justice.’ But according to Plato’s conception of justice,


nobody is entitled to any freedoms of any kind. Since there is no independent


reason to accept such a conception of justice, and every reason to reject, the


actual answer to the above question is indeed: No. The lies that, in Plato’sview, the state should require its citizens to accept are ones that the state must


tell if it is to continue to enforce Plato’s conception of justice, According to


that conception of justice, people do not have the right to listen to the kind of


music they enjoy or marry the people they love or indeed do much of


anything that they personally would like to do. Since such a restrictive


conception of justice is false and evil, any lies that are told to uphold it are


ipso facto evil, and there is therefore to principled distinction between good


and evil lies in relation to such a conception.


   Politics and Contemporary France and Russia (Politics/Current Events)


 


              Interest Groups


              1.            Describe the evolution of political parties in the United


      States.


                                    France


 

              1. France has a semipresidential system. What exactly does this

          mean? Specifically, address the roles of the executive and legislative

          branches in this system. Would you recommend the semipresidential

          system for other countries? Explain why or why not

 


 


                                          Russia


              1.How has geography influenced Russian political development


      over the centuries?


 

              2. What led to the collapse of the Soviet Union?

 

              3. What kind of political system does Russia have now? Is it

          effective? Legitimate? Explain.

 

              4. Is it possible for Russia to break its dependence on strong          leaders? If so, how will it get rid of Putin? And should it?

 


                           Politics in the USA, Russia and France


 


                Harvard University Political Science Take-home Exam


 

Political Parties in the United States: A Brief History

France’s Political System

Russia’s Geography in Relation to its Political Development

What led to the collapse of the Soviet Union?

Russia’s Current Political System

Russia’s Dependence on Strong Leaders

                   Political Parties in the United States: A Brief History


 


      Describe the evolution of political parties in the United States.


 


      The United States is technically a multi-party system, but in practice,


it is and always has been a two-party system. When the United States was


founded, there were no political parties, in the United States or anywhere


else. The Founding Fathers did not see American as being party-based, and


the Constitution does not even refer to political parties. But political parties


quickly came into existence, quickly stabilizing into the two-party


configuration that we still have today. The first two parties were the


Federalist Party and the Democratic-Republican Party. The Federalist party


concerned with the country’s macro-economic well-being, and the


Democratic-Republican Party was concerned more with the individual’s


welfare and quality of life. The Federalist party corresponded (with some


qualifications) to today’s Republican Party, and the Democratic-Republican


Party corresponded to today’s Democratic Party. (The qualifications relate to


the fact that the Federalist Party was focused mainly on economic matters


and, unlike today’s Republican Party, had little or no interest, or even


negative interest, in ‘religious values’ and ‘family values’ and the like.)


      In fact, for the entirety of the USA’s existence, politics has beendominated by two parties, one corresponding to today’s Democratic Party,


the other corresponding to today’s Republican Party.


      The actual Democratic Party came into existence in the 1830s and was


founded by Andrew Jackson, as an attempt to transfer wealth away from


plutocrats and into the hands of the masses, and the actual Republican Party


was founded in 1854, largely as an attempt to end slavery but also as an


attempt centralize power and unify the country under sustainable macro-


economic policies.


      As the just-stated facts make clear, there have been pronounced shifts


within and between the parties. Someone with Andrew Jackson’s values


would now being seen as the antithesis of a democratic; in fact, Jackson’s


positions were strongly in line with those of current President Donald Trump.


(Trump, though wealthy and though in some ways a supporter of the wealthy,


is also an arch-populist, just as Jackson was.) And Lincoln, though a


Republican, probably had values at least in some ways more in line with


those of contemporary democrats. (That said, Lincoln was in other respects


quite representative of modern Republicanism, mainly in that, despite his


progressive views on race-relations, he represented the interests of the


Corporatistic North over the more agrarian and in some ways pre-capitalist


South.)


      But even more striking than what has changed the American PartyPolitics over the last 250 years is what hasn’t changed. During any given


election cycle, there is one party that focuses on macro-economic policy, and


another that focuses on ‘the little guy’; there is one party that wants to


centralize power and another that wants to decentralize it; there is one party


that wants to cleave to the Constitution, and another that regards the


Constitution as being contraindicated. In some contexts, in some respects, the


Republican Party represents, or is seen as representing, the interests of small


businesses; in other words, the Democratic Party has that role. At certain


junctures, the Republican Party is relatively isolationist and relatively


uninclined to go to war, and the Democratic party, being less isolationist, is


relatively inclined to do so; and at the other junctures, the roles are reversed.


      Despite the differences between the two parties, there was a kind of


equilibrium or stalemate between the Republicans and the Democrats. They


agreed to disagree on certain issues and to agree on others, and their back-


and-forth had a rather automated, kabuki-like quality to it. But with Donald


Trump that changed (whether for better or worse is obviously a matter of


debate). What is distinctive about Trump is that he came into politics from


the outside. He is not a politician; he is a businessman who went into politics.


And this is reflected in his views, which are in some ways more disruptive to


Republican orthodoxies than to Democratic orthodoxies. (Trump actually


conforms quite well to Democratic presumptions about the Republican Party,and for that same reason Trump does not conform well to Republican efforts


to mollify the Democratic Party.) In any case, though, American party


politics was quick to come into existence and assume a form barely


distinguishable from its contemporary form. Be it noted that, in his book


Propaganda, Edmund Bernays, the father of modern advertising, claimed


that, for reasons of psychology, people need political parties and, at the same


time, that they cannot have more than two. And it would seem that Bernays


was right.


                                   France’s Political System


 


      France has a semipresidential system. What exactly does this mean?


Specifically, address the roles of the executive and legislative branches in


this system. Would you recommend the semipresidential system for other


countries? Explain why or why not


 


      Much like Russia, France has a semi-presidential system of


government, meaning that there is a prime-minister as well as President, both


of whom are answerable to the nation’s legislature. A semi-presidential


system differs from a parliamentary republic in that in the case of a


parliamentary republic the president is a mere figure head, whereas in the


case of a semi-presidential republic has real power. And semi-presidential


system differs from a presidential system in that, whereas in a presidential


system the cabinet is appointed by the president and can also be dismissed by


him, in a semi-presidential system the cabinet is appointed by the legislature


and cannot be unilaterally dismissed by the president. In France, the President


names the Prime Minister.


        France’s government, like the USA’s, is divided into executive,


legislative, and judicial branches. And the judicial branch, like the USA’s, is


divided into a National Assembly, corresponding to the US House ofRepresentative, and a Senate, corresponding to the US senate.


      The legislative process in France, though basically similar to its


American counterpart. In the United States, the Supreme court does not


determine the constitutional of a prospective law; it merely determines the


constitutionality of pre-existing laws, and then only under when their


constitutionality is made salient by criminal or civil litigation. But in France,


in order for a bill to become law, its constitutionality must be determined in


advance (by the Constitutional Adviser) and so must its consistency with


existing National and European laws (by the Conseil d’état). But the largest


difference between the American and the French system is that, whereas the


American system is presidential, the French system is semi-presidential, so


that the French system has a ‘dual executive’ branch.


      The advantage of a semi-presidential over a presidential system is that


it tends to prevent political gridlock, mainly by making it impossible for the


President to exercise power without the support of both the Prime Minister


and the legislature. So the legislature and the executive have trouble drifting


far enough apart from each other for there to be insuperable disagreements


between them. At the same time, this is also, at least in some contexts, a


disadvantage, since it prevents the President taking the bold initiatives that


may be necessary to deal with crises.


      My personal view is that, while there should be checks and balancesand that Presidential authority must be restricted, the presidential has more


than enough checks and balances on the President’s power. By the same


token, the semi-presidential arraignment over-limits the President and


(unless, as is the case in Russia, which is really an autocracy and only


formally a semi-presidential system) and prevents him from taking bold and


(in some contexts) necessary action.


             Russia’s Geography in Relation to its Political Development


 


      How has geography influenced Russian political development over the


centuries?


      The Russian Empire was physically extremely large. Also, much of it,


being Arctic or Sub-arctic, is very cold. Further, even though it has the


largest coastline of any country, that coastline is on the Arctic Ocean and is


therefore of limited use for either commerce or for Russia’s self-


management. Russia’s size, though in some respects a strength, left it


exposed to invaders and made it difficult to protect, this being why, over the


centuries, it sustained a series of nasty blows at the hands of numerous


Central Asian and East Asian countries.


      Also, whereas the United States is replete with high-quality arable


land, the land in Russia is relatively non-arable and the climate is


inhospitable to many forms of agriculture. Russia’s geographical isolation,


coupled with enormous size and the difficulties involved in Russia-internal


(and therefore largely land-based) travel, had the result that Russia as a whole


was in some ways more backwards than other European nations, being


slower than most other European nations (including some Eastern European


nations) to receive the benefits of political enlightenment. Also, the


difficulties involved in traveling from Russia’s urban centers (e.g. St.Petersburg and Moscow)—all of which are located in the far West of the


country and in which Russia’s aristocracy as well as its intelligence tended to


reside---created an unusually large cleavage in outlook and in standard of


living between the elite and the non-elite of Russia, which helped make


Russia vulnerable to the 1917 Revolution.


        Additionally, Russia, being large and being difficult to travel within,


was (and is) difficult to govern and to control, which is probably part of what


made Russia slow to adopt democratic rule and which, in turn, was part of


what it made relatively easy for the Bolsheviks to take over. To this day,


Russia is ruled in a semi-autocratic manner, and its lack of arable manner has


resulted in an economy that over-relies in petrol exports.


      Further, its harsh climate and vast internal distances make it difficult


(but not impossible) to develop medium sized business.


                             The Collapse of the Soviet Union?


 


      What led to the collapse of the USSR?


 


      The proximal cause of the collapse of the Soviet Union was the


lowering of gas prices that occurred in the late 80s. Russia, being a defunct,


bureaucratic communist nation had very little economy, and its revenue came


almost entirely from petroleum exports. So when petroleum prices fell in the


late 80s, Russia was completely decapitalized, and its economy literally


ground to a halt: trains containing food didn’t even leave the station, since


worker’s weren’t being paid.


      The fall in prices was deliberate, being the workmanship of strongly


anti-Soviet US President Ronald Reagan, who had already done much to


deplete Soviet coffers by engaging in it a Nuclear Arms Race. (It was unclear


whether it was Reagan’s intention in engaging in the Arms Race to


decapitalize the Soviet Union. Some believe Reagan’s motivations were of a


knee-jerk anti-Communist kind. Others believe that, indeed, Reagan was


deliberately driving the Soviet Union to poverty and subsequent collapse.)


      Because Russia had no legitimate free market on the basis of which to


generate funds, a return to Communism was not an option. At the same time,


Russia had a vast grey-market economy and—as the next few years wouldmake clear—no shortage of entrepreneurial talent. So (after a years of


economic catastrophe, courtesy of Jeffrey Sachs and other Western Economic


advisers) the Iron Hand of State-planning quickly made way for the Invisible


Hand of the free market.


                               Russia’s Current Political System


 


      What kind of political system does Russia have now? Is it effective?


Legitimate? Explain.


 


      Russia is a Constitutional (constitution-based) Federal, Semi-


presidential Republic. It is Federal in that, like the United States, it consists


of a plurality of states that have their own individual governments but that are


in their managed by a single (Federal) government. It is semi-Presidential, as


opposed to presidential, in that, although the President is the de jure head of


government, he shares power with a Prime Minister. (In actuality, the Prime


Minister, Vladimir Putin, has more power than the President, Dmitry


Medvedev.)


      In practice, Russia is a semi-autocratic state with democratic elements


—but more of an autocracy than a democracy. This configuration is


legitimate in the Russian people, though far from happy with every aspect of


the job Putin is doing, seem to prefer strong, centralized governance, as


opposed to decentralized, democratic governance.


      So relative to the awesome tasks faced by any possible government of


Russia, the semi-autocratic, semi-democratic approach seems indicated, in


that it combines the decisiveness and crisis-reading of a strong, autocraticgovernment with the responsiveness to the people’s needs of a democratically


elected government. 


                          Russia’s Dependence on Strong Leaders


 


      Is it possible for Russia to break its dependence on strong leaders? If


so, how will it get rid of Putin? And should it?


 


      While it is an article of faith in the West that ‘democracies’ are good


and ‘autocracies’ are bad, autocracies can sometimes function better. An


example is China: China’s massive economic growth and economic


liberalization over the last 30 years were consequences of sapient, but strong


centralized management. Russia’s economic growth during the last few


decades, though not quite as good as China’s, has still been considerable.


And this seems, at least in part, to have been made possible by the political


stability created by Putin’s rather autocratic ruling style.


      Also, Russia, consisting as it does of a plurality of oftentimes mutually


belligerent nationalities, might be better off, at least for the time being,


having decisive strong rulers, instead of politically driven weak ones. Be it


noted that, whereas only 1/5th of Russians express support for the democratic


leaders they have had (basically Gorbachev and Yeltsin), ½ of Russians still

                                                          [27]
have positive feelings about Brezhnev and Stalin!


      So while Putin’s future is unclear and while there is legitimatedisagreement as to his merits, it seems unlikely that Western style democracy


in Russia is particularly likely or desirable any time soon.


         Summary of Politics of Economic Growth in the States (Economics)


 


      In the 1980s, rates of economic growth among the various different


states of India were relatively uniform. But in the 1990s, this changes.


Whereas some states (e.g. Bihar, Orissa, UP, Punjab, Rajasthan) stagnated


economically or even declined, rates of economic growth increased in other


states (e.g. Gujarat, Kerala, West Bengal).


      How are these growth differentials to be explained? Let us start by


identifying two plausible but false answers to this question.


      First liberalization in the states in question attracted investment-


capital, which led to growth. Though plausible, this analysis is false, as Table


1A shows there to be no correlation between growth-rates and state-income


during the period in question.


      Second, the states that had high rates of growth during the 1990s were


those that had rates of growth during 1980s, and the high-rates of growth in


the states in question were therefore simply the result of economic inertia.


But this is simply false, as Table 1D shows.


      The actual answer is this: In each case, economic growth was a


combination both of investment-capital along with pre-existing


infrastructure; in other words, if a given Indian state exhibited pronounced


economic growth during the 1990s, it was because of a combination of ahigh-degree of infrastructure on its part and a large amount of outside


investment.


      Thus, states that were given a large amount of capital but had poor


infrastructure did not appreciably grown, and neither did states that had good


infrastructure were given little investment capital. Only those states grew that


satisfied both conditions. And not only is this a priori reasonable; it is the


only explanation not ruled out by the data (see Tables 1A-1D).


                       Should the US have entered WWI? (History)


 


      The U.S. had two prima facie reasons for entering WWI on behalf of


the Allies. First, the American economy stood to gain much if America


fought in the War, specifically if it fought on behalf of the Allies. Second, the


U.S. had reason to regard Germany as a military threat. In this context, it is


necessary to distinguish reasons that the US had to go to war from the actual


causes of its going to war, and it is necessary to distinguish each from what


the US alleged to be the reasons for its going to war. We will see that


although the US had legitimate economic and (to a lesser extent) military


reasons for going to war, these probably were not the actual causes of its


going to War. We will also see that what the US alleged to be its reasons for


going to war were probably identical neither with the legitimate reasons it


had for going to war nor with the actual causes of its doing so.


      WWI began in 1914 when a Serbian nationalist assassinated the


Archduke Ferdinand. This led to a series of territory-disputes among the


nations of Europe, which turned to into a full-blown international war. The


two sides of this war were the Allies and the Central Powers. The Allies


consisted of France, Britain, Russia, Japan and Italy. The Central Powers


consisted Germany, Austria-Hungary, Turkey and Bulgaria.


      For the first 3 years of the War, the US was not involved. PresidentWilson urged neutrality and issued a ‘neutrality-proclamation.’ (Wilson had


been re-elected on an anti-war platform with the slogan ‘he kept us out of


war.’) Most Americans supported him in this.


      Both sides wanted the US to join them. The British had cultural and


linguistic ties to the United States and also controlled transatlantic cables,


allowing them to drench the US with anti-German propaganda. At the same


time, German Americans were one of the largest minorities in the US, and


Kaiser Wilhelm II, the leader of Germany, was hoping for their support.


      Most Americans opposed Germany, partly because of its attack on


neutral Belgium and also because Kaiser Wilhelm seemed to personality


authoritarianism of the worst kind.


      But it wasn’t until America’s economy came to be affected by the war


that the US had any reason to choose sides. The US had been in a recession,


and French-British purchases of American military supplies pulled it out of


that recession, giving the US a reason to want to support the Allies. Germany


also needed American military supplies and would have purchased them, but


the Britain used her navy to cut off all commerce between Germany and the


US. American. In any case, the upshot was that the US had a vibrant trade


with Britain and France and had no trade with Germany, giving the US a


practical reason to side with the former. Thanks to British propaganda,


American citizens were unaware of Britain’s treachery in this context.      Largely because the US was providing the Allies with military


supplies, Germany began to attack American vessels. This stirred up anti-


German sentiment among American citizens,. Thanks to propaganda, much


of it British, American citizens did not know that Germany was merely trying


to prevent the delivery of military supplies that would be used against it.


Thanks also to largely British propaganda, they also didn’t know that had


severed all commercial ties between the US and Germany, thereby severing


good will between those two nations. In any case, German attacks on


American vessels, especially the sinking of the Lusitania in 1915, fueled anti-


German sentiment among the American public.


      Wilson continued to urge neutrality. But the American public began to


turn against him and he was becoming increasingly unpopular. Also, public


figures, most notably former President Theodore Roosevelt, ridiculed Wilson


for being a ‘coward’ who was unwilling to stand up to German aggression.


      There were two key events that caused Wilson to finally change his


position. First, there was the ‘Zimmerman Telegram.’ This was a telegram


sent by German Foreign Minister Arthur Zimmerman to Mexico, in which, in


exchange for Mexico’s help, he promised to help Mexico reclaim the


territories that it had lost in the previous century to the United States. Second,


Germany sunk a number of unarmed American passenger ships, killing


hundreds of American civilians.      At this point, Wilson could no longer remain neutral without losing all


political credibility. So he sought a declaration of War from Congress, his


pitch being that war with Germany was necessary to “make the world safe for


democracy.” The justification for this pitch was that Germany was an


autocracy whereas the Allies were for the most part democracies. Congress


granted Wilson’s request for a declaration of War.


      The actual cause of the US’s going to war was Wilson’s realizing that


to save political face he had to go to war with Germany. Nonetheless, there


were good reasons why it was in the US’s interest to go to War with


Germany. As previously indicated, the US benefited from the War. More


precisely, the sale of American munitions to the Allies gave strength and


vitality to the previously stagnant American economy. Granting that the


primary cause of the US’s going to war was Wilson’s need to salvage what


was left of his political reputation, American economic dependence on the


sale of munitions to the Allies may have made Americans as well as their


elected officials more receptive to the prospect of going to war with


Germany.


      Also, there was, as previously mentioned, at least some reason to


regard Germany as a threat to national security. After all, Germany had


attacked American vessels and it had also indicated that it might want to


collude with Mexico to strip the US of much of her territory. But in actualityGermany was not a real threat to the United States, and most American


decision-makers probably knew this. Germany is very far from the United


States and at the time it did not have either the force structure or the


technology necessary to mount a meaningful assault on the United States---


all of which would have been known to American decision-makers. As for


the Zimmerman Telegram, this did not constitute a prima facie threat to the


United States. But it is extremely unlikely that Mexico would have taken


Germany up on its offer (supposing that it even was a serious offer) and


equally unlikely that Germany, already seriously overextended, could have


been of any use to Mexico---all of which American decision-makers surely


knew. Nonetheless, between the Zimmerman Telegram and the numerous


German attacks on American vessels, Germany was appropriately seen as an


adversary, and the US did therefore have something to gain by this threat to


itself.


      Just before the US entered the war, the allies were about to sign a


peace treaty that was largely favorable to Germany. In effect, they were about


to surrender. Thanks to American involvement in the War, the Allies


ultimately won. In 1919, the Allies and the Central Powers signed the now


infamous Treaty of Versailles, the terms of which were exceedingly punitive


towards Germany. German delegates to the peace talks were shocked at how


severe the terms of the treaty were towards Germany and also how differentthe terms of the treaty were from the term proposed by the Allies when the


armistice that concluded the war was first being negotiated. But the Allies did


not allow Germany to negotiate any of the terms, and the Treaty was signed


by all parties present.


      The Treaty of Versailles demanded that Germany pay damages to the


Allies in the amount of $33 billion, which it simply was not possible for


Germany to do and which Germany could not even try to do without


hobbling its own economy. The Treaty also included provisions preventing


Germany from having a military of scale and therefore preventing it from


defending itself against aggression.


      The Treaty also included a provision to the effect that all of the


signatories would belong to a League of Nations that prohibited its members


from encroaching on each other’s territorial integrity or independence and


that would impose economic sanctions any member that resorted to


belligerence. Not wanting the US to submit to such an arrangement, the US


Senate, led by a group of so-called ‘irreconcilables’, refused to sign the


Treaty.


      Even though there were compelling reasons, mainly economic in


nature, for the US to enter WWI, its decision to do so appears in hindsight to


be misconceived. First of all, even though the US’s supposed reason for


going to war was to ‘make the world safe for democracy’, it had the oppositeeffect. Freedom of speech was suppressed in the United States, so as to


silence voices of opposition to the war. More importantly, the Treaty of


Versailles destroyed the German economy and embittered the German


people. This gave Germany an economic reason as well as an emotional


incentive to remilitarize itself, which in turn disposed to Germany to support


Hitler. Be it noted that in his book The Economic Consequences of Peace,


John Maynard Keynes predicted that the Treaty of Versailles would cause


Germany to remilitarize itself under the rule of a strongman.


      In conclusion, the US had legitimate reasons for entering the war on


behalf of the Allies. But this statement is subject to several heavy


qualifications. First, while the US arguably had two legitimate reasons for


going to war---these being that its doing so stood to invigorate the economy


and that its doing so would protect the US from Germany---only the first


survives scrutiny. Germany was not much of a threat to the United States: it


was too far away and lacked both the requisite force structure and


technology. Second, to the extent that Germany was a threat to the US, it was


a completely self-generated threat. Germany wanted the US not to enter the


war and was only a threat to the US because Britain went out of its way to


make it impossible for the US and Germany to have either profitable or


peaceful relations. Had the US found a way to restore its trade relations with


Germany, Germany would not have been a threat to the US; and howeverdifficult it might have been to restore trade relations with Germany, it would


have been less difficult than going to war with Germany, which cost the US


116,000 soldiers. Also, it is expensive to go to war, and however much the


US economy gained in vitality from war with Germany, it is a distinct


possibility that the gains did not offset the expense, especially when the


200,000 US wounded are taken into account. Further, even if the US did have


to use military force to protect itself from Germany--which it probably didn't-


-and even if the US economy stood to gain by entering the war--which it did


up to a point---those were not the reasons the US actually went to war. The


US actually went to war because Wilson wanted to protect his public image.


Further, in his attempt to justify entering the War, Wilson claimed not that it


would be good for the economy nor that it was necessary to neutralize an


existential threat, but that it was necessary to 'make the world safe for


democracy.' But this wasn't why the US was going to war. Just before the US


entered the war, Germany had already ceased and desisted, and it was only


because the US entered the war that it resumed its attempts to expand. Also,


because the US involvement in the war so obviously had nothing to do with


'making the world safe for democracy', a number of Americans protested US


involvement in the war, to which Wilson responded with the decidedly anti-


democratic measure of criminalizing free speech. So yes, the US had two


arguably legitimate reasons for entering the war, but only one actuallylegitimate reason for doing so; and this reason, in addition to being a


relatively weak one, was not the operative one.


 


 


      Should the US have entered WWI? In your response, consider the


various reasons the U.S. gave for entering the war and the conclusion of


the War with the Treaty of Versailles and the U.S. Senate’s refusal to


sign it.


 The U.S. had multiple legitimate reasons for entering WWI on behalf


of the Allies. First, the American economy stood to gain much if America


fought in the War, specifically if it fought on behalf of the Allies. Second, the


U.S. had reason to regard Germany as a military threat..


 In this context, it is necessary to distinguish reasons that the US had


to go to war from the actual causes of its going to war, and it is necessary to


distinguish each from what the US alleged to be the reasons for its going to


war. We will see that although the US had legitimate economic and (to a


lesser extent) military reasons for going to war, these probably were not the


actual causes of its going to War. We will also see that what the US alleged


to be its reasons for going to war were probably identical neither with the


legitimate reasons it had for going to war nor with the actual causes of its


doing so.  WWI  began  in  1914  when  a  Serbian  nationalist  assassinated  the


Archduke  Ferdinand.  This  led  to  a  series  of  territory-disputes  among  the


nations of Europe, which turned to into a full-blown international war. The


two sides of this war were the Allies and the Central Powers. The Allies


consisted of France, Britain, Russia, Japan and Italy. The Central Powers


consisted Germany, Austria-Hungary, Turkey and Bulgaria.


 For the first 3 years of the War, the US was not involved. President


Wilson urged neutrality and issued a ‘neutrality-proclamation.’ (Wilson had


been re-elected on an anti-war platform with the slogan ‘he kept us out of


war.’) Most Americans supported him in this.


 Both sides wanted the US to join them. The British had cultural and


linguistic ties to the United States and also controlled transatlantic cables,


allowing them to drench the US with anti-German propaganda. At the same


time, German Americans were one of the largest minorities in the US, and


Kaiser Wilhelm II, the leader of Germany, was hoping for their support.


 Most Americans opposed Germany, partly because of its attack on


neutral  Belgium  and  also  because  Kaiser  Wilhelm  seemed  to  personality


authoritarianism of the worst kind.


 But it wasn’t until America’s economy came to be affected by the war


that the US had any reason to choose sides. The US had been in a recession,


and French-British purchases of American military supplies pulled it out ofthat recession, giving the US a reason to want to support the Allies. Germany


also needed American military supplies and would have purchased them, but


the Britain used her navy to cut off all commerce between Germany and the


US. American. In any case, the upshot was that the US had a vibrant trade


with Britain and France and had no trade with Germany, giving the US a


practical  reason  to  side  with  the  former.  Thanks  to  British  propaganda,


American citizens were unaware of Britain’s treachery in this context.


  Largely  because  the  US  was  providing  the  Allies  with  military


supplies, Germany began to attack American vessels. This stirred up anti-


German sentiment among American citizens,. Thanks to propaganda, much


of it British, American citizens did not know that Germany was merely trying


to prevent the delivery of military supplies that would be used against it.


Thanks also to largely British propaganda, they also didn’t know that had


severed all commercial ties between the US and Germany, thereby severing


good  will  between  those  two  nations.  In  any  case,  German  attacks  on


American vessels, especially the sinking of the Lusitania in 1915, fueled anti-


German sentiment among the American public.


 Wilson continued to urge neutrality. But the American public began


to  turn  against  him  and  he  was  becoming  increasingly  unpopular.  Also,


public figures, most notably former President Theodore Roosevelt, ridiculed


Wilson  for  being  a  ‘coward’  who  was  unwilling  to  stand  up  to  Germanaggression.


 There were two key events that caused Wilson to finally change his


position. First, there was the ‘Zimmerman Telegram.’ This was a telegram


sent by German Foreign Minister Arthur Zimmerman to Mexico, in which, in


exchange  for  Mexico’s  help,  he  promised  to  help  Mexico  reclaim  the


territories that it had lost in the previous century to the United States. Second,


Germany  sunk  a  number  of  unarmed  American  passenger  ships,  killing


hundreds of American civilians.


      At this point, Wilson could no longer remain neutral without losing all


political credibility. So he sought a declaration of War from Congress, his


pitch being that war with Germany was necessary to “make the world safe for


democracy.”  The  justification  for  this  pitch  was  that  Germany  was  an


autocracy whereas the Allies were for the most part democracies. Congress


granted Wilson’s request for a declaration of War.


      The actual cause of the US’s going to war was Wilson’s realizing that


to save political face he had to go to war with Germany. Nonetheless, there


were  good  reasons  why  it  was  in  the  US’s  interest  to  go  to  War  with


Germany. As previously indicated, the US benefited from the War. More


precisely, the sale of American munitions to the Allies gave strength and


vitality  to  the  previously  stagnant  American  economy.  Granting  that  the


primary cause of the US’s going to war was Wilson’s need to salvage whatwas left of his political reputation, American economic dependence on the


sale of munitions to the Allies may have made Americans as well as their


elected  officials  more  receptive  to  the  prospect  of  going  to  war  with


Germany.


      Also,  there  was,  as  previously  mentioned,  at  least  some  reason  to


regard  Germany  as  a  threat  to  national  security.  After  all,  Germany  had


attacked American vessels and it had also indicated that it might want to


collude with Mexico to strip the US of much of her territory. But in actuality


Germany  was  not  a  real  threat  to  the  United  States,  and  most  American


decision-makers probably knew this. Germany is very far from the United


States  and  at  the  time  it  did  not  have  either  the  force  structure  or  the


technology necessary to mount a meaningful assault on the United States---


all of which would have been known to American decision-makers. As for


the Zimmerman Telegram, this did not constitute a prima facie threat to the


United States. But it is extremely unlikely that Mexico would have taken


Germany up on its offer (supposing that it even was a serious offer) and


equally unlikely that Germany, already seriously overextended, could have


been of any use to Mexico---all of which American decision-makers surely


knew.  Nonetheless,  between  the  Zimmerman  Telegram  and  the  numerous


German attacks on American vessels, Germany was appropriately seen as an


adversary, and the US did therefore have something to gain by this threat toitself.


      Just before the US entered the war, the allies were about to sign a


peace treaty that was largely favorable to Germany. In effect, they were about


to  surrender.  Thanks  to  American  involvement  in  the  War,  the  Allies


ultimately won. In 1919, the Allies and the Central Powers signed the now


infamous Treaty of Versailles, the terms of which were exceedingly punitive


towards Germany. German delegates to the peace talks were shocked at how


severe the terms of the treaty were towards Germany and also how different


the terms of the treaty were from the term proposed by the Allies when the


armistice that concluded the war was first being negotiated. But the Allies did


not allow Germany to negotiate any of the terms, and the Treaty was signed


by all parties present.


      The Treaty of Versailles demanded that Germany pay damages to the


Allies in the amount of $33 billion, which it simply was not possible for


Germany  to  do  and  which  Germany  could  not  even  try  to  do  without


hobbling its own economy. The Treaty also included provisions preventing


Germany from having a military of scale and therefore preventing it from


defending itself against aggression.


      The  Treaty  also  included  a  provision  to  the  effect  that  all  of  the


signatories would belong to a League of Nations that prohibited its members


from encroaching on each other’s territorial integrity or independence andthat  would  impose  economic  sanctions  any  member  that  resorted  to


belligerence. Not wanting the US to submit to such an arrangement, the US


Senate,  led  by  a  group  of  so-called  ‘irreconcilables’,  refused  to  sign  the


Treaty.


      Even  though  there  were  compelling  reasons,  mainly  economic  in


nature, for the US to enter WWI, its decision to do so appears in hindsight to


be  misconceived.  First  of  all,  even  though  the  US’s  supposed  reason  for


going to war was to ‘make the world safe for democracy’, it had the opposite


effect.  Freedom  of  speech  was  suppressed  in  the  United  States,  so  as  to


silence  voices  of  opposition  to  the  war.  More  importantly,  the  Treaty  of


Versailles  destroyed  the  German  economy  and  embittered  the  German


people.  This  gave  Germany  an  economic  reason  as  well  as  an  emotional


incentive to remilitarize itself, which in turn disposed to Germany to support


Hitler. Be it noted that in his book The Economic Consequences of Peace,


John Maynard Keynes predicted that the Treaty of Versailles would cause


Germany to remilitarize itself under the rule of a strongman.


      In conclusion, the US did have legitimate reasons to fight with the


Allies  in  WWI.  But,  first  of  all,  these  reasons  were  not  the  US’s  actual


reasons for doing so, though they may have played a supporting role, and,


second of all, the consequences of the US’s involvement in WWI, the main


one being WWII, were so disastrous (and, arguably, so predictably so) thatthe US, whatever its reasons for entering the War, was probably not acting


rationally in doing so.


                     Mill and von Hayek on Free-market Economics


                                (Economics/Philosophy)


 


              1. Power corrupts. How have authors read for the course aimed


    to ensure that government promotes the interests of the governed? In


    your answer, discuss three or more of the following authors: Plato,


      Locke, Madison, Rousseau, Thoreau, Hayek, and Mill


 I will focus on Madison, Mill and von Hayek. All three have the more


or less the same view (government should restrict as little as only possible,


only curtailing freedom to prevent violence), but they have it for slightly


different reasons and have different recommendations as to how to actualize


this conception of gov’t.


        According to Madison, there are two threats to liberty: the government


and other people (the majority ganging up up on the minority). Freedom from


government tyranny is accomplished by dividing the government into


mutually independent branches (e.g. executive/legislative/judiciary), allowing


someone who is being oppressed by one such branch to seek relief from the


others. As for protection from the majority, Madison’s solution is to divide


the government into Federal and local/state, which divides the people up into


a lot of little groups (different states, different counties, different cities),


which makes it hard for them to form blocks that gang up on others. Madisonsays that pure democracy provides no protection to the minority against the


majority, but that a ‘republic’ does do so, a ‘republic’ being indirect


democracy (the people vote for representatives, and the representatives


decide specific issues: the people themselves do not decide how to deal with


specific issues). In this way, gov’t protects people from itself and others and


does the people the maximum amount of good.


 According to Mill, people should be allowed as much freedom as


possible (short of being violent to each other). A major threat to this is the


tyranny of the majority. The way to protect against this is to have


‘proportionate representation’, meaning that if n% of the people vote for


party x, then n% of elected officials should belong to party x. So if 3% of the


people support the green party, 10% the black panther party, 23 % the


libertarian party, etc., then 3% of the members of congress should be green


party members, 10% black panther party members, etc. In this way, there is


majority rule and minority rights.


 According to Hayek, the sole purpose of government should be to


allow the economy to run its course, and government’s role should therefore


be limited to enforcing contracts and preventing crimes and otherwise


allowing the economy to flourish. If the government interferes with the


economy, through planning or through the outright confiscation of property,


then the economy will fail and the people will be the worse for it. Each of these authors wants the people to be protect from gov’t and


from others, but have different views as to how to accomplish this. Hayek’s


view is that the economy will give people what they need, the role of gov’t


being just to keep the economy alive. Madison and Mill want to protect


people from each other, but have different views as to how to do this, with


Mill believing the solution to be proportional representation and Madison


believing the solution to be a Republican form of gov’t.


 


 3. How does private property either promote or inhibit liberty in


    the works of three or more of the following authors: Plato, Locke,


      Rousseau, Mill, Goldman, and Marx & Engels?


              According to Rousseau and Marx/Engels, the institution of


      private property leads people to exploit one another and to turn one


      another into commodities. According to Locke, property allows people


    to develop resources and provide for one another, thereby enhancing


      freedom.


              Rousseau: when people have just enough, there are no problems;


      they are nice to each other. When some people begin to have more than


      they need (surpluses), there are problems. When people start to want


      more than they personally need, they need to exploit others. And this


      means that they need strict laws in place to keep people compliant. So      property (i.e. surplus property: enough property to exchange with


      others) leads to mutual exploitation, enslavement, injustice.


              Marx/Engels: Private property leads people to turn each other


      into property. Under capitalism, people have only as much worth as


      they have economic value. And under capitalism, people want to make


      production efficient, leading to division of labor, leading in turn to


      meaningless tasks for workers and ‘alienated’ labor.


              Locke: Labor is the basis of ownership. I come to own the land


      by tilling it. Without property, therefore, there would be no labor:


      nobody would work metal into machines or land into produce, etc. So


      property involves production and its absence involves its absence. As


    for the idea, that one is stealing from others by acquiring property, that


    is misconceived. In order to cultivate the land, somebody has to own it;


    but if he owns, he creates corns, etc. for everybody to consume that


      weren’t there previously. So property leads to economic growth, which


      leads to a greater bounty for everyone. And when people have


      excessive surpluses of property, they have an incentive to exchange it,


    so the property tends to keep itself relatively evenly distributed.


      Property leads to development of resources and all the advantages and


      freedoms resulting therefrom. Absence of property means lack of


      incentive to work. Property equals freedom to tend to one’s own needs    and needs of others.


  How is Colonialism different from Imperialism? Short Version


                                        (Politics)


 


        Colonialism involves settling another territory or country and


dominating it in that way. Imperialism involves dominating another country


either by settling it or by using force or by commandeering its economy. All


colonialism is imperialism but not vice versa.


      European colonialism from 1492-1789 was about settling new


territories and building new economies. 19th Century European imperialism


was less about building new economies or settling territories than it was


about using military force to take over pre-existing economies. This is what


happened in China in the 19th Century, when Britain used her naval power to


take over worldwide distribution of China-grown tea. To secure her


stranglehold on the international tea-trade, Britain resorted to flooding China


with opium so as to debilitate her inhabitants and make her submit to British


domination of China’s economy.


      European colonialism during 1492-1789 led to the creation of nations


that are to this occupied by descendants of the inhabitants of the colonial


powers in question. European imperialism in the 19th century involved little


European settlement of the territories being dominated, as is evidenced by the


fact that the ethnic composition of those territories has hardly changed at all.(North America is now populated largely by people of European descent.


Africa is only to a very small degree populated by such people.)


      19th Century European imperialism created a large demand for goods


(e.g. tea, silk, rubber) from the territories being dominated, which created


tremendous economic development in Europe. This spurred great


technological innovations, leading to the industrial revolution, along with the


far-reaching social changes entailed thereby.


 


             How is Colonialism different from Imperialism? Long Version


                              (History/Politics/Economics)


 


      First of all, colonialism is not the same thing as imperialism.


Colonialism is when one country settles territory occupied by some other


people. Imperialism is when one country dominates the people in another


territory or country. Although imperialism may involve some of the dominant


country’s citizens settling in the territory that is being dominated, it does not


necessarily do so. Also, there are many different forms that imperialist


domination can take: military, economic, political, religious. (Usually the


domination is either military or economic or both.)


        Colonialism and imperialism, though different, are not mutually


exclusive. All colonialism is imperialism but not all imperialism is


colonialism. If country X dominates country Y, either economically or


military or in some other way, but X’s people do not settle Y, the result is a


case of imperialism without colonialism.


      The colonial expansion in 1492-1789 was just that. In colonizing


North America and Australia the British were not so much leeching off of


pre-existing economies as they were creating new economies, the same being


true, though probably to a lesser extent, of Spanish and Portuguese


colonialism in Central and South America. European colonialism during thisperiod was less about dominating already exiting countries than it was about


creating new countries (which usually involved dominating peoples, albeit


ones who were not organized into nations, at least not in the modern sense).


      By contrast, European Imperialism in the 19th Century was less about


creating new countries than it was about economically taking advantage of


pre-existing ones. (That said, it did involve nation-building up to a point: see


below.) In the 19th Century, the British did not really colonize China, but


they did dominate it. They did this by using British Naval power to give


British merchants control over international sales of tea grown in China. In


order to weaken the Chinese populace, so as to make submit to this


arrangement, the British flooded China with opium, leading to mass opium


addiction among Chinese.


      In the 19th century, the French and British colonized much of Africa.


British colonialism, though exploitative, was less viciously so than French


colonialism and also more constructive, in the sense that to a greater extent


than French colonialism led to stable and relatively autonomous economies.


In any case, both British and French 19th century colonialism were more


about dominating pre-existing groups (not nations in the modern sense of the


word, but nations of a kind) and less about settling new territories. This is


why early European colonialism led to countries in the New World whose


residents are to this day largely or European descent, whereas 19th CenturyBritish and French colonialism hardly affected the ethnic composition of


Africa at all.


      19th Century European imperialism greatly stimulated economic


development in Europe, by creating a huge demand for goods imported from


the countries being dominated (e.g. silk, tea, rubber), which in turn spurred


technological development, thereby giving rise to the Industrial Revolution.


           Was the US a World Leader Between 1946-1991? Long Version


                                    (History/Politics)


 


      The U.S. has been the world leader since WW2. The Soviet Union was


also a leader during the years 1946-1991, mainly because it had a powerful


military and was extremely aggressive in its attempts to bring under countries


under its political control. But the Soviet Union had an obsolete economy and


it poured what few resources it had into its military, the result being that it


collapsed  in  1990  and  now  belongs  to  what  Trotsky  referred  to  as  “the


rubbish heap of history.” By contrast, the U.S. still has the most powerful


economy in the world and, although other nations (mainly Russia, India, and


China) are emerging as fellow world leaders, the U.S.’s absolute position


remained relatively constant. This paper will substantiate the points just made


and  to  this  end  will  discuss  the  Marshall  Plan,  the  Berlin  Blockade,  the


Truman Doctrine, and the conflict between communism and capitalism to


show that U.S. was the dominant leader over the Soviets. Be it noted that the


conflict between communism and capitalism was both economic and military


in nature: it was a conflict between opposing views as to the rightful role of


government and the legitimacy of private property and free enterprise. But


this conflict, though primarily ideological, became militarized, leading to a


45 year ‘cold war’ between the U.S. and the Soviet Union and also involvingseveral wars by proxy, including the Korean War and the Vietnam War.


      After World War II, and to some extent because of it, two countries


emerged as the world’s main powers: the United States and the Soviet Union.


Not only were these two nations the most powerful ones in existence; they


were  also  irreconcilable  adversaries.  This  was  largely  because  the  United


States was (and still is) a capitalist country whereas the Soviet Union was


communist. A capitalist country is one in which private citizens are allowed


to own property and to transact with each other. A communist country is one


in  which  private  citizens  do  not  own  private  property,  at  least  not  on  a


significant  scale,  and  are  not  allowed  to  transact  with  each  other.  In  a


communist country, the government owns everything, and what people have


is  determined  by  government  policy,  not  by  market-forces.  In  a  capitalist


country, what people is determined by market forces. Therefore communism


and capitalism cannot coexist.


      As  soon  as  World  War  II  ended,  the  Soviet  Union  expanded


aggressively. It did not directly take over other countries. Instead, it helped


set up communist regimes in those countries, which would be loyal to the


Soviet  Union  and  through  which  the  Soviet  Union  could  control  those


countries. The Soviet Union immediately succeeded in setting up communist


regimes,  all  of  them  loyal  to  the  Soviet  Union,  in  all  of  Eastern  Europe,


including a large part of Germany, and after a few years, it helped establishcommunist rule in China.


      The Soviets had a large military and a well-educated and also well-


indoctrinated  population,  but  their  economy  was  almost  completely  non-


functional. By contrast, the United States not only had a powerful military


but a booming economy and a correspondingly high standard of living. In


fact, the United States had the world’s largest economy (and still does), while


the Soviet Economy was small relative to its population and also in absolute


terms. (The economies of Japan, Germany, and Great Britain were all larger


than the Soviet Economy.)


      Also, even though the Soviet Union had a powerful military, it was


only able to pay for its military by depleting the rest of its economy. This is


why the Soviet Union simply collapsed in 1990, along with most of the other


communist regimes in the world. This is also why the Soviet Union was so


aggressively expansionist: it had no economy and therefore had to predate on


other economies, which it did up to a point but which the USA resisted in


allied countries and which it therefore was not able to do indefinitely.


      The Soviets’ aggressiveness led to the so-called Truman Doctrine, this


being  the  US’s  commitment  to  prevent  the  Soviet  Union  from  absorbing


additional  countries  into  the  Soviet  Bloc.  The  Truman  Doctrine  officially


came into existence in 1947 when Harry Truman announced to Congress in


1947 that he would block the attempt the Soviets were then making to installCommunist puppet governments in Turkey and Greece. The US’s subsequent


attempts to check Soviet (and, more generally, communist) expansion were


not always successful (though they were ultimately completely successful),


but the very fact that the US made those efforts and thus made it so hard for


the Soviets to expand made the U.S. a protector and therefore a leader of


nations.


      The conflict between the US and USSR was in large measure a ‘cold


war’, meaning that it did not involve overt, direct armed conflicts between


those two powers. But the so-called ‘Cold’ War involved a number of ‘hot’


(actual) wars-by-proxy between the US and USSR. The first of these was the


Korean War, which began when the Soviet-backed North Korean Communist


army (henceforth PAK, short for ‘People’s Army of Korea’) crossed the 38th


Parallel in an effort to assume control of all of Korea. The US intervened and


deployed 550,000 troops in an effort to stop PAK. The US was aided in this


effort by non-communist Korean forces. The US prevented PAK from taking


over the southern half of Korea, but PAK retained control of the Northern


part.


      Since 1953, Korea has been divided into a non-communist southern


part  (South  Korea)  and  a  communist  northern  part  (North  Korea).  North


Korea is currently run by Kim Jong Un, the grandson of Kim-il Sung, the


leader of PAK, and the son of Kim Jong Il. The differences between theKoreas is illustrative of the nature of the Cold War. South Korea is extremely


prosperous and modern. North Korea is desperately poor and its residents for


the most part have little to eat and extremely few freedoms. North Korea is


by every measure a failed state. It survives largely thanks to handouts from


(nominally Communist) China, but its economy is, for the same reasons as


the Soviet economy, a complete failure.


      South Korea was one of the first beneficiaries of the World Bank,


which, though not technically created by any one nation, was largely the


handiwork of the US and Britain. The purpose of the World Bank is to help


struggling economies, mainly by giving them loans but also by providing


them with expertise. After the Korean War, South Korea needed money to


rebuild its shattered infrastructure, and the World Bank loaned it the required


amounts, helping South Korea’s economy become the powerhouse that it is


today. Meanwhile, North Korea depended on Soviet and Chinese loans, still


depending on the latter, and its economy is non-functional.


      Whereas Soviet power had only one side to it - a dark and aggressive


side - US power had two sides to it: an anti-Soviet and sometimes belligerent


side and a non-belligerent, constructive side. The constructive side involved


the US’s being an economic leader, which it did partly by simply having a


booming  economy  and  which  it  did  partly  by  providing  direct  economic


assistance to other countries, which it still does and which it first began doingwith the advent of the Marshall Plan.


      The Marshall Plan was an initiative on the US’s part to rebuild Europe


in the aftermath of WW2. The purpose of the Marshall was to repair the


shattered  economies  of  Europe  by  creating  and  modernizing  industry,


lowering trade-barriers between nations, encouraging commerce between and


within the nations of Europe, and preventing the spread of communism. To


this  end,  the  US  invested  billions  of  its  own  dollars  in  the  economies  of


Europe. The US offered to extend the benefits of the Marshall Plan to the


Soviet Union, but the latter declined and also blocked the US’s attempts to


extend such benefits to Poland and Hungary.


      Europe’s economy, especially the economies of the countries covered


by  the  Marshall  Plan,  boomed  in  the  decades  following  WW2,  and  it  is


overwhelmingly  likely  that  Marshall  Plan  had  a  hand  in  this.  Also,  the


economies that were not covered the by Marshall Plan, mainly the countries


in the Soviet Bloc, did not improve. So granting that the Soviet Union was a


world power of a kind after WW2, it did not did not use its power in a way


that benefited either its own citizens or those of other countries. By contrast,


the United States did use its power benevolently, at least in many contexts


(though obviously not all), and it did not have to deplete its own economy to


either have or exercise that power.


      A stark example the contrast between American power and Soviet wasthe Berlin Blockade. After WW2, control over the city of Berlin was divided


between four powers: France, Britain, US, and Soviet Union. In 1948, in an


effort  to  gain  complete  control  of  Berlin,  the  Soviet  Union  blocked  off


railway,  canal  and  road  access  to  the  parts  of  the  city  under  non-Soviet


control. The US responded by airdropping much needed supplies into those


areas. For fear of starting an all-out war with the US, the Soviets did not try


to  prevent  these  air  supplies  from  coming  in  and  eventually  backed  off,


opening the up the land-ways that it had originally blocked off. The Berlin


Blockade, along with the US’s response to it, made the Soviets look like


malicious predators and made the US look like a hero.


      In 1948, the Soviets overthrew a democratically elected government in


Czechoslovakia and installed a Communist puppet regimes. This was but one


of many instances of Soviet aggression in the immediate aftermath of WW2,


the crisis in Berlin being another, and American and other Western leaders


were  worried,  leading  to  the  creation  in  1949  of  NATO  (North  Atlantic


Treaty Organization), this being a group of Western Nations that agreed to


act as one if the Soviets acted aggressively towards given any one of them.


The  initial  members  of  NATO  were Belgium,  Britain,  Canada,  Denmark,


France, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal and


the United States. Although NATO was created largely in order to contain


Soviet aggression, it had a larger purpose, this being to help different nationshelp one another through crises. And so it is that NATO still exists, even


though the Soviet Union fell long ago, and as of 1999 includes Hungary,


Poland and Czechoslovakia, all former members of the Soviet Bloc.


      Was the US a world leader between 1946-1991? Yes. It led the world


militarily, in that it had the world’s most powerful military and also used it to


defend  against  Soviet  and  Soviet-backed  expansionism.  It  led  the  world


economically, in that it had the world’s largest and most vigorous economy.


And  because  it  it  tried  (sometimes  successfully)  to  use  its  economic  and


military might for good, the US was in some ways a ‘moral’ world leader


during this time-period. The Soviets were world leaders only in the sense that


they had a powerful military. Moreover, when the Soviets did harm, they did


so deliberately: under Stalin they massacred 20,000,000 of their own citizens


and  imprisoned  millions  more  in  Gulags  (political  prisons);  they  helped


install Mao-tse Tung in China, who himself killed (or led to the starvation of)


millions of his own. Mao, in his turn, helped install Pol Pot in Cambodia


who,  during  1975-1979,  killed  2  million  Cambodians,  out  of  a  total


population of 7,000,000. When the US did harm, which it often did (and


probably still does), it was not out of a wish to undermine other countries but


out of a failure to know how to help them properly. So yes--the US was not


only a world leader during this period but the world leader, with the Soviets


being a rather distant second. A Case for Environmental Regulation and against Carbon Taxes


(Economics/Politics)


 


      I would not support replacing existing environmental regulations with


a carbon tax. The reason is that life-and-death issues are not for the free


market to decide. It is not for the free market to decide whether pollution-


generating activity should be regulated, since the economic freedoms lost


because  of  anti-pollution  regulations  are  insignificant  compared  to  the


environmental problems thereby averted. A company's right not to have to


recycle motor oil is not as important as a community's right to have drinkable

      [28]
water.


      Those  who  advocate  replacing  environmental  regulations  with  a


carbon tax argue that giving people economic incentives not to pollute will

                                                                                        [29]
do as much to prevent pollution as fining or jailing people who pollute.


This is misconceived. If people know they’ll be fined or go to jail if they


pollute, they won’t pollute. If people know they stand to increase revenue by


polluting  less,  they  may  pollute  less---or  they  may  not.  The  cost-benefit

                                          [30]
calculus here is extremely complex. Perhaps what a given company stands


to  gain  by  polluting  may  exceed  what  it  has  to  pay  in  carbon  taxes.  Or


perhaps  new  tax  loopholes  might  arise  that  allow  companies  to  write  off


carbon taxes. If executives know that they will be jailed for polluting, theywill not pollute. But if pollution simply generates more operating expenses


and may even lead to backdoor revenue of some kind, they may pollute.


      Many will claim that the debate between different political ideologies-


--between advocates of ‘small government’ (represented by the pro-carbon


taxers) and those who favor ‘big government’ (represented by the anti-carbon

      [31]
taxers). This is a pernicious and false way of representing the matter. Even


those  who  advocate  minimal  government  grant  that  government  should


intervene when the very survival of the governed is at stake, as it is where


matters relating to the integrity of the environment are concerned, and the big


government/small government debate therefore only concerns matters that are


genuinely  optional.  The  legal  status  of  prostitution  and  drug  use  affect  a


society’s moral character but not its very existence, this being why it is ‘big


government’ to prohibit them and ‘small government’ to permit them. But


massive  amounts  of  pollution do threaten  a  society’s  very  existence.


Consequently, a government that permits life-threatening amounts of is not


‘small’ but simply inadequate, and one that prohibits it is not ‘big’ but simply


adequate.  In  fact,  a  government  that protects companies  that  despoil  the


environment  is  the  very  definition  of  a  big  government,  since  it  deprives


many  people  of  health  in  order  to  spare  a  few  people  some  regulatory


inconvenience.


      Relatedly, many will claim that this is a debate different economictheories---between ‘free-marketeers’ (represented by the carbon-taxers) and

                                                              [32]
‘Keynesians’ (represented by the anti-carbon-taxers). Again, this is a very


misleading  characterization  of  the  matter.  Even  the  most  hardcore  free-


marketeer favors government intervention when the market’s very existence


is threatened; and the debate between free-marketeers and their opponents


therefore only concerns matters that are internal to a functioning market, such


as  welfare  and  taxation.  High  taxes  and  generous  unemployment  benefits


affect an economy’s degree of vigor but not its very existence, this being why


free-marketeers want minimal taxes and welfare and their opponents want


non-minimal taxes and welfare. But massive amounts of pollution undermine


the  existence  of  a  free  market  since  they  undermine  the  health  economic


actors, and the market therefore isn’t made less free by anti-pollution laws or


made freer by their absence.


 


      Arrow, Kenneth. 2014. The Economics of Information. Cambridge:


Harvard University Press.


 


      Hazlitt,  Henry.  2017.  The  Failure  of  the  “New  Economics.”  New


Haven: Yale University Press.


 


        Controlling Pollution and Externalities. 14 August 2019. Accessed at:        http://www.economicsdiscussion.net/environmental-economics/controlling-


  pollution-and-externalities-environmental-economics/21345


 


        Externalities and the Answer to Climate Change. 12 February 2016.


Accessed at: http://economicstudents.com/2016/08/arthur-cecil-pigou-


externalities-answer-climate-change/


 


      A conservative case for climate action. 8 February 2017. Accessed at:


      https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/08/opinion/a-conservative-case-for-


  climate-action.html?_r=0


 


        Republican tax proposal: Novel climate solution or regulatory


giveaway? 9 February 2017. Accessed at:


        https://insideclimatenews.org/news/08022017/carbon-tax-epa-clean-power-


  plan-climate-change-donald-trump


                 Wollstonecraft vs. Marx on Religion (Intellectual History)


 


 Mary Wollstonecraft’s view on religion are very different from Karl


Marx’s. Marx was unambiguously opposed to religion, believing it and all of


the notions associated with, including the idea that there exists a God, to be


nothing but propaganda, by means of which the poor are kept docile. Mary


Wollstonecraft has a much more qualified view on the matter. Her position is


that organized religion can reinforce society’s prejudices. But unlike Marx,


she does not believe that the concepts associated with religion are


categorically false or harmful. In particular, she believes the concept of God


to be one that, if properly understood, can help eliminate prejudice and


improve the lot of the oppressed. I will now systematically describe and then


compare the views of Wollstonecraft and Marx on religion.


 Marx famously describes religion as “the opium of the people”, his


position being that religion is a mere soporific whose purpose is to key the


masses sedated. More precisely, he believes that religion is a smokescreen for


the exploitation of the poor by the rich: “Law, morality, religion”, writes


Marx, “are to him so many bourgeois prejudices, behind which lurk in


ambush just as many bourgeois interests”, (Marx and Engles 12) his point


that religion (along with law and morality) are ways of both looting and


subduing the poor. We are familiar with the proverbial televangelist (e.g.Jimmy Swaggart, Jim Bakker) who feigns piety and religious zeal to


squeezes his congregation for money and to keep them in a state of perpetual


infancy and psychological dependence. We are familiar with cult leader (e.g.


Jim Jones, Charles Manson) who manipulates his followers into giving him


their money, bodies and souls. Marx would not see such people as


aberrations, but rather as embodying the very essence of religion.


 Wollstonecraft has a different conception of religion. Wollstonecraft


is a deist, meaning that she believes the universe to have been created by al


God who, after creating the universe, ceased to have any dealings with it.


Wollstonecraft believes this God to be rational and benevolent and believes


the structure of the universe, in particular human nature, to embody these


virtue: “The wise Being who created us and placed us here. . . .allowed it to


be the case—and thus willed it to be the case—that our passions should help


our reason to develop, because he could see that present evil would produce


future good.” (Wollstonecraft 3) At the same time, as this same quote


indicates, Wollstonecraft believes that God’s rationality and goodness are


embodied not so much in what we are in what we could be: it is up to us to


develop the rationality and goodness that, in Wollstonecraft’s view, God


implanted in us.


 Though a believer in God and religious in that sense, Wollstonecraft


thought ill of organized religion, describing it as “worse than a farce”, (169)her position being that the main consequence of organized religion to be a


kind of psychological “Slavery to...ministers, whose deadly grasp stops the


progress of the human mind, is not yet abolished and won’t be for a long


time.”(38) Wollstonecraft seems to hold that ‘religion’ is legitimate when it is


about the pursuit of enlightenment but not when it is about membership in an


organization.


 Wollstonecraft seems to hold that religion (of the legitimate, non-


institutional variety) will help end sexism, simply because it makes people


more rational and less prejudiced: “Why would God lead us from love of


ourselves to the sublime emotions aroused by the discovery of his wisdom


and goodness, if these feelings weren’t launched so as to improve our nature


(of which they are a part)2 and enable us to enjoy a more godlike portion of


happiness? Firmly convinced that no evil exists in the world that God didn’t


intend to occur, I build my belief on the perfection of God.” (4) As this quote


indicates, Wollstonecraft regards God as a paradigm by emulating whom we


improve ourselves.


 When it comes to organized religion, Marx and Wollstonecraft are in


partial agreement. Both regard organized religions as corrupt and exploitative


and as doing the opposite of what they claim to be doing. But even here Marx


and Wollstonecraft are not in perfect agreement. Wollstonecraft doesn’t


regard organized religion as inherently bad. She seems to hold that ifreligions were better run, they would do what they claimed to do. By


contrast, Marx regards organized religion as inherently bad, his position


being that a ‘well-run’ religion simply does a better job than a poorly run


religion of spreading propaganda.


      When it comes to religion in general, Marx and Wollstonecraft don’t


agree at all. Wollstonecraft holds that religion is inherently good, while


granting that it can be corrupted. Marx holds that a religion cannot possibly


be good, since a religion is simply a way of pacifying the masses with fairy


tales about Gods and other such chimera. For Marx, religion is simply to be


eliminated, his view being that “communism”, which he believes to be the


only path to a just social order, “abolishes eternal truths, it abolishes all


religion, and all morality, instead of constituting them on a new basis.” For


Wollstonecraft, religion is not to be eliminated disengaged from its corrupt


institutional trappings. Thus purified, Wollstonecraft holds, it will exist as a


private relationship between the individual and the Almighty and as such will


liberate the former the bondage of prejudice.


 


 


 


             Carbon Taxes vs. Standing Regulations (Economics/Politics)


 


      I would vote in favor of the carbon tax, and I would do so because it


would help the environment. It would also help the economy; and for reasons


that I will now explain, it would help the environment because it would help


the economy, not despite its doing so. According to the conventional wisdom


of both Democrats and Republicans, the environment can only protect at the


expense of economic growth. Because Republicans accept this and also want


the  economy  to  grow,  they  deny  the  existence  of  climate  change  and,  in

                                                                            [33]
general,  downplay  the  negative  consequences  of  pollution.  Because


Democrats accept this and do not downplay the adverse effects of pollution,


they  downplay  the  adverse  economic  effects  of  environmental  regulation.


Both positions are misconceived. Industrial waste obviously does damage the


environment. (One can debate whether global warming is a reality, but not


whether  dumping  chemicals  into  soil  and  water  hurts  and  human  beings


alike.)  Heavy-duty  regulations  obviously  do  dampen  the  economy’s


performance, since they make it difficult for new companies to break into


markets, force existing ones to increases prices to cover regulatory costs, and


also lead to increased taxes.


      Carbon taxes are hewed to carbon use: the more people use carbon, the


more they are taxed. This rewards energy-efficient conduct. When energybills are too high, people learn how to conserve. They learn not to leave the


lights on when they’re not home and not to blast heat or air-conditioning


unnecessarily. John Cushman argues that a carbon tax would not increase


energy-efficiency  in  those  who  cannot  make  structural  changes  to  their

      [34]
homes. But this argument fails for several reasons. First, they can develop


less wasteful personal habits (e.g. they can choose not to leave the AC on


when they leave for work). Second, the cost of living in an energy-inefficient


apartment  will  be  extremely  high,  especially  with  carbon  taxes,  forcing


tenants to move and forcing landlords to make the needed improvements.


Third, many people can make such changes.  Of course, high energy-bills


currently  incentivize  energy-efficient  behavior,  but  carbon-taxes  would


increase those incentives dramatically.


      Most pollution and resource-depletion result from practices that are


legal  but  wasteful,  e.g.  using  paper  instead  of  e-readers,  environmental

                                                                    [35]
regulations do nothing to discourage such wastefulness. Unlike standing


regulations,  carbon-taxes  would  penalize  legal  but  wasteful  behavior  and

                                          [36]
reward legal and efficient behavior. As a result, carbon-taxes encourage


people  and  companies  to  look  for  ways  to  lessen  their  environmental


footprint and therefore to produce enviro-friendly innovations. Regulations


have this effect up to a point, but for the most part their effect is to wall out

                                                                      [37]
start-up companies that cannot afford to comply with them. As a result, theentrenched companies that can afford to comply with them are ambivalent


about producing technology that would make it easier and less expensive to


comply  with  regulations,  since  such  innovations  would  threaten  their


position.


      Some  regulations  are  helpful  and  necessary.  Regulations  prevent


companies from making air unbreathable and water undrinkable. But carbon-


taxes  will  not  displace  environmental  regulations,  since  carbon-taxes  and


regulations have different bailiwicks: whereas the purpose of regulations is to


eliminate certain practices (e.g. dumping toxic waste in rivers), the purpose of


carbon-taxes is not to criminalize existing practices but to give people an


incentive to make them more efficient and environmentally sustainable.


 


      Sowell, Thomas. 2005. Basic Economics. New York: Basic Books.


 


      Light Pollution Hurts Our Economy and Our Resources. 8 August


2018. Accessed at http://cescos.fau.edu/observatory/lightpol-econ.html


 


      A conservative case for climate action. 8 February 2017. Accessed at:


      https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/08/opinion/a-conservative-case-for-


  climate-action.html?_r=0


         Republican tax proposal: Novel climate solution or regulatory


giveaway? 9 February 2017. Accessed at:


        https://insideclimatenews.org/news/08022017/carbon-tax-epa-clean-power-


  plan-climate-change-donald-trump


                         Culture and Creativity (Sociology)


 


Assignment: Find a relation between culture, innovation, development, and


creativity.


 


      Culture can be thought of as naturally occurring creativity. What we


do mean when we refer to ‘culture'? What immediately comes to mind is


great music, literature, art, architecture and the like. Of course, the word


‘culture' sometimes refers to the values and understandings that govern the


interactions of a given group of people. This is what is meant when people


say that in Japanese ‘culture', it is considered polite to decline a gift. But


these two meanings of the word ‘culture' are related: Japanese art and music


tend to embody the same values that govern relations among Japanese


people, the same being true of German Culture and Bantu Culture. In general,


the ‘culture’ of a given people is the creative genius that gives rise to the


various values, understandings, and artistic creations that guide them in their


dealings with one another. The very essence of culture, consequently, is


creativity, with the qualification that it occurs organically—not as a result of


a conscious intention on somebody’s part to solve some problem, but as a


natural by-product of interactions between people.


      Because the kind of creativity involved in culture ends up beingembodied in long-standing understandings and traditions, it tends to limit


what it is considered permissible for individuals to do on their own and it


therefore tends to limit innovation. Whereas culture arises organically and


unconsciously, innovation is the result of a conscious resolution on an


individual’s part to use his creative powers to solve some problem. The


phonograph was an innovation. Somebody invented it with the conscious


intention of solving a problem. The same is true of the polio vaccine. By


contrast, beautiful medieval cathedrals were not innovations. They were


original, and they were the products of creative and technical genius. But


they did not come into existence because of some individual’s intention to


solve some problem. Even though many conscious acts of problem-solving


were involved in creating them, the intention to create them was not itself


goal-oriented, and instead arose organically out of largely unconscious,


collective understandings and mores.


        Development is growth. Individuals develop, and so do pluralities of


people. A highly developed individual is one who has cultivated his native


talents, and a highly developed economy or nation is one that has put its


various resources, including the abilities of the individuals composing it, to


good use. Development can be thought of as the creation of a mature being


out of an immature one: an adult is being created, as it were, out of a child; an


advanced nation is being created out of one that is backward. Althoughdevelopment can be the consequence of conscious intention, as when a


person consciously works to develop his abilities as a pianist, it tends to


happen organically: no conscious intention is involved in a caterpillar's


developing into a butterfly. In any case, development, unlike other forms of


creativity, is reflexive in nature. When an infant develops into an adult, the


raw material, as it were, is the infant, and the finished product is the adult.


        Culture, innovation, and development are always manifestations of


creativity. Culture is creativity that is collective and largely unconscious in


nature. Development is creativity that is reflexive in nature and tends not to


have a conscious goal. Innovation is creativity that does have a conscious


goal. So creativity is what is common to culture, innovation, and


development, in that they are all different expressions of it.


                               The American Dream (Politics)


 


      The American Dream can be summed up in one word: opportunity.


The essence of Americanism is opportunity. Everybody has the opportunity


to improve their lives. People are not locked into pre-existing social


arrangements. Whatever circumstances they are born into, they are able to


change and improve their lives. That is what the American Dream is.


      And it is not just a dream: it is to a considerable extent a reality. It


isn’t simply that, in the United States, people are supposed to be able to


change their lives for the better. They actually do so; it is practically a regular


occurrence. In fact, although it may be not the norm, it is certainly a norm.


 In this country, people whose parents did not go to college themselves


frequently go to college and make good lives for themselves, with the result


that, although they themselves started out at one social tier, their own


children are born into a higher social tier, with correspondingly more


opportunities and fewer obstacles to capitalizing on those opportunities. And


there are similar opportunities for change and growth for those who are born


into higher social tiers: they are not required, as they are in other cultures, to


repeat what their parents did. They do not have to assume a position in the


proverbial ‘family business.’ They can strike out on their own. I personally


have known children of investment bankers who became writers andprofessors, and I have known children of professors and writer who became


investment bankers—or who went onto start some entirely new business or


even new kind of business.


      And this last fact brings us to an important fact about the American


Dream. The American Dream isn’t simply about being able to move up


within some pre-existing social structure. It is also about being able to change


that structure. Bill Gates came from a well-to-do family. He could have just


completed his degree at Harvard and more or less just coasted, working as a


computer scientist or financier. But he didn’t just coast; he invented a new


product—nay, a new kind of product: the personal computer. And he didn’t


just invent that product: he made it available to literally billions of people for


a modest price.


      I don’t know what Bill Gates’ personal motivations were in doing this,


but the effect of his actions was to make life easier and better. Right now, in


writing this very essay, I am using the operating system that he invented and


also made available for a modest price. And it is very likely that in reading


this essay, you too are using these same inventions.


      Bill Gates is not alone in this. Think about todays’ IT and tech-giants:


Mark Zuckerberg, Elon Musk, Sergei Brin, Larry Page, Jeff Bezos. All of


these people are Americans, either by birth or by naturalization, and all of


them chose to ‘set up shop’, as it were, in the United States.      Why did they make this choice? Because this country is hospitable to


big ideas and to big innovations. It is hospitable in a purely logistical, as in,


the laws of this country do not discourage it even encourage it, there being,


for example, tax-breaks for start-ups along with government-sponsored


business-education programs. And there is also a special ‘place’, as it were,


in the American psyche for somebody who strikes out on his own and tries to


‘make it big.’ People are people, no matter where you go; and people tend to


respond two novelty with suspicion and they tend to respond to successful


upstarts with envy and fear. And granting that Americans are by no means an


exception to this, there is a value that all Americans seem to have internalized


to the effect that ‘all bets are off’---that there is to be a suspension of all of


the usual pettiness and resentment that is usually directed towards people


who are trying to make something of themselves; that such people are to be


‘given a break’ and allowed to follow their dreams. So if somebody suddenly


quits his job as phone-salesperson in order to start a company, he is not


ridiculed or hassled for doing so. It is understood that, business being what it


is, may not succeed, at least not initially. But over and above the difficulties


that are inherent in starting a business, he is not thwarted for doing so.


      A related point is that in this country, to a much greater degree than in


other countries, people are given a second chance—and a third, and a fourth.


In fact, the whole concept of the second chance is a distinctively Americanconcept. This country is about giving people second chances, in business and


in life in general. Think about the late Anthony Bourdain. At the age of 45,


Bourdain was, in his own words, “basically a fry cook.” And then he boldly


quit his fry cook job and started a career as a combination of explorers, chef,


and cyber-preneur. Before ‘breaking out’, Bourdain had had a decidedly


checkered and uneven career, having numerous battles with substance abuse


and other personal demons. But despite it all, he had his intellect, his


creativity, and his boldness; and he not only succeeded in making money, but


succeeded in re-inventing a tired industry.


      This country’s history is replete with Anthony Bourdain’s---with


people who were on the precipice of financial and emotional disaster but


who, at the last minute, pulled themselves together. Let us not forget that


Harlan (‘Colonel’) Sanders was 65 when he opened his first Kentucky Fried


Chicken Restaurant.


      I would not go so far as to say that at the moment I embody the


American Dream. But I aspire to embody it. I want to become a dentist. I


have always wanted to become a dentist. People ask me ‘Why do you want to


become a dentist, Jonathan?’ And I have no ready response. I honestly


believe that, just as certain people are cut out for finance and others for the


military, so some people really want to help others by fixing their teeth. I


believe that an interest dentistry is a specific evolutionary deviation---thatsuch an interest pre-dates tens of thousands of years the existence of dentistry


in anything like its modern form


      In any case, given my passion for dentistry, it is clear how I need the


American Dream to come through for me: I need the opportunity to learn the


craft of dentistry; I need to learn how to help people as a dentist; and I


therefore need to attend the possible schools and programs. And the


American Dream is coming through for me in that respect. Because I have


worked so hard at my classes and been rewarded with correspondingly high


grades, it is overwhelmingly likely that I will have the privilege of being


accepted to one of the prestigious institutions to which, in pursuit of my own


private American Dream of becoming a dentist, I am seeking admittance


                     Knowledge-capital (Politics/Economics/Philosophy)


 


      In today’s world, property is important, but knowledge is more


important than property. Suppose that Person A has unlimited


knowledge/intelligence but no property, and suppose that Person B has


property but little to no intelligence or knowledge. Person A can probably


acquire property; in fact, there is little limit to how much property he can


acquire. And once Person A has property, there is little or no limit how much


he can make it grow. By contrast, the best Person B can do is hold his


position: he can hold onto the property that he has but (setting aside blind


luck) cannot make it grow. In a market economy, anyone who can figure out


a way to satisfy market demands is able to add to his holdings, and it is


knowledge, and knowledge alone, that enables one to be able to satisfy


market-demands.


      In a feudal economy or a command economy, property seldom passes


from one person to another, tending to remain fixed. Such economies are not


dynamic, and participants in such economies, having as they do little way to


improve their lot, focus more on property-retention than on property-


acquisition. In such an economy, it doesn’t pay to invest in one’s own


education, since there is no guarantee that one will be in a position to market


one’s education. But in a market-economy, there is such a guarantee, since insuch an economy one can always find a way to trade knowledge or skill for


property.


      This is why since the beginning of the Enlightenment, one’s stature in


society has come to depend increasingly on one’s own abilities, including


intellectual abilities, and decreasingly on the social position that one


happened to be born into. A market economy is an Enlightenment (or,


technically, post-Enlightenment economy), and in such an economy one’s


ability to acquire property, and even sometimes just to retain, depends largely


one’s abilities, especially one’s intellectual abilities.


      Kant published his paper “What is Enlightenment?” in 1784. The


Enlightenment was already three centuries old at that point. But it wasn’t


until around this time that Enlightenment views caught up with economic


practice. During the most of the period between around 1550 to 1750, the


average citizen’s ability to transact was severely restricted; in order to play a


given trade, or even engage on some specific venture within a trade that he


was already practicing, he often needed special dispensations from


government officials or from guilds. This was beginning to change in the


mid-1700’s. As a result, the average citizen was increasingly able, and


increasingly obligated, to stake his own claim in the market-place.


      Given that markets were beginning to be free when Kant wrote his


essay, individuals had to start being self-reliant or, to use Kant’s term,‘autonomous.’ In a truly free market, nothing is permanent. Institutions come


and go, depending on what consumers want. Under such circumstances, the


individual cannot rely on fixed institutions or indeed on anything other than


his own ability. This means that people have to decide for themselves how


their lives will be. And this is one of the main points of Kant’s essay, as its


opening words make clear:


 


        “Enlightenment is man's emergence from his self-imposed nonage.


Nonage is the inability to use one's own understanding without another's


guidance. This nonage is self-imposed if its cause lies not in lack of


understanding but in indecision and lack of courage to use one's own mind


without another's guidance. Dare to know! (Sapere aude.) ‘Have the courage


to use your own understanding,’ is therefore the motto of the enlightenment.”


 


      In a non-market economy, the exhortation to ‘have the courage to use


your own understanding’ is without operational meaning. It is well and good


to urge an indentured servant to ‘think for himself’, but even if he does


manage to think for himself, it won’t do him any good in a practical sense.


But in a market-economy that exhortation is on point, since one ultimately


has nothing to rely on in such an economy other than one’s own judgment.


      That in turn is why general education has replaced apprenticeships asthe way of inducting people into the workforce. When the economy was less


free, professions were not constantly being improved or replaced, and one


could guarantee a living for oneself by deciding on a particular trade. Now


that the economy is free and therefore volatile, this doesn’t necessarily work,


and workers, even skilled workers, are constantly having to acquire new


skills in order to earn a living. For this reason, they need the foundation of a


broad education, as opposed to an apprenticeship. Hence Daniel Allen’s


statement in his article “What is Education For?”:


 


      “The dominant policy paradigm attends almost exclusively to


education’s vocational purpose: the goal is to ensure that young people, and


society generally, can compete in a global economy. This view is tightly


connected to a technocratic economic policy that focuses on the


dissemination of skills as a way to reduce inequality in a technology-


dependent economy.”


 


      Implicit in this statement is the idea that one’s financial capital


depends on one’s intellectual capital. A corollary of the latter is that


intellectual capital (including access to knowledge) is at least as important as,


and in some ways more important, possession of property.


      There is another relevant fact, namely, that in market economies, thereis an extremely high degree of specialization and there is a correspondingly


high degree of division of labor. The reason for this is that in market-


economies efficiency is reward and, as Adam Smith points out, a high-degree


of division of labor is efficient:


 


      “The greatest improvement in the productive powers of labour, and the


greater part of the skill, dexterity, and judgment with which it is any where


directed, or applied, seem to have been the effects of the division of


labour…”


 


      Being able to survive in a market-economy thus tends to involve being


able to do highly specialized work. And because market economies are


dynamic, it also tends to involve being able do a series of different


specialized kinds of work. So from the standpoint of competing in a market-


economy, what matters is not having this or that specific body of knowledge,


but is rather having the ability to acquire knowledge-on-demand. In other


words, what matters is access to knowledge, such access being the modern


version of capital.


 


                   Four Essays on Modern History (History/Politics)


 


          Answers to Graduate School Exam Questions about Colonialism,


                            Imperialism, and Nationalism


      1) To what extent was nationalism responsible for the catastrophic


wars of the twentieth century? How did Europeans attempt to curtail the


dangers of nationalism in the wake of World War II? In what ways did


European nationalism persist during the Cold War?


 


      WWI was a consequence of nationalism, in that it involved a number


of nation-states trying to break free of the Austro-Hungarian empire and was


sustained by a conflict between the UK/USA and Germany, which, though it


was largely economic in nature, had a nationalistic character and was


certainly represented in British and American propaganda as being


nationalistic in character.


      Germany lost WWI and was bankrupted by the subsequent peace


accord (the Treaty of Versailles) Hitler convinced the German people that


Germany had made too many concessions to foreign powers and advocated a


policy of nationalism, meaning economic and political self-containment,


which included anti-Semitism, since he saw the Jewish people as being


international in character . Hitler’s nationalism involved his violating thesovereignty of other nations, notably Poland, which served as a precipitating


cause of WW2. Other countries (UK, USA, USSR: the allies) sought to


contain Germany. Germany joined forces with Japan, which, like Germany,


had an intensely nationalistic ethos. The allies won, at which point the US


and USSR entered into a 50 year cold war, which was more about capitalism


vs. communism that it was about this nation vs. that nation.


      The conflicts following WW2, e.g. Korea and Vietnam, were largely


about communism vs. capitalism but had nationalistic components, especially


in the case of Vietnam, which was in part about Vietnamese self-


determination.


      After the USSR fell, the ‘Soviet Empire’ immediately disbanded, with


each of its member-states quickly reverting to its pre-Soviet condition, i.e.


with Poland, Georgia, Hungary etc. all quickly reverting to being Sovereign


states.


        Although nationalism was a factor in the wars of the 20th century, it


was not the only factor. For example, Japan’s involvement in WW2 was


largely about its oil supply being cut off, and the Gulf War, though


supposedly about protecting the Kurdish people, was at least arguably about


providing the US with a continued supply of oil.


 


  


      2) Trace the ideological evolution of Europe during the century


stretching from 1890- 1989. Would it be correct to argue that the


ideological center of gravity shifted leftward during this period? If so,


why? If not, what would be a better description of the ideological


changes that took place during World War I, World War II, and the


inter-war period? What might account for the global rightward shift in


the ideological center of gravity since 1989?


 


      Since WW2, there has been a massive shift away from nationalism to


globalism. This is partly because of the odium that Hitler’s movement


attached to nationalism, but it is also because as the world’s economy simply


became more global, requiring relaxing of boarders and a generally less


xenophobic attitude than might have been acceptable in earlier times.


Relatedly, the British and French empires, mainly the former, disbanded


during this time, partly because it ceased to be seen as acceptable for a


country to colonize other countries, this being a consequence of a leftward


shift in political thinking following WW2.


      During the post WW2 period, there continued to be conflicts between


‘liberal’ and ‘conservative’ ideologies, but whereas these conflicts had


previously been about social conservatism vs. social liberalism (e.g.opponents of women’s suffrage vs. proponents of it), they tended in the


aftermath of WW2 to concern economic liberalism vs. economic


conservatism, with ‘conservatives’ championing the free market and


‘liberals’ championing the ‘welfare state.’


      The ‘global rightward shift’ since 1989 is due to the utter failure of the


Soviet Union and to the consequent loss of faith in a hyper-regulated


economy. As a result of this failure, there came to be tremendous faith in the


free market, and this faith continues to grow. So in this sense there has been a


‘rightward shift’ since 1989. But in other respects, the post-WW2 leftward


shift has continued, with gay rights, transgender rights etc. now being seen as


mainstream and normal. So in sum, since WW2, there has been a rightward


shift in economic thought and a leftward shift in social and political thought,


both of these being due to the success of the free market and the failure of the


controlled.


 


 


      3) Many scholars have argued that between 1492 and 1989,


European culture became increasingly secularized. How valid is this


thesis? If you agree that Europe became more secularized, how can you


explain it? What key developments or events might account for the


process? If you disagree with the thesis, then explain how and whycertain forms of religious practice and sentiment have persisted. Has


religion truly declined in Europe since 1492, or has it simply migrated to


less recognizable domains of human activity, such as nationalistic politics


and culture?


 


      Europe most definitely has become more secular since 1492. This is


mainly because science and technology progress enormously during that


period, making it clear that a number of ‘articles of faith’ (e.g. that the Earth


is the center of the Universe, that people came into existence 6,000 years ago,


etc.) are simply false. Also, as science and technology progressed, people


came to turn to science/technology for answers, which it provided much of


the time, and less to religion, which never had provided particularly cogent


answers and which only offered emotional comforts, as opposed to actual


solutions.


        Religion itself was responsible for its displacement in that Martin


Luther, by breaking away from the Catholic Church, enormously weakened


the power of the latter, thereby making religion more of a personal matter and


less of an institutional matter.


      In the mid-1700s, owing in large part to the works of Locke and Adam


Smith, whose worldviews in their turn owed much to Newtonian scientific


rationalism, European economies came to be increasingly less dominated bypolitical authorities and increasingly driven by market forces.


      People have an impulse to be religious and religion certainly still


exists in the West, much more so in the USA than in Europe, and arguably


some of the fanaticism and dogmatism that used to be reserved for religious


faith was channeled into nationalism. But for the most part religious faith in


the West has been on the decline.


      The key developments leading to secularization, were the birth of


physics and chemistry, the industrial revolution, European colonization of the


New World (which gave European powers enormous incentives to liberalize


trade with one another), the theory of Evolution and, arguably, the


development of psychoanalytic thought.


 


      4) Since 1492, Europeans have increasingly encountered non-


Europeans across the globe, yet the terms of those encounters have


changed over time. Write an essay that traces the history of European


colonization, imperialism, and decolonization from 1492 to 1989.


 


      Europe began colonizing the New World as soon as it discovered it in


1492. The driving forces behind European colonization were largely


economic in nature. Because Europe needed cheap labor to service the


colonies, it forced many non-Europeans into slavery. This gave the colonistseconomic incentives to have racist attitudes towards non-Europeans, since


slavery is not justifiable except on the basis of a deeply racist attitudes


towards those who are enslaved.


      At the same time, colonization assumed different forms in different


places. In North America, colonization was less about exploiting the native


populations than it was about constructing a new economy from scratch. As a


result, the North American economy was based more on skilled labor and


industry than on agriculture and therefore could not be based solely on the


exploitation of one group of people by another. In Central and South


America, however, there were (and still are) large native populations who


could be pressed into slavery (or near slavery). Moreover, those economies,


being largely based on mining (of precious metals) and agriculture (coffee,


sugar, rubber) were based more on unskilled labor than on skilled labor and


could to a greater extent than North American economies be serviced by


slave labor.


      The economy in the United States was ultimately based on the free


market, and for this reason, along with the obvious fact that slavery is


immoral, slavery was abolished in the USA in 1865. This inaugurated a slow


but steady process of eliminating racial attitudes in the New World among


people of European descent.


      During the 19th Century, there was a fierce wave of French andBritish imperialist colonization of Africa and Asia, all of which was


obviously facilitated by a certain degree of racism on their part. After WW2,


and because of it, these empires quickly disbanded, mainly because WW2


was in large part a war against racism, and although racism continues to this


day, it doesn’t exist in the deeply entrenched, institutionally backed way that


it used, this being people are not denied suffrage or other rights on the basis


of race. In a word, WW2 shattered the ideological basis for imperialism, as


well as racism, leading to independence of countries such as India (liberated


from Britain in 1948), Algeria (liberated from France in 1962) and Vietnam


(liberated from France in 1958). In some cases, decolonization involved


armed revolt (as in Algeria), in other it didn’t.


      In short, free market economies are inherently non-racist. They can


involve exploitation and exploitation can be racist in nature. But ultimately


such economies require people to be able to transact with each other to be


able to buy at the lowest price and sell at the highest price, which it tends to


be hard to do if there are racist policies that restrict who can sell their labor


and determine how much they can sell it for.


         Why is the United States so Energy-inefficient? (Sociology)


 


 


      The United States is energy-inefficient in two ways. First, we use


more energy per capita than does any other country. Second, we use energy


less efficiently than other countries, in the sense that we get less work-output


per energy-input.


      A number of specific reasons for this have been proposed. For

        [38]
example:


 


      (i)         There are number of old businesses in the United States that use


antiquated an therefore energy-inefficient methods.


 


      (ii)   There are disproportionately many start-ups in the United States,


and, being managed by neophyte business-administrators, start-ups are


energy-inefficient.


 


      (iii)                       US customers have a taste for luxury and they demand


wastefulness: shoppers demand full-blas AC in the summers and full-blast


heat in the winter.


       (iv)   Many companies in the United States have wasteful business


practices, e.g. their employees leave computers on all night, the reason being


that the employees do not personally have a stake in their host-companies’


being energy-efficient.


 


      But whether taken individually or collectively, (i)-(iv) are not the real


reason why the US is so energy-efficient. (In fact, it isn’t clear that any one of


them is even a reason.) The reason is cultural in nature.


      The United States is all about the the American Dream. And what is


the American Dream? It is about living in the suburbs and commuting 45


minutes by car into the city every day. It is about having not one, but two or


even three cars in the garage. It is about having a large screen TV, and a pool


in the backyard.


      The American Dream is not merely about living well. It is possible to


live well without living wastefully. The American dream is about living well


by living non-austerely.


      The American dream is also about independence. And obviously there


is nothing with this and much that is good about it. But it has come to mean


in practice is that one is seen as a failure in the United States if one takes the


bus. Indeed, no one is more ridiculed and seen as a failure than somebody


who ‘has to take the bus’, instead of driving his own car. And no one is seenas more of a success than somebody who drives an expensive car—not an


economy car, which is almost seen as a sign of poverty, but a gas-guzzler,


like the $85,000 Ford Raptor, which is one quarter as efficient as a Hyundai


Elantra, but also—and perhaps partly for that reason---has around four times


as much social cache.


      American culture is about making it. And making it is equated with


making more money. And the most visible indicators that one has made


money tend involve wasteful practices---large air-conditioned penthouses,


gas-guzzling cars and planes, long weekend commutes to the Hamptons, and


so on.


      Whereas an ancient nation like China or Greece is about culture, the


United States is about economics and economic success. And economic


success, at least as interpreted by most people, is about “conspicuous


consumption”, to use Thorstein Veblen’s expression. And it is the


distinctively American identification of success with consumerism—with


conspicuous consumption, in other words—that the roots of American


energy-inefficiency lie.


             Stalin’s Nationalism vs. Putin’s Nationalism (History/Politics)


 


 


      Putin’s rule is similar in some key respects to Stalin’s. Let us begin by


saying what Stalin did.


 


      Stalin


 


      Stalin was the Marxist dictator of the Soviet Union form 1923-1953.


Stalin had two objectives: He wanted to make Soviet Union be as communist


as possible, and he also wanted to hold onto power. These two objectives of


his were confluent.


        Communism is the doctrine that nobody is to have any private


property (on a commercially significant scale).


      And so it was the Stalin divested people of all of their property. The


State took everything. Farmers gave up their land, their livestock, even their


lodging to the State.


      This was true not just of those in the agricultural sector, but of


everybody. Nobody owned anything. The state owned everything, and


everyone worked for the state.


      Given that the state owned everything, the State was everything. Thenation was everything: it owned everything, decided what kind of work


people were to do, decided who would work in the Gulag and who would be


‘free’, decided who would live and who would die, decided what people


could read, what move is they could watch, and what radio programs they


could listen to. Thus the Soviet Union was indeed completely totalitarian, in


the sense that the state was governed the totality of each person’s existence.


      In the Soviet Union, all action, all commerce, and even all thought


were state controlled (at least, to the extent that control of thought is a


consequence of control of education and media).


      In the Soviet Union, everything existed for the sake of the Soviet


Nation, and the latter was therefore a maximally nationalist nation.


      A consequence of this hyper-nationalism is that different ethnicities


and sub-nationalities were cruelly absorbed into this homogeneous Soviet


behemoth. Sub-national differences were suppressed; all official history was


Soviet history; all education was Soviet education; all official culture was


Soviet Culture. To the extent that Georgian or Ukrainian or Chechen culture


different from Soviet Culture, it was not tolerated. They were not tolerated


because the Soviet Union was to be a single communist nation, not a plurality


of ideologically different nations and not, moreover, a plurality of


ideologically different people.


      A consequence of agricultural collectivization was widespreadfeminine. To some extent this consequence was unintended, being a mere


consequence of administrative incompetence on the part of the Soviet


Leadership. But to a considerable extent, it was deliberate, being used as a


way of defeating sub-nations and bullying them into submission to the Soviet


Union. And so it was that Stalin’s regime actively encourage the


collectivization-caused mass-famine in the Ukraine, which caused the death


of 10,000,000 Ukrainians.


      Vladimir Putin is not quite in the same category as Joseph Stalin. First


of all, Russia under Putin is a capitalist/free-market society. (There are some


restrictions on commerce, but they are comparable to those in the United


States.) But there are some similarities between Putin’s style of leadership


and Stalin’s.


 


      Putin


 


      First of all, Putin, like Stalin, is an arch-nationalist. But whereas


Stalin’s nationalism was a consequence largely of his communism, Putin’s


nationalism is about preserving Russia’s historical identity (or what Putin


perceives to be that identity). Putin wants Russia to retain the religious and


moral traditions that it had before the Soviet Era; he wants Russia to be


Christian, and he wants social and political relations between people toconform to a rather traditionalist paradigm, with traditional gender roles and


traditional views about sexual orientation. (It should be pointed that Putin’s


traditionalism in these respects is quite circumscribed: There are more female


physicians and physicists per capita in Russia than in the United States. And


people are not jailed for being gay in Russia, even though they may be jailed


for being, as Putin sees it, for being gay in a disruptively political manner.)


      Also, under Putin, as under Stalin, there is only limited freedom of the


Press. There are two facets to this. First, the media is not allowed to question


the legitimacy of Putin’s power. Second, the Media is not to discourage the


growth of Western liberalism and anti-traditionalism within Russia.


Obviously, Putin’s nationalism is directly responsible only for the second of


these two facts, the first being a consequence not so much of Putin’s


nationalism as of his simple desire to retain power.


      But Putin’s nationalism is confluent with this desire to stay in power.


As a nationalist, Putin’s intention is to subordinate diversity to a single


national norm. And as somebody who wants to have power, it is in Putin’s


interest to subordinate diversity to a single norm. Also, given that Putin, as


supreme leader, is the state (up to a point), there is (to that extent) no


difference between subordinating everyone in Russia to Russia, on the one


hand, subordinating everybody in Russia to Putin, on the other hand.


      The same was true of Stalin. As a communist-nationalist, Stalinwanted to subordinate diversity to a single nationalist norm. And as


somebody who wanted to hold onto power, it was in Stalin’s interest to


subordinate diversity to a single nationalist norm. And given that Stalin was


the supreme leader, there was to that extent no difference (to that extent)


between subordinating everyone in the Soviet Union to the Soviet Union, on


the one hand, and subordinating everyone in the soviet Union to Stalin, on the


other.


 


                               Why Minimum Wage is Wrong


 


      My topic is minimum wage. The question I will answer is: Should


minimum wage be increased? The answer I will defend is: No, it should not


be increased.


      There are three reasons why it supposedly makes economic sense to


increase minimum wage.


      First, there must be minimum wage (and minimum wage must


periodically be increased) to ensure that workers make enough money for


basic necessities (lodging, food, healthcare): an employee who is physically


ill or malnourished is not a productive employee, and workers must be paid


enough to ensure that they are adequately nourished and have healthcare and


lodging. (Technically, a homeless person can be well nourished and healthy,


but homelessness dramatically increases the likelihood of physical injury and


illness, and workers must therefore be paid enough to have lodging.) In the


short run, underpaying employees saves employers money and might


therefore seem to help businesses grow. But in the long run, businesses that


depend on underpaid workers tend to fail, since underpaid workers tend not

                                                                  [39]
to be physically healthy enough to be competent workers.


      Second, there must be minimum wage (and periodic increases thereof)


if employees are to ensure that workers have a psychologically acceptablestandard of living. If a worker has just enough for food, lodging and


healthcare, he is likely to feel demoralized and also to experience depression


and other forms of mental illness, and mental illness, like physical illness,


diminishes competence. A worker whose life is pure tedium simply won’t


perform very well on the job, especially if his job involves any degree of


cognitive acumen. So even though it may seem to make economic sense for


employers to underpay their employees, the result of doing so is a workforce


that underperforms and therefore fails to contribute both to the businesses

                                                          [40]
that employ them and to the economy as a whole.


      Third, it is important that workers be paid enough not just to be


physically and psychologically healthy but also to have some surplus capital.


There are two reasons why workers need surplus capital. First, they need to


raise their children properly, children being the next generation of workers.


Second, economic growth is largely a consequence of new businesses coming


into existence; people needed surpluses of wealth to start businesses (the bare


minimum won’t suffice); and if workers don’t have such surpluses, then


entire class of people who could start businesses won’t be able to do so. Be it


noted that workers to a greater extent than others have industry-specific


knowledge and may know what kinds of businesses to build and how to build


them. So it is important that they be paid more than the bare minimum, so

                                                                              [41]
that they can at least have a chance to try to build such businesses.      There are three reasons why, despite what was just said, minimum


wage increases (and minimum wage in general) hurt the economy more than


they help it.


      First, when minimum wage is increased above its natural (market)


level, employers have to downsize and also stop hiring, making it hard for


people to find jobs and to make a living. So even though raising minimum


wage from $7.50/hour to $15/hour would seem to put more money in the


pockets of workers, the reality is that this ‘wage-increase’ really amounts in


most cases to a wage-decrease from $7.50/hour to $0/hour, since an

                                        [42]
unemployed worker makes nothing.


      Second, when minimum wage is increased, employers often lack the


funds to compete even after they downsize. Businesses need employees: it is


not an option for them to fire everybody. And minimum wage increases may


make it impossible for them to compete while also paying their employees,

                                    [43]
even after they have downsized.


      Third, when minimum wage increases do not altogether destroy


businesses, they do tend to eat up their profits, leaving them no surplus to


capital to invest back into themselves or into the economy in general. If a


pharmaceutical company has just enough money to pay its staff, it won’t have


enough to invest in research and development, which means it won’t be able


to grow and won’t be able to contribute new medications to the economy. Forthis reason, minimum wage increase result in a lackluster economy and are to

 [44]
be avoided.


      Finally, even though workers should obviously be paid enough for


them and their children to be healthy and educated, while also having some


surplus capital of their own, market forces see to it that this is done naturally.


It isn’t naturally that the government intervene by artificially inflating wages.


And if the government does intervene, the result is that employers have to


pay workers more than their actual market value; in other words, they must


pay workers for work they are not actually doing. This makes it hard for


businesses to stay in business, let alone grow and create new jobs, and this in

                                                                  [45]
turn results in loss of employment and a weak economy.


 


 


      Friedman, Milton. 2009. “Response to President Obama’s proposal to


raise the minimum wage.” Retrieved from


      http://www.aei.org/publication/milton-friedman-responds-to-president-


      obamas-proposal-to-raise-the-minimum-wage-the-most-anti-black-law-in-


the-land/


 


      Hazlitt, Henry. Economics in One Lesson. Retrieved from:


      https://mises.org/wire/hazlitt-explains-minimum-wage-laws 


      Jevons, William Stanley. 1871. A Treatise on Political Economy.


Retried from https://www.econlib.org/library/YPDBooks/Jevons/jvnPE.html


 


      Marshall, Alfred. 1890. Principles of Economics. London: Oxford


University Press.


 


      Myerson, Allen. In Principle, a Case For More 'Sweatshops.”


Originally published in the New York Times (June 22, 1997). Retrieved from:


        https://www.nytimes.com/1997/06/22/weekinreview/in-principle-a-case-for-


more-sweatshops.html


 


      Sowell, Thomas. (2017) “Minimum Wage Madness. Retrieved from


      https://www.creators.com/read/thomas-sowell/09/13/minimum-wage-


madness


 


      Smith, Adam, 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the


Wealth of Nations.


 


      Von Mises, Ludwig; Goddard, Arthur (1979). Liberalism: A Socio-


Economic Exposition           Pot Legalization in California: Prop 64 (Current Events)


 


      In California, in 2016, Proposition 64 passed, making recreational

                                                    [46]
marijuana use legal in the state of California. This seems to have many


upsides, and few downsides. The likely upsides include:


 


      *Revenue to the state of California from taxes on the sale of


Marijuana,


      *An improved economy, owing to the new economic vistas opened up


by the possibility of legally growing, marketing, and distributing marijuana,


        *Decreased contempt for the law, owing to the removal of unpopular


and hard-to-enforce (and impossible-enforce-in-an-equitable-manner)


marijuana laws


        *Shrinkage of a criminal justice system bloated with so-called ‘drug-


offenders’, many of whom have spent years in jail or on parole or probation


for marijuana-related offenses,


        *Freeing up of funds now dedicated to zero-sum


      *Improved morale, owing to decreased contempt


 


                         Zara’s Supply-chain Efficiency (Business)


 


      To: CEO


      Re: Strategic Factors Impacting Wearable Wishes' Competitive


Environment


 


      Our company, Wearable Wishes, has a number of strengths, but our


competitor, Zara, has each of these strengths to a comparable or greater


degree, and it also has several strengths that we lack.


      First of all, Zara is extremely effective at using data-analytics to


determine what customers want and, on that basis, to design fashions that

  [47]
sell. Wearable Wishes certainly does use data-analytics, but it does not use


as effectively as Zara. This, I believe, is because Zara has a well-defined


concept (it provides consumers with lightning-fast access to low-cost but


respectable imitations of the very latest fashions), whereas Wearable Wishes


has a more generic concept (we provide consumers with reasonably


fashionable clothes at moderate prices), with the result that Zara knows


exactly what to look for in data-analytics, whereas we don’t.


      In any case, Zara’s focused use of analytics is a serious threat to us,


since it enables Zara to pinpoint what customers want. This means that Zara


can focus on products that it knows with reasonable certainty will sell. Thisin turn means that it does not waste resources create, shipping, and marketing


products that nobody will buy. We, on the other hand, create, distribute, and


market products that people don’t buy at the original price and that we are


forced to heavily discount to offset costs. Also, because Zara’s products are


so in line with consumer demand, Zara has a special place in the hearts of


potential customers, whereas customers view us, with our relatively batting


average, with a certain suspicion or, at least, without the same respect.


Therefore, the effect on us of Zara’s precision analytics is negative, as it


increases Zara’s market-share and decreases ours.


      Also, Zara’s use of analytics, like all cases of industry-efficiency, has

                                      [48]
a positive effect on the economy. The economy slows down when people


don’t buy. Because of Zara’s effective use of analytics, its products are, so to


speak, flying off the shelves, and Zara therefore has to hire more people----


more people to market, manufacture, design, distribute, and so on. Our failure


to use analytics effectively has the opposite consequence: products remain on


shelves unsold. This means that we lose money and therefore have to let


people go. This in turn means that those people are unemployed, at least for a


while, and therefore spend less, which has a cooling effect on the economy.


Of course, we are a single, medium-sized company, so that cooling effect is


likely to be unnoticeable; but large-scale economic slow-downs are the result


of many little economic slowdowns.      Another important fact about Zara is that it has an unusually high


degree of control over its own supply chain. It is able to create and distribute

                                                                          [49]
products with amazing speed. This benefits Zara in many ways. First of all,


it minimizes the lag time between requests for products and receipt of those


products. If a given retailer wants 10,000 units of a certain kind of handbag,


Zara is able to oblige more or less right away, whereas Zara’s competitors,


including us, take a bit longer. Zara is therefore better than its competitors at


supplying the public with products while they are still fashionable and the

                          [50]
public still wants them. It also, I suspect, creates a willingness on the part


of retailers to do some free marketing on Zara’s behalf. If the owner of retail-


outlet X knows that Zara can fill orders within a matter of days, he will be on

                                                              [51]
the lookout for hot new items and will let Zara know. He will not be very


interested in talking to someone who will take months and months to fill the

                                                                      [52]
order, since, by then, the product in question may be a loser.


      Zara’s fast and efficient supply chain bodes ill for us. We lose


business to Zara, since Zara is able to get the product to customers before we


can, not to mention that merchandise is more likely than ours to be


fashionable when it hits the stores.


      Zara’s efficient supply-chain, like all cases of industrial efficiency,


will have a positive effect on the economy. It will lead to increased sales and


therefore to increased jobs and therefore to increased spending. Our relativelyinefficient supply chain will have the opposite effect, since it leads to


decreased sales, lay-offs, and decreased spending. To be sure, setting aside a


few juggernauts, like Microsoft, the success or failure of any given company


is not likely to have a noticeable effect on the economy. But, as previously


stated, noticeable effects are compounded out of unnoticeable ones.


      All of this said, Zara’s primary strategic advantage, I believe, is not its


use of analytics or its efficient supply-chain, but is rather its highly


differentiated product. Fashion-driven clothes buyers would ideally like to


have hyper-fashionable clothes; but those clothes are far too expensive for


most buyers. Zara has targeted such people and has, in effect, made a deal


with them. It has agreed to sell them inexpensive but creditable knock-offs of


super-fashionable clothes. By contrast, we provide reasonably fashionable,


moderately priced clothes. So we are ‘stuck in the middle’, servicing neither


high-fashionistas nor penny-pinchers, whereas Zara services the former and,


to a greater extent than us, the latter.


      Some might say that Zara and Wearable Fashions do not have the


same target audience and therefore are in competition, with Zara servicing


those who want high fashion and Wearable fashions serving those who want


clothes of the ‘respectable’ variety. I do not agree with this view. Many


people who end up settling for semi-fashionable clothes would like to have


extremely fashionable clothes, and we have to assume that Zara is taking                            [53]
customers away from us. As for the consequences for the economy of


Zara’s highly differentiated, the obvious position is that it has no such


consequence. Again, I disagree. Sales benefit the economy; the absence hurts.


Because of its highly-differentiated line of goods, along with its large


customer-base, Zara’s products sell and therefore stimulate the economy.


Also, Zara’s aggressive use of analytics and its supply-chain efficiency


encourages other companies to step up their game, which in turn leads to


technological and organizational innovations, which in their turn often do


have noticeably positive macroeconomic consequences.


             Microsoft Financial analysis 2016-2018 (Business/Accounting)


 

Introduction

Operating Cash Flow

Common Equity

Profitability

Return on Equity

Net Profit Margin

Asset Turnover

Leverage

Return on Assets

Conclusion

Sources        Introduction


      This present work is a financial analysis of Microsoft during the years


2017-2018. 2016 is included when the necessary data is available in course-


documents. Other years are excluded. This analysis is not complete and it


focuses only on the absolutely crucial financial indicators. Microsoft’s


financials are compared to Oracle’s, so as to provide information as to


Microsoft’s performance relative to its competitors.


      Our main source of information about Microsoft is Microsoft’s 2018


10-K form (specifically pages 50-53). Our main source of information about


Oracle is Oracle’s income statement, accessed at


  http://financials.morningstar.com/income-statement/is.html?


  t=ORCL&region=usa&culture=en-US. The financial data provided in those


documents rounds figures to the nearest thousandth. All specific financial


data relating to Microsoft and Oracle come from these sources unless there is


an indication otherwise.


        Microsoft’s performance during this time-period is positive in absolute


terms. Microsoft also marginally outperforms Oracle. That said, the one


companies financials parallel each other to a striking degree: Microsoft has


more total assets, but its performance relative to its total assets is similar to


(though marginally better than) Oracle’s performance relative to its total


assets. Between 2017 and 2018, there are dips in Microsoft’s performance,but those are corresponding dips in Oracle’s performance, indicating that the


issue is not with Microsoft itself but with the industry as a whole.


       Operating Cash Flow


      When conducting a financial analysis of a company, the first step is to


determine its cash flow from operating activities, or operating cash flow


(OCF), this being the amount of money that it generates from its activities,

                                      [54]
excluding long-term investments. In 2016, Microsoft’s OCF was


$33,325,000; in 2017, $35,507,000; and in 2018, $42,884,000. It is a good


sign that Microsoft's OCF was positive during each of these years since this


indicates that its products and services were generating income. A company


whose OCF is zero or negative can still profit since it can make money from


investments and assets, but its products and services are failing to generate


income, and its position is therefore unstable. Also, Microsoft’s OCF grew


over 30% during this period---also a positive sign.


        Microsoft’s net income (revenues minus expenses, i.e. profits) in 2016


was $20,539,000; in 2017, $25, 489,000; and in 2018, $16, 571,000. During


each year, Microsoft’s net income was positive, but its net income fell by


$8,918,000---a drop of over 34%.


      Oracle’s OCF in 2016 was $13, 561, 000; in 2017, $14,126,000; and


in 2018, $15,386,000. Oracle’s net income in 2016 was $8,901,000; in 2017,


$9,335,000; and in 2018, $3,825,000. Oracle’s OCF was positive during each


of these years, and also increased during this time period by around 13%.


Between 2017 and 2018, Oracle’s net income plummeted, falling by over50%. Since its OCF grew during this period, the fall does not indicate a


decline in demand for Oracle products and services.


       Common Equity


      In 2016, Microsoft’s common equity (the amount invested by


shareholders) was $68, 465, 000; in 2017, 68, 178,000; and in 2018,


$69,315,000. There was therefore modest growth in Microsoft common


equity during this period. In 2016, Oracle’s common equity was $164, 950,

                                                                  [55]
000; in 2017, $209, 937, 000; and in 2018, $175,569,000. Oracle’s


performance here is more jagged than Microsoft’s but also better on the


whole.


         Profitability


      The next few sections focus on financials relating to Microsoft’s


degree of profitability. We will see that Microsoft is ‘in the black’, so to


speak, and also compares better than Oracle, a representative competitor.


       Return on Equity


      In 2016, Microsoft’s return on equity (ROE)---in other words, its net


income divided by shareholder’s equity, this being the change in the value of


the shareholder’s equity--- was $20,539,000/$164, 950, 000≈30%; in 2017,


$25, 489,000/68, 178,000≈37%; and in 2018, $16, 571,000/69,315,000≈24%.


During each year, ROE is positive. At the same time, there was a decrease


from 2017 to 2018.


      Oracle’s ROE in 2016 was $8,901,000/$164, 950, 000≈5%; in 2017,


$9,335,000/$209, 937, 000≈4%; and in 2018, $3,825,000/$175,569,000≈2%.


In each year, ROE is positive, but much smaller than with Microsoft. Also,


with Oracle, as with Microsoft, we see a 2017-2018 drop. This parallel


suggests that in both cases the drop is a consequence not of anything


company-specific but rather of some larger economic phenomenon.


       Net Profit Margin


      In 2016, Microsoft’s net profit margin (net income divided by total


revenue, i.e. percentage of revenue that Microsoft retained after paying


expenses) was $20,539,000/$91, 154,000≈23%; in 2017, $25, 489,000/96,


571,000≈26%; and in 2018, $16, 571,000/110,360,000≈15%. The profit


margins are all positive, though there is a (now familiar) 2017-2018 drop.


      Oracle's ROE in 2016 was $8,901,000/$37,047,000≈24%; in 2017,


$9,335,000/$37, 728,000≈25%; and in 2018, $3,825,000/$39,831,000≈10%.


Again, profit margins are positive, with a 2017-2018 drop. Microsoft's profit


margin appears to track Oracle's, suggesting that changes in them are due not


to company-specific but rather to industry-wide factors.


       Asset Turnover


      Asset turnover is significant because it is a good measure of a


company’s health. A company with low-asset turnover is not using its assets


efficiently, and a company with high-asset turnover is using them efficiently.


      In 2017, Microsoft’s asset turnover (total revenue divided by total

 
assets) was $96,571,000/250,312,000≈39%; and in 2018, it was


  $110,360,000/$258,848,000≈43%. In 2017, Oracle’s asset turnover was $37,

                                [56]
  728,000/$134,991,000≈28%; and in 2018, it was

                                      [57]
  $39,831,000/$137,264,000≈29%. We are seeing parallels—increases in


both cases, albeit higher ones in Microsoft’s case.


       Leverage


      In 2017, Microsoft’s leverage (debt/equity) was

 
  $162,601,000/250,312,000≈65%; and in 2018, it was


  $176,130,000/$258,848,000≈68%. In 2017, Oracle’s asset turnover was

 
  $80,745,000/$134,991,000≈60%; and in 2018, it was

                                      [58]
  $91,040,000/$137,264,000≈66%. Both companies are highly leveraged. A


high degree of leverage can be a bad sign, since it can indicate deficit


financing, but here it is not a bad sign, as it seems to indicate aggressive and

                                                              [59]
successful investments in a growing economic sector. 


      Return on Assets


      In 2017, Microsoft’s return on assets (ROA), i.e.net income divided by

 
total assets, was $25,489,000/250,312,000≈10%; and in 2018, it was


  $16,571,000/$258,848,000≈6%. In 2017, Oracle’s asset turnover was

 
$9,335,000/$134,991,000≈7%; and in 2018, it was

                                  [60]
$8,901,000/$137,264,000≈6%. Both ROA’s are low but positive.


         Conclusion


      Microsoft and Oracle are both vigorous companies with high operating


cash flows and asset-turnovers. They are highly leveraged, but this seems to


be because they have thus far profited from aggressive investments in their


own growth.


         Sources


        Morningstar: Oracle Corp. Accessed at:


  http://financials.morningstar.com/income-statement/is.html?


  t=ORCL&region=usa&culture=en-US


      Stock Analysis on Net: Oracle Corp. April 2019. Accessed at:


      https://www.stock-analysis-on.net/NYSE/Company/Oracle-


  Corp/Valuation/Enterprise-Value


      Calculating Cashflow from Operating Activities. March 2019.


Accessed at: https://www.sapling.com/8370027/calculate-cash-flow-


operating-activities


      Oracle Net Income 2016-2019. May 2019. Accessed at:


    https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/ORCL/oracle/total-assets


        Investopedia: Leverage Ratio Definition. May 2019. Accessed at:


      https://www.investopedia.com/terms/l/leverageratio.asp


           Case Studies in Corporate Fraud (Accounting/Fraud Examination)


 

The Fraud Triangle

Using the Fraud Triangle to Prevent Fraud

The Valeant Fraud

An Actual Case of ID Theft

A Case of Financial Fraud at a University

The Olympus Fraud

The Dixon Fraud

MCPA

The ARCP Fraud

The Basia Skudrzyk Fraud

The Liberty Bell Fraud

A Hypothetical Skimming Case

Fraud Risk Factors in a Hypothetical Multinational Company

Cybercrime: How to Spot It and Stop It

Fraud Interview Techniques

Some Key Obstacles to Effective Fraud Risk Assessment

                                       The Fraud Triangle


 


      What is the fraud triangle, and how should you consider this when


assessing a company's anti-fraud programs and controls?


 


      The Fraud Triangle is a hypothesis put forth by Donald Cressey as to


why high-level corporate fraud occurs. The Fraud Triangle is not concerned


with low-level ‘street level’ scams. Nor is it concerned with ongoing high-


level criminal enterprises, such as Bernie Madoff’s pyramid scheme. The


Fraud Triangle is concerned to explain cases where people who are not career


criminals and who typically have not committed major crimes embezzle large


amounts of money from companies that employ them. The Fraud Triangle is


meant to explain why somebody would use company funds to pay off


personal debts. The Fraud Triangle is not meant to explain the case of


somebody like Bernie Madoff, whose entire company was simply a front


designed to abscond with people’s funds. The Fraud Triangle is intended to


explain cases like that of Carlos Ghosn, an executive at Nissan who used


company funds to cover massive personal investment losses, or like that of


Nick Leeson, a trader for Barings Bank who used company funds to make a


series of unauthorized trades to cover up his financial losses. In other words,


the Fraud is meant to explain cases of high-level fraud committed by peoplewho have legitimate positions within legitimate organizations and who


therefore do not otherwise profile as criminals.


        According to the Fraud Triangle, three conditions must met for such


fraud to occur:


 


      1.            There must be a high degree of financial pressure on the


individual in question. In other words, he must need money desperately,


perhaps because of gambling losses, a drug problem, or (as with Carlos


Ghosn and Nick Leeson) poor investment choices.


      2.            He must have a relatively senior position within the company in


question, since he will not otherwise have access to the funds that intends to


embezzle. (A janitor cannot commit large-scale embezzlement; a CEO or


high-level bond-trader can do so.)


      3.            He must be able to rationalize his act of fraud. In other words,


he must be able to tell himself that he is justified in doing what he is doing,


even though it is illegal and unethical.


 


      Consider the case of Nick Leeson. As a trader at Barings, he was


entrusted with large amounts of company assets. Therefore, he was able to


generate huge losses, placing him under great financial pressure, and he was


also in a position to use company assets to try to cover those losses. Thus,conditions (1) and (2) were met in his case. Finally, Leeson did not have any


legal recourse: there was no one he could go to. He could not go to a bank,


since no bank would be able to loan him the billions of dollars needed to bail


him out; nor could he go to his own employer, since they would fire him and


he would be banned from the industry for life. So he was able to rationalize


his misconduct to himself on these grounds--and that is just what he did.


      There are several ways that a given company can minimize the


likelihood that one of its employees will commit fraud of this kind. These


include:


 


      1.            Running thorough background checks. This lowers the


likelihood of hiring somebody who is psychologically capable of committing


fraud.


      2.            Having clear guidelines relating to the handling of funds and


sensitive information. This creates a climate of transparency, making it hard


for people to commit fraud, and also makes it harder for people to rationalize


committing fraud.


      3.            Secure assets, including passwords and other sensitive


information. This minimizes the opportunity to commit fraud.


      4.            Separating employee-duties. This prevents any single employee


from having access to too much information or to too many funds.      5.            Requiring authorization for employee-transactions involving


more than a certain amount of money. This minimizes the likelihood of theft


and also of Leeson-style losses that incentivize fraud.


      6.            Have an independent firm conduct audits, including surprise


audits, of company accounts. This nips fraud in the bud and also scares


employees into not committing it in the first place.


      7.            Conduct annual internal audits. This gives the company


advance-notice of shortfalls that should be made good before the IRS


conducts an actual audit.


      8.            Have an internal reporting mechanism. This helps nip fraud in


the bud and also scares people into not committing it in the first place.


      9.            Have a company-culture of honesty and transparency. This


makes it hard for fraudsters to rationalize their conduct, which in turn lowers


the likelihood of their committing fraud in the first place.


                 Forensic Accounting Post-Enron (Business/Accounting)


 


        Accounting is the recording and evaluating of business transactions.


Thus, an accountant working for a given business is supposed to keep records


of what that business spent, what it spent it on, and what money it has coming


in. If Smith is Brown’s accountant, then Smith’s job is to keep records of


what Brown spends, what he spends it on, and what money Smith has coming


in. Forensic accounting is the branch of accounting that is concerned with


resolving accounting-related matters that have given rise to legal disputes or


are likely to do so. If Green is a client of Smith and Green believes that the


financial statements that Smith and Brown jointly issue are fraudulent, a


forensic accountant may be called in to determine what the truth of the matter


is. A forensic accountant may be employed privately, as would be the case if


Green is himself an employee of Smith’s firm, or it may be done by the


government, as would be the case if Green works for the Securities and


Exchange Commission.


        Forensic accounting has existed as long as accounting has existed. But


its importance grew in the immediate aftermath of Enron scandal in 2001. In


order to understand how forensic accounting has changed since that time, we


must understand what the Enron scandal involved.


      Enron was a Texas-based energy provider that, while under theleadership of CEO Kenneth Lay, began to expand aggressively and make a


number of bold investments. At first, these moves were lucrative, causing the


value of its stock to rise and enhancing Enron’s prestige. Forbes at one point


ran an article claiming that Enron was “the most creative Energy Company in


the United States.” As a result, Enron continued to make bold financial


moves, buying up new companies and thereby pinning its financial success to


that of these subsidiaries. Unfortunately, many of these ventures failed


utterly, generating large losses for Enron. Enron’s attempts to dig itself out of


this whole through additional ventures failed, with the result that Enron only


dug itself in even deeper.


      Enron was at a crossroads. On the one hand, it could be honest with


shareholders and other stakeholders about its financial situation. On the other


hand, it could attempt to cover up these losses. The first path would be legal,


but would cause the value of the stock to plummet, possibly causing the


company to collapse. The second path would at least temporarily fool


stakeholders into believing that the company was still a good investments,


allowing for a continuation of high-profits, but would be illegal.


      Enron chose the second path, and to this end it enlisted the help of


Arthur Andersen, an accounting firm that Enron had already hired to serve as


an external auditor. Andersen’s legal and ethical duty was to verify that


Enron’s financial disclosures to the public and to stakeholders were accurate.But when Enron began to lose money, it asked Andersen to help cover up the


losses, and Andersen complied. To this end, Anderson engaged in a number


of deceptive accounting practices. In some cases, Anderson used legal


loopholes that allowed them to over-report profits and under-report losses,


and in other cases, Anderson simply destroyed incriminating documents.


Eventually, Enron’s losses caught up with it, since it was never able to make


good on the losses that it had sustained. As a result, Enron simply collapsed,


and its financial malfeasance, including Andersen’s role in falsifying its


financials, was exposed.


      The United States government responded with the Sarbanes-Oxley


(SOX) Act of 2002, the main provisions of which were:


 


      (i) The creation of a Public Company Accountability Oversight Board


(PCAOB): An independent company that scrutinizes the financial conduct of


large companies;


      (ii) The enactment of heightened standards of corporate financial


accountability and transparency, along with stricter penalties for executives


of companies that fall short of these standards; and


      (iii) The creation of ‘conflict of interest’ laws that strictly prohibit


accounting firms from conducting external audits of companies towards


which they might be biased.      When Enron collapsed, its financial statements lost all credibility, and


so did Andersen’s financial statements about Enron’s financial condition. As


a result, new investigators, including forensic accountants and fraud


examiners, had to figure out what Enron’s actual financials were. This


awaked the public to the need for forensic accountants, creating a surge in


demand for their services. This demand has only grown, thanks to the post-


Enron series of financial scandals, including the Madoff Scandal and the


2008 Housing Market Collapse.


      Being a good forensic accountant involves all of the skills involved in


being an ordinary accountant (e.g. a high-concern for detail, a facility with


numbers, and high degree of conscientiousness), but it also involves


additional skills. Unlike ordinary accountants, forensic accountants are


dealing with intentional cover-ups and therefore have to deal not just with


complex financial data but also with deliberate deception. This means that in


addition to being accountants, forensic accountants must also be detectives.


Therefore, they must good at detecting and investigating financial crimes,


including interviewing possible witnesses, using new technologies, and being


familiar with the laws governing such activities. In a word, a forensic


accountant is two parts accountant and one part detective and must therefore


have an accountant’s analytical abilities along with a detective’s intuitive


faculties. 


                         Using the Fraud Triangle to Prevent Fraud


 


      The Fraud Triangle is a theory developed by Donald Cressey to


explain the occurrence of high-level corporate fraud. The Fraud Triangle is


meant to explain cases of fraud carried out by a trusted member of an


organization against that same organization, e.g. a company executive


embezzling funds or using company funds to make personal investments.


According to the Fraud Triangle, instances of this sort of fraud are the result


of a confluence of three factors, namely:


 


      1.            Unusual and extraordinary financial pressure on the individual


in question (e.g. Smith has just gambled away his life-savings);


      2.            The opportunity to commit fraud, meaning that the person in


question is in a position where he is actually able to make fraudulent use of


company money or resources (e.g., Smith is the Chief Financial Officer of the


company in question);


      3.            The ability to rationalize the fraud, meaning that the person in


question can convince himself, and possibly others, that under the


circumstances he was justified in perpetrating fraud (e.g., the company that


employs Smith is itself constantly stealing money from clients, making it


possible for Smith to tell himself that the company deserved to be defrauded). 


      A good example of the kind of fraud that the Fraud Triangle can be


used to explain, and also to prevent, is the case of Nicholas Leeson. Acting in


his capacity as a trader in the Singapore branch of Barings Bank, Leeson


made some legitimate but unsuccessful trades. Rather than admit to his


superiors that he lost company money, he illicitly used additional company


funds to make more investments, hoping to cover his losses. When these


investments failed, the subsequent losses to Barings were so large that the


bank simply collapses, taking much of the securities market along with it.


      The Fraud Triangle makes it clear how companies can prevent the


occurrence of fraud. According to the Fraud Triangle, it tends to be people


who under extreme financial pressure who commit fraud, a corollary being


that companies should not hire such people or at least should give them


positions of financial authority. If somebody has an extremely low credit


rating or has just suffered millions of dollars of losses on the stock market,


that person has a strong incentive to commit fraud, and a company wishing to


avoid the occurrence of fraud in its midst is well-advised not to hire him or at


least not give him a position that would allow him to make inappropriate use


of company money or resources. Of course, not all cases of fraud can be


prevented in this way, since in many cases, including Nicholas Leeson's, the


person in question isn't under extreme financial pressure until after they arehired.


      This brings us to the second part of the Fraud Triangle, according to


which people don’t commit workplace fraud unless their positions within the


company make it possible for them to do so, a corollary being that companies


should limit such opportunities. Nicholas Leeson was able to commandeer


such huge funds because his activities were not being adequately supervised


and because his position made it possible for him to execute large trades


without being given clearance by a supervisor. In general, fraud is likely to


occur when people within a company operate without supervision and when


they have the power to make important decisions without company-


clearance. Consequently, fraud is unlikely to occur when there is adequate


supervision and when there are adequate checks and balances. Companies


wishing to reduce the risk of fraud in their midst should strictly oversee


sensitive activities on the part of employees and should also limit the amount


of power, especially power to use company assets, that any single employee


has.


        According to the third component of the Fraud Triangle, Fraud is more


likely to occur when people are able to justify committing acts of fraud, a


corollary being that the risk of fraud is reduced when they cannot do so. The


ability to rationalize fraud has both internal and external determinants. If a


person lacks integrity, he may be able to rationalize practically any case ofmisconduct on his part, even if that misconduct is not a response to strong


external pressures. Consequently, a good way for a company to reduce the


risk of workplace fraud is to hire people who have integrity and not to hire


people who don’t.


      Also, if a given company treats its own employees well, it gives them


that much less of a way to rationalize perpetrating fraud against that


company. If the CFO of a given company hasn’t received the bonuses he was


promised, he will be that much more tempted to help himself to those funds


through fraudulent means. Further, if a company has unclear or excessively


complex procedures, especially in regards to the financially impactful


activities, then it is that much easier for employees to rationalize fraud; and


the risk of fraud is therefore reduced by having well-defined and intelligible


employee-guidelines in place. Finally, if a company is itself engaged in fraud


(e.g., by providing poor service or by overbilling clients), employees within


that company may feel that the company has lost any moral right not to be


defrauded. A corollary is that companies reduce the risk of fraud in their


midst by themselves being non-fraudulent.


               Money Laundering: Basic Principles (Business/Accounting)


 


      Money laundering is the act of making illegally obtained money

                                          [61]
appear to have been legally obtained. There are many reasons why


terrorists, drug cartels, and criminals of all varieties need to launder the


money they make. First of all, money that is clearly illegally obtained is


evidence of a crime. Second, money that does not appear to have been legally


obtained is difficult to invest. Third, such money is hard to use for large


transactions. Fourth, such money is difficult to use for many kinds of small

                                            [62]
transactions, such as online purchases. Some hypotheticals will help clarify


these points:


        Hypothetical #1: Smith is a drug dealer who has $1,000,000 in


illegally obtained cash. Smith’s ability to use that money is limited so long as


it remains in cash form. Smith therefore sets up a fake business, and he pays a


friend of his a $1,000 to make $1,000,000 in purchases from this fake


business. The money then goes into a business checking account, and the


money, having been duly ‘laundered’, is available for online purchases,


securities purchases, and the like.


        Hypothetical #2: Jones robs a bank and makes off with $1,000,000 in


cash. There is not much he can do with the cash, since the bills are likely to


be traced. So he convinces Brown, an associate of his, to set up a phonycharity. Jones ‘donates’ the $1,000,000 to this charity. In exchange for a fee,


Brown deposits the money in the charity’s bank account, and he then makes


Jones the trustee of that account.


        Hypothetical #3: Robins runs a large and successful prostitution ring,


leaving him with large quantities of cash. He wants that money to grow,


instead of simply sitting under his mattress. So he buys a large orange ranch


in Florida for $10,000,000 but convinces the seller to record the official


selling price as $10,000. This way, Robins can easily explain to officials how


he came up with the money for his ranch, giving him legal insulation. At the


same time, his money has now been converted into a constant source of


legitimate revenue.


      Here are some actual cases of money laundering:


      Case #1: On February 12, 2019, seven Texas residents (Adrian


Arciniega-Hernandez, Adriana Alejandra Galvan-Constantini, Luis Montes-


Patino, Ravinder Reddy Gudipati, Harsh Jaggi and Neeru Jaggi) were


convicted of drug trafficking and money laundering. These individuals


worked for a Mexican Drug Cartel. They paid legitimate businesses to set up


accounts in which the illegally obtained money was deposited. On record,


these accounts belonged to these businesses and therefore appeared to be

                                                                          [63]
legitimate, but in actuality they were controlled by drug dealers.


      Case #2: December 14, 2018, 36 individuals were convicted ofrunning a sex-trafficking ring based in Thailand and then laundering the


proceeds by depositing them in accounts belonging to fake charities that they

            [64]
had set up. 


      Case #3: On June 18, 2014, Robert Boedigheimer, a Minnesota


attorney, was convicted of laundering the proceeds of illegal narcotics sales.


Boedigheimer purchased several properties in Minnesota, and a client of his,


Brandon Lusk, used money obtained through drug deals to manage those


properties, with both Lusk and Boedigheimer sharing the proceeds from the

                    [65]
subsequent rentals.


      In each of these three cases, a criminal or criminal organization was in


possession of illegally obtained that they could not use, and they either set up


fake businesses or used real businesses to hold that money, thereby making it


appear legitimate. Once that money had been thus ‘laundered’, it was


available to be used to invest in legitimate enterprises, such as the apartment


complexes owned by Robert Boedigheimer. Thus, laundering money allows


it to grow, with the proceeds typically being reinvested in the criminal


enterprise in question, while concealing the source of that money.


      Money laundering involves three stages:


 


      *The Placement Stage: Money is placed in a seemingly legitimate


company or organization. (For example, a drug dealer uses cash to purchase alemon ranch.)


      *The Layering Stage: Money is then filtered through a network of


different companies and organizations. (Said drug dealer deposits the


proceeds from said ranch in numerous different accounts.


      *The integration phase: The money in those accounts is injected back


into the legitimate economy. (Said drug dealer uses the money in said


accounts to purchase stock in Amazon, McDonald's, and other Fortune 500

            [66]
companies.)


 


      There are many different indications that money laundering is taking


place. These include:


 


      *Cash purchases that are being made unusually frequently or in


unusually large amounts. (Robert Boedigheimer paid hundreds of thousands


of dollars in cash for contracting and renovating services.)


      *Large transactions involving recently created legal entities (e.g.


companies or charities), where the values of the transactions are out of


proportion to the likely value of the companies. This is what happened in the


sex-trafficking case discussed above.


      *Large purchases of land or equipment that do not involve the buyer


actually inspecting the land/equipment in question prior to the purchase.      *A series of cases where property is purchased and then ‘flipped’,


especially where the resale price is much higher or lower than the original


price.


        *Somebody’s opening a large number of different accounts within a


short period of time and depositing money in each of those accounts.


      *Heavy use of offshore accounts.


      *Money being shuttled between a plurality of different accounts.


      *Sales involving massive discrepancies between book values and


market values, e.g. a case where the official sales price of a property actually


worth $40,000,000 is $1,000.


      *Inflated invoices, e.g. a restaurant whose official invoices indicate


that its income comes from $300 shrimp cocktails.


        *Obvious discrepancies between a person’s lifestyle and supposed


income. For example, Al Capone’s ‘official’ occupation was furniture maker,


but his lifestyle was obviously not that of a furniture maker.


        *Attempts to sidestep regulatory requirements, such as filling out 8300


forms, as well as unusual or constantly shifting modes of transferring money.

[67]


 


      In most cases, investigators are tipped off by a suspicious individual,


e.g. somebody who finds it suspicious that a low-earning junior associate athis law firm suddenly bought a $300,000 car or a bank official who finds it


suspicious that a client tries to make deposits without filling out the requisite


paperwork.


      Also, a number of legal controls have been instituted, violation of


which automatically alerts the authorities to possible money laundering.


These include laws that require banks and other financial institutions to file


reports on all unusually large transactions and to scrutinize client-information


in such cases. In addition, special investigative agencies have been created,


most notably the Financial Action Task Force, an intergovernmental agency


that enables investigators in different countries work together to investigate

                              [68]
cases of money laundering.


      Once investigators have been alerted to a possible case of money


laundering, their primary mode of investigating is to ‘follow the money.’ For


example, in Case #1 (discussed above) businesses were pressuring their


bankers not to fill out the usual deposit-forms. The banks sounded the alarm,


leading investigators to investigate the source of the money being deposited.


Investigators in Case #2 (discussed above) were tipped off by private citizens


who doubted the legitimacy of some the charities in question. Investigators


then scrutinized those charities and immediately found them to be bogus.


Investigators in Case #3 were tipped off by personal acquaintances of Robert


Boedigheimer, who found it odd that an unsuccessful attorney was suddenlyable to afford several multi-million dollar apartment buildings, leading


investigators to discover the connection between Boedigheimer and Lusk.


      Even though money laundering investigations tend to be extremely


complex, they all have the same two-part structure. Part 1: Somebody reports


some kind of suggestive irregularity to the authorities, for example, a banker


reports a client who pressures him not to fill out the requisite forms, a


neighbor reports another neighbor who is suddenly living above his means.


Part 2: Investigators follow the money: they try to find out where so and so


got the money that is trying to deposit or that he already spent on a new car.


      In conclusion, money laundering makes it possible for illegal


enterprises to conceal and compound their earnings, and it is combatted


through a combination of strict financial regulations and careful subsequent


examination of financial networks.


 


                                       The Valeant Fraud


 


      Valeant has been a major supplier of pharmaceuticals since its


inception. In 1959. The standard strategy for drug companies is based on


research and development (R&D): new medicines are discovered through


research, then manufactured and sold. In 2007, Valeant revenue was a


dangerously low level, and the company looked non-standard strategies for


revenue growth. J. Michael (‘Mike') Pearson, a consultant hired by Valeant,


proposed that Valeant simply stop doing R&D and instead buy patents to


undervalued medications and, having acquired them, raise the prices. The


logic behind this strategy is simple: R&D is extremely expensive and


outcomes are not guaranteed, since scientific can never be guaranteed to


happen. By contrast, Pearson's acquisitions-based strategy involved buying


products that were already known to work and whose price Valeant would be


able to manipulate to its own advantage.


      At first, this strategy worked. In fact, it worked so well, that Valeant


asked Pearson to be its CEO. He accepted and embarked on a campaign of


aggressively buying out smaller pharmaceutical companies, along with the


medicines they supplied, and then inflating the prices of those medications


whenever possible. Valeant’s price-gouging sowed some early seeds of


public distrust in Valeant, which later be harvested.      After a few years, the strategy began to backfire. First of all, other


pharmaceutical companies followed suit, replacing R&D with Pearson’s


acquisitions-based model, making it more expensive to acquire


pharmaceutical companies and therefore thinning its profit margins. Also,


some of these acquisitions were losers; for example, Valeant spent millions to


buy the rights for Potiga, an anti-seizure, believing that it would be a break-


out success; but it failed, and Valeant had nothing to show for.


      Operating jointly, these factors were driving Valeant back into the red.


This is where Pearson and Valeant took a fraudulent turn. Pearson chose not


to let the public know that Valeant was losing money. Instead, he embarked


on a two-prong plan, involving the use of anti-competitive practices to regain


market-share as well as outright fraud to conceal existing losses. Valeant set


up a secret arrangement with Philidor Rx Services, an online pharmacy-


company, whereby Philidor would sell only Valeant products in exchange for


lower prices while billing insurance companies according to the original


prices and then splitting the ‘skim' with Valeant. Though fraudulent, this did


generate real revenue for Valeant. But even with this extra revenue, Valeant's


actual financials were poor, and Pearson used Philidor to carry out a second


scam. This one involved Valeant booking sales to Philidor that were never


made, thereby inflating Valeant's revenue on paper and attracting investment.


In exchange for its role in this Philidor received a cut of the resultinginvestments in Valeant. Eventually, Valeant simply bought out Philidor while


letting the previous Philidor owners remain as the owners of record, thereby


turning Philidor into a full-service, off-the-books money-laundering


operation for Valeant.


      Also, under Pearson’s direction, Valeant was bribing physicians


nationwide to prescribe Valeant-owned medications. Finally, Valeant was


relying increasingly on price-gouging to generate revenue, drawing public ire


and regulatory scrutiny.


      Also, Valeant did not comply with GAAP. When the values of


Valeant’s investments fell, as they increasingly often did, Valeant did not


adjust its financials accordingly, this being a violation of the Full Disclosure


Principle (financial statements must tell the truth, the whole truth, and


nothing but the truth) and also of the Matching Principle (no credits without


debits, or vice versa). Further, it used several different accounting methods,


also a violation of the Full Disclosure Principle.


      A number of factors operating simultaneously led to Valeant’s crash.


Public outrage at Valeant’s price-gouging caused regulatory to scrutinize


Valeant, in search of regulatory or criminal violations. Regulators discovered


that Valeant used opaque and non-standard accounting practices, making


them suspicious; and whey they finally deciphered Valeant’s financials, they


discovered that many of the sales that it had booked with Philidor werefraudulent. This triggered further investigations, which unearthed Valeant’s


other scams.


      Dimitry Khmelnitsky, a financial analyst and Valeant-employee since


2011, realized shortly after being hired that Valeant’s official numbers were


off. He repeatedly tried to apprise Valeant executives of this fact, but they


angrily rebuffed, suggesting that it was an ‘open secret’ that these figures


were phonies. Though there is limited publicly available information on this


matter, the Khmelnitsky situation suggests that the problem with Valeant was


not that Pearson was hiding what he was doing from other Valeant employees


but rather they were in most colluding with him. This makes it unclear what


kinds of internal controls could have been used. Pearson was not stealing


from Valeant; rather, Valeant, under Pearson’s direction, was hiding losses


from investors and manipulating markets. So this was a matter for external,


not for internal controls.


      Even though financial statement fraud was only one of the many forms


of fraud that Valeant committed under Pearson’s direction, it would have


been hard for Valeant to run these scams without cooking the books. It


should be pointed out that Valeant was guilty of three very different kinds of


financial statement fraud. First, it intentionally used cryptic and inconsistent


accounting methods. Second, it booked gains that did not exist; in other


words, it simply made numbers up. Third, it went so far as to buy anothercompany so as to make it easier to concoct fraudulent financials.


      What is most striking about this case to me personally is that Valeant


was entirely speculation-based, whereas other Pharmaceutical companies are


R&D-based, suggesting that when there is financing without product, fraud is


just around the corner.


                                 An Actual Case of ID Theft


 


      1.            What could the victim’s bank have done differently that could


have potentially stopped or limited the fraudulent activity?


 


      Whenever an attempt is made to withdraw a large amount of money


from an account or to cash a check for a large amount, the identity of the


person in question must be verified thoroughly. This did not happen in this


case.  This  is  particularly  inexcusable,  given  that  the  withdrawal  was  for


$5000 from an accounting containing only $5200. First of all, $5000 is a


large amount. Second, it is a large amount relative to the total amount in the


account, which is a red flag. Fraudsters will often try to make off with just


less than what they know to be in the account that they are pillaging. Finally,


the teller noted that the signature, though similar to Jim’s, was slightly off---


another red flag that the bank ignored.


 


      2.            After the fraudulent activity had been discovered, Jim met with


a representative of the check printing company regarding policies/controls


that  the  company  should  consider  implementing  in  order  to  help  identify


fraud in the future. What changes would you recommend to the company?


       The bank’s response to Jim’s query was ambiguous. On the one hand,


they did apprise him of the fact that they had a video of the person who


cashed the check. On the other hand, they were very slow to cooperate with


after making that disclosure. My suspicion is that the bank’s management


realized  that  they  had  ‘dropped  the  ball’,  and  were  attempting  to  dodge


liability for that mistake. I would recommend that the bank double-check the


identification of anyone making withdrawals, triple check in cases when the


withdrawals are large, and quadruple check when there are red flags such as


possibly forged signatures. Also, there should be standardized protocols for


verifying  identify:  only  certain  documents  should  be  used  (e.g.  driver’s


license, Government ID card), and bank staff should be trained how to know


when such documents are valid.


 


      3.            What could the furniture store have done differently that could


have potentially stopped or limited the fraudulent activity?


 


      The  fraudsters  applied  for  financing  at  the  furniture  store,  which


means that they should have been required to present incontrovertible proof


of identity. They were not asked to do this. The employee who approved the


financing later disappeared and turned out to have been involved in other


fraud cases, making it a distinct possibility that this was an ‘inside job.’ Thatcompany, like all companies, should always require proof of identity when


dealing with non-cash purchases.


 


      4.            What could the credit card company have done differently that


could have potentially stopped or limited the fraudulent activity?


 


      The fraudsters applied in person for a credit line in Jim's name, and


they did this without having a valid ID. (And even though they may have had


forged identify papers, most such documents are not very convincing.) The


credit card company should obviously have verified their identity, which did


they did not do. The fact that they were involved in other suspicious cases


involving  the  same  furniture  company  employee  shows  that  they  were


systemically remiss in their responsibility to verify the legitimacy of credit


applications. This in turn suggests that they may have been aware that they


were getting phony applications, but turned a blind eye to since they wanted


the business.


 


      5.            What could have the victim have done differently that could


have potentially helped in this case?


 


      When the victim first noticed a suspicious withdrawal from thisaccount, he should have put a hold on his account and reported the incident to


the bank as possible fraud. He did not do any of this, and this is opened the


door to the fraud that ensued. Also, although he went to the police, he did not


go to legal authorities. The police are not equipped to deal with cases of


financial fraud. One should either go to the FBI or file a motion in Federal


Court under the False Claims Act. The latter is most easily done with the help


of a lawyer, and Jim probably should have at least consulted an attorney


(many of whom do free first-time consultations), which, so far this document


indicates, he did not. (The reason he didn’t, presumably, is that his attorney-


fees might have exceeded the amount he was trying to recover.)


 


      6.                      Is there anything the victim could have done prior to the


fraudulent activity that could have helped?


 


      Jim should probably have made himself better known to the people at


his bank, since, had he done so, they would have known who he was and


would have stopped the fraudsters dead in their tracks. (That said, the article


does mention that some of the tellers knew who he was, which makes the


bank’s  failure  to  prevent  even  more  inexcusable.)  More  importantly,  Jim


obviously  did  something  that  gave  the  fraudsters  access  to  his  personal


information. Whatever it was he did that led to this, he shouldn't have done it.It appears from the document that instead of using checks issued by his bank,


he purchased less expensive checks online. This appears to have been the


weakest link in his defenses. The fraudsters somehow knew that he bought


checks online (perhaps by rooting through his garbage, looking for some such


point of entry), and were able to impersonate Jim by ordering checks in his


name from the same company. Had Jim simply used bank-issued checks, this


situation might have been avoided.


 


      7.            Is there anything else the victim could have done after the


fraudulent activity that could have minimized the fraud?


 


      Jim probably should have moved his money to a different bank, since


his  current  bank  obviously  wasn’t  reliable.  Also,  Jim  should  probably  be


careful about his online behavior, especially in connection with purchases of


checks or other financial instruments. Finally, Jim should henceforth destroy


checks, credit cards, and other such documents before throwing them away;


and, more generally, he should make sure that his financial information is


never physically or digitally made available to anyone who cannot be trusted.


                         A Case of Financial Fraud at a University


 


        ABSTRACT: This nonfictional case of inventory fraud in a university


setting exposes students to fraud detection and investigation. These skills are


becoming increasingly important for auditors, as evidenced by the alarming


rate of fraud. The accounting profession has acknowledged the seriousness of


this issue with the issuance of SAS No. 99, Consideration of Fraud in a


Financial Statement Audit, developed in part to improve detection of frauds


by auditors.


 


      The case raises many of the fraud-related issues faced by accountants:


recognizing red flags indicative of fraud; the importance of a good system of


internal controls; the profile of the typical fraud perpetrator; the fine line


auditors walk when investigating a fraud; the need to develop an audit team


with the appropriate level of expertise which may require members from a


variety of disciplines (e.g., investigative, legal and forensic areas); and the


difficulty of obtaining sufficient evidence to prosecute and convict


perpetrators.


 


 


       Part 1: The Initial Audit


 


      The Internal Audit Department of “X State University”2 performs an


unscheduled audit whenever a university department head desires assistance


in determining the financial status of his department’s operation, and reports


its audit results to the Vice President of Administration and Finance. In


addition, unknown to most university employees, it is standard operating


procedure for the Internal Audit Department to perform an unscheduled audit


prior to the departure of key employees (e.g., an employee responsible for


handling large amounts of cash). In December 1988, the campus computing


services director requested that the Internal Audit Department audit the


campus Microcomputer Store (MCS) operations, prior to the imminent


departure of the MCS manager. The manager had held the position for eight


years. During the past year he purchased a new house in the community, he


had been seen driving a new sports car to work, and he had just returned from


his European honeymoon prior to the start of the audit. The internal auditors


completed the engagement in six weeks. Their findings were as follows:


 


      1) All employees were on the payroll of the MCS and there were no


additional or “ghost” employees on the payroll. The MCS manager earned


approximately $18,000 a year in salary. 


      2) For select samples, the university’s purchasing guidelines were


adhered to by the MCS operation. However, the use of personal computers


was becoming much more common during the 1980s. There was one


personal computer on campus in 1981, but by 1988 there were approximately


1,500 units on campus. Consequently, the volume of computers purchased for


campus use had risen close to 200 percent per year in each of the past five


years.


 


      3) There were no written position descriptions for any of the positions


in the MCS, nor were there any written operations manuals or guidelines for


any daily transactions.


 


      4) Despite their best efforts, the Internal Audit Department was able to


compile only a few fully documented transactions, from requisition/ order, to


receiving, to setup and delivery, to billing and finally to additions in the


Capital Property Control records. The problems noted included: few of the


forms were prenumbered; the files were widely dispersed in the center;


documents were not attached to each other and were not in any particular


order; and often a billing statement or a purchase order would be missing all


related documentation— only a handwritten note by the MCS manager on thebilling statement or purchase order would support the transaction. To


compound these problems, there were no “checks and balances” built into the


MCS accounting system as compensating controls.


 


      5) The direct supervisor for the MCS manager was aware of how the


MCS operated in general, but knew nothing about the operating details of


what was essentially a one-person operation (i.e., the MCS manager).


 


      6) Purchases, as far as the internal auditors were able to ascertain,


approached $1,200,000 in the most recent year.


 


      Required:


 


      1)              What additional work could the Internal Audit Department


perform prior to issuing the audit report?


 


      MCS was doing a large volume of business. This could be verified


even without proper documentation. The university used a large number of


computers, and MCS provided all of them. The auditors could have readily


determined the approximate number of computers used on campus along with


the approximate cost of each unit, and they may even have had thisinformation from the start. Either way, it provided what should have been a


benchmark, in comparison with which the MCS reported earnings would


have obviously fallen suspiciously short. Also, surveillance of MCS during a


period of a week or so, along with scrutiny of the receipts thereby generated,


would have given auditors another similar benchmark. Before submitting


their report, the auditors should have availed themselves of such information


and considered its implications. It is not possible to conduct a meaningful


audit of a business except on the basis of business-volume, and the auditors


failed to take business-volume into account.


 


      2) What recommendations to the campus computing services director


and the university administration would be appropriate for the MCS?


 


      Both parties should have been required to keep careful and easily


understood records of sales, of funds requisitioned from the university, of


purchases made using said funds, and of any other financially impactful


activity on their part.


 


      Part 2: The Plot Thickens


 


      Three weeks later, the Internal Audit Department received a telephonecall from a local repair shop owner who was working on a personal computer


brought in from the public library for warranty repair. However, the box in


which the personal computer was delivered had a shipping address for the


university. There was even a bill of lading in the shipping envelope showing


the university as the ordering party and referencing a university purchase


order number. After verifying the information as factual, one of the internal


auditors contacted the library director, and they met later in the day to


determine how the personal computer had come to be in a box destined for


the university.


 


      The library director told the internal auditor that the library had been


working with a university employee who owned a consulting company called


MCS (Micro-computing Consulting Services). In addition, the library


director indicated that the library had ordered several personal computers and


printers from MCS, as well as the associated software, and had paid the


consultant for the products and his fine service.


 


      Required:


 


      1)              At what point should the Internal Audit Department suspect a


fraud? What actions should be considered to ensure that professional auditingstandards are met? Whom does the Internal Audit Department need to


inform?


 


      The first hint of fraud was that the MCS’s sales- and purchase-records


were so poor. The first relatively definitive indication of fraud was that a


computer that was supposedly the director’s ‘personal’ property was


delivered to the library in official university packaging and with official


university documentation. The fact that the ‘consulting’ company in question


had the same initials as the Microcomputer Store (MCS), though not proof of


fraud, is consistent with it, since it suggests that a deliberate effort was being


made to provide a pre-emptive explanation incriminating data.


 


      2) What red flags might have initially tipped off the internal auditors


that this employee might be involved in a fraud?


 


      The computer that was delivered to the library clearly belonged to the


university, showing that the MCS director was guilty of at least one case of


selling university property for personal profit, and the fact that the source of


this computer had an ongoing business relationship with the university was a


strong indication he was doing this on a consistent basis.


  


      2)              In what ways does the MCS manager fit the profile of the


typical fraud perpetrator?


 


      This was an ongoing pattern of fraud, not a single incident; and it is


difficult to carry out large-scale fraud without having a professional position


that makes it possible and without having the personality-traits involved in


being willing to capitalize on such an opportunity. The MCS-director was


obviously in a good position to perpetrate this fraud—especially so since,


when he was doing so, the computer-business was still young and people,


including auditors, were not yet alive to its financial implications. Also, he


was indeed enterprising, as is evidenced by his creating a consulting


company to serve as a cover for the fraud; and he was cunning, as is


evidenced by his giving his consulting company the same name as MCS. He


was in a position to commit the fraud, he had the intelligence to recognize the


opportunity to commit fraud, and he had the requisite streak of amorality. In


these respects, he was indeed representative of the typical white-collar


fraudster.


 


      Part 3: The Fraud Audit


       The auditors then began to try to uncover the full extent of the


suspected fraud. Department orders for computers, printers and software were


traced to purchases, to sales records and to billing receipts. The Internal Audit


Department even worked directly with computer manufacturers to identify


the serial numbers of all personal computers and printers shipped to the


university in the previous 18 months. The vendors provided all sales records


to assist in the audit, but were unable to provide serial numbers for the


computers shipped to the university.


 


      Tracking sales to campus departments proved to be worthwhile, as


three employees stated that they had made personal purchases from the MCS


manager acting in his “professional capacity.” The employees provided


canceled checks for the purchases, made payable to MCS. The Internal Audit


Department was able to trace some equipment serial numbers back to the


actual university purchase orders and bills of lading. After ten weeks of work,


the Internal Audit Department’s report revealed that they could not account in


full for purchases exceeding $140,000 that had been ordered by MCS, for


which the university had paid the vendors. They also confirmed that


equipment worth slightly more than $14,500 had been ordered and paid for


by the university, but had never been recorded as sold, yet was in the


personal custody of people and organizations who sincerely believed thatthey had bought the equipment from the university. The university did have a


policy for MCS that stated there were to be no sales of hardware, software or


peripheral devices to any private party for personal use; sales were to be


made only to the campus departments for university-related work use.


 


      Required:


 


      1)              What should have been the key points of the audit/fraud


investigation report? What supportable audit conclusions could be drawn?


 


      There are three key facts. First, the MCS-director was generating huge


sales but was unable to account for more than a small fraction of these sales,


suggesting that he was simply pocketing the difference. Second, there were


multiple verified cases of his failing to record to sales that he personally


made and therefore knew of. Third, the MCS-director created a ‘shell'


company to facilitate off-the-books sales of university-owned computers.


These three facts should have been the focus of the investigation report.


 


      2)              What additional steps might have been taken by the Internal


Audit Department or Fraud Examiner to uncover evidence regarding the


existence and the extent of the suspected fraud? 


      The auditors would have had an easier time proving their case if they


had subpoenaed the financial records of the MCS-director's consulting


business. Because he was stealing from the university, the records that he


kept in his capacity as a university employee were poor. But it is a distinct


possibility that his consulting business's records were good, given that he


probably wanted to know how much ‘business' he was doing and given also


that, as he likely knew, he would probably have good financial records to


explain to the IRS, in the event of an audit, why he had made purchases far in


excess of what his $18,000/year university permitted. Such records would


have been a ‘smoking gun.’ That said, they already had several smoking


guns: one for each proven case of his selling university-merchandise off the


books.


 


      3)              What evidence is needed to prove a case of fraud?


 


      Fraud is simply the use of deception to acquire assets to which one has


no legal claim. In this case, proving fraud involved proving that the MCS-


director was using deception to sell university property. This was in fact


proved. The MCS director deliberately created a company whose sole


purpose was to facilitate, and give the appearance of legitimacy to, thetransfer of university-owned computers and the proceeds from the sales


thereof to his person. He also kept obviously fraudulent records.


 


      Part 4: Closure


 


      After extensive discussions with the administration, the university


attorney, the state attorney general (because the university was a public


institution), and the local county attorney, a decision was made not to


criminally prosecute because the attorneys believed the evidence was not


sufficient to obtain a conviction in court. Therefore, the university attempted


to contact the former MCS manager, now living across the country, to see if a


confession and partial restitution could be arranged. After weeks of telephone


calls back and forth, and relentless pressure from the Internal Audit


Department trying to determine the full extent of the fraud, the former MCS


manager hired a local attorney to work with the university to clear his name.


After fully reviewing the Internal Audit Department’s working papers, the


local attorney recommended to his client that restitution in the amount of


$14,500 be provided to the university, with no admission of guilt.


 


      The university did insist on including a summary letter of the situation


in the personnel file of the former employee. All parties agreed to theseconditions, restitution was paid to the university, and the personnel file was


appropriately documented. Shortly after the MCS manager had moved across


the country, he applied for a job with the National Security Council. Three


weeks after the summary letter had been included in his personnel file, a


representative


      of the National Security Council telephoned the university to ensure


that its new employee, the former MCS manager, could receive top-security


clearance. As a result of the evidence contained in the documented personnel


file, the Internal Audit Department was advised soon afterwards that the


clearance was denied and the job offer to the former MCS manager was


withdrawn.


 


 


      Required:


 


      1) Do you think the university should have brought criminal charges


against the MCS manager? Why or why not? Besides the reason of


insufficient evidence, why might a company be unwilling to prosecute a


suspected fraud perpetrator?


 


      The university should have pursued a criminal against the MCS-director. There are several possible reasons for their not doing this. First, the


fact that this fraud happened makes the university's management look


incompetent. A related point is that the university's prestige would have taken


a hard, and well deserved, fall had this matter gone public. Also, universities,


even public ones, charge their students hefty fees, and students and parents


might have questioned the legitimacy of those fees if it turned out that


university-assets were being looted by university employees. Finally, if


charges had been filed, it might have created opened the door to intense


financial scrutiny of the university, and it might not have been able to


withstand such scrutiny. Suppose it turned out, as it might well have, that


several university departments were unable to account for their large sums


they had been by the university. In that case, the state might have investigated


and might have concluded that, in giving state-money to financially


irresponsible departments, the university’s management was criminally


negligent. Unless an organization is certain that its financials are in order, it is


likely to not to escalate scrutiny of its financials, this being why many


organizations, including this one, decline to prosecutor fraudsters in their


own midst.


 


      3)              What other work remains to be done by the internal auditors to


bring this case to a close? 


      The auditors have already done a decent job of determining how much


the MCS-director stole from the university. At this point, their job is


preventative in nature. They and the university need to figure out how to


prevent future frauds like this from occurring. This means that they have to


come up with well-defined protocols relating to financials-records and funds-


requisitions. It also means that they have to identify the various kinds of


fraud that the university’s structure makes it possible to perpetrate; and


having done this, they have to figure out how to close off these opportunities


for fraud. Doing the latter is likely to involve subjecting requests for money


on the part of university departments and employees to extra scrutiny and to


require them to keep good financial records of activities on their part


involving university-assets. It may also involve setting up a full-time internal


‘financial task force’, whose sole function is to police the financial behavior


of university departments and employees.


 


 


      4)              A confession by the MCS manager would have made this an


“open-and-shut” case. Should the internal auditors have tried harder to obtain


a confession, perhaps by relying more upon the university’s legal counsel and


law enforcement officers in the investigation? 


 


      Given that the university did not wish to pursue this as a criminal


matter, they were not in a position to try much harder to elicit a confession.


First of all, the employee had already ‘lawyered up', limiting what the


auditors could do in the way of extracting information, including a


confession, from him. Also, if the auditors had decided to pursue this matter


more aggressively, they would have to have had to have involved the police,


which, for the previously stated reasons, they could not have done without


subjecting themselves to unwanted scrutiny.


 


      4) Fraud researchers have coined the phrase “fraud triangle” to


describe why people commit fraud. The three elements that make up the


fraud triangle are pressure, perceived opportunity and rationalization; all


three must be present for a fraud to occur. The pressure provides the motive


to commit the fraud, and usually involves financial need. The opportunity


typically presents itself in the form of weak or nonexistent internal controls.


Fraud perpetrators must believe that they will be able to commit the fraud and


remain undetected. Finally, fraud perpetrators must be able to rationalize or


justify their fraudulent actions as morally acceptable.


       One of the most common rationalizations is that the fraud perpetrator


will pay back the stolen funds, so that the perpetrator is only “borrowing” the


money for the moment. Apply the fraud triangle to this case and describe the


pressure, perceived opportunity and rationalization that were present and that


allowed the MCS manager to commit his fraud.


 


 


      The MCS-director almost certainly had no intention whatsoever of


paying back the university. This was not a case of somebody making a


mistake and then using fraud to cover up his mistake. This is a case of


somebody who set to steal from the university, did so, and then went to great


lengths, including setting up a shell company, to expand his operation. So


although the MCS-director almost certainly did have a rationalization, it was


not almost certainly not that particular one. We can only guess what his


rationalization, but I suspect that, as a university employee, he told himself


that he was merely properly allocating funds that the university had


misallocated. Universities spend enormous amounts of money on


questionable endeavors, such as sports teams and dorm-room renovations,


and the like; and they also hemorrhage money through bloated internal


bureaucracies. The MCS-director was likely aware of this and told himself


that, in keeping a little off-the-books university money for himself, he wasmerely putting money that the university would otherwise have wasted to


good use.


      The other two components of the fraud triangle are easily accounted


for in his case. The employee in question was clearly under financial


pressure, as his $18,000/year salary was probably not even sufficient to cover


basic living expenses, let alone to subsidize luxury-expenses. As for


opportunity, the employee’s position made it possible for him to sell


university-assets and keep the proceeds, and he was assisted in this by the


university’s slipshod attention to its own finances.


 


                                     The Olympus Fraud


 


      This week is focused on financials statement fraud. You will review


the fraud at Olympus. Please review the articles, fraud report, video, and


conduct your own research to address the following questions:


 


      1.            What fraud schemes were used by Olympus?


 


      The main fraud scheme was tobashi, this being the Japanese term for


concealment of losses. Starting in the late '80s, Olympus invested heavily in


other companies, sometimes by buying them outright. At first, this worked


well; but starting in the early '90s, these investments became losers. Rather


than cutting its losses, Olympus doubled down by making additional, highly


speculative investments. These investments became losers, and Olympus


responded by tripling down---with this new round of investments also


resulting in losses for the company. Instead of coming clean with the public


and with regulators, Olympus decided to hide the losses. It did this by setting


up shell companies to whom it pretended to sell these investments at values


far higher than their actual value. To this end, Olympus set up arrangements


with other parties to front them the money for these pseudo-sales, on the


condition that it be returned, along with a convenience fee. Also, in itsfinancial statements, Olympus recorded the values of its investments at their


initial price, i.e. at the prices when first purchased, instead of at their current,


much lower value. Moreover, in an attempt to put a benign face on the


company, Olympus hired a ‘ringer’ CEO, Michael Wolford, whom they


believed, incorrectly, would neither know about the fraud nor care. Finally, in


its financial statements, Olympus over-represented their intangible assets, i.e.


their goodwill-to-assets ratio.


 


      2.            What is your opinion of Michael Wolford?


 


      Michael Wolford clearly behaved honestly in this context. He knew


that something was wrong and he blew the whistle on Olympus by going to


the British authorities and also by going to the media.


 


      3.            What role did the Japanese media/culture play/or not play in


revealing this case? (would it be different in the US)


 


      When approached by Wolford, the Japanese media refused to cover


the story. In effect, they ‘buried’ it. This allowed the fraud to continue for a


while. More importantly, the fraud probably would not have been possible, at


least not on such a large scale, except in a culture in which the media couldbe expected to ‘play ball’, as the Japanese media did.


 


      4.            How was the fraud uncovered?


 


      As the CEO, albeit a strawman CEO, Michael Wolford did have


access to financial data and to information about ongoing, in particular, the


purchase, at a suspiciously high price, of a medical supplies firm. Wolford


noticed that he was rebuffed when he sounded the alarm to other Olympus


executives. When his inquiries did not cease, Wolford was fired and went to


the British authorities.


 


      5.            What role did the auditors play? Should they be liable?


 


      The auditors, both internal and external, failed utterly to report the


fraud. There was either collusion or extreme incompetence---probably the


former. Although the auditors did not face criminal liability, the Olympus


scandal prompted Japanese lawmakers to tighten regulations on auditors.


 


      6.            What role did Olympus' corporate culture play in this fraud?


 


        Japanese corporate culture, like Japanese culture in general, greatlyvalues stability and not rocking the boat. In American culture, there is a


certain grudging respect for rebels and whistleblowers, who can often expect


some degree of sympathy even they before they have fully proven their own


legitimacy. Not so in Japanese culture, especially corporate culture, in which


not ‘rocking the boat’ is seen almost as an end unto itself. This obviously


allowed the fraud at Olympus to continue for longer it might otherwise have.


All of this said, there is plenty of fraud in American firms; and much as


Americans might like to perceive themselves as cowboys, they too tend to


fall in light with malfeasance, at least in authoritarian settings, such as


corporations.


 


      7.            What was the final outcome of the case?


 


      The Chairman of Olympus, Tsuyoshi Kikukawa, was given a three-


year sentence, as was Hideo Yamada, another executive involved in the


fraud. A third executive, Hisashi Mori, was given a two- and half-year


sentence. In court, Kikukawa took full responsibility for the fraud. IN the


immediate aftermath of the case, Olympus lost 80% of its value, but quickly


rebounded to its pre-scandal value. 


      The Dixon Fraud


 


Submit a 1-2 page paper that discusses what red flags were present in the


Dixon fraud. How did the auditors miss the red flags? How did the


Whistleblower uncover it?


 

                                                      [69]
      There were several red flags in this case. First of all, while


Crundwell was comptroller, the city of Dixon was constantly short of money.


As a result, Dixon police were not able to upgrade their equipment; Dixon


employees who were overdue for raises did not get them; Dixon employees


were fired; and, most strikingly, streets in Dixon were not adequately


maintained. Dixon was constantly running a deficit of millions of dollars---an


excessive amount for a municipality of 15,000, especially given the hefty


yearly pay-outs it received from the State of Illinois.


        Crundwell explained this by lying about these pay-outs, claiming that


they were much smaller than they actually were. But suspicions should have


been aroused.


      Another red flag was that Crundwell, a city employee with a low five-


figure salary, was able to bankroll a huge horse-breeding operation, owned


several properties and several luxury cars.      A third red flag was that Crundwell did Dixon’s banking off-line,


through paper statements. This should have been a red flag to anyone who


knew of it. It was known to Swanson, who did put the pieces together, albeit


rather belatedly.


      Also, the bank in question, Fifth Third Bank, was a local bank, and it


should have known that there was something suspicious about a city


comptroller depositing large sums in a personal account.


      If Dixon City financials were audited during Crundwell’s time as


comptrollers, those audits were far from thorough. The State of Illinois is


presumably supposed to conduct such audits, and the fact that it didn’t is


perhaps the most important fact here. The money that Crundwell embezzled


was, after all, Illinois-state money, and the State of Illinois should have


verified that the funds it was giving to Dixon were being appropriately used.


It did not verify this.


      It is unclear whether anyone in Dixon complained to the State of


Illinois about Dixon’s financial problems. If they didn’t, they should have.


      Rita Crundwell is a sociopath who was defrauding Dixon out of


millions. Such people exist and may even be drawn to positions of financial


responsibility, such as City Comptroller. It is incumbent on others, especially


other officials, to alert the authorities, in this case the State of Illinois, of their


concerns. In this case, those concerns were deep: questionable layoffs of cityemployees, overdue raises, and problems replacing police equipment and


maintaining roads. Given only the information contained in the three articles


that I read, it is unclear how all of this went on for so long. Presumably, it


was because people in a small town like Dixon were slower than people from


big cities to suspect criminal activity, and it was possible that people in


Dixon, including police officers and other officials, were personal


acquaintances with Crundwell, sometimes even having grown up with her,


and were slow to believe that ‘one of their own’ could have committed such a


crime.


      One lesson that I derived from this case study is that subjective


assessments of personality are to be given far less weight in matters relating


to fraud and crime generally than are hard facts, especially hard financial


facts.


 


             Multinationals in Relation to the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act in


                                        Relation


 


      Part 1


 


      Dear Mr. Marshall,


 


      The FCPA is the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. The FCPA was


enacted in 1977, and its purpose is to prevent Americans from engaging in


corrupt businesses practices in foreign countries. The primary purpose of the


FCPA is to prevent Americans doing business abroad from bribing public


officials or using their situation to engage in practices, such as money-


laundering, that would be prohibited in the United States. Under the FCPA,


an American doing business in India, for example, breaking American law by


bribing an Indian official, even if his act is tolerated or even encouraged in


India.


      There are two components to the FCPA. The one component prohibits


Americans doing business in a given foreign country from bribing officials in


that country. The other component requires Americans doing business in a


given country to be extremely transparent about their financial dealings in


that country. They must keep records of all transactions and must neverfalsify or obfuscate those transactions. Additionally, financial records must


not only be accurate, but must also make it easy for auditors to understand the


nature of the transactions recorded. The purpose of the second component of


the second component is to prevent the concealment of bribery or other


corrupt financial transactions. The insistence on easy-to-understand records is


to prevent Americans from using aspects of their situation that would be


unfamiliar to American auditors as a way of concealing acts of corruption.


For example, it would prevent the use of locally but not generally accepted


accounting principles, and it would also prevent the use of local argot to


record transactions.


      India is a country of over 1 billion people. Its economy is rapidly


growing, and there are many economic opportunities there, both for Indians


and for non-Indians. However, there are two serious problems facing people


attempting to business in India. One problem is that the Indian government’s


behavior with respect to businesses in India tends to be extremely corrupt. It


is very much the norm for Indian officials to extort bribes from businesses in


exchange for the right to continuing doing business. The other problem is that


the businesses in Indian are extremely regulated. Businesses must remain in


compliance with a byzantine network of regulations, and this involves time,


energy, and money. Oftentimes, the simplest way for businesses to stay on


the right side of this bureaucracy is to bribe government officials.      That said, American businesses are prosecuted for violating FCPA,


and it is not an option to attempt to circumvent it. This has several


implications for Americans, such as yourself, who wish to do business in


India. The first is that operating expenses are likely to be higher than initially


estimated, because compliance expenses are going to be dramatically higher


than they would be in the United States. Another implication is that you must


operate on the assumption that people in your organization are likely to


violate FCPA provisions, given how lucrative and convenient such violations


can be, and you must be aware of the ways that FCPA-violators falsify


records to conceal acts of bribery. It is less likely that numbers will be


doctored than it is that acts of bribery will be recorded as legitimate business

                        [70]
expenses, for example:


 


      *Travel expenses


        *Consultant fees


        *Entertainment expenses


      *Sales and marketing costs


      *Vendor or supplier payments


        *Discounts or rebates


      *Post-sale service fees


        *Commissions, and        *Write-offs.


 


      Thus, if a given official is bribed, it may be recorded that he was a


consultant who was appropriately compensated. Or the official might have


been bribed with a vacation or with entertainment services, instead of with


cash.


      What these items have in common is that they tend to be vague.


Consulting services, unlike purchases of machinery or land, do not lead to a


verifiable product; and neither do any of the other items listed above.


      The list above is not complete, but it makes it relatively clear how


financials are likely to be distorted to cloak FCPA-violations.


      If any of these items, or any other hard-to-verify items, are unusually


prominent in financial records, FCPA-violations are likely and the matter


should be investigated. Verifying that FCPA-violations have occurred tends


to be difficult, but your objective is not so much to prove the existence of


such violations as it is to pre-empt such violations, which you can do by


treating suspicious financials as evidence of such violations and appropriately


discharging suspected violators while also conducting vigorous internal


audits and setting up a safe and easy way for people to blow the whistle on


FCPA-violations.


       Part II


 


      The case I will discuss involves Walmart’s Mexican subsidiary.


Starting in 2005, Walmart-Mexico began paying large sums to Mexican


officials for licenses to expand within Mexico. The total amount of these


bribes is estimated to be $24 million. The bribes continued until 2011. They


came to end because of an inside whistle-blower, not because of pressure


from either Mexican or American officials. As soon as Walmart became


aware of the situation, it sent in internal auditors to determine exactly what


had happened, and it presented its findings to the US Department of Justice.


        Walmart-investors brought a class-action lawsuit against Walmart, and


in October 2018, Walmart agreed to them $160 million dollars. The SEC


approved the settlement.


      Thus far, the situation has cost Walmart over $900 million dollars. In


addition to the just-mentioned $160 million, Walmart spent over $700 to


ensure that its foreign subsidiaries be FCPA-compliant.


      In September 2016, US prosecutors agreed to drop the case against


Walmart if Walmart paid a fine of $600 million. Walmart declined. Since


then, the case has been in prosecutorial limbo, and there has been no


prosecutorial outcome thus far.


        According to some, this is because President Trump, who is stronglypro-business, does not want to discourage American business with what


might be regarded as unnecessary prosecution of an extremely successful


American retailer. During Trump’s presidency, the Justice department has


sent mixed messages on the matter. On the one hand, Attorney General Jeff


Sessions has said (though not in connection with Walmart specifically) that


he is reluctant to let law-breakers off the hook by granting them DPA’s


(Deferred Prosecution Agreement) or NPA’s (Non-prosecution Agreements).


At the same time, white collar prosecutions under Trump have plummeted,


the reason being, as Trump himself explicitly states, that he does not want to


discourage business and he wants to reserve prosecutorial resources for


violent offenses, drug offenses, and immigration-related offenses. Also,


Trump has expressed his contempt for the FCPA, saying that it hamstrings


American businesses.


      It is a matter of speculation how the case will be resolved, but it is my


opinion extremely unlikely that Walmart will be prosecuted. Walmart is a


major American retailer and employs many Americans; and because of its


low costs, wide selection, and high quality it is much beloved by American


consumers. Trump knows that if he were to prosecute Walmart for FCPA


violations, it would undermine his pro-business message.


      If this is in fact Trump’s reasoning, it is highly defensible reasoning. It


is easy to reside in one country and sit in judgment of the practices in anothercountry. It is in the United States to condemn somebody in India or Mexico


who bribes an official. But businesses operate on thin margins, and


obstreperous officials in a given country can easily drive a business into a


oblivion with paperwork, fines, and the like. Oftentimes, FCPA-violations


involve cases of somebody bribing an official to do something that he could


automatically do in the United States. This appears to be what was happening


with Walmart-Mexico. Walmart-Mexico wanted to open new stores. Mexican


officials were blocking it, supposedly on regulatory grounds, but possibly


because they were waiting for bribes. The American legal system works


reasonably well, but the legal systems of other countries may not work as


well, especially in connection with American business-interests in their


countries. I would therefore suggest that American prosecutors use discretion


when prosecuting FCPA-cases.


        Oftentimes, regulatory requirements are used as a way of extorting


under the table payments. A regulatory in India or Mexico makes a fraction


of what his US counterpart makes, and it is to be expected that he may make


up the difference by extorting money from businesses under his thumb. It is


easy to judge people who give or receive bribes, but in some contexts it is not


realistic to expect strict compliance on anyone’s part with the law. FCPA


seems to make good moral sense, but it make dubious economic sense. Given


that American businesses are likely to violate it and given that unenforceablelaws generate contempt for the law, I would personally suggest softening


FCPA.


                                       The ARCP Fraud


 


      Pick a recent financial statement fraud that has been in the news. Post


your chosen company to the discussion board, if someone has already chosen


that company, then choose another. Write a 2 page paper detailing the fraud:


how did it happen, how was it detected, what controls were lacking, how


could it have been prevented or detected sooner.


 


      In June 2017, Brian Block, CFO (Chief Financial Officer) of ARCP


(American Realty Capital properties) was convicted of using fraudulent


financial statements to exaggerate the success of the company’s holdings.


Block’s presumed reason for doing this was to inflate the price of ARCP’s


shares and also to attract private investors.


      ARCP is a real estate investment trust (REIT), meaning that it makes


money by owning or financing income-producing real estate (meaning rental


or commercial properties). Block’s case involved his using a non-GAAP


measure of performance to exaggerate the values of company holdings. More


precisely, the earning-statements prepared by BLOCK were based on a what


is called AFFO (Adjusted Funds From Operation), AFFO being the measure


typically used to determine the performance of a REIT is known as AFFO.


The formula for AFFO is: 


      AFFO = FFO (Funds from Operations) + rent increases - capital


expenditures - routine maintenance amounts.


 


      The formula for FFO is:


 


      FFO = net income + amortization + depreciation - capital gains from


property sales.


 


      The difference between FFO and AFFO is that AFFO, unlike FFO,


makes allowances for rent increases and capital expenditures. Let ABC be a


REIT. According to AFFO, if the rent on the properties ABC increases but


ABC is otherwise unchanged, then ABC has increased according to AFFO


but has remained the same according to FFO; and if maintenance costs or


capital expenditures for those properties increase, but ABC is otherwise


unchanged, then ABC has lost value according to AFFO but remained the


same according to FFO.


      AFFO is considered by industry insiders to be a more exact measure


than FFO of a REIT’s financial performance. At the same time, AFFO, unlike


FFO, allows money that has not yet been received or spent be considered


when evaluating a REIT. This means that AFFO can be used to inflate ordeflate the value of a REIT, whereas FFO cannot be so used. AFFO therefore


violates the Principle of Conservative Accounting (only count income when


cash has actually been received), this being one of the ten principles of


GAAP, and for this reason is a non-GAAP measure. FFO is a GAAP


financial measure, since it does not violate this or any other GAAP principle.


      Block had promised investors large returns. When those investments


fell short of Block’s promises, he used AFFO to make it appear as though


those investments had performed as promised. ARCP-accountants pointed


out the discrepancy to Block, thinking that he had made an innocent


accounting mistake. Block continued to use AFFO to inflate ARCP’s value.


Moreover, when ARCP’s investments sank so much that Block could no


longer use AFFO alone to cover up the losses, he simply plugged fake


numbers into his mandatory SEC-filings. Block was assisted in these various


cover-ups by Lista McAlister, ARCP’s Chief Accounting Officer. When


investors in ARCP were unable to liquidate their holdings for prices


consistent with the financials prepared by Block, the SEC was brought in and


the gig was up.


        McAlister and Block claimed that they had been instructed by the


company founder and CEO, Nick Schorsch, to perpetrate this fraud. These


accusations have not been substantiated, and Schorsch has not been indicted.


However, Schorsch was forced to resign as CEO; and because of the declinein ARCP’s value caused by this scandal, Schorsch personally lost millions of


dollars.


      Internal auditors were quick to spot the inaccuracies in Block’s


financial statements and cannot be blamed for the debacle. Also, Block had


the support of McAlister and other key personnel at ARCP, who worked


together to mislead or silence internal auditors. Unlike other cases of fraud,


this one was not so much about an absence of internal controls as it is about


an excess of credulity on the part of holders of equity in ARCP. Equity-


holders knew that they financials they were given were prepared using


AFFO, not FFO, and they knew AFFO not to be a GAAP financial measure.


The lesson from this case is less about how organizations should self-police


and more about how consumers should do so. When non-standard metrics are


used, including non-GAAP financial measures, one should know that fraud is


a distinct possibility.


                                 The Basia Skudrzyk Fraud


 


      Use the internet to research a fraud involving one of the schemes


addressed in this week's reading materials. You can use the same scheme you


discussed in the Discussion Board.


      1. Discuss how the fraud was committed.


      2. Discuss controls that could have been in place to deter and detect


this fraud.


      3. How was the fraud detected and what was the outcome?


      4. What were the red flags associated with the scheme?


 


      The case that I will discuss concerns one Barbara “Basia” Skudrzyk,


who on March 7, 2017, was convicted of several counts of fraud in relation to


a lucrative and long-lived personal-purchase scheme that was running at


Washington University, where she was business director for medical


education. Starting in May 2010 continuing right up till her arrest on July 31,


2018, Ms. Skudrzyk used Washington University funds to pay for a wide of


personal range of personal services. She did this by creating, submitting, and


approving false invoices and W2-forms, thereby making it appear as though


the various services purchased were for work done for and at Washington


University. In actuality, each and every one of the services purchases was forher personally. Skudrzyk used the funds to pay for contractors and a


construction company for services performed on her home, a moving


company, a house cleaning service, housepainters, babysitters for her


children, and a divorce lawyer.


      Skudrzyk also purchased Visa gift cards at the Campus Bookstore by


forging another Washington University employee’s signature. She used the


Visa cards for personal purchases. Finally, Skudrzyk got Washington


University to pay for trips for herself and her family. She did this altering


invoices from airlines and hotels, then submitting them to the Division of


Medical Education and approving them.


      In all, Skudrzyk defrauded Washington University of over $400,000.


She was caught not because internal auditors took note, but because the


employee whose signature she was forging received a routine financial


statement saying that he had spent $35,000 of dollars on Visa gift cards. That


employee complained, and auditors were then dispatched.


      There were many red flags. Every invoice submitted by Ms. Skudrzyk


was a red flag. But the only red flag that wasn’t ignored was the routine


financial statement given to the employee whose signature was forged. All


the rest---the five-figure invoices for work that clearly was not being done—


did not even raise an eyebrow.


      The reason for this lies in 


        University departments and divisions are enormously wealthy.


University employees do not typically earn as much as investment bankers or


high-powered attorneys, but they have access to enormous amounts of


money, owing to the extremely wide of range of educational, recreational,


and research-related services provided by a university. Many universities,


including Washington University, are technically private. But their modus


operandi is nothing like that of a business. Businesses compete for


businesses, each trying to better products and services for less money than its


rivals. For this reason, margins are thin and businesses have to be extremely


aware of what they are doing with their own money. Universities are not in a


comparable position. They constantly receive extremely large government


grants and subsidies, and they also benefit from the enormous prestige and


status that universities have, leading to a constant influx of tuition-money,


most of which is financed by government loans. Consequently, universities


can be financially inefficient with relative impunity.


      Skudrzyk knew how loosely money was spent at her institution and


knew how large the sums were, and she saw an opportunity to cash in. As the


head of the Medical Education Division, Skudrzyk knew how much funding


her division could requisition from the university without arousing suspicion.


She also knew what kinds of services universities pay for and was thereforeable to dummy up convincing invoices. Finally, she knew how bureaucratic


and inefficient her university was when it comes to verifying that work paid


for was actually done.


        Washington University could have prevented this disaster by


regularly, aggressively auditing its various departments. The problem with


this proposal is that university expenses tend to be extremely opaque.


Professors are given six-month leaves of absence to write five-page articles;


speakers are paid tens of thousands of dollars to give lectures that virtually


nobody attends; various studies and other forms of research are paid for, the


legitimacy of which is not easy to verify since much of it concerns topics that


are comprehensible only to discipline-insiders. Finally, universities are


supposed to be bastions of culture and thought; they are supposed to be


places where scholars and artists-in-residence and the like can live ‘the life of


the mind’ without being subjected to close financial scrutiny. Goodyear and


McDonalds are willing to have regular, aggressive internal audits, because


their very purpose is to provide well-defined products and services at


minimal cost. Universities are about ‘exploring ideas’, and the like, and


therefore inherently averse to the kind of internal auditing on which any


ordinary business depends.


      We must also remember that when the government goes after a


fraudster, it usually does so because of complaints from customers. The SECgoes after the likes of Bernie Madoff when people complain to it. In the case


of universities, who would be doing the complaining? There are no


shareholders; nor are there investors. So there is no obvious demand for


accountability. Universities therefore don’t have nearly as much of an


incentive as businesses to be mindful of their own financial conduct. And


granting that Washington University could have avoided Skudrzyk-debacle


had it had regular, meaningful internal audits, it did not have the same kind of


incentive as a business to subject itself to such scrutiny.


      That said, if students were given university financial statements---if


they were given documents making it clear exactly how much their university


was spending and what it was spending it on—students would likely begin to


put terrific pressure on universities to self-audit. But for whatever reason—it


may be the mystique universities or it may be the government-backed student


loans---neither students nor their parents demand such financial transparency


of universities. If a given university wished to eliminated expense-padding


and financial fraud in its midst, the way for it do so is to make its own


financials transparent to the people who care—the students and their parents.


Until that happens, we cannot expect universities to scrutinize their own


finances with the same vigor as a business.


                                   The Liberty Bell Fraud


 


      Read the Liberty Bell Hospital case and answer the discussion


questions (on pages 4 and 5 of the case). What factors contributed to this


opportunity to commit fraud?


 


      Matt Harris was hired (albeit as a part-time independent contractor)


without having to undergo a background investigation. A background


investigation might well have revealed a history of fraud or malfeasance,


given that he was fired from his last job. Also, Matt Harris probably


shouldn’t have been hired in the first place, at least not with a thorough


review of his employment record, given that he had just been fired from a


similar position at another organization. Other candidates besides Matt Harris


should have been interviewed for his first position. When Matt Harris was


asked to apply for the full-time position, his record should have been


scrutinized, especially since it involved more responsibility than the previous


position.


 


      What breakdowns in internal control could have been improved so that


this fraud could have been prevented?


       Matt Harris’s vendor account should have been deleted as soon as he


was given the full-time position. He no longer needed a vendor account, and


his having such an account gave him access to sensitive information.


      The CFO should have listened to Alan Walters when Walters


cautioned him about the fact that Harris was a nepotism-hire. Harris should


not have been given access to the safe containing pre-signed checks. When


Downs went on vacation, a more senior person, not a less senior person,


should have been given responsibility for handling the disbursements usually


handled by Downs.


 


      Other than Matt Harris, who bears some responsibility for this fraud?


 


      Tracy Downs, Accounts Payable Manager, bears responsibility since


she violated LBH's policy on nepotism-based hires, did not do a background


check on Matt Harris, did not interview other candidates for the position, and


also did not delete Harris’s vendor account when he took the full-time


position.


      Elinor Linz, Assistant Accounts Payable Manager, bears responsibility


since she did not delete Harris’s vendor account.


      Alan Smith, CFO, bears responsibility since he allowed Harris to


continue to work at LBH, despite knowing that Harris was a nepotism-hire.      Sharon Harris bears responsibility since she recommended her son,


Matt Harris, for the contractor position, knowing that she was violating


LHB’s nepotism-policy and also possibly knowing of fraud in her son’s


background.


 


      Did the Alan Walters, Internal Audit Manager do the right thing?


 


      Yes. He alerted the CFO to the fact that hiring Harris was a violation


of company policy, and he also successfully carried out the investigation of


Harris’s fraud, with the end result being a confession on Harris’s part.


 


      Explain how general computer controls and application level controls


could have helped prevent and detect this fraud?


 


      Harris’s vendor account should have been automatically deleted once


it was no longer inactive. Also, if the company had made payments


electronically, instead of through physical checks, this would not have


happened, at least not in this way. By 2003, electronic payments were already


the norm. Additionally, the system should (and could) have been set up to


automatically bar anyone with a vendor’s account from having access to safes


containing checks or other securities, given that anyone with a vendor’saccount can, in effect, send such checks to himself.


                               A Hypothetical Skimming Case


 


      You have just been hired as a Fraud Examiner to investigate an


employee of Ace Auto Supplies store suspected of skimming a percentage of


cash payments made on a daily basis. The employee is a Parts Manager and is


believed to be skimming a portion of all parts sales where cash is used as the


method of payment. The parts are ordered by the customer and the invoice is


generated, which is logged into the system. The parts inventory is adjusted


based on sales entered into the system. The Parts Mgr is responsible for


turning over all sales (cash, check, credit) to the cashier at the end of the day.


The cashier reconciles the total sales for the day to the checks, cash and sales


on credit. The cashier submits the paperwork to Ace's accountant who


prepares a bank deposit slip and deposits the amount based on daily sales.


There is also concern that the accountant is skimming cash before depositing


the amount into the bank at the end of each day.


      Prepare a memo to the Owner of the Auto Dealership covering the


following:


 


      1. Investigative steps needed


      2. Evidence required to prove the fraud


      3. List of interviewees      4. List some questions you would consider asking


 


      Re: Possible Fraud (Cash Skimming)


      To whom It May Concern:


 


      My understanding is that you suspect that two kinds of fraud—


specifically, cash skimming---are being committed within your organization.


As you have described the situation to me, it is possible that the two alleged


fraudsters are colluding, but it is possible that they are not. It is also possible,


and in fact likely, that if there is in fact fraud, three parties are involved in it.


It is possible that these parties are operating independently of one another; it


is also possible that they are colluding.


      I will now identify the steps you must take to verify that fraud is in


fact occurring, along with the steps that you must take if it turns out that


fraud is occurring. If fraud is occurring, these steps will enable you to


determine whether there is collusion among the parties involved.


      I will begin by describing the two fraud schemes that you believe to be


occurring, along with some relevant background facts. Your store sells auto


parts, and you believe that a Parts Manager is skimming some of the money


from cash-sales of those auto parts. Whenever a sale is made, the parts


inventory is duly adjusted. At the end of each workday, the Parts Managerhas to turn over all sales (cash, checks, and credit) to the cashier, who


reconciles said sales to total sales (sold goods multiplied by their prices). The


cashier then submits the paperwork to an accountant, who deposits the


amount of daily sales into the business's bank account.


      For each day falling within the time period during which you suspect


that fraud was being committed, start with that day’s total sales (goods sold


times their prices. Then subtract cash, check, and credit sales from that


number. The amount should be zero. If it is greater than zero, the next step is


to rule out simple accounting errors. To do this, make sure go over each


credit card sale, and make sure that the appropriate amount was charged for


the item in question, and do the same with check sales. If those amounts are


correct, then some of the cash from sales is indeed missing, and cash is


indeed being skimmed.


      That said, we don’t know who is skimming that cash. It could be the


Parts Manager or the Cashier or both. Moreover, they could either be


colluding or operating independently. Below we will discuss how to


determine who is skimming how much.


      If cash has been skimmed thus far in the process, it is still possible that


the accountant is skimming. At the same time, the accountant may be


skimming if no cash has been skimmed. Either way, the same method is used


to determine whether or not the accountant is skimming: simply compare thecashier’s daily statement to the amount that the accountant deposits. If


deposits fall short, then the accountant is skimming.


      The method just used deals with past cases of skimming. It is also


recommended that you perform a ‘sting’, so as to prove the existence of an


on-going act of fraud. Two separate stings would have to be conducted. The


first would involve taking daily sales directly from the Parts Manager and


comparing them against total sales. If cash sales fall short, then the Parts


Manager is skimming. The second sting would involve taking sales directly


from the Parts Manager, comparing them to total sales, then passing them


along to the Cashier without letting the Cashier know that the sales have


already been audited. If the Cashier’s daily report is off, then the Cashier is


skimming.


      If properly conducted, these stings would make it clear exactly who


was skimming how much, and this information would be very useful when


interviewing fraud-suspects. Let us now turn to this topic.


      There are three possible suspects, as we have discussed. If the Parts


Manager is skimming, the Cashier knows it, since the Cashier’s job is to


check the Parts Manager’s receipts against Total Sales. At the same time, the


Cashier could be skimming without the Parts Manager being aware of it.


Further, if either the Parts Manager or the Cashier are skimming, the


Accountant wouldn’t necessarily know it, since the cashier’s paperwork is theonly source of information that he has about sales. Finally, if the accountant


is skimming, neither the Parts Manager nor the Cashier necessarily knows


about it.


      When interviewing, it is best to have as much knowledge as possible.


The ideal situation is to prove that fraud is being committed and to know who


is responsible for what part of that fraud; and unless the accountant is the


only person skimming, the only way to have this knowledge is to conduct the


previously described stings.


      If it is known exactly who is skimming how much, then the questions


the fraud examiner would ask might include:


      How long has this been going on?


      Does anyone else know about it?


      What led you to do this? Were you unhappy with your position or


compensation?


      Are you willing or able to make reparations, so as to minimize civil


and criminal liability?


 


      If you are interviewing one of the three parties, ask questions about the


possible roles of the other two; for example, if interviewing the Parts


Manager, you might ask:


       Does the Cashier know about what you are doing?


      Who came up with the idea, you or him?


      What about the accountant? What is his role in this?


 


        Variations of these questions could be asked when interviewing the


other two parts.


      If it is not known exactly who is doing what, questions have to be


chosen more delicately. You might want to include general questions, along


the lines of:


 


      Are you aware that cash from sales cannot be accounted for?


      Do you know who might be responsible?


      Do you feel that you might have opened the door to skimming on


someone else’s part?


      Are you on good terms with that other person?


      If you could return the money in exchange for legal immunity, would


you be able to do so?


      Is there any way that you can help us prove your innocence in this


matter?


      Are there any loopholes in the system that you are aware of that might


allow people to skim?      Would you be willing to help us identify and close them?


      Would you mind if we went over the books with you? There are a


couple of things we'd like you to clear up. Would that be ok?


      Are you aware that if this goes to court, and you are only responsible


for 10% of the fraud, you are still 100% guilty in the eyes of the law?


      You know that once this goes to the police, it’s out of our hands.


Would you be willing to help us minimize your liability? It’s your best bet.


 


      As for evidence, you simply need:


 


      *Sales proceeds submitted by Parts Manager to Cashier


        *Paperwork proceeds submitted by Cashier to Accountant


      *Deposit Slips/Bank Statements


 


      Testimony from interviews may also be helpful, especially if there is


proof of skimming without a clear indication of who is responsible for what


part of it.


       Fraud Risk Factors in a Hypothetical Multinational Company


 


      Answers that exceed 600 words will be penalized.


 


 


      1.            Answer the following questions based on the information


provided below .


      a. What are fraud risk factors?


      1.            Define 5 fraud risk factors for this company.


 


 


      Risk factor #1: This business has multiple accounting systems,


resulting in potential accounting ambiguities that open the door to fraud.


      Risk factor #2: This company has autocratic, centralized management,


coupled with a geographically dispersed employee-pool. Consequently,


employee behavior is unlikely to be adequately monitored. Also, because of


the various different currencies involved, along with the multiplicity of


different kinds of transactions being conducted, the door is open to a variety


of schemes, involving improper asset valuations, off-balance sheet entities


and liabilities, disclosure fraud, and cash-skimming.


      Risk factor #3: Bonus-driven salaries put great pressure on employeesto do whatever they must to earn, including committing fraud.


      Risk factor #4: Autocratic management may cause employees to


dislike management and to find them unapproachable, thereby giving


employees an incentive to ‘rip off’ the company by committing fraud.


      Risk factor #5: Because of the geographically dispersed employee-


pool, different banking procedures are involved, making money laundering


easier than it would be if activities were confined to a single banking system.


Also, given that the company has never done business in Russia, its


attempting to conduct operations there and to employ Russians makes it


vulnerable to employees who can use their knowledge of local customs,


along with their knowledge of company-vulnerabilities, to commit fraud. It


also exposes the company to ‘shakedowns’ by local criminals, putting


Russia-based employees under pressure to defraud the company.


 


 


      2.            Identify one fraud scheme for each risk factor identified in part


b.


 


      Fraud Scheme Corresponding to Risk Factor #1: Assets/inventory can


be overvalued, with the differences between reported and actual values being


skimmed.      Fraud Scheme Corresponding to Risk Factor #2: Centralized,


autocratic management makes it easy for employees to fail to report sales


actually made and pocket the proceeds.


      Fraud Scheme Corresponding to Risk Factor #3: Bonus-driven salaries


may encourage employees to concoct phony investment deals in an effort to


inflate the revenues they are generating for the company.


      Fraud Scheme Corresponding to Risk Factor #4: Remote and


autocratic management may encourage employees to sell company inventory


and claim that it was robbed.


      Fraud Scheme Corresponding to Risk Factor #5: Exposure to Russian


criminal organizations, along with the potential profits from cooperating with


them, may lead to money laundering schemes, along with bribery of local


officials.


 


      b. Describe the benefits of including personnel from various


departments within the company during your fraud risk assessment.


 


      Each department carries its own windows of opportunity for fraud;


and since one won’t know about these unless one knows about each


department, one’s investigation should draw on the knowledge and


cooperation of people in as many departments as possible. 


      Information for Question 1


      You have just been hired as the Fraud Deterrence Specialist for a


small business. The company is expanding into an emerging market in


Russia. See the following facts about the company:


      · They employee 2,000 people worldwide


      · Have very decentralized accounting and procurement processes


      · Managed by an autocratic CEO


      · Executive management salary is paid through salary and bonus. The


bonus potential is significant and driven by earnings per share.


      · Has never employed anyone in Russia before this expansion.


 


      2.            Answer the three questions below:


 


      a.            Describe the “Behavioral Elements of Fraud.”


 


      The behavioral elements of fraud are the personality traits that


fraudsters are likely to have. These include:


      *A weak or flexible moral compass: The fraudster doesn’t have a strict


moral code and can rationalize theft and fraud.


        *Unstable and toxic relations with others: The fraudster is likely tohave associates of ill-repute and to not have long-term stable and healthy


relations.


        *Deceitfulness: The fraudster is likely to be a liar.


      *Arrogance: The fraudster is to believe his needs to be more important


than the law and to believe himself to be smarter than others and also smarter


than ‘the system.’


        *Creativity and cleverness: The fraudster tends to be intelligent and


creative; and he must be both, given that he has to figure out both how to earn


outside the system and to conceal the fact that he is doing so.


 


      b.            How did the culture at Crazy Eddie promote fraud?


 


      The management at Crazy Eddie’s explicitly encouraged fraud.


Employees were paid in cash, so that tax-liability could be minimized.


Employees were encouraged to overstate losses to insurance companies.


Finally, employees were explicitly encouraged to do what they could to


conceal assets from the government.


 


      c.            What elements of the fraud triangle were present at Crazy


Eddie?


       Employees were paid in cash and therefore given the opportunity to


skim and evade taxes. Employees were also told, implicitly and sometimes


explicitly, that tax-evasion and skimming were legitimate, making it easy for


them to rationalize doing so.


      Finally, Crazy Eddie’s had a low tolerance for low performance,


putting pressure on employees to satisfy performance-benchmarks however


they could.


 


      d. What do you consider to be the most interesting part about the


Crazy Eddie fraud?


 


      To me, the most striking feature of this case was the company’s failure


to try to conceal it. To be sure, Crazy Eddie’s did misreport assets and


revenue. But its now infamous sales campaigns (available on YouTube:


    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ml6S2yiuSWE) dripped with contempt


for established business practices and strongly hinted at a kind of Mafia-like


criminality on the part of its management.


 


      3. Read the following information and then answer questions a & b


below :


      Assume you are an internal auditor for a large, multinational,manufacturing organization with a division in Mexico. One of your


responsibilities is to investigate allegations made on the company’s fraud


hotline. When you arrive at work one morning you learn an anonymous tip


was left on the hotline that alleges fraud involving the division manager.


“Pat’s significant other is a fraudulent vendor,” was the anonymous tip left


on your company’s fraud hotline. Pat is a division manager at your company.


      “Wow. I can’t believe this guy is so blatant,” you are thinking as you


review some accounts payable invoices while following up on this anonymous


tip. The invoice that caught your attention is shown in Table 1.


      A quick search of the AP file reveals a total of three invoices like the


one in Table 1 (on the next page of this exam), all for identical amounts but


on different dates. The division manager, Pat, has the authority to approve


payment of invoices for less than $10,000. It is obvious to you that the


manager has a created a shell company. You happen to know that Pat’s


significant other is named Kim, hence the name Kimco Marketing. There is


no documentation to support these transactions other than the invoices, all of


which are purportedly for marketing services.


      The manager’s office is not more than 30 feet away and Pat can be


seen at the desk. You throw the invoices in a file, grab your buddy in the next


office, and head for Pat’s office. After all, it doesn’t take a brain surgeon to


know what’s going on here. 


        Requirements for Question 4:


 


      a. Should Pat be confronted and interviewed now? Why or why not?


 


      No. It is too soon to interview Pat. Fraud-interviews should not be


fact-finding expeditions. But if Pat were interviewed right now, that is what


that interview would be. It has not yet been established that Pat committed


fraud. It may well be that you are not aware of evidence to support the


legitimacy of these invoices, but you have only been just made aware of the


situation, and you must verify your suspicions before confronting pat.


      Your job right now is to figure out what happened. If you verify your


suspicions, your next job is to figure out what to ask Pat. Before interviewing


Pat, you must know exactly what happened, so that you can control the


interview and maximize the likelihood of a confession.


      When you do interview, make sure not to go in ‘guns blazing.’ Keep


an open mind, and start with non-confrontational questions (e.g. how long


have you worked her?, what is a typical day for you like?). This will help


establish trust. Once you have ‘connected’ with the interviewee, move to


tougher questions.


       b.) Compile a written list of the questions you would ask in the


interview with Pat and the sequence in which they should be asked.


Ultimately, your objective is to determine whether a fraud has been


committed and, if so, obtain a confession from Pat.


 


 


 


 


      What is your current position?


      How long have you worked here?


      What is a typical day for you like?


      Does your job involve providing marketing services? What about


consulting services?


      Can you tell me about that?


      If you provide marketing services, what does that involve?


      Are the fees for marketing services simply for your expertise, or are


they used to defray subcontractor expenses?


      Tell me about some recent marketing clients of yours?


      Do you happen to recall doing work for the E.Z. Pickens


Conglomerate?


      Tell me about that?      Do you recall how much you might have invoiced them?


      Was that a standard account or was it unusual?


      You say that you hired an advertising agency for that? You wouldn’t


happen to remember which firm you used? Receipts would be great if you


have them.


      When you service a marketing-account, do you bill through the


company?


      Do you happen to contact information for E.Z. Pickens? Who was


your contact over there?


      Were they pleased with the work?


      Who else worked with you on this?


      Do you think they might have receipts?


      Is the first time you’ve done work ‘off the books’?


      Could you tell me about the other times?


      I have some other invoices here. Could you help me clear up some


questions I have about them?


      Did somebody here pressure you into doing this? Would you like to


talk about that?


      Were these the only times you did this, invoiced non-existent clients I


mean?


      And what you estimate company losses to be for these ‘clients’?      Do you like working here? What about the industry?


      Are you aware that complete transparency will help me help you?


                           Cybercrime: How to Spot It and Stop It


 


 A cybercrime is any crime that is committed online. If Smith creates a


business website and uses that website to charge people for non-existent


services, he is committing a cyber-crime. If Jones lures young women into


his sex trafficking ring by posting an online advertisement for ‘legitimate


modeling jobs', he is committing a cybercrime. If Brown posts an


advertisement on Craigslist for a car that he doesn't own and then takes


money for it, he has committed a cybercrime.


      There are many different kinds of cybercrime, and there are many


different ways of committing a given kind of cybercrime. Three particularly


common forms of cybercrime are hacking, identity theft, and internet fraud.


      Hacking is simply entry into a cyber-venue, such as a bank account or


student account, to which one does not have authorized access. Suppose I


know Mary Jane's Amazon password. I can use that information to log into


her Amazon account, I am guilty of hacking. If I then make unauthorized


purchases on Mary's account, I am guilty theft in addition to hacking.


Hacking is the cyber-equivalent of breaking and entering; and just as physical


breaking an entering is often a prelude to burglary, so hacking is often a


prelude to theft. Hacking may also be a prelude to a number of other different


internet crimes. Suppose that I log into Mary Jane’s Facebook accountwithout her permission and then impersonate her by sending messages from


her account. Here my act of hacking is a prelude not to property theft, but to


identity theft, this being an extremely common form of cyber-crime.


      Identity theft is the use of the internet to impersonate another person.


In many cases, the purpose of identity theft is property theft. For example,


Smith may steal Brown's identity with the intention of draining Brown's bank


account. But property theft is not always what identity theft is about. Smith


may steal Brown's identity with the intention of destroying his livelihood (by


sending inappropriate messages to his employer from his email account) or of


humiliating him (by posting compromising photos on his social media


accounts).


      Internet fraud is the use of the internet to commit fraud. Each of the


cybercrimes discussed in the first paragraph is a case of internet fraud. The


internet is a magnet for fraudsters since it allows practically anyone to


assume practically any identity. A man can pretend to be a woman; an adult


can pretend to be a child; a lowlife can pretend to be a respected financier.


      One particularly widespread form of internet fraud is internet romance


fraud. Someone will post a phony profile on a dating website, such as


match.com. If the fraudster’s objective is to swindle young males, he or she


may post a photo of an extremely good-looking young woman who is eager


to find a ‘normal guy to have fun with.' If the target is elderly divorcees, thefraudster is likely to post a photo of a distinguished looking executive who


wants to spend ‘a cultured woman who isn't simply after my money.' When


somebody responds, an internet courtship ensues, during which the fraudster


carefully gains the other person's trust. Eventually, the fraudster will try to


capitalize on that trust by defrauding the other person in some way.


      Here is a real-life example. Ken Azeah and Akunna Ejiofor created a


phony profile on an internet dating site, claiming to be a handsome and


distinguished financier. Operating through this persona, Azeah and Ejiofor


cultivated online romances with several different women, manipulating them


into allowing this non-existent person to manage their money, thereby


swindling tens of millions of dollars from them. These women alerted the


authorities, who quickly traced the money. Azeah and Ejiofor were arrested


and convicted of several counts of internet fraud and wire fraud.


      The victims in this case did not exercise due diligence. They gave their


money to someone without first verifying his credentials or even his very


existence. Azeah and Ejiofor were manipulators, not hackers, and their


victims voluntarily gave them every dollar that they took from them, and they


would have avoided this disaster had they simply used their judgment.


Internet fraud, like all fraud, involves taking advantage of wishful thinking,


and as long as one thinks realistically, instead of wishfully, one won’t be the


victim of internet fraud.      Most people have been the victims of some kind of internet fraud.


They may have given money to a company promising to give them lucrative


stay-at-home jobs. They may have signed up given money to online


‘coaches’ who never provided them with meaningful services. They may


have been paid an online ‘lawyer’ for legal advice that they never received.


Or they may have signed up for phony get-rich-quick schemes promoted by


slick YouTubers. The victims of these crimes are always wishful thinkers:


they are people who want to believe that they can make $100,000 working


four hours/day; that a real lawyer will give them counsel for $5; that the


government will simply give them money; that, in short, they can have what


they want without working for it. All internet fraud involves wishful thinking,


and a healthy dose of realism makes one impervious to it.


      One virtually full-proof sign that an online ‘business opportunity’ is a


scam is that one has to pay for it. Real employers pay you; you don’t pay


them. If you are being asked to pay money to make money, you are being


scammed out of your money and also quite possibly being manipulated into


disclosing information to someone who will try to use it to defraud you


further.


      To be sure, internet fraud is only one kind of cybercrime, but internet


fraud tends to be involved in carrying out other kinds of cybercrimes. If


someone is able to steal your identity or hack into an account of yours, thereis a good chance that he manipulated you into giving him personal data. He


may have friended you on Facebook and carefully eased you into giving him


personal data, or he may have sent you an email luring you with the promise


of easy money into setting up an account on a website of his. It is likely that


some element of wishful thinking on your part was involved in this person’s


being in a position to obtain the information that needed to hack into your


accounts and steal your identity.


      There are indeed cybercrimes that do not involve internet fraud and


therefore do not involve wishful thinking on the victim’s part. In some cases,


PayPal or Bank Accounts are raided, and the victim isn’t guilty of any


obvious lapse in judgment. But scrutiny of such cases tends to show that the


victim put too much faith in someone (it may have been a slick salesman or


an unvetted app-designer on Fiverr) and tipped their hand to that person. It is


very unlikely that one’s bank account will be raided or one’s identity stolen


unless one has been too quick to give credence to big talkers without


verifiable credentials.


      To be sure, professionals often have access to personal information,


and they may use that information to commit cybercrimes against those


people. For example, physicians may have access to patient credit card


information, and they could use that information to commit theft or fraud.


But physicians value their careers too much to throw them away for a fewunauthorized credit card purchases, the same being true of all professionals:


lawyers, professors, accountants, and stockbrokers stand to lose much and


gain little by misusing client information. If a given person does have an


incentive to run up unauthorized charges on your credit card, he probably


isn't a professional, and he probably is somebody who could not have


acquired that information without manipulating.


      In conclusion, although there are internet crimes that do not involve


fraud or manipulation, most such crimes do, and the best protection against


internet crime is to use one’s judgment. Verify someone’s credentials before


giving someone your personal information, let alone your money, and assume


the worst if you are unable to verify their credentials.


                                 Fraud Interview Techniques


 


      The purpose of any interview is to elicit information from the person


being interviewed. This is especially difficult to do, when the purpose of the


interview is to elicit information about a crime that the interviewee is known


or believed to have committed. Consequently, someone conducting a fraud


investigation interview has to meet requirements that other interviews do not.


      First of all, the interviewer must know the facts. He must know what


kind of fraud has committed and what it involved; and he must also know


what the likely role is of the person is being interviewed. If the interviewer


doesn’t have this information, he will be ‘fishing’ for information and the


interviewee will know it, making the latter even more disinclined than he


would otherwise be to be open truthful. Also, the interviewee is likely to


‘pied pipe’ such interviewer with false or half-true narratives, which will


prevent the interviewer from focusing on the right issues and asking the right


questions. To be sure, the interviewer need not know all of the relevant facts.


But he must know enough to know what to ask and to know whether a given


statement on the interviewee’s part for truth and relevance.


      Second, the interviewer must be able to make it psychologically easy


for the interviewee to talk. In a fraud interview, the interviewee is being


asked to provide incriminating information about himself, and in this respectfraud interviews are very different from job interviews. If the interviewer


comes on too strong, the interviewee is likely to feel threatened and to ‘clam


up.’ The interviewer must therefore ‘build rapport’ before asks the questions


that he is there to ask. He should come off as approachable and interested in


what the interviewee has to say, and he should also start out with non-


threatening questions that the interviewee can answer truthfully without


incriminating himself. Having established rapport in this way, the interviewer


should gently move on to tougher questions, making sure to frame them in a


way that makes the interviewee feel comfortable answering them. Having


successfully taken this step, the interviewer should ‘turn up the volume’ once


more, this time directly asking about the alleged offense, taking care not to


break his rapport with the interviewee. During this phase of the interview, the


interviewer wants to come off as a confessor, not an accuser: he wants the


interviewee to see him as somebody to whom he can ‘unburden’ himself.


      Third, the interviewer must be prepared. He must choose the venue


appropriately, making sure that there are as few or no distractions or possible


interruptions. To this end, the interviewer must remember to ask the


interviewee to turn off his cell-phone, since the interviewee is likely to dodge


questions by checking his messages, taking incoming calls, and the like.


Also, the interviewer should dress appropriately, since odd attire might make


the interviewee suspicious and unwilling to talk. Most importantly, theinterviewer must know exactly what it is that he wants to ask. He must not


‘wing it' during the interview.


      Fourth, the interviewer must be open-minded. He mustn’t have his


mind made up about who is guilty of what, and he must be prepared for the


possibility that the interviewee will give him legitimate information that


conflicts with his preconceptions. Consequently, the interviewer, while being


prepared, shouldn’t rigidly stick to a script, since the questions he asks must


reflect any new and relevant information that the interviewee has given him.


      Fifth, the interviewer must be quick to pick up on signs of deception,


of which there are many. Deceptive people are reluctant to answer questions


directly, and they are likely to stall and ask for unnecessary clarifications.


They may also volunteer extraneous or excessive information. (For example,


when asked ‘do you know anything about the phony accounts that we


discovered last week?’, a liar may respond by saying: ‘I have never


committed fraud in my life.”) Such a person is likely to have selective


amnesia.(“I don’t recall” is a go-to for many liars, as is “I haven’t heard


that.”) Deceivers are likely to respond with emotional ‘performances’; when


asked a straightforward question (e.g. ‘do you know how stole those treasury


notes?’), a liar may respond being indignant (“how dare you ask such a


question!”). Deceivers are likely to make extraneous movements (e.g. they


are likely to fidget, adjust their ties, stroke their beards, play with rings, flicktheir hair). Their body language is also likely to indicate defensiveness; for


example, they are likely to have an unusually stiff and upright posture or to


cross their legs excessively. When asked questions, liars are not likely to


respond with concise and plausibly answers, and they are likely to dodge the


question in one way or another.


      When conducting a fraud interview, one must be professional. This


involves having the facts and knowing what to ask. But it also means not


having an agenda: not regarding the interviewee either as enemy or a friend,


but simply as a possible source of information who is to be treated


accordingly.


               Some Key Obstacles to Effective Fraud Risk Assessment


 


      There are several obstacles to conducting an effective fraud risk


assessment of a given organization. First of all, a thorough knowledge of the


industry in question is a prerequisite for effective fraud risk assessment.


Suppose that ACME is a company that provides extremely specialized and


high-level financial services. It might be very difficult for an independent


auditor (or any other outside agency) to know exactly what kinds of fraud


ACME employees might be likely to commit. Suppose that ACME handles


large volumes of foreign currency. Because of fluctuating exchange rates, it


might be possible for account-managers to misrepresent earnings and, on this


basis, to siphon off funds for themselves. In this context, effective fraud risk


assessment would involve knowledge of how to interpret complex financial


statements concerning foreign currencies, which would require knowledge


that is more in-depth than most auditors are likely to have.


      Second, a thorough knowledge of the company in question is


necessary for effective fraud risk management. Suppose once again that


ACME provides specialized financial services, often involving foreign


currencies. Also suppose that there are multiple fund-managers servicing


each of ACME’s different accounts. (So if Smith is one of ACME’s clients,


then ten different fund-managers are involved in servicing Smith’s account.)It will be difficult to know exactly who is doing what for a given client, and it


will therefore be hard to know who has access to what kind of information or,


therefore, who is in a position to commit a given kind of fraud. If money goes


missing from one of Smith’s accounts, there will be ten different ACME


employees to investigate, making it hard to conduct a speedy and effective


investigation.


      Third, even if a given auditor (or auditing agency) has the requisite


degree of industry-specific and company-specific information, a prohibitively


high degree of sophistication may be needed to process all of the raw data in


question. Suppose that ACME is an extremely large company that provides


many different kinds of services in many different countries. In a case like, it


would be hard to conduct an ad hoc investigation of each individual branch


of ACME, since the time and expense involved would be excessive, as would


the difficulties in interpreting the resulting information; and it would


probably be necessary to come up with a company-wide fraud risk


assessment program. But coming up with such an assessment would be an


intellectually extremely demanding task.


      Fourth, many companies, especially companies in the fields of finance


and consulting, provide services that are poorly defined. Suppose that ACME


provides ‘project management support’, ACME employees might send


complex invoices that their clients are unlikely to scrutinize, making itpossible to bill for services that were never rendered. Also, those services


might involve creating new accounts or even new holding companies, which


could then be used to create hide losses or gains or simply to hide funds.


      Fifth, while requiring industry-specific and company-specific


knowledge, fraud risk assessment must also be conducted by disinterested


parties, and this makes it inherently difficult to conduct effective fraud risk


assessment. It is hard for any organization to be objective about itself and


therefore to identify fraud in its own midst, but it is hard for outside agencies


avail outside agencies of the information needed to do so.


      Finally, when conducting a fraud risk assessment, it is necessary to


bear in mind what the company will actually be able and willing to do with


the resulting information. Suppose that Smith is an external auditor who


conducts a fraud risk assessment of ACME, and suppose that the ACME-


services that Smith flags as likely to lead to fraud are the very ones that


ACME depends on for most of its revenue. In that case, Smith’s findings may


well fall on deaf ears. In order to avoid this, Smith would have to be very


precise about how exactly the services in question might lead to fraud, and he


would also have to be very precise about how to those services could be


retained while also being so modified or monitored that they were no longer


fraud-conducive. In a situation like this, fraud risk assessment would involve


a high-degree of knowledge, intelligence, and discretion.      In conclusion, effective fraud risk assessment requires a combination


of company-information, industry-information, objectivity, and discretion


that may make it difficult to carry out effectively.


 


                   Five Characteristics of Reliable Employees


 

                                                                          [71]
      In her article Five Characteristics of a Good Work Ethic, Erin


Schreiner identifies what she believes to be some necessary ingredients for a


good work ethic, these being:


 


      Reliability and dependability


      Dedication to the job


        Productivity that doesn’t quit


        Cooperation and teamwork


        Self-disciplined character


 


      Let us briefly discuss each of these:


 


        Reliability and dependability: An employee is only as good as he is


reliable. The most talented surgeon in the world is useless to the hospital that


employs him if he doesn’t show up to work regularly. In fact, as this very


example shows, if someone who has talent is unreliable, that can be a


dangerous situation: given that the surgeon in question is talented, the


hospital will expect him to do that much more than his colleagues; and if he


doesn’t show to work, then that much more work isn’t being done. 


      Dedication to the job: It isn’t enough that employs show up and do


their job. It is necessary that they do their job with distinction. A talented


surgeon who shows up to work but doesn’t apply himself is not only failing


to help his organization but is actively hurting it.


 


        Productivity that doesn’t quit: A dedicated and reliable employee is a


productive employee; an employee who isn’t dedicated or reliable is not a


productive employee. So productivity, though not exactly a character-trait in


and of itself, is a consequence of the first two character-traits.


 


        Cooperation and teamwork: It isn’t enough that an employee be


dedicate and reliable. If he doesn’t cooperate with the organization that


employs him, then his successes won’t be its successes. Such a person may


be a great entrepreneur; but if he is part of a team, then he function as such.


And even if he is an entrepreneur, he still has to work with others—with


suppliers, investors, customers, and employees of his own—and he must, in


that sense, be a team-player. So cooperativeness with one’s team is essential


for success in any enterprise that is not completely solitary.


 


        Self-disciplined character: In order for a person to have any of thepreviously mentioned traits, he must be self-disciplined. Someone who is not


self-disciplined is a ‘slacker’, and slackers are neither reliable, hard-working,


dedicated, or productive; and they are not good team-members. So self-


discipline is, in a way, the root-characteristic of all of the various


characteristics of a good worker.


 


 


               The “So What?” About your Industry Analysis (Business)


 


 


      Remember what we learned about the value of using structure to make


your points more easily understood. There isn’t an obvious analytic


framework to use here, but you might consider an introduction to set the


context, then (up to) 5 bullet/numbered points that are your key messages


about the industry.


 


      *Owing to high start-up and fixed costs, there is a pronounced


tendency towards industry-concentration, with the top three companies


having an 80% market-share.


 


      *Global warming is eating into already thing profit-margins,


intensifying this tendency towards market-concentration.


 


      *This industry is sensitive to changes in the economy and can be


expected to grow as long as the economy does and to shrink when it doesn’t.


 


      *Existing ski resorts have an enormous advantage over prospective


rivals, owing mainly to the fact that there are very places on Earth whereskiing is possible and also owing to the high maintenance costs.


 


      *Because costs, though high, are fixed, profits outpace expenses given


a minimum number of customers.


 


      *The industry offers a valuable and ultimately non-fungible service


and will therefore remain in existence for the foreseeable future, but market-


concentration will grow, as will barriers-to-entry for non-established players.


 


      Industry Definition:


 


      The Ski and Snowboard Resorts industry is composed of


establishments engaged in operating downhill, cross-country or similar skiing


areas, or operating equipment, such as ski lifts and tows. These


establishments often provide food and beverage services, equipment rental


services and ski instruction services. Four-season resorts without


accommodations are also included in this industry, but companies that own


and do not operate ski resorts are excluded from the industry.


 


        Products/Services Provided by Industry


       The primary activities of this


industry are:

  
 


        Operating alpine skiing


facilities without accommodations


        Operating cross-country


skiing facilities without  


accommodations


        Operating downhill skiing

  

facilities without accommodations


        Operating four-season ski

 

resorts without accommodations


        Ski lift and tow operation


        Operating ski resorts without


accommodations


        Operating cross-country


skiing facilities without


accommodations


        Operating downhill skiing


facilities without accommodations 


        Example firms in industry


 


      Vail Resorts Inc


      Alterra Mountain Company


      Boyne Resorts


      Peak Resorts Inc


 


        Examples/descriptions of buyer groups


 


      Skiers aged 18 to 34 make up the largest market for ski resorts,


representing 33.3% of industry revenue. Although this age group has a low


level of disposable income, they direct a substantial and increasing


percentage of income toward recreation. Studies have shown that millennials


spend more of their income on experiences instead of on material items


 


        Consumers aged 35 to 54. In 2018 are estimated to account for 32.4%


of industry market share. This is primarily driven by the aging snowboarder


population. This trend is anticipated to continue, having driven falling


snowboarding participation over the past two years.


         Consumers aged 55 and older represent the smallest share of industry


revenue at 10.9%.


 


        Consumers under 18 represent the remaining 23.4% of industry


revenue. Consumers in this age demographic often have to rely on their


parents to afford, travel to and participate in skiing and snowboarding. For


this reason, this age demographic is heavily reliant on the trends of consumer


aged 35 to 54. However, skiing and snowboarding have historically been very


popular among younger individuals, especially those that are local to areas


that surround ski resorts.


 


        Examples/descriptions of key supplier groups


 


      Grocery Wholesaling: Supply grocery items to retailers on the


mountain


        Heating & Air-Conditioning Contractors: Supply plumbing and


heating services to accommodation units on the mountain.


      Oil & Gas Pipeline Construction: Supply pipelines used for converting


water into snow.


        Plumbers: Supply plumbing and heating services to accommodation


units on the mountain.        Sporting Goods Wholesaling: Supply recreational equipment to the


skiing facilities.


      Water & Sewer Line Construction: Supply pipelines used for


converting water into snow.


 


      Potential substitute products/services


 


      Golf Courses


      Golf courses and country clubs may offer similar amenities, such as


lodging and restaurants, as ski resorts.


        Hotels/Motels


      These establishments primarily engage in providing accommodations


in resorts with skiing facilities.


        Casinos/Casino Hotels


      These establishments primarily engage in operating resorts with both


casinos and accommodations.


      Bed and Breakfast and Hostel Accommodations


      These establishments provide short-term lodging in private homes


converted for this purpose. They are characterized by highly personalized


service and include a full breakfast with accommodations.


  


        Supplier Value Chains (dominant chains) – from your examples of


Supplier Groups


 


 


 
















 









 


 


 


        Channel/Buyer Value Chains (dominant chains) – from yourexamples of Buyer Groups


  


      Consumer


      Force: Buyer Power


        Factor or factorsEnables/InhibitsReasoning w/


                                Ind. Profitabilitydetails (may vary by


                                                              buyer group)


          DiscretionaryInhibits profitsPeople don’t


Activity have to take vacations,


                                                              let alone ski. Ski


                                                              resorts are a luxury,


                                                              not a necessity.


 


        Multiple SubstituteInhibits profitsIf people wishGoods. to take vacations, they


                                                              have alternatives: they


                                                              can go boating, they


                                                              can go hiking, etc.


 


 


          Seasonal/Weather-Inhibits profitsSkiing is


dependentpossible only during


                                                              certain months of the


                                                              year and even then


                                                              only if certain weather


                                                                conditions obtain.


 


          HighlyEnablesThere are few


    Enjoyable/Rewardingprofitabilityactivities that are as


Activityexhilarating as skiing


 


        Low BuyerInhibits profitsIf a given


Switching Costsperson isn’t happy


                                                              with a given ski resort,


                                                              he can switch to                                                              another one without


                                                                penalty or loss.


 


        Summary of Force’s impact on industry profitability:


 


      This force does more to inhibit than to promote profitability. Skiing is


a leisure activity, not a necessity; it is relatively expensive, and there are


alternatives to it. That said, few activities are as thrilling or demanding as


skiing, and this makes it impossible to replace, notwithstanding the


abundance of substitute goods. It is probably because of this last factor that


profits in the Ski and Ski Resort Industry remain stable, despite the largely


adverse effect of this force on that industry.


 


      Force: Supplier Power


        Factor orEnables/InhibitsReasoning w/ details


factorsInd. Profitability(may vary by supplier


                                                          group)


        High CostsInhibits profitsHigh-energy bills,


                                                          coupled with high wages


                                                        for workers, force resorts to


                                                        price their services high,                                                          alienating buyers.


 


        High BarriersEnablesIt is extremely


to Entryprofitabilityexpensive to build a ski


                                                        resort, and there are


                                                          formidable legal and


                                                          licensing-related barriers to


                                                        doing so, giving already


                                                          existing ski resorts a major


                                                          competitive advantage.


 


          Geography-EnablesThere are very few


specific Industryprofitabilityplaces in the world the with


                                                          requisite physical


                                                          geography for skiing, and


                                                        this gives Ski Resorts a


                                                        kind of natural monopoly,


                                                        similar to that enjoyed by


                                                        owners of diamond mines


                                                        or oil fields.


  


          RelativelyEnablesEven though costs


Fixed Costsprofitabilityare high, they tend to be


                                                        fixed, meaning that they


                                                        don’t increase with the


                                                        number of additional


                                                          customers.


        Changes inInhibits ProfitsGlobal warming is


Weather Patternslimiting the already small


                                                        amount of time that ski


                                                          resorts can operate, eating


                                                        into already thing profit-


                                                          margins and boding ill for


                                                        the industry as a whole.


 


        Summary of Force’s impact on industry profitability:


 


      The Ski and Ski Resort industry has high costs, but they are relatively


fixed, meaning that profits from additional customers are not eaten up by


additional expenses. Also, there are very few places on Earth where it is


physically possible to ski, giving existing ski resorts an enormouscompetitive advantage. Relatedly, there are extremely high barriers to entry,


owing to the high start-up costs, the singular geographical conditions, and the


formidable regulatory issues. This gives existing ski resorts a massive


advantage over possible rivals.


 


      Force: Rivalry


 


        Factor orEnables/InhibitsReasoning w/ details


factorsInd. Profitability


        High degreeInhibits ProfitsSomebody wishing to


of competitionski in a given area can


                                                        usually choose from many


                                                        different, equally good ski


                                                        resorts.


 


 


        IncreasingInhibits profitsAs technology


technological costsadvances, technology-


                                                        related costs grow for ski


                                                        resorts, making it hard for


                                                        small players to stay afloat. 


 


        Need forInhibits profitsThe average cost per


Economies of Scaleuse for small resorts tends to


                                                        be prohibitively high,


                                                        making it hard for them to


                                                        compete against companies


                                                        that operate multiple ski


                                                        runs.


 


 


        LimitedEnables profitsAlthough there are


Foreignsome ski resorts in Canada


Competitionand Europe, American ski


                                                        resorts of little to fear from


                                                        non-American competition.


 


 


 


        Summary of Force’s impact on industry profitability:


       Owing to high-overhead and already thin profit margins, it is hard for


‘mom-and-pop' ski resorts to stay in business. As a result, the three largest ski


resort operators (Vail Resorts, Alterra Mountain Company, and Boyne


Resorts) jointly have an 80% market share. The competitive landscape is


therefore grim in the extreme for small operators. At the same time, owing to


the absence of foreign competition and high entry costs, coupled with a stable


business volume, entrenched operators can expect steadily increasing profits


for the foreseeable future.


 


      Force: Threat of New Entrants


 


        Factor orEnables/InhibitsReasoning w/ details


factorsInd. Profitability


          MinimalEnablesHeavy-duty financial


threat of newprofitabilityand legal barriers have to be


entrants.surmounted by prospective


                                                        operators, giving incumbents


                                                      a massive competitive


                                                        advantage.


 


         Summary of Force’s impact on industry profitability:


 


      Ski resorts can only be built in very specific parts of the world, most


of them in the United States; they require enormous start-up capital, and there


are heavy-duty licensing and regulatory issues to deal with. Therefore,


existing ski resorts need only cover costs to stay afloat. Owing to high fixed


costs, however, smaller operations tend to go under or be absorbed into large


ones, resulting in the oligopolistic situation currently prevailing in the


industry.


 


 


      Force: Threat of Substitutes


 


        Factor orEnables/InhibitsReasoning w/ details


factorsInd. Profitability


        TheInhibits profitsPeople don’t need to


services providedengage in these activities, and


by ski resorts arebusiness is therefore very


  leisure-activitiessensitive to changes in the


                                                      economy.


         There areInhibits profitsPeople who have


substitutedisposable income and wish to


services.recreate don’t have to ski; they


                                                    can golf, boat, etc.


 


        There is aEnhancesSkiing is in many ways


deeply entrenchedprofits.unique and for this reason has


base of peoplea large, dedicated customer


who like to ski.base.


 


 


        Summary of Force’s impact on industry profitability:


 


      The overall effect here is neutral, with the one positive (that skiing is


unique in many ways and has a strong customer-base) balancing out the


negatives.


 


        Summary of Industry Structure - how the industry makes money


and the overall contribution/balance of key forces & factors that enable or


inhibit industry profitability.


       Many people enjoy skiing, and there are very few places on Earth


where it is physically possible to do so. The Ski Resort Industry makes


money by giving people an otherwise impossible-to-obtain opportunity to ski.


Consumer demand for the opportunity to ski is sufficiently strong that this


industry is unlikely to collapse, but many factors conspire to make it difficult


for small operators to survive and for large ones to make more than modest


profits. These include


 


        *Season-specificity (no skiing except during Winter)


      *High start-up and maintenance costs


        *Increasing technology-related costs


      *The existence of substitutes (e.g., golf, boating).


 


      Because of the entrenched and relatively widespread nature of the


desire to ski, ski resorts will continue to profit, but those profits will shrink


and be shared by increasingly few market-participants.


 


 


 


           Analytical Assessment of Greg Toppo’s “Do Video Games Inspire


                                      Violence?”


 


      The main point of this article is supposedly that “decades of research


have turned


      up no reliable causal link between playing violent video games and


perpetrating actual violence.” The author repeatedly asserts that playing


violent video games (e.g. Grand Theft Auto) does not cause (or, to put it


more conservatively, encourage) children to carry out actual acts of violent.


But the data that the author cites tends to support the opposite conclusion. To


be sure, that data does not definitively warrant acceptance of the position that


playing video games causes children to be violent; but it is more favorable to


that position than to its negation. As a result, this article consists of a series of


unargued assertions to the effect that playing such games doesn’t lead to


violence, interposed between which is data that tends to undermine that


conclusion along with some entertaining but irrelevant anecdotes.


      The author begins by discussing Adam Lanza. 20-year-old Lanza


killed 20 children in a school yard in 2012. Toppo points out that, as


investigators would come to discover, he spent much of the time leading up


to the shooting by playing video games at a local arcade.


      Of course, this doesn’t prove causality: many people play videogames; most of them do not commit acts of violence thereafter; and, for all


we know, many people of them perform positively saintly acts. But with


regard to the fact that Lanza, by the author’s own admission, spent hours


obsessively playing aggressively-tinged video games, this fact doesn’t


exactly bolster Toppo’s assertion that there is “no… causal link between


playing violent video games and perpetrating actual violence.”


      Bizarrely, Toppo also points out that Lanza’s home video game stash


included a number of violent games, including: “Call of Duty, Dead or Alive


[and] Grand Theft Auto.” Toppo also points out that, in having these games,


Lanza was “like many teens.” But the fact that Lanza had these games, and


almost certainly played them frequently in the years leading up to his


shooting spree, doesn’t exactly support Toppo’s “no causal link” thesis.


      Also, even though Lanza’s crimes were unusually overt and unusually


violent, he was not the only violent criminal in the country. There are many


car-jackings, rapes, physical assaults, acts of vandalism, and even murders,


all committed by males of approximately Lanza’s age, this being the prime


demographic (suggestively) for violent video-game: and what if it turned out


—a possibility that Toppo does not even consider—that a disproportionate


number of these crimes were carried out, and perhaps even immediately


preceded by, people playing such games? Again, that would not definitely


prove causality; it could be a mere correlation. But it wouldn’t help Toppo’scase, and neither does the limited data that Toppo does cite.


      Toppo mentions that there were many video games at the arcade


Lanza frequented that were not violent, e.g. “Dance Dance Revolution.” One


would presume that, in pointing this out, Toppo was making an attempt,


however feeble, to cast doubt on the idea that Lanza’s video-gaming had a


hand in his murderous rampage. But instead of saying this, Toppo says: “Yet


no one knows how any of these games—Dance Dance Revolution included—


might have affected a kid who was clearly struggling.” The point of which


remark seems to be that, indeed, Lanza’s playing video games might have at


least nudged him in the direction of committing mass murder. But instead of


saying that, Toppo says—without having provided a shred of support or even


of due expository build-up--- “The truth is that decades of research have


turned up no reliable causal link between playing violent video games and


perpetrating actual


      violence.”


      And that may be true: but Toppo doesn’t actually cite any of the data


that disproves the existence of such a connection. Toppo mentions that, in


addition to owning (and presumably using) several violent games, Lanza also


had newspaper clippings relating to the infamous 1997 Columbine shooting.


This does not prove that playing violent video games causes people to be


violent, but it certainly doesn’t prove the opposite. And the fact that boththese newspaper clippings and these violent video games were evidently


congenial to Lanza certainly makes it reasonable to suspect, however


tentatively, that there is some kind of affirmative connection, however


tenuous, between Lanza’s gaming and his killing.


      In the next two sections, Toppo discusses the views and research of


different psychologists (e.g. Melzer, Bandura, Gentile), some of whom held,


and provided evidence in favor to the view, that there is a connection


between ‘virtual’ violence (e.g. reading violent comics, playing violent video


games) and actual violence, and some of whom believed and otherwise (and


provided some, albeit feeble, evidence to the contrary). But the totality of the


research-data cited by Toppo is ambiguous at best and, if anything, tends to


support the contention there is a causal link between virtual and actual


violence.


      For example, Toppo cites a study that mentions how, after playing a


violence-themed board-game, children would deal with frustration by


punching a toy clown in the face. (Toppo then feebly asserts that this doesn’t


prove there to be a connection between virtual violence and actual violence.


But it doesn’t prove the opposite; and tends to support such a claim. If you


knew someone who repeatedly punched dolls in the face, would you really


not at some level suspect that person of being violent?) He also mentions a


study according to which children who played violence-themed gamesbecome angry more easily than others and were more given to aggressive


ideation.


      Toppo then mentions, presumably in effort to offset these claims, that


according to one study, there was a slight negative correlation in some


populations between level of violence-themed gaming and levels of actual


violence. But this was one study, which concerned one population, and the


inverse correlation in question was marginal at best. In any case, this


particular claim involves more of a failure to distinguish causation from


correlation than do the claims of his adversaries.


      Toppo then mentions that the number youthful offenders fell even as


the number of violent games grew. This is certainly suggestive, but it is far


from probative, and to think otherwise would involve a rather brazen failure


to distinguish correlation from causation.


      Toppo then mentions that a number of distinguished authors, e.g.


Emily Dickenson and Nathaniel Hawthorne, liked to read violence-themed


literature. Exactly what this proves is deeply unclear. But Toppo seems to be


insinuating that, if there were an actual connection between reading about (or


thinking about) violence and committing acts of violence, then these


distinguished authors would have steered clear of such literature. But if that is


what Toppo is saying—and it must be what he is saying, unless (what is


possible) his inclusion of this material serves no argumentative purpose—then Toppo’s reasoning is weak, to put it mildly.


      Taken by itself, Toppo’s main claim—that decades of research have


turned


      up no reliable causal link between playing violent video games and


perpetrating actual violence”---is perfectly plausible. And it may even be


true. But the data that Toppo himself sites does not support the belief that


there is no such connection. In fact, that data doesn’t even support the much


more modest claim that “decades of research” have failed to produce such


data. Given only what Toppo says—given only the data that he sites---it


seems as though scientific research has generated data suggestive of a link


between virtual and actual violence. In fact, given the totality of the data that


Toppo himself sites, it would be epistemically more conservative to affirm


than to deny the existence of such a link. In conclusion, while it may be there


is no such link, Toppo’s article fails utterly to prove otherwise.


        Throughout the article, Toppo seems to be insinuating that people are


guilty of some sort of prejudice---of some failure to look at their personal


values in light of the actual facts—in holding there to be a causal connection


between virtual and actual violence. Toppo’s ‘position’, if that isn’t too


strong a word, seems to be that, although people attach a negative value to


violent games, there is no reason for them to do so, the facts being what they


are.      There are several points to make here. First, the facts being what they


are, there is reason to hold there to be such a connection. Are there definitive


reasons? No. But is there more reason than not to posit such a link? Probably.


      Second, to the extent that Grand Theft Auto and other such games are


held in contempt, is it not necessarily solely or even primarily because those


games are suspected of promoting violence. Another possibility—a very


distinct possibility—is that people see it as a waste of time to spend all day


playing video games. Indeed, people don’t have much respect for people who


spend all day playing Grand Theft Auto. But they have equally little respect


for people who spend all day playing Pac Man or Galaga. Video games have


their place, but they tend to function as ways for people to procrastinate and


avoid the real world. And so far as gaming is held in contempt, that is


probably way. Going on a Lanza-style shooting spree is one way of being a


loser. Spending all day playing video games is another of being a loser.


      Third, judging by video game sales, it doesn’t seem that there is any


particular societal contempt for gaming. Who buys those games after all? Not


the people who use them---they don’t have money. 15 year old rarely have


enough money of their own buy much of anything. And when they purchase


video games, it is with their parents’ money (and knowledge: the parents


obviously see their children playing those games and know that they were


purchased with allowance-money). So it is, in effect, their parents who arebuying those games. So by all accounts, the contingent of anti-gamers that


Toppo is inveigling against is rather small. Moreover, given only the data that


Toppo sites, that contingent is not completely without good reasons for


thinking ill of virtual recreational violence.


      This raises a larger question, namely: Do the facts ever justify


valuative attitudes? According to David Hume, the answer is “no.” “One


cannot derive an ‘ought’ from an ‘is’”, says Hume.


      But is that really true? If know that Smith is dumping large quantities


of poison in the local reservoir—if I am aware of that fact---do I not have an


obligation to alert the authorities and to make people aware of the fact that


their water supply has been contaminated? It seems that, in this case, unless


common sense is deeply wrong, I can derive an ‘ought’ (I ought to tell the


police about Smith’s behavior) from an ‘is’ (Smith is dumping poison in the


water supply).


      In general, it seems as though normative assertions are answerable to


factual assertions. Let A be the statement:


 


      Jim hurts people for no good reason; it doesn’t even make him feel


good; it just gives him mild sadistic pleasure.


 


      And let B be the statement: 


      Jim is evil or, at the very least, lacking in moral fiber.


 


      It seems that, given A, B cannot reasonably be denied—that there is a


relation of entailment from A to B. If Hume believes otherwise, it is, at least


on the face of it, Hume’s position that is to be rejected.


      In any case, Toppo’s reasoning is so weak that it doesn’t much matter


what ‘ought’ he is saying you should, or should not, derive from what ‘is.’


Toppo has cited some data, the totality of which is compatible with, and


mildly probative of, a causal nexus between virtual and actual violence.


(Personally, I don’t believe there to be such a connection. But Toppo,


ironically, has actually done more to prove there to be such a connection than


to disprove it.) So is Toppo saying that, the data being what it is, we should


not derive “you ought not prohibit youngsters from playing Grand Theft


Auto” from that data? Or is he saying that we should derive “you ought to let


youngsters play Theft Auto” from that data? It doesn’t matter. Because


Toppo’s argument is so weak, and the data he cites so ambiguous, that it is


left open what, if anything, is to be derived from what.


                     Why Barings Fell (Business/Economics)


 


      To: Audit Committee of a Commercial Bank


      Re: Risk Factors and Control Issues Contributing to the Downfall of


Barings Bank


 


      The basic facts of the Leeson case are simple. An unlicensed 25-year-


old broker, Leeson was hired by Barings and placed in charge of its futures


trading operation on the Singapore International Monetary Exchange

          [72]
(SIMEX). Leeson was hard-working and bold, and he initially made


enormous amounts of money for Barings by making large, highly successful


trades. These trades were highly speculative, this being why they were so


lucrative. They were also unauthorized. Leeson went to great lengths to make


the trades seem legitimate. He created a dummy account (Account #88888)


for a non-existent client, through which he routed money from other Barings


accounts to finance his unauthorized trades, and he created an elaborate

 
phony paper trail to throw off auditors. After a few early successes,Leeson’s

 [73]
luck ran out. He placed bad trade after bad trade, dummying up the books


to hide the losses from Baring’s auditors and also from his supervisors. The


auditors were increasingly alarmed by the holes they found in Leeson’s


financials, but Leeson’s supervisors, still believing Leeson to be a successfulearner, dismissed their concerns. In 1995, an earthquake in Japan caused the


Nikkei to plummet, resulting in losses for Leeson that he could not hide and


that exposed his operation for the house of cards that it was. He fled but was


promptly captured, tried, convicted, and incarcerated.


      Barings made several mistakes in connection with Leeson, the first of


which was to hire him in the first place. Leeson was denied a broker’s license


in the United Kingdom because he had lied on his application, claiming that

                                                            [74]
he had educational credentials that he in fact lacked. Given that Leeson


was applying for a job at Barings that would involve him handling other


people’s money, the people reviewing his application should have regarded


this indiscretion on his part as disqualifying from that position. This was a


violation of Principles 1 of Component 1 of COSO 2013: “Principle 1 - The

                                                                        [75]
organization adheres to the principles of integrity and ethics.” A company


is obviously failing to adhere to principles of integrity and ethics if it hires


somebody who lies on official paperwork and then gives him person a


position of fiduciary responsibility.


      Another big mistake Barings made in connection with Leeson was to


put him in charge not only of making trades but also of settling them (i.e. of

                                                                              [76]
seeing to it that the money is transferred from account to account).


Ordinarily, these two jobs are kept separate, so as to prevent the making of


unauthorized trades and also to prevent traders from being able to hide theirtrading activity. This is a violation of COSO 2017 Principle #10, this being to

                                            [77]
identify possible risk-factors for fraud. In addition, when Barings internal


auditors began to sound the alarm about Leeson’s numbers not adding up,


management always took Leeson’s word on the matter, this being a violation


of COSO 2017 Principle #16, this being to review risky behavior and

              [78]
performance.


      A giant red flag in the Leeson case was when it turned out that Leeson


would have needed approximately 70 million pounds (worth over one


hundred million dollars) to finance his trades, this being an amount far in

                                                                      [79]
excess of what any trader could possibly have had access to. Leeson gave a


brief and vague explanation to his supervisor. The supervisor was puzzled by


Leeson’s inadequate explanation but chose to look the other way. Indeed,


there were several occasions when one of Leeson’s supervisors was contacted


by an auditor asking for paperwork relating to Leeson’s trades; and in each


case, the supervisor, being personally chummy with Leeson and also still


under the spell of his charm and earlier successes, chose to look the other


way.


      Leeson’s crooked behavior was ultimately not motivated by financial


pressure. He made his first known unauthorized trade to cover up a minor


loss; but after making good on that loss, he continued, while under absolutely


no financial pressure, to make unauthorized trade after unauthorized trade,indicating that his behavior was not about his circumstances but about his


character. The question is not why he did it (he was crook, who had run afoul


of regulators before working for Barings and was acting accordingly). Nor is


it how he rationalized his behavior. (Criminals don’t always have to


rationalize their conduct; and when they do, the rationalizations can be thin


ones, along the lines of ‘Barings has more money than it knows what do with,


so I’m entitled to my fair share’). As far as the Fraud Triangle goes, the


relevant question here is how Leeson did what he did; and the answer is that


he was in charge of settling the trades he was making, which gave him the


power to generate a phony paper trail and thereby keep internal auditors off


his track, at least until the scam collapsed.


 


                             Internet Crime (Computer Security)


 


        ‘Computer crime’ is a veritable synonym of ‘internet crime.’ Internet


crime always involves the internet. But there are two very different kinds of


crimes that involve the internet. In some cases, the internet is being used in


an honest manner but with the intention of committing a crime. In other


cases, the internet is being used in a dishonest manner, and that is the crime.


      Here is an example of the first kind of crime. I go to a drug website


and purchase a controlled substance. The merchant in question sends me


what I bought; the product is good; and the quantity is what I asked for. In


this case, I am not committing fraud and neither is the merchant. But a crime


has been committed.


      Here is an example of the second kind of crime. I send out emails in


which I claim to be a representative of Bank America. In those emails, I tell


the recipient that their account has been compromised; so they must


immediately provide me with their log-in credentials, so that I can personally


enter their account and secure it. In actuality, I am not a representative of


Bank of America, and I use the information that I receive from the people I


have duped to log into their accounts and abscond with their funds.


      The first crime technically qualifies as an ‘internet crime’, since it


involves the use of the internet. But in reality it is just a case of someonebuying an illicit drug. The second crime seems to be in a different category.


This is because the second case is one where my use of the internet is


deceptive: I am taking advantage of relations of trust and interdependence


that have grown up around the internet. Therefore, the sense in which the


second crime is an internet crime is stronger than the sense in which the first


crime is an internet crime.

                                                                                      [80]
      A list of the top 10 ‘internet crimes’ will help illustrate these points:


 


            Phishing/Spoofing


          Accessing Stored


            Blackmail/Extortion


          Sports Betting


          Non-delivery of Merchandise


          Electronic Harassment


          Child Pornography


            Prostitution


          Drug Trafficking


          Criminal Copyright Infringement


 


 


      Each of these crimes raises important ethical and legal issues. Some ofthese ‘crimes’ are arguably not of great ethical significance. But some of the


items on this list are quite clearly very serious crimes; but, for reasons that we


will discuss, they are extremely difficult to enforce, and the laws that must be


created to enforce are often invasive and abridge people’s personal liberties,


sometimes to what is arguably an inappropriate degree. Let us now discuss


each of these crimes, along with its likely ethical and legal ramifications.


Then we will discuss forms of conduct that might or might not be regarded as


internet crimes, depending on one’s point of view.


        Phishing/spoofing: Phishing/spoofing is pretending online to be


someone who one isn’t in order to get privileged information, usually relating


to bank-accounts, credit cards, and the like. We have already discussed an


example of this: somebody emails Smith pretending to be a bank


representative and thereby tricking Smith into giving up his account-


information.


      There is no doubt that Phishing/spoofing is a serious crime, both


legally and ethically. The problem is that much phishing/spoofing is done


internationally. This means that the identification, apprehension, and


prosecution of phishers/spoofers involves the coordination of different law-


enforcement agencies and prosecutorial offices in different countries. Since


such coordination is very hard to achieve, it is hard to successfully prosecute


people for this crime; and the best defense against it is simply for computer-users to be wary and to be extremely careful with their personal information.

[81]


      Also, since phishing/spoofing involves stealth, the people who commit


this crime are very good at covering their tracks. Plus, one can commit this


crime from anywhere there is an internet connection, and phishing/spoofing


is therefore very different from running a meth lab, for example, which


involves standing facilities.


        Accessing-privileged information: If I use the internet in order to hack


into your OneDrive Storage Account, I am guilty of accessing privileged


information. But not all cases of this crime involve the internet, and in this


respect this particular crime is unique among the crimes being discussed in


this paper. For example, if I use my roommate’s computer to access his


personal records, which I then use for personal gain, I am guilty of accessing


personal-information, even though I did not use the internet to do so.


        Obviously it is both ethically and legally wrong to access personal


information. But the same problem arises here that arose in connection with


phishing/spoofing: many cases of this crime are international in nature and

                                                                                [82]
therefore involve the cooperation of a number of different agencies. Also,


as with phishing/spoofing, this crime is of its very nature secretive. The


prospect of being jailed for this crime is therefore only of limited deterrent


value, and best protection against it is to be careful with one’s personalinformation.


        Blackmail/extortion: This is the use of the internet to blackmail or


extort people, usually with the threat of publicizing private or compromising


materials on YouTube, Facebook or other social media platforms. Here is a


hypothetical example. I make consensual sex tapes of me and my wealthy


girlfriend. After doing this, I threaten to send those tapes to her conservative


parents unless she gives me $10,000. This is blackmail/extortion.


      This sort of crime is common, but unlike the crimes mentioned above,


it is relatively easy to prosecute. This is because both the black-mailer and the


black-mailee tend to be in the same country---often the same city or even


residence---and the black-mailer tends to over-estimate his leverage over the


black-mailed. Thus, in cases like the one describe, the woman is likely to


‘bite the bullet’ and let her parents see the sex tape, in which case the black-


mailer is vulnerable to prosecution. Many people are jailed for so-called


‘revenge porn’, and many such cases start out as unsuccessful attempts to

                              [83]
extort/blackmail someone.


      There is little legal or ethical ambiguity in connection with this type of


crime. It is obviously wrong to blackmail/extort people; moreover, it is illegal


and easily prosecuted.


      Sports betting: People like to gamble, but in most places, including


most places in the United States, it is illegal to gamble. And even when it islegal, it is heavily regulated. For this reason, online illegal betting parlors are


very popular. If a betting parlor services people in the same country, it is


easily shut-down and its owners are easily prosecuted. If it services clients in


other countries, then the usual issues arise relating to the coordination of law-


enforcement in different countries.


      But there are cases of international betting parlors being shut down,


one of which involved an American Citizen who was living abroad but whose


clients were usually American.


      Online betting parlors handle large amounts of money. Therefore, they


need to have stable relations to banks and are fairly easy to trace, unlike


phishing and other internet-crimes.


      One question that arises is whether it is actually immoral to run an


online betting parlor. If people want to gamble on a horse race and to this end


they enlist the services of an online casino, is the casino-owner really guilty


of wrong-doing? He is guilty of an illegal act, but the question is: should that


act be illegal? And that is unclear.


        Non-delivery of merchandise: This is when person x orders something


online from person y and person y doesn’t deliver the product or service in


question. Obviously this sort of crime is extremely common. Moreover, it is


not only illegal but extremely unethical. But it is also relatively easy to avoid


being the victim of such a crime: when procuring a good or service, usereputable intermediaries, such as Amazon, eBay, and Fiverr. These platforms


weed out suspicious actors, and they also refund money spent on bogus


services.


      Electronic harassment: This is when somebody engages in trolling or


other internet-based ways of making another person’s life uncomfortable.


Here is a hypothetical example: Smith doesn’t like Jones. So Smith sends


Jones hundreds of hurtful emails, and Smith also blasts out messages on


Facebook and Twitter in which he speaks ill of Jones. This is electronic


harassment. In some cases, this is illegal; and even when it isn’t illegal, some


of the platforms involved may put an end to it. I personally have known


people who have been banned from Facebook for electronically harassing


other people.


      Not all forms of electronic harassment are illegal or should be illegal.


For example, it should not be illegal to post an ill-willed review of a book on


Amazon, even if the review is without merit. Sometimes freedom of speech is


more important than freedom from hurtful taunts.


      Electronic harassment is sometimes fairly easy to prosecute. The


reason is that people usually harass people whom they know and who live or


work near them. So this eliminates some of the issues, earlier discussed,


relating to the coordination of law-enforcement agencies. ON the other hand,


electronic harassment may involve different states or even different countries,and it is sometimes unlikely the F.B.I. or Interpol will take an interest in a


case of mere harassment.


      Child pornography: Internet pornography accounts for around 25% of


online activity and a comparably high percentage of internet transactions.


Most of this activity is legal. But some of it is not. Child pornography is not,


and yet, sadly, it is extremely popular.


      The good news is that it is relatively easy to prosecute child


pornographers. The reason is that child pornography is an extremely involved


crime. Whereas phishing or accessing of privileged information merely


involve a laptop and some expertise, child pornography involves actual


children, who are often kidnapped; and those children have to be transported,


housed, and fed, all of which leaves a clear forensic trail. As a result, child


pornographers are likely to eventually be caught and prosecuted.


Unfortunately, the child pornography business is booming.


        Prostitution: Prostitutes, like most other merchants in our time,


advertise their services online. Sometimes they advertise their services in a


‘coded’ manner, saying that they offer ‘massage therapy’ or ‘sensual


readjustment.’ But oftentimes they are extremely overt, saying openly that


they will provide sex for money. As a result, it is not uncommon for people to


be arrested and prosecuted for advertising prostitution-services online.


      At the same, there are so many online prostitutes and law-enforcementresources are so sufficiently limited that law enforcement tends to focus more


on the organizers of large-scale prosecution rings than it does on individual


prostitutes.


      Also, given how popular such services are, along with the fact that it is


unclear whether it is morally wrong to exchange sex for money, the public


has only limited interest in seeing crimes of this kind prosecuted. And if


prosecution of it were excessively aggressive, the result could be contempt


for law, which might actually lead to more crime. IN any case, given the high


expected profits along with the low likelihood of a serious criminal sentence,


online prostitution is alive and well and will continue to be so for the

                    [84]
foreseeable future.


      Drug trafficking: this is when people use the internet to buy or sell


illegal drugs. It should be pointed out that most of the drugs that are bought


online are pharmaceuticals, as in, they are products manufactured by actual


pharmaceutical companies and usually sold in the original packaging. Also,


many of the drugs in question are Schedule III or IV, meaning that the


sentences for buying them, or even selling them, are light. To be sure, the


drugs bought online are opiates (Schedule II) and possession of them is a


relatively serious offense and selling them is an extremely serious offense.


But the people who sell them are usually located overseas. And law


enforcement in the countries that host them have extremely little interest inprosecuting them, partly because, even though they are violating American


laws, they are bringing a lot of money and business into their host countries.


Plus, it is unclear whether there is anything ethically wrong with selling a tab


of Xanax or Vicodin to someone overseas. In any case, it is unclear whether


the acting of doing so is morally worse than the act of putting someone in


possession of a Vicodin table in jail for three years. Finally, the online drug


trade, unlike the ‘in-person’ drug-trade, involves little or no violence, and its


existence may even take business away from violent non-internet-based drug


traffickers. For these reasons, the online drug-trade is seen as a more of a


‘gray-market’ than a ‘black-market’ business, and law enforcement is

                      [85]
correspondingly lax.


      In conclusion, there are many different kinds of internet crimes. In


some cases, these crimes are of a morally reprehensible nature (e.g. child


pornography), but in other cases (e.g. prostitution) they are morally


ambiguous or even innocuous. And even when they are unambiguously


wrong, they are often extremely hard to prosecute (cf. phishing/spoofing).


Finally, the best defense against many internet crimes is an attitude of caution


and suspicious. Where most such crimes are concerned, the police are of little


use, but an attitude of wariness is of great help and can make it very unlikely


that one will be the victim of such a crime.


         Bibliography


                http://www.complex.com/pop-culture/2012/11/the-10-most-common-


internet-crimes/


 


          https://www.fbi.gov/investigate/cyber


          https://www.fbi.gov/wanted/cyber


            http://kellywarnerlaw.com/revenge-porn-laws-50-state-guide/


      Britz Marjle T. 2013 Computer Forensics and Cyber Crime: An


Introduction New York: Pearson


        Goodman, Marc 2015 Future Crime: Insight the Digital Underground


and the Battle for Our Connected World New York: Penguin Random House


 


                       Privatization in African Telecommunications

                                                            [86]
                      Ethio Telecom Being Privatized (Business)


 


      Ethiopia announces that it will sell shares of Ethio Telecom, the

 
nation’s telecommunications company.In effect, Ethiopia is privatizing its


telecommunications company. As a result it is opening Ethio Telecom, and


therefore Ethiopia itself, to foreign investment.


      This is likely to have far-reaching consequences for Ethiopia and for


East Africa as a whole. Ethiopia is Africa’s fastest growing economy. This


move is likely to galvanize Ethiopia’s already rapid growth. It will do this


mainly by attracting foreign investment capital to Ethiopia.


      It has already begun to do this, as major telecommunications


companies, such as South Africa’s MTN, are already positioning themselves


to purchase large positions in Ethio.


        Overall, this development signals that Ethiopia is moving away from a


rigid, bureaucratically managed economy to a flexible private economy.


 


 

                                                                          [87]
                      Nigerian Invents New Kind of Smart Book


 


      Nigeria’s barely functional educational system represents a vast fieldof opportunity for edupreneurs, such as Chizaram Ucheage. Ucheaga, the co-


founder of Mavis Computel, a computer company in Nigeria, just announced


his invention of the “Mavis Pen.”


      The Mavis Pen is a pen with a built-in computer and translation-


software that synchs with a special tablet, also manufactured by Computel.


Working together, the pen-and-tablet translate sentences written on the tablet


into any one of the many different languages used in Nigeria, and


simultaneously produced high-quality and easy to understand vocalizations of


those sentences.


      This is enormously important in a country such as Nigeria, in which


many different languages are spoken and in which people, including


members of a given educational institution, have enormous difficulty making


themselves understood to one another.


      This in turn could stimulate the development of Nigeria’s moribund


education-sector, which in turn would likely stimulate Nigeria’s large but


dysfunctional economy.


 

                                                                                  [88]
              Ethiopia Announces Privatization of its National Airline


 


      Ethiopia just announced that it will privatize its national airlines and


open them up to foreign investment. Ethiopia has done this largely as a wayof jump-starting its large but sluggish economy, which has been hit hard over


the last few years by the failure to launch of several large-scale State projects,


massive national debt, a shortage of high-grade foreign currency, and a high


but under-serviced demand for foreign goods.


      This move will likely inject capital into Ethiopia’s economy, and


hopefully it will trigger a larger waive of interest on the part of foreign-


investors in Ethiopia. Also, the probable improvements in the quality of


Ethiopia’s Airline will likely encourage travel to and from Ethiopia, helping


to establish Ethiopia’s position as a player on the world economic stage, and


will also inspire investor-confidence in Ethiopia.


This move is a part of a larger privatization initiative on Ethiopia’s part that


also included the just-announced forthcoming privatizing of the state


telecommunications company. This move towards privatization is likely to


help actualize Ethiopia’s untapped economic potential.


           The Economic Justification for America’s Involvement in WWI


                                  (Economics/History)


 


      The  US  had  good  reasons  to  enter  the  war.  These  reasons  were


primarily economic in nature: the American economy stood to gain if the


U.S. entered the war and stood to lose if it didn’t. Also, if the US didn’t enter


the war, then at least arguably its safety and territorial integrity were at risk.


      World War 1 began in 1914 and it wasn’t until 1917 that the US got


involved. Wilson initially didn’t want to enter the war. In fact, he was elected


to office on an anti-war platform. But much happened to change Wilson’s


feelings, as well as those of the American public, during those three years.


      First of all, the U.S. fell into a massive recession, but War lifted the


US out of this recession by creating a large market for American military


goods. So the American economy came to depend on the war. Also, in order


to make it possible for the Allies to pay for American goods, a number of


American financiers, including J.P. Morgan, loaned them a large amount of


money, which said financiers would probably not recover if the Allies lost.


      So the U.S. actually had a double economic incentive to enter the War.


First, the American economy depended on it (or at least benefited from it).


Second, large amounts of American capital would be lost if the Allies didn’t


win---which, unless the Americans intervened, was not likely to happen. (Inpoint of fact, Germany had more or less won the war when the U.S. finally


intervened in 1917.)


      Also,  the  Allies,  mainly  Britain,  were  putting  immense  economic


pressure on the US to enter the war on their behalf. Prior to the war, there


was a large volume of trade between the United States and Germany. But


Britain cut off this trade, using her navy to prevent vessels from sailing from


the United States to Germany or vice versa. This was not exactly a positive


incentive to enter the war, but it did remove an incentive that the US had


previously had to enter the war on Germany’s behalf.


        Arguably, Germany was a threat to the United States, and the latter


therefore had to go to war against Germany for reasons of self-preservation.


In any case, the American government tried to convince its own citizens of


this, flooding them with propaganda to this effect. But Germany was not


actually a threat to the United States, and American officials probably did not


believe otherwise, any legitimate reasons they had for involving the US in the


war being economic, not existential, in nature.


      That said, the canonical answer to the question “Why did the US enter


WW1?” is: “Because of German attacks on American vessels, coupled with


the Zimmerman letter.” But Germany was not a military threat to the US, as it


simply  did  not  have  the  ability,  in  terms  of  technology  or  manpower,  to


conduct war with a power of the US’s stature from such a great distance off.In  fact,  just  prior  to  the  US’s  entry  in  the  war,  Germany  had  effectively


‘won’, in the sense that the allies, tired and depleted, were about to sign a


peace accord that heavily favored Germany. Aware of this, Germany very


much  wanted  the  US  not  to  enter  the  war.  True---Germany  did  attack


American vessels, but only because the US such vessels to supply the allies


with military supplies. As for the Zimmerman letter---that was more of a


strategic blunder on Germany’s part---an empty and self-destructive threat—


and the US almost certainly saw it as such.


      German belligerence, including the Zimmerman letter, were used by


American propagandists to rally the American public in favor of war with


Germany. But beyond that, they were not legitimate reasons for the US to


enter the war nor were they were among the causes of its doing so. of the


US’s entry into the War.


      Be it noted that, even though the US did have good economic reasons


for going to war with Germany, it doesn’t follow that these reasons were to


any degree what caused the US to go to war with Germany. In all likelihood,


they  were  not  among  the  causes  (though  they  may  have  served  as


justifications after the fact). The real causes lay in Wilson’s psychology—


specifically in his concern for his deteriorating public image. During his time


in office, Wilson was ridiculed as a weakling and coward (by, among others,


former  President  Theodore  Roosevelt)  for  not  responding  to  Germanbelligerence  with  American  aggression.  The  content  of  these  accusations


wasn’t that Wilson was failing to protect the US from danger; it was that


Wilson was besmirching the dignity of the United States by making it look


weak. Germany was not much more of a threat to the US in 1917 than Iraq


was a threat to the US in 2001; but if George W. Buch hadn’t attacked Iraq in


2001, he would have opened himself to accusations, however ill-founded, of


cowardice  and  weakness;  and  Wilson  was  in  a  similar  situation  vis-à-vis


Germany.  So  to  protect  his  public  image,  Wilson  had  to  go  to  war  with


Germany. And that was the actual cause of America’s entry into WW1.


      Wilson did not openly admit that he was simply knuckling under to


political pressure. He claimed that war with Germany was necessary to ‘make


the world safe for democracy.’ Germany was an autocracy; the Allies were


democracies; therefore, so Wilson claimed, war with Germany was necessary


to protect democracy. This was Wilson’s pitch when seeking a declaration of


war before Congress.


      But a pitch is all it was. Wilson himself obviously didn’t believe it,


given that he had thus far kept the US out of the war, even being reelected on


an anti-war platform. Wilson was simply capitulating. The purpose of pro-


democracy rhetoric was to make it seem as though his decision to go to war


was standing by his principles, when in actuality it was about forfeiting them.


        Nonetheless, even though the causes of the US’s entry into WWI layprimarily  in  Woodrow  Wilson’s  frail  ego,  the  US  did,  as  previously


discussed, have legitimate reasons for going to war. Whether either the US or


the world in general benefited from the former’s involvement in WWI is a


question for another time. 


                The Economics of Higher Education in the 21st Century


                                  (Economics/Business)


 


 


      Table of Contents


      The Economics of Higher Education in the 21st Century: Part I


        Introduction to Part I


        Retention-rates and Graduation-rates: Introductory Remarks


      Do Graduation- and Retention-rates Matter?


        Open-market Companies (OMC’s): How they Differ from Universities


      Colleges Sell Degrees, not Instruction


        Enrollment-rates Matter: Retention- and Graduation-rates Don’t


        Universities: Their Distinctive Business-model


      How Useful Do Students Really Want Their Educations To Be?


      The Paradox of Macroeconomic Efficiency


      When in Doubt, Drop Out: Dispelling the Myth that Only Losers Drop


Out


          Knowledge-management: Introductory Remarks


      Why Knowledge-management Cannot be of Assistance to Universities


      Key Points        Conclusion of Part 1: How to Maximize Revenue by Optimizing


Education


      The Economics of Higher Education in the 21st Century Part II


        Introduction to Part II


      What is Knowledge-management (KM)?


      An Actual Company that Could Benefit from KM


      Who Exactly Sounds the KM-alarm?


      KM as Preventative Measure


      KM in Relation to Organizations that Sell Results


      KM in Relation to Organizations that Sell Services


          Service-organizations Depend on Poor KM


      KM Impossible Unless Employment and Pay are Performance-


dependent


      No KM without Financial Transparency


        Expense-padding in Relation to KM


      A Corollary: Education Must be Digitized Whenever Possible


      DMO: A New and Better Kind of University


      All Accreditations Examination-based


      How DMO Turns Non-STEM Students into STEM Students


        Emphasis on Instruction as Opposed to Selection


      More Degree-levels at DMO      Instructors Never to Function as Gatekeepers


        Payments to Go Straight from Student to Instructor


      The Inverted Payment Pyramid


      25 Desiderata that DMO Must Satisfy


        Conclusion of Part 2


        Conclusion of the Present Work


 


                The Economics of Higher Education in the 21st Century


 


                                              Part I


 


        Introduction to Part I


 


      In the first part of this two-part work, the economics of higher


education are explained. It is made clear how a university’s business model


differs from that of a company that has to compete on the open market, and


on this basis it is explained:


 


      (i) Why universities are in no way threatened by low retention rates


and graduation rates;


      (ii) Why universities cannot significantly improve or otherwise alterthe quality of their educational services without imperiling their very


existences;


      (iii) Why universities do not have to improve the quality of their


educational services;


      (iv) Why universities couldn’t improve the quality of their services


even if they wanted to;


      (v) Why the fact that many universities have low retention- and


graduation-rates does not a represent a business opportunity, or opportunity


of any other kind, for anyone, whether inside or outside of academia; and


      (vi) Why principles of Knowledge Management (KM) that are so


useful when it comes to helping businesses that compete on the open market


are completely useless, and indeed of negative utility, when it comes to


helping universities solve their problems.


 


      In the second part of this work, it is explained how to construct an


online university that is both lucrative and provides instruction that is faster,


better, cheaper, and more useful than the instruction provided by any existing


(or possible) brick-and-mortar university. It is also explained how the


principles of KM can be used to optimize such a university, once it is up and


running.


         Retention-rates and Graduation-rates: Introductory Remarks


 


      A university’s retention rate is the percentage of students who stay


after the first year. A university’s graduation rate is the percentage of students


who graduate within six years of enrollment. These numbers never coincide,


but they track each other. Universities with high retention rates have high


graduation rates, and universities with low retention rates have low


graduation rates.


        Retention rates are necessarily at least as high as graduation rates and


in practice are always higher. Also, even if a university has a graduation rate


of 0%, as is the case with a number of institutions, it doesn't follow that


nobody graduates from it, only that nobody does so within six years of


enrollment.


 


      Do Graduation- and Retention-rates Matter?


 


      From a financial perspective, a university has relatively cogent reasons


to want a high retention rate: when a student doesn’t enroll for a second year,


that university loses business, and it doesn’t when he does. A university has


less strong reasons to want a high graduation rate. If a student comes back


year after year and never graduates, the university makes more money than itdoes if he graduates.


      All of this said, universities with low graduation and retention rates


almost always tend to stay in business. Great Basin College in Nevada has a


retention rate of 4% and a graduation rate of 0%, but it is not in financial


trouble. And Great Basic is not an exception. There are many institutions of


higher learning with graduation rates of 0% and retention rates that are only


marginally higher, and yet not a single one of them is going out of business.


      Would universities with low retention rates like to have higher


retention rates? Of course. Do they need to have higher retention rates?


Evidently not. Is there anything they can do to increase their retention rates?


That is the question. The answer: No. If a university made the systemic


changes to itself necessary to improve retention rates, it would lose most of


its existing customer base. In the pages to come, it will be explained why this


is so, but the main ideas are readily stated.


      Consider the case of Texas College, a private, religious college, only


10% of whose students major in STEM (Science, Math, Engineering,


Technology). Texas College has a 51% retention rate and a 6% graduation


rate. 6% is an extremely low graduation rate: the national average is 53%.


51% is a relatively low retention rate: the national average is around 80%.


Why does Texas College have such low retention and graduation rates? One


very distinct possibility is that students question whether their earnings aftergraduation will compensate for the expenses incurred in the course of getting


a Texas College degree.


      In light of this, suppose that Texas College decided to improve its


retention rates by making its programs of study more practical---by making


them such that those who completed them were better able to compete in the


workforce. Would student retention increase? Maybe. Graduation rates?


Perhaps. But such changes would alienate 90% of their current customer


base.


      Texas College is not a singularity; it is the rule, not the exception.


Universities would as a rule lose far more customers than they would gain


were they to change their courses of such in such a way as to make them


financially more worth doing. It will now be explained why this is so.


 


        Open-market Companies (OMC’s): How they Differ from Universities


 


      Let us refer to companies that compete in the open market as ‘open


market companies' (or OMC's). Such companies include Nike, Oscar Meyer,


Microsoft, and Hyundai. There is one very important difference between


universities and OMC's. OMC's sell products and services. That is what


people pay them for. That is all they pay them for. That is not what people


pay universities for. Universities pay people for degrees. That is whatuniversities sell, and that is what people pay them for; and with relatively


minor qualifications, that is all that people pay them for.


        Universities provide instruction, and they may also provide other


services. But people pay them for degrees and for nothing besides. Consider


the following hypothetical. William & Mary magically improves the quality


of its instruction 100% and it cuts its tuition in half: but it stops issuing


degrees. So whatever it is that one can currently learn at William & Mary


about physics, psychology or any other subject, one can now learn twice as


well for half as much money. But one cannot get a degree in that subject from


William & Mary. Under these circumstances, William & Mary’s enrollment


rate would plummet, possibly to zero. And its enrollment would plummet to


zero if it ceased to give out degrees and it either failed to lower tuition or


managed to improve instruction.


      William & Mary is a reputable institution, and the points just made are


even more brazenly true of less reputable institutions. What would happen to


Great Basin College in Nevada if it ceased to give out degrees? Or to Dalton


State? Or to Oglala Lakota College? Their enrollments would instantly drop


to zero. In actuality, each of these colleges does give out degrees and each is


financially doing extremely well. Moreover, each of these colleges has a


graduation rate of 0% (meaning that 0% of their students graduate within six


years); each has a retention rate in the single digits, and none of them does agood job of guaranteeing high ($60,000+) incomes for its graduates. But each


is not only financially stable but positively flourishing.


 


      Colleges Sell Degrees, not Instruction


 


      Imagine the following. Max is a mathematical genius who has


completely mastered his discipline. (We won’t worry about how he did this.)


He is as good a mathematician as any human being alive. But he doesn’t have


a college degree, and he has never attended college. What can Max do


professionally? He cannot be a professor. He cannot publish in academic


journals. He cannot be a high-school teacher. He cannot work for an online


tutoring agency. He could conceivably work as a freelancer, but he will lack


credibility and will have trouble getting clients.


      If Max wants to ply his trade, he needs a degree, the same way a


construction worker needs a union card. So he has to go to college. And if he


does go to college, why does he do it? To learn? No. To get a degree. He


probably will learn while at college (though he may learn a lot less than if he


were not in college, since he may very well be better at teaching himself than


his professors are at teaching him).


      To be sure, Max doesn’t have to go to college. He can become a


plumber, a police officer, or an enlisted man in the military. He can alsobecome a comedian, or an actor, or an entrepreneur. But he cannot be a


mathematician and be paid for it. (He can do it for free, with the qualification


that nobody will read what he’s writing, let alone pay for it.) Nor can he have


a white-collar job, unless he succeeds as an entrepreneur, which is not likely,


given that his lack of a degree will diminish his credibility in the eyes of


investors and will also make it unlikely that he will acquire the kind of


professional experience that is typically a prerequisite for knowing what the


market wants. In any case, if Max does get a degree---even if while getting it


he learns nothing and indeed becomes less intelligent---it will make it


possible for him to ply his trade and will open up an entire world of


additional professional possibilities.


      Of course, even if Max doesn't get a college degree, he is not


completely without hope, since, being a genius, he is relatively likely to pull


off the financial equivalent of a hole-in-one. But most people are not


geniuses; so let us now consider a hypothetical that makes it clear what


happens to non-geniuses who don't have degrees. Jane is a person of average


or marginally above intelligence who has a degree in psychology. Tammy is


exactly as intelligent as Jane, both psychologically and otherwise, but does


not have a college degree. For Jane, the possibilities are endless. She can


become a social worker or a licensed therapist. She can go to law school. She


can become a Federal Agent. She can get an MBA and become a corporatebureaucrat who is making $120,000/year by the age of 30. She is not


guaranteed any of these outcomes, of course, but they are available to her.


      But what about Tammy? What are her options? She cannot become a


licensed therapist. She cannot work for a corporation, except in a menial


capacity. She cannot be a social worker. She cannot go to law school. She is


quite stuck. Can she become an entrepreneur? Technically, yes. But


entrepreneurs have a success rate of 1%; and most of that 1% tend to be


intellectually gifted and also have to have college degrees, as well as years of


college-degree-based professional experience.


      Would it make a difference if, instead of being intellectually average,


Tammy were in the top 10% of the population? Yes—but not much. Her lack


of a degree would bar her from pretty much all white-collar employment, and


if she tried her hand at entrepreneurship, she would still be even less likely


than most entrepreneurs at succeeding. If Tammy wants white-collar


employment, she can try her hand at selling insurance or real estate—and is


unlikely to succeed at either, simply because, popular conceptions to the


contrary, success-rates in such professions are extremely low. 95% of people


who try to succeed as an insurance salesman quit within a year; more than


quit within three years. Similar figures hold of real estate.[1] And those who


‘succeed’ are likely to be making $20,000/year, working 70 hours/week.


      Setting aside long-shot possibilities, Tammy only has two choices:work in a blue-collar capacity (as a police officer, plumber, secretary, or


some such) or go to college. True—if she goes to college, she is likely to rack


up debt. But, first of all, she will not even have to begin paying off that debt


for many years; and during the intervening years, she can live well, taking


classes she enjoys and living a well-funded, leisurely lifestyle. Moreover,


even after she has to start paying off her student loans, she will have the


option of doing white collar work—of working as a teacher, executive,


consultant, or stock-broker. To be sure, she may have some ‘down-time’


working at Starbucks. But as long as she has that degree, she has options: she


has the option of going to business school, of working as a supervisor at a


company, of getting her Master's in Social Work, or of being a teacher. And


some such option is very likely to materialize. And even during her darkest


hours as a ‘barista', she is in a very different position from her fellow baristas


who don't have college degrees. She is passing through; they are not.


      One often hears about college graduates working at Starbucks and


stuck with massive student loans. These horror stories are no doubt


oftentimes true. What isn't true is that it's not worth it to go to college. In


some ways, college is a lottery. If one majors in political science at an


undistinguished institution, one is not guaranteed the ability to pay off one's


student loans any time soon. Does that mean that one shouldn't go to college?


No, it does not. And one should go to college-for several reasons. First of all,it is not always a lottery: someone with a degree in chemical engineering is


not rolling the dice. Second, even when it is a lottery, it is a lottery worth


playing: the proverbial political science graduate from a low-tier school is


more than able to get a reasonably decent white-collar job sooner or later.


Third, it is a lottery that one can always pull out of: a first- or second-year


political science major at a no-name can drop out and cut her losses. She can


also switch majors, switch schools, or both. Also, she can hedge by taking a


few semesters off, then resume studies, all the while considering other career


options or educational tracks and testing the employment waters.


      People with degrees have options, and people without degrees don’t.


[2] People with useful degrees from high-prestige institutions have many


very good options; people with useless degrees from low prestige institutions


have fewer options and they are not as good—but they are still good in


absolute terms, and they are still plentiful. People without degrees do not


have options. They can hustle or they can have blue collar jobs. It does not


matter how intelligent or skillful they are: without that piece of paper, they


are stuck.


      Colleges sell those degrees. That is what they do. Colleges also


provide instruction. Sometimes that instruction is good, and sometimes it's


useful; usually, it's neither. Either way, that isn't what students are paying for.


They are paying for the degree. And since that is what they are paying for,they are willing to put up with very low-quality instruction. In fact, setting


aside the 15% or so of students who major in engineering, nursing, and the


like, students don't want particularly high-quality instruction: high-quality


instruction is demanding, and since they are paying for degrees, they want to


have to jump through as few hoops as possible to get those degrees.


      To be sure, students are willing to jump through some hoops: students


do want to believe that their degrees have meaning. And in some cases, those


degrees actually do have to have meaning, since the student in question is


planning on entering a field, such as dentistry or engineering, where he won't


be able to function if he doesn't have the requisite knowledge. Also, there are


some students who, though not intending to go into practical fields, actually


do want to hone their intellects while in college. And if colleges improved


instruction—if they made it more demanding and if they made those who


received it more economically competitive---they would indeed attract more


of a certain kind of student: they would attract more savants and truth-


seekers, as well as aspiring doctors and engineers. But for each such student


that they attracted, they would lose ten students in their existing customer


base.


 


        Enrollment-rates Matter: Retention- and Graduation-rates Don’t


       It is assumed that retention-rates must stay above a certain level for a


university to be financially stable. If that is true, the rate in question is


extremely low. There are many universities with retention rates of in the


single digits that are financially perfectly fine[3]. To name just a few:


 


      Great Basin College, Nevada


        Oklahoma State University Inst. of Technology, Okmulgee


      Sam Houston State University, Huntsville, TX


      Texas A&M University, Commerce


      Texas A&M International University, Laredo


      Alabama State University, Montgomery


      Macon State College, Macon, GA


      Dalton State College, Dover, DE


 


      In fact, there is does not appear to be a single case of a university


failing because of low retention rates, even though there are many that have


retention rates that are close to zero.


      This is possible because it isn't retention rates that matter: it is


enrollment rates. If enough people enroll, then the university is financially


ok. It is assumed that if retention rates are low enough, then not enough


people will enroll—the idea being that no one would want to enroll at auniversity that, for whatever reason, is failing to hold onto the vast majority


its incoming freshmen. But this is neither a theoretical necessity nor, as it


turns out, an empirical fact. If a university has an extremely low retention


rate, one possibility is that it is alienating the students who don’t come back


(by being incompetent, expensive, inhospitable, or otherwise deficient). But


that is not the only possibility.


      Suppose that a university’s target-customer is somebody who


desperately wants a college degree but is financially or intellectually just on


the cusp of being able to complete a college degree. It may well that for every


hundred such people who enroll, only four are able to make it to the second


year. When compared to Harvard, with its 98% retention rate, such a


university might seem to be doing badly. But from a business-viewpoint, a


1/25 batting average isn’t necessarily bad: many businesses operate on the


assumption that most people are just ‘window-shopping.’


      Also, the students who don’t come back are not exactly window-


shopping, since they are paying handsomely for the time they are there. In


fact, since most of them drop out before completing the first year, they are


paying not only for the time they are there but also for a great deal of time


they are not there, with the university simply pocketing the difference. Plus,


soon-to-be drop-outs tend to make rather minimal financial demands on


universities: they tend not to go to office-hours, not to submit homework, andin general not to use university-resources.


      Further, if a university has a 4% retention rate, it will scale down its


services and set its prices accordingly. It will not pay for faculty, facilities,


and so on for the students who aren’t going to stay. Moreover, it will set its


prices so that those who do stay are paying to offset any losses generated by


those who didn’t.


      Again, there is nothing unusual about this from a business viewpoint.


A successful angel investor may invest a small amount in 100 companies,


knowing that 99 of will failing and also knowing that the one that succeeds


will make up for the others. Many companies give out free samples, knowing


that they will more than make for their losses as long as one person in a


hundred eventually buys.


      Finally, universities with extremely low retention rates tend to have


extremely high acceptance rates; and they also tend to have moderately high


enrollment rates, since the students they accept have limited options. As a


result, they do a lot of business, despite their low retention rates.


      Of course, when people that a given university has a 4% retention rate,


they then to assume that it wants a higher retention rate. But, first of all, even


if it wants a higher retention rate, it doesn't necessarily need it. Second, it


may not want a higher retention rate, since it may only be able to


accommodate 4% those who enroll and would actually incur losses ifretention rates increased. Third, there may not be anything it can do to


increase its retention rates that wouldn’t alienate most of its customer base.


Fourth, even if there is something that such a university can do to increase its


retention rate, it is very unlikely to be able to change itself in such a way as to


be able to do it. Let us now clarify this last point.


 


        Universities: Their Distinctive Business-model


 


      An OMC can turn on a dime. It can replace its entire labor force. It can


start making new products. It can fire its CEO. Its CEO can fire every besides


himself. An OMC has to be flexible, because it has to change its product to


meet constantly changing consumer demands. But universities sell degrees—


nothing else.[4] In order for people to buy those degrees, the instruction they


provide must on average exceed certain standards. When averaged over time


and when averaged over all of the courses being taught, instruction must rise


above a certain threshold. If the quality of instruction in every subject at a


given university were always execrable, then that university might well


eventually come to grief (though it would not necessarily do so: see below).


But a university won’t necessarily come to grief if it always provides


execrable instruction in some subjects or if it sometimes provides execrable


instructions in all subjects. The instruction has to be just good enough, incertain respects in certain subjects at certain junctures, for there to be a


perception on the part of enough people that it is worth having a degree from


that institution.[5]


      A corollary is that most of a university’s business depends on its


providing instruction that is on average lackluster. Most students at a given


university are just buying a degree; only a few are really working for that


degree. And that degree has prestige, and is therefore worth buying, because


of the efforts of those few. Consequently, the ideal situation for a university


is when its degrees have prestige and as few people as possible are actually


giving them that prestige. For so long as that degree has prestige, the way to


maximize enrollment is to have as few students giving it prestige and as


many as possible merely benefiting from that prestige. The more students are


expected to be responsible for the prestige of that degree, the more


prospective students are likely to shy away from enrolling at that university


in the first place. And the fewer students responsible for it giving it prestige--


-provided that somebody is giving it prestige—the larger the university’s


customer-base.


      When people buy a lawn-mower or a pair of running shoes, what they


are buying actually has to be good; there is no other reason to buy it. But a


degree from Harvard doesn’t have to be backed by good instruction. Suppose


that someone gets a degree from Harvard by cheating on all his papers andexams (without ever getting caught) and without learning anything. That


degree is still an enormously powerful piece of social capital. And that


person, even though he cheated his way through college, is far more likely


than those without a Harvard degree (or equivalent, e.g. a Yale degree) to be


accepted to business school, to get a job at an investment bank, etc.


      In light of these points, suppose that reasonably prestigious university


X does the following. X eliminates tenure. It requires its faculty members to


make sure that their students pass objective tests (tests that have objectively


correct answers and that are not issued by those same faculty members). If a


given faculty member fails to get enough of his students to pass, he is fired


and replaced by someone who will hopefully do the job.


      What would happen to X? Instruction would certainly improve, and


that might well bring in more of a certain kind of student. But most of X's


prospective students would be alienated by it. Most of X's students want the


prestige of a degree from X without having to go through four years of


intellectual boot camp.


      The changes just described would certainly benefit people who did


end up attending X, and it might well make those people more employable


than the X students who preceded them. But would those changes benefit X?


No. X would lose most of its future students and many of its current students.


Contrariwise, in its current condition, X, with its on average quite shoddyfaculty and sup-par courses, is probably doing extremely well financially.


      Suppose that X took a middle-path. Suppose that, without turning


itself into an intellectual boot camp, X improved the quality of its instruction


to the point by a solid margin, so that it was no longer just doing enough to


give prestige to its degrees. If X did this, it would not lose as many as it


would if it became an intellectual boot camp, with uniformly good professors,


but it would still lose a good chunk of those students, and it would be in a


much worse situation, enrollment-wise, than it would be if it simply did the


bare minimum.


      In general, colleges depend on their providing instruction that is on


average just good enough and, consequently, in their demanding, on average,


just enough of their students. If they turn themselves into genuinely


efficiently educational entities, they will alienate most of their present and


future customers. If they even try to make themselves more than just good


enough to preserve the prestige-level of their degrees, they will alienate


enough of their customer-base to appreciably worsen their financial situation.


They optimal path for universities is to issue degrees that are prestigious and


to provide instruction that is just good enough to be compatible with that


objective. A corollary is that universities will often have rather low retention


rates. If a university is doing just enough, it will inevitably sometimes slip


below that threshold, with the result that students bail. 


      How Useful Do Students Really Want Their Educations To Be?


 


      ‘But surely it would be better,’ it will be said, ‘if universities


restructured themselves in such a way that, when their retentions got too low,


they could make the necessary changes to themselves?' Better for whom? If a


given university changed itself in this way, that means it would be able to


letter the ax fall whenever times got tough: nobody would be safe; any given


professor or administrator could lose his job. Also, if an organization


becomes such that it can fire people during lean times, then it can also fire


people during good times: if a given university made itself able to right-size


itself when retention was too low, then anyone could lose their job at any


time, and some people would lose their jobs during good times. And nobody


at a university wants that. [6]


      ‘But there is another, less risky way that universities could guarantee


higher retention rates for themselves,' it will be said. ‘If they simply made


their graduates more employable—and managed to do so without making


their undergraduate curricula alienatingly difficult--then everybody would be


happy: universities would have high retention rates; professors and


administrators would continue to have job-security, and students would have


an assurance that their degrees would pay for themselves.'      As we’ve already pointed out, it wouldn’t be easy, or even possible,


for universities to do this. But there is an even deeper issue that we haven’t


yet discussed. People want to be employed, obviously, but how employable


do they really want to be? Suppose that Smith is employed because he is


employable---because he is useful, in other words. That means that he


employed only as long as he is useful. He might lose his job because of some


slight change in technology or in company objectives. Before Wix came


along, there were armies of people who made a decent living building


websites. All but 1% of those people became useless when Wix and


WordPress became available. They had to repurpose themselves, possibly


completely retrain themselves.


      Also, if Smith is employed because he is useful, that means that, in


order to keep his job, he actually has to be useful: he has to solve problems;


he has to do whatever has to be done: he has to live by his wits. He has to


figure out the left side of the building is sinking; he has to update the


company's computer system by the start of the next business day; he has to


reconstruct his patient's face; and so on. Is this what people want to be doing


when they are 50, 60, 70? Nurses are useful, and a 60-year-old registered


nurse spends her day cleaning out infected wounds and mopping up


biohazardous material. A life of usefulness is not easy.


      What most college students want, at least if their eventual careers areany indication, is to be relatively useless and employed. Explanation: If


somebody who is useless has stable employment, their employment isn’t


contingent on their being useful. Nobody expects redundant bureaucrats and


middle managers to be useful; that is not why they are employed. And their


jobs exceptionally safe precisely because those jobs are not about being


useful.


      When jobs serve very well-defined practical functions, they are easily


lost. If somebody’s living depends on his being able to produce great


paintings or thought, or on his being able to hit a hole in one or to get


acquittals in unwinnable cases, his career is over if he falls just slightly short


once or twice. By contrast, if somebody’s career is about being a bureaucrat


in some corporation or some government agency, and it isn’t quite clear what


he does, he can fall short all he wants: his employment has nothing to do with


his not falling short. If somebody is a mid-level lawyer who has an ill-defined


role in some large corporate case, his job is relatively secure. If somebody is


employed only as long as he gets acquittals, his job is not secure.


      Also, if one is employed only because he is useful, his earnings tend to


wax and wane with his degree of usefulness. If somebody makes a living


solving math problems, and somebody comes along who can do the job just


slightly faster, the first person’s earnings are driven down. A corollary is that


people who make their living by being useful tend not to have inflatedsalaries. By contrast, if somebody is a small part of an organization, with an


ill-defined function within that organization, his earnings tend not to be


hewed to his usefulness (or lack thereof), and he may consequently have an


enormously inflated salary.[7]


      Most college graduates tend to have well-paid jobs with poorly


defined functions. They end up, to be blunt, being pencil pushers within


corporations or government agencies, and are extremely well-paid for doing


little more than showing up and not making waves. They are not paid to be


useful in the way that a plumber or doctor is useful.


      And that is what most college students want. They don't want their


future incomes to depend on their always being useful. They would like to


know that when they are 55, they can have a comfortable income and a nice


lifestyle without having to prove their usefulness every day. If they end up


being plastic surgeons, they will have to prove their usefulness: nobody pays


a plastic surgeon who botches the job. If they end up working as mid-level


managers in corporate finance, they won't have to prove their usefulness.


      So if colleges made their students more ‘employable' by making them


more ‘useful', they would alienate most of those students. Political science


majors know that their major does not make them useful, and that is part of


the reason they do it. A ‘successful' political science major tends to end up


with a well-paying job that does not have a well-defined function and that isfor that very reason relatively secure. A political science major does run a


heavy risk of having no employment for some time after graduation. But the


truth is he probably will end up with pretty much just the kind of white-collar


job that he expected to have---a good paying job that has no well-defined


function or performance-benchmarks and is therefore secure. A computer


science major is certainly better able to find work, and probably has a wider


range of jobs to choose from; but those jobs have well-defined functions and


  performance-benchmarks and are correspondingly insecure.


 


      The Paradox of Macroeconomic Efficiency


 


      Many people assume that if most of the work-force consists of useless


pencil pushers, that cannot last for long—that there is some kind of


employment ‘bubble’ that will soon burst. Certainly, if a micro-economy—an


economy of 100 people---consisted of people who were not pulling their own


weight, it would not last long. In tiny self-contained villages thousands of


years, people tended to have to be useful in some very well-defined way.


      But in a micro-economy, there is very little division of labor, and labor


tends to be extremely inefficient, that being why nobody can ‘slack off.’ But


in economies of scale, there is enormous division of labor, and only a small


percent of the population actually has to produce. The more advanced aneconomy is, the greater the percentage of people in it who can be useless. In


Cambodia under Pol Pot, there was 100% employment, because everybody


had to be employed, and everybody had to be employed because production


was so inefficient. In Britain in 1820, there very few useless jobs, but the jobs


that people had tended to be difficult and unpleasant. In the United States in


2019, most jobs are useless. They are useless because they can be useless,


because the small part of the population that is productive is so productive


that the rest doesn’t have to be.


      So yes, if the percentage of the population that was actually useful


dropped too close to zero, then the economy would fall apart. But that hasn’t


happened yet and there is no reason to think that it will happen any time


soon. And until it does happen, it is not irrational for people to do easy


majors and bide their time after college until they land a well-paid sinecure.


Contrariwise, if colleges got rid of easy majors and insisted on producing


only useful undergraduates, they would alienate those students.


      But suppose that someone majors in political science at Macon State


and finds himself unable to get a job after graduation. Such people often get


vocational certifications; they become certified emergency medical


technicians, accountants, or computer-technicians. This is extremely


common. When this happens, does it mean that the person in question was


wrong to get a degree in political science (or religious studies…) at MaconCollege (or VCU…)? It obviously means that it didn’t pan out for them, but it


was still very likely a risk worth taking. Had it worked out, they would have


had an easy, stable $75,000/year job. Given that it didn’t work out, they have


some student debt, but nothing irreparable. Plus, many people enjoy their


time in college, however little that time contributed to their being able to


make a living. In any case, although majoring in a non-practical subject at a


low-tier (or even a high-tier) school may not immediately have a good


outcome, it is often a risk that it is rational to take.


 


      When in Doubt, Drop Out: Dispelling the Myth that Only Losers Drop


Out


 


      Mention is often made of the ‘tragedy’ of high college dropout rates.


But is this ‘tragedy’ really a tragedy? No. To be sure, it certainly could be a


mistake for someone to drop out. It is indeed a mistake for someone to drop


out if he is just one term-paper away from a degree that will open vast


professional vistas. But when people drop out, it is usually for good reasons,


and it isn't a tragedy for anyone.


      Harvard has a drop-out rate of close to zero. Virginia Commonwealth


University (VCU) has a 60% drop-out rate. Sul Rock State has a 95% drop-


out rate. Explanation: A Harvard degree is worth the trouble 99% of the time,a VCU degree is worth the trouble 30% of the time, and a Sul Rock State


degree is worth the trouble 5% of the time. It isn’t successful engineering


majors who drop-out of VCU; nor is it successful nursing majors. It is people


who are barely getting by in political science or criminal justice. Much the


same is true of Sul Rock State. When people drop out, it is usually (not


always) because it isn’t worth it for them to stay. When people drop out from


such institutions, it may be to pounce on a job-opportunity that won’t last and


is better than what will be available to them when they graduate. And even if


they don’t have definite plans as to what they will do after they drop out, they


generally do not become indigent. They may become police officers or they


may go to trade school. When people drop out, it is usually because they


believe that they stand to lose more by staying in school than by dropping


out, and in most cases they are right.


      Also, dropping out is often part of a hedging strategy. People who


drop out of college can usually go back. And when people drop out, it is often


to ‘test the waters': they are not sure if their current college is worth the


trouble; so, they drop out to see whether they can do without a degree. If they


find that a degree is necessary, they are likely to return to college.


      It is not possible to become an investment banker or surgeon without a


college degree. But the people who drop out of college are usually not


destined for such positions. If they finish out their degrees in religious studiesor political science from VCU or Sul Rock State, they may become probation


officers, Community College Administrators, or mid-level managers at a


local firm. When they drop out, they may become plumbers, electricians,


computer-technicians, or police officers. And they may find the latter careers


more fulfilling than the former, and the latter may be also be as lucrative as


the former.


      So in most cases, dropping out is not a tragedy for the drop-out. Nor is


it a tragedy for the institution that was dropped out of. If a university has a


drop-out rate of 70%, it adjusts its service and prices accordingly. In any


case, there has not been a single case in the United States of a college


shutting down due to high drop-out rates.


 


          Knowledge-management: Introductory Remarks


 


      In recent years a new discipline has emerged called Knowledge


Management (KM); and for reasons that will become clear, KM is believed to


have the potential to help institutions become more efficient. It might


therefore be surmised that KM could help colleges increase low retention-


rates, the idea being that low retentions are a function of inefficiencies on the


part of colleges. In the second part of this work that KM certainly has the


ability to help construct alternatives to existing colleges. But when it comesto improving retention-rates at existing colleges, there is nothing for KM to


do.


      First of all, what is KM? In order for institutions to capitalize on


opportunities, they must be organized in such a way as to optimize the flow


of relevant information between their members. If there are people in the


Acme Bridge-building Company who know how to build bridges but don’t


know where bridges are needed, and there are Acme-employees who know


where bridges are needed but not how to build them, Acme will succeed if its


employees can share their knowledge and will fail otherwise. KM explains


how Acme must be organized to maximize the likelihood of such exchanges.


In general, KM explains how institutions must be organized if knowledge-


exchanges that must occur are to occur.


      KM can help when poor internal communications are preventing an


institution from accomplishing what it wants to accomplish. KM cannot help


when poor internal communications are not the issue or, of course, when


there simply is no issue. Therefore, KM cannot help universities, since there


is not much of an issue where they are concerned and since, so far as there is


one, poor internal communications are not responsible for it.


 


      Why Knowledge-management Cannot be of Assistance to Universities


       Unlike OMC’s, universities actually depend on poor internal


communications. University departments are highly isolated from and


fiercely independent of one another. On the rare occasions when different


departments cooperate, they do so only at specific junctures, in very


circumscribed ways, after months or years of meetings, and then only with


heavy reservations. By contrast, an OMC would simply fail if its different


departments were comparably isolated.


        Explanation: OMC’s are about providing optimal products and


services, whereas universities are about maintaining prestige, and prestige is


harder to maintain when information is allowed to flow than then when it is


sequestered. In any university, there are innumerable occasions when


students would be well-served by a class that was taught jointly by the


philosophy and psychology departments, or by the philosophy and economics


departments, or by the economics and African studies departments, and so


on. But such joint ventures almost never happen.


      Within their own departments, professors have virtually uncontested


authority, and they have a kind cult status. They cannot be called out, because


each student within that department depends on their good graces. But if a


philosophy professor teamed up with an economics professor, that


philosophy professor could (and probably would) be called out economics


students who were not under his thumb, and the economics professor mightbe called out by philosophy students who were not under his thumb.


Consequently, were departments not mutually isolated and were they in the


habit of cooperating with one another whenever students stood to benefit,


they would have to step up their game considerably to survive the consequent


scrutiny. A professor's survival, as it were, would be that much less prestige-


based and that much more competency-based. And the kind of professor


would do well in this kind of environment is the kind of professor would


demand a lot of his students. Some students do like this kind of professor;


most do not. And most of practically any given university's students would


bolt if that university's professors were replaced with the professors of the


kind who were always ready to take on new subjects and fresh challenges.


Contrariwise, the kinds of professors who do well in actual universities,


where they never have to teach students who are not strictly under their


thumb and where they teach the same material year in and year out, demand


relatively little of students.


      The kind of professor who is always looking for a new challenge is a


high-energy professor: he demands a lot of himself and will tend to demand a


lot of his students. The kind of professor who has his niche is happy to stay


there does not demand much of himself or (apart from a certain degree of


adulation in some cases) of his students. Students of a certain kind are drawn


to professors of the first kind, but most of a university's business comes fromstudents who are more comfortable with professors of the second kind.


Consequently, universities thrive on a low degree of communication between


departments and therefore, as it were, on a certain lack of knowledge-


management.


 


 


      Key Points


 


        Universities are extremely reluctant to change. Universities don't have


to change. Universities would alienate their customers as well as most of their


own  employees  if  they  did  change,  especially  if  those  changes  involved


making  them  better  at  teaching  their  students  and  at  making  them


employable. Universities are doing well financially and otherwise, despite


low  retention-  and  graduation  rates.  The  fact  that  many  universities  have


lower retention- and graduation-rates than they would like does not represent


much  of  a  business  opportunity  for  anyone.  Nor  does  it  represent  an


opportunity to do any real good, since making universities better would lower


their retention- and graduation-rates: making them better at teaching and at


producing employable graduates would be the kiss of death for them. Nor


does  it  represent  an  opportunity  to  try  out  principles  of  knowledge-


management,  since  universities  are  positively dependent on  poor  internalcommunications and therefore on systemically rooted failures of knowledge-


management.


 


 


        Conclusion of Part 1: How to Maximize Revenue by Optimizing


Education


 


      Now for some corollaries of these points. First, if one's desire is to


have a successful business venture, the way to do it is not to try to improve


the retention- and graduation-rates of existing universities. Second, and more


significantly, if one's objective is to improve education—to make it faster,


cheaper, better, and more useful---the way to do it is not to try to ‘fix' existing


universities:  they  are  happy  just  the  way  are  and  are  both  unwilling  and


unable to be fixed. In fact, the idea that one could march into a university and


fix it, and possibly even be paid to do so, is the very definition of absurdity.


Universities are they are, and that's the end of it. Apart from a few religions,


there are no institutions that are as unwilling to change and as resistant to


being tinkered with as universities. Universities do change, but slowly and


only to their own terms, which will make extremely little sense to people


with a bottom-line mentality. Finally, and most significantly, if one wants to


improve education and to make money doing so, there is at the current anenormous  opportunity.  Right  now  is  the  perfect  time  to  make  education


affordable, fast, effective, and also (for the owner of the educational service


in question) extremely lucrative. In the second part of the present work, it


will be described exactly how to do this, and it will be made clear how the


principles of knowledge management can integral to doing so.


 


 


          The Economics of Higher Education in the 21st Century Part II


 


 


        Introduction to Part II


 


      In this part of the book, we will design a university that provides fast,


reliable, and affordable service. For reasons that will be made clear, this


university will be online. This will university will be distinctive in a number


of other ways, all of which will be stated explicitly.


      We will refer to this hypothetical university as DMO (short for


‘digitize, mechanize, optimize’, the idea being that digitization and


mechanization will help to optimize this institution).


      DMO's structure is to a large extent rooted in principles of knowledge


management (KM). So we will begin by saying what KM and by stating theprinciples of KM that are relevant to our project.


 


      What is Knowledge-management (KM)?


 


      Any given person within any given institution needs to have


information in order to do his job properly. KM is the discipline is that


attempts to say how an institution must be organized if the people in it are to


have the highest possible chance of having the information that they need to


do their job.


      Here is an illustration. Smith, Jones, and Brown are the only members


of a three-member firm. Smith is having lunch with Green, a billionaire oil


tycoon and potential client, and Green says that he desperately needs


somebody who is an expert in petroleum engineering. As it happens, Jones is


the world's greatest petroleum engineer, but Smith doesn't know this and


therefore tells Green that he will ‘try to find a petroleum engineer' for him.


Disappointed with this lackluster answer, Green doesn't retain the services of


Smith's firm and they lose a billion-dollar account.


      This situation is the result of poor knowledge-management. The talent


was there, and so was the demand, but the company didn't know that it was


able to service that demand.


      What are some solutions? Smith-Jones-Brown (SJB) could haveweekly board meetings. SJB could institute policies that require a given


member to advise the others of any meetings with possible clients. SJB might


make their policy to send daily memos to one another.


      Being an academic discipline, KM is more interested in producing true


generalizations than it is solving particular problems had by specific


organizations. But those generalizations are legitimate if, and only if, they


can be used to solve such problems, and there is also no way to identify those


generalizations except by dealing with many specific cases.


 


      An Actual Company that Could Benefit from KM


 


      The example just given was obviously artificial. Here is an actual


example of a case where KM is needed to solve a problem. There is a


reasonably prominent online tutoring agency by the name of OneClass


(https://oneclass.com/). It hires reasonably talented people and offers them


what appear to be high rates of pay (e.g. $45 to help with an assignment that


ordinarily should take around one hour to complete). But tutors find for one


hour that they spend with a student, they have to spend around five justifying


their answers to supervisors who can and will withhold pay indefinitely,


usually under the pretext of ensuring that the tutor complies with OneClass’s


rather extensive and vaguely defined procedures. As a result, instructors ofmerit don’t stay for long, and students are left with shoddy and (thanks to all


of the bureaucratic bloat) expensive service. As a result, clients are leaving


OneClass or simply avoiding it, and revenues are falling. Instructors cannot


communicate directly with upper-management; only middle-management can


do that. But the instructors are the ones who both know what the problems


are and have an incentive to make upper management aware of them; so that


information is not relayed to the right people, and the company is


hemorrhaging money.


      KM is supposed to tell us whether this problem can be solved and, if


so, how to solve it. KM is also supposed to tell us how to avoid having


problems like this in the first place. Let us now discuss each of these points.


 


      Who Exactly Sounds the KM-alarm?


 


      A KM-expert cannot be of service to OneClass unless OneClass asks


for his help. For argument’s sake, let us suppose that this happens. A


competent KM-expert would probably suggest downsizing middle-


management, which would free up money, making it possible to charge


students less and hire better tutors. He would also suggest eliminating


bureaucratic hurdles that the instructors have to jump through that waste their


time and drive them away from the company.      Of course, there may not be any single person at a given company who


can decide to enlist the help of a KM-expert, let alone implement the changes


that a KM-expert would suggest making. And if the necessary executive


power is shared by a number of different people, as is often the case, they


may not agree to hire a KM-expert; and if they do hire one, they may not


agree as to whether to implement his recommendations. After all, a KM-


expert might recommend changing the structure of the company in a way that


deprives many of these decision-makers of their power. He may even


recommend firing many of them. They will know this and not hire him. And


if a given self-described KM-expert can be trusted not to recommend


downsizing or otherwise changing management-structure, then he probably


isn’t very good at what he does, since knowledge-management within an


organization cannot be appreciably improved without changing the very


structure of that organization.


 


      KM as Preventative Measure


 


      This brings us to the second scenario. Suppose that somebody wants to


start an online tutoring service that avoids the problems that OneClass has.


Such a person might conceivably hire a KM-expert (or, more likely, use his


own KM-expertise) to design his company in such a way that those problemsdon't arise. In practice, this is what usually happens. Once a company already


exists, especially if it is large, there may not be any way to change that


company without the consent of the very people within that company who are


causing the problems. If the ACME Corporation is run by a board of four


equally powerful people, two of whom are ruining the company and two of


whom are not, they are unlikely to agree to implement the changes suggest by


a competent party who is brought in from the outside, assuming that they can


even agree to enlist such a person's help in the first place. In general, KM


problems are hard to fix but easy to avoid, and they are avoided by designing


companies properly. The mistake made by the people who designed


OneClass was to focus more on policing instructors than on hiring instructors


who don't need to be policed.


 


      KM in Relation to Organizations that Sell Results


 


      Our objective is to design a superior educational service. In this


section, we will state some principles of KM, along with principles of


economics and of simple common sense, that are relevant to that objective.


          Knowledge-management is possible when the organization in question


has definite objectives, and when it does not have definite objectives,


knowledge-management is as difficult as those objectives are vague. If acompany’s objective is to help people to pass some assessment test, then it


tends to be clear whether a given piece of information is worth


communicating to other company members. If a company's objective is to


‘improve wellness' or ‘broaden minds,' then it tends not to be clear whether a


given piece of information is worth relaying.


      When an organization is in the business of providing results,


objectives are well-defined, with correspondingly positive consequences for


knowledge-management within that organization. When an organization


provides services, objectives tend to be vaguely defined, with


correspondingly negative consequences for knowledge-management within


that organization.


      When an organization sells results, prices tend to drop, and when it


sells services, they tend to rise. The first computers were expensive. But once


the first one was built, it was clear what had to be done and it was only a


matter of time before the process was streamlined, the result being computers


that are thousands of times more powerful than the first ones and thousands


of times less expensive. By contrast, when you a hire law firm to settle a


contract dispute, you are not paying for results, since results cannot be


guaranteed in such a situation, and you are therefore paying for services.


Since the law firm therefore profits by selling services, it has every incentive


to draw out the process as much as possible, resulting in soaring costs foryou. In general, when results are sold, there is no money in services, and


services have to be streamlined; and when services are sold, there is no


money in results, and services have to be inflated.


 


      KM in Relation to Organizations that Sell Services


 


      When you hire somebody to build a pool for you, there is a well-


defined objective, and that is what you are paying for. Services are priced


into the end-result, but you are paying for the end result, not the services: if


no pool is built, you are likely to sue the contractor and he will end up paying


you, not the other way around.


      But when services, as opposed to results, are provided, many different


results are ipso facto possible: in a legal dispute, there are innumerably many


possible results intermediate between complete success and complete failure.


A criminal case can result in no time served and twenty years’ probation; five


years served and three years of community service; two years served and


$5,000,000 in fines; and so on.


      Vague benchmarks lead to vague communications, and knowledge


management is only as good as benchmarks are clearly defined. But this is


not necessarily a problem for providers of services. Inefficiency and poor


internal communications are lucrative when the client is paying for services,and they are expensive only when he is paying for results. If a lawyer is


billing by the hour, then he has everything to gain and nothing to lose if he


gets stuck in traffic or his secretary misplaces a file.


      It is only when results are being paid for that the costs of such


inefficiencies cannot be passed onto the client. If a plumber says he’ll fix a


pipe for $100, and it turns out to take him 10 hours to do the job, he can only


charge $100, and he is likely to be lowballed by the competition if he hedges


by quoting a higher price.


        Results-providers compete on efficiency, and their prices tend to be


bid down. Service-providers compete on inefficiency, and their prices tend to


be bid up. A lawyer cannot tell a client what he will get for him. He can only


tell him what he will do for him. He cannot promise an acquittal. But he can


promise to hire around-the-clock private detective; he can promise to


subpoena 100 different witnesses; he can promise to hire a voice-expert; and


so on. So if one lawyer tries to lowball another, it will tend to be not offering


some of these services, which obviously diminishes the client’s faith in him.


A better strategy is for him to offer more services than the first: he’ll get a


team of private detectives, he’ll personally fly to Washington to speak with


the attorney general, and so on. In general, whereas results-markets are


inherently efficient, service-markets are inherently inefficient.


           Service-organizations Depend on Poor KM


 


      When people within a given organization have an incentive to block


communications within it, information tends to be blocked, and people within


service organizations tend to have such incentives. Such organizations make


money by multiplying and drawing out services. Therefore, the management


profits from the inefficiencies that good communication eliminates, and


people within such an organization are paid to create such inefficiencies.


Such an organization profits by having a middle-manager who withholds


information from underlings in order to force tasks to be repeated and in


order to justify various quality-controls. It is only to the extent that an


organization profits from good internal communications that internal


communications are good.


 


      KM Impossible Unless Employment and Pay are Performance-


dependent


 


      When poor performance doesn’t lead to loss of employment,


performance tends to be poor, and performance tends to be good when poor


performance does lead to loss of employment. A corollary is that internal


communications tend to be bad when employment is guaranteed and goodwhen it isn’t.


      When salaries depend on performance, performance tends to be good,


and it tends to be bad when salaries do not depend on performance. A


corollary is that internal communications tend to be good when salaries are


performance-dependent and bad when they aren’t.


 


      No KM without Financial Transparency


 


      It is hard to know who is pulling their weight in an organization, or


exactly how much weight they are pulling, unless clients hire them directly.


Imagine the following. Firm 1 and Firm 2 are both engineering firms, but


there is an important difference between them. When clients go to Firm 1,


they cannot hire engineers directly: they have to hire Firm 1 as a whole, and


Firm 1 then assigns an engineer to them.


      But when clients go to Firm 2, they hire engineers directly. The


engineers who are hired then give a percentage of their earnings to Firm 2, in


exchange for equipment, permits, marketing, credibility, and other important


resources. It’s going to be very for Firm 1 to know who they should promote


and who they should hire. They can rely on reviews from clients, but those do


very little in the way of making it clear how much a given worker is really


doing. (A gruff engineer who single-handedly builds a skyscraper might getmiddling reviews, while an affable engineer who can barely build a birdhouse


gets stellar ones.) And if engineers in Firm 2 can set their own prices, it will


even more clear who is doing how much.


      Also, given that clients cannot hire engineers directly from Firm 1, its


engineers have to take the work that is given to them. That means that


somebody else (a middle manager) will decide whether to award a given


project to a given engineer. Projects will go the wrong people, and the talent


will be misdeployed and underdeployed. Also, given that the customer-


interface will be management, and not the talent itself, the latter will always


be laboring under a glass ceiling, making it hard for them to develop larger


projects and to maximize their contributions to the firm.


        Organization-internal communications are worthless unless they are


based on solid information as to how the organization in question can engage


the market. There is no better way for an organization to have such


information than for its employees to be able to offer their services directly to


clients. This isn’t always possible. No single engineer in an aircraft company


is going to be able to service clients. But it is possible where organizations


that provide instruction are concerned, for reasons that will soon be


discussed.


 


        Expense-padding in Relation to KM 


      When a business is legitimate, it does not inflate costs. Microsoft has


an enormous market-share because it gives people what they are paying for at


a low cost, and it would lose its market-share were it to pad expenses or


otherwise gouge its customers. When a business can provide what it says it


provides, it stands to make more money by keeping quality high and costs


low than by keeping costs high and quality low.


      Businesses are forced to pad and gouge when it isn't by providing the


service that they say they are providing that they make their money. For


example, most life-coaches don't do much of anything. Since they don't


provide a product, there is no way for them to provide that product more


efficiently. For them, the best way to make money is to make what they are


offering to seem important while being vague about it. Clients are lured in


with impressive but vague claims. Once they are there, some actual services


are dribbled out and mixed in with various unnecessary but expensive


services.


      A business of this kind thrives on inefficiency. It cannot give the


customer what he is paying for all at once, since the customer would then


know how little he was really getting. Legitimate services have to be dragged


out and interspersed with extraneous ones. A business of this kind is


concerned with managing expectations. It is not concerned with increasing itsown efficiency: in fact, it is concerned with decreasing it. If a business of this


kind consists of a handful of people, they may all be consciously in on this


fraud. It is certainly possible for Smith, Jones, and Brown to explicitly agree


with each other that they are going to defraud clients. But if such a business


is at all large, most of its employees will have to at least partially accept the


company’s own propaganda: otherwise, it will have trouble recruiting people


and trouble keeping them motivated once they are there. Such a company’s


internal communications therefore tend to be inefficient, since it isn’t clear


what the company does or therefore what there is to say about how it could it


do it better.


 


      A Corollary: Education Must be Digitized Whenever Possible


 


      A corollary is that when education can be digitized, it must be


digitized. Of course, not every kind of instruction can be digitized, at least


not at present. It is very difficult to teach somebody how to play the piano or


perform surgery over the internet. But usually it can be digitized; and should


be whenever possible, since doing so saves time and money and makes it


easy for people to purchase custom-made education from the best instructors


at the lowest possible price. If a university chooses not to digitize educational


services that can be digitized, that is because it isn't primarily by providinginstruction that it makes its money.


 


      DMO: A New and Better Kind of University


 


      Thanks to the points thus far made, we are now in a position to draw


up a blueprint for a new and better kind of institution of higher education. As


previously stated, we will refer to this hypothetical institution as DMO.


      The most important fact about DMO is that students pay for results,


not services. Therefore, a degree from DMO must be proof of competence.


DMO does not sell prestige; it sells competence.


      DMO is not meant to meant to replace existing brick-and-mortar


institutions. DMO is meant to provide maximally efficient and effective


instruction in every area that can be taught digitally, with several heavy


qualifications.


      The main qualification is that a degree from DMO is actual proof of


competence. It follows that DMO will not teach people how to be pilots,


surgeons or plumber. It also follows that DMO will not provide


accreditations in areas, such as history or religious studies, where a degree


cannot possibly constitute proof of competence.


      Another second qualification is that what DMO offers in the way of


instruction covaries in real time with what the market needs people to know.      Third, DMO will offer instruction (and accreditation) in a dramatically


wider range of subjects than any existing (or possible) brick and mortar


institutions. (This qualification is to some extent a corollary of the second.)


      Fourth, DMO will offer many different levels of accreditation in


practically any given of the areas in which it provides instruction. DMO will


offer bachelor’s, master’s and doctoral degrees; but it will offer many other


accreditations.


      Fifth, nobody who graduates from DMO is useless. DMO-graduates


may want to get additional degrees, but they won’t have to: they will already


be employable.


      Sixth, DMO’s objective is to produce people who are competent. It is


not to exclude incompetent people so that it can then take undeserved credit


for the merits of its graduates. Consequently, DMO will not exclude people.


DMO will regard unintelligent people who want a DMO-education as being


in the same category as sick people who go to a hospital: they are there to


improve themselves and will thus receive service.


 


      All Accreditations Examination-based


 


      At DMO, instructors do not issue grades. There are no grades. There


are accreditations. Accreditations are attained by taking examinations. Theseexaminations are graded anonymously (by computer, whenever possible).


They are designed and administered by independent third parties.


      The questions on these examinations have determinate answers. There


will be little or no disagreement among experts how a given question is to be


answered.


      The instructors have access to past accreditations exams. (In fact,


DMO will make such exams available to all students, and possibly to the


general public, free of charge.) But they do not have access to forthcoming


exams.


      One consequence of this arrangement is that there are many subjects


(e.g. history and religious studies) that DMO simply will not teach. Another


consequence is that the instructors at DMO are indeed instructors, not gate-


keepers. It does not matter whether your instructor likes you or what he


thinks of your work. He does not pass you or fail you. You pass if you pass


the accreditation exam and fail if you fail that exam. Your instructor's one job


is to get you to pass that exam. These points will be developed below.


 


      How DMO Turns Non-STEM Students into STEM Students


 


      DMO has two lines in the sand. First, whenever a degree is earned, it


is definite proof of merit. Second, it is always completely clear (to everyone,including employers), what kind of merit a given degree is proof of. If


somebody has an accreditation in discrete mathematics from DMO, then an


employer who needs a discrete math specialist can hire that person with


complete confidence that he will be competent.


      This means that when it comes to the kinds of people who are likely to


major in the humanities and social sciences, DMO has its work cut out for


itself. Its primary solution will be to offer lite science degrees: lite-physics,


lite-math; math for computer scientists; lite biology. In this way, DMO gets


people out of the doldrums of the liberal arts and into STEM.


      In addition to being inherently legitimate, this objective is also highly


attainable. Many people in the humanities, especially philosophy, are actually


highly intelligent. But (for that reason, arguably) they find details rather


annoying. Anyone who has studied physics knows that it’s largely about


details; there are some ‘big ideas’, but it is mainly about grinding out


solutions, oftentimes using rather thorny mathematics. The same is true of all


of the sciences. Yes—there are ‘big ideas.’ But most of them are about


grinding out facts/theorems.


      Because people in the humanities tend to be ‘big idea’ people, they


resent doing the labor involved in STEM subjects. At the same time, they like


and are adept at the ‘big ideas’ part of those disciplines. College majors being


what they are, big idea people tend to have little choice but to flee fromSTEM, including economics, into the likes of poly sci, history, etc. The result


is that these people, despite their considerable intellectual gifts, end up being


completely useless: no matter how advanced you are in political science, you


are not employable (except in a bureaucratic way). Contrariwise, somebody


whose college career consists in his learning the big ideas of science, along


with just enough applications to nail down understanding, is extremely


useful.


      For this reason, DMO will offer a major in ‘general studies in the


sciences.’ There will be variants of this degree, including general studies in


the applied sciences, general studies in the biological sciences, general


studies in information sciences, general studies in health sciences, and the


like.


 


        Emphasis on Instruction as Opposed to Selection


 


        Existing universities are discriminatory; they do not all service all


comers. OMC's (open-market companies) are not like this. Nike doesn't


‘exclude' certain customers; nor does Amazon or Microsoft. Why this


difference? Because OMC's sell products, whereas universities sell prestige.


If universities really sold instruction—in other words, if they made their


money by seeing to it that people left them more competent than they came tothem---they would want as many customers as possible. If they were in the


business of making people smarter, they would want as many people as


possible paying them to make them smarter. But universities are very


selective about who they choose to service, and the reason is that their


product is weak: they are simply not that good at instructing people. (They


are reasonably good at taking people who are already gifted and then pointing


them in the right direction.)


      If I invent a pill that makes people smarter, and I want to make money


by selling that pill, I will obviously want to sell to as many people as


possible. I won’t want to exclude anybody. In fact, the less desirable (the less


intelligent) the customer, the better. By contrast, if invented a pill that doesn’t


make people smarter, or does so only under certain circumstances, I may


want to have a different business model: I may want to vet customers. DMO


has the first business model. Other universities have the second.


 


      More Degree-levels at DMO


 


      An A in a given class at a given university tends not to mean anything.


And even in cases where an A definitely means something, its exact meaning


is deeply unclear. True—an A in engineering 101 means something. But it


means  one  thing  at  M.I.T.  and  something  quite  different  at  VirginiaCommonwealth University. Because individual classes at universities have


either no significances or no determinate significances, accreditations can be


only awarded to people who have taken hulkingly large pluralities of classes.


This is a hedging strategy. The idea is Smith must have at least at least some


merit if he passes a hundred classes, even though many of those of them had


no meaning and few if any had determinate meanings.


      The less guarantee there is that a given class has merit, the larger the


number of classes a student must pass in order to be awarded a degree that is


taken as proof of merit. This limits the number of levels of degrees that a


university can issue. If someone takes six classes a given university, that


doesn’t necessarily mean anything at all; and even if it does mean something,


it isn’t clear exactly what it means, since it isn’t clear what the student had to


do to pass them. (He may have had to have passed some test or other in logic,


but  it  is  not  clear  what  was  on  that  test—or  even  if  there  was  one.  The


situation will vary from school to school and, within a given school, from


professor to professor.)


      But  if  individual  courses  had  guaranteed  meanings,  and  if  it  was


always determinate what those meanings were, then passing so much as a


single class would be definite proof of a definite kind of merit. In that case, a


‘two-year’ degree---in other words, a degree awarded for two-years’ worth of


course-work---would have an enormous amount of meaning. In fact, a oneyear-degree would have meaning. Even a three-month degree---of the right


kind—would have meaning. In general, the greater the guarantee that a given


course  has  meaning,  and  the  greater  the  degree  of  specificity  as  to  what


meaning is, the fewer courses a student will have to take in order for that


student to be recognized as having merit.


      At DMO, there is no such thing as a grade that is not definitive proof


of a well-defined kind of merit. For this reason, a student at DMO can prove


himself to have a high degree of a very definite kind of merit by passing a


relatively  small  number  of  classes.  For  this  reason,  DMO  will,  with


credibility, be able to issue many different levels of degrees. (In fact, any


given course at DMO will itself be a mini-degree, simply because successful


completion of that class constitutes definite proof of a definite kind of merit.)


      This means that students can earn credible degrees from DMO in a


fraction  of  the  time,  and  with  a  fraction  of  the  expense,  that  would  be


involved  in  getting  a  degree  from  another  institution.  It  also  means  that


students would have many options intermediate between getting a degree at


all and spending four to eight years, and wracking up debt, getting a degree


that may have little inherent or practical significance.


 


      Instructors Never to Function as Gatekeepers


       DMO always offers students the ability to ‘test out.’ In other words, a


student can get a given accreditation just by passing the examination in


question: no time need be spent ‘in class.’


      This is necessary. As long as students have the option of testing out, it


is guaranteed that students only pay instructors for actual instruction. When it


isn’t possible to test out, instructors tend to function as gatekeepers: they are


not there to instruct, but rather to open the gates, as they see fit. If instructors


are paid to be gatekeepers, there is no guarantee that they are good


instructors.


 


        Payments to Go Straight from Student to Instructor


 


      At DMO, a hires a given instructor only if he believes that instructor


to be able to help some accreditation exam that the professor himself does not


grade. This means that students will not want to work with instructors who


are failures at getting students to pass these exams and will want to work


instructors who can get them to pass. It also means that students will be


willing to pay more for instructors who are likely to get them to pass than for


those who unlikely to do so.


      This means that students and instructors must be able to negotiate


prices directly. If the student pays DMO, and DMO then supplies the studentwith an instructor, the student is no longer able to choose competent


instructors and to not choose incompetent ones. This means that incompetent


instructors will not pay the price for their incompetence and competent ones


will not be rewarded for their competence. This in turn means that instruction


will be poor. Therefore, students must negotiate prices directly with


instructors, and payments must go straight to the instructor. The instructor


will give a percentage of his earnings to DMO in exchange for use of the


platform, business volume, credibility, instructional materials, and the like.


      An immediate corollary is that there is no permanent employment at


DMO, let alone tenure, only contract-work. Another corollary is that


instructor-revenue is determined entirely by instructor-competence.


 


      The Inverted Payment Pyramid


 


      At a conventional university, the money flows down. Students pay the


university; the university pays instructors. The result: expensive and bad


education. At DMO, the money flows up. Instructors are directly sought by


students based on their performance-statistics, with instructors keeping most


of what the student pays and the rest, probably around 20%, going to defray


overhead costs.


      This will make DMO lean and functional. Because the student knowswhere his money is going, there is not very much DMO can do to over-


charge or mis-charge. Also, since management has to work within the limits


set by that 20%, bureaucrat will be impossible, and management will have


strong incentives to hire and retain instructors who are able to service large


market-sectors.


 


      25 Desiderata that DMO Must Satisfy


 


      Let us now state all of these points as explicitly concisely as possible.


      Any given degree issued by DMO will be definite proof of a definite


kind of merit; and to do this, as well as satisfy the objectives that we have


seen to be involved therein, DMO satisfy the following twenty-five


desiderata:


 


      1. DMO must be accredited. Students must be able to receive


recognized degrees.


      2. DMO must be online.


      3. Instruction must be largely (though not entirely) individualized.


      4. There must be clear, universally recognize performance-


benchmarks for students in all academic areas.


      5. There must be similar benchmarks for instructors (this is a corollaryof the last point).


      6. Students hire instructors directly.


      7. Instructor-rates are determined by the student and the instructor, not


by DMO. The instructor gives a cut of his earnings to DMO, in exchange for


DMO’s resources (these being the platform, educational resources,


marketing, credibility, large business volume, and the like).


      8. Instructor-statistics are always available to prospective students.


These statistics include number of accreditation-tests pasts by students and


the exact identifies of such tests. Instructor-pay is therefore based on volume


of work and satisfaction of such benchmarks.


      9. Satisfaction of such benchmarks is never to be decided by the


professors. Consequently, there are no ‘grades’ per se, only accreditation


exams. A corollary is that assignments, including papers, are always simply


exercises; they do not result in grades or accreditations. Those assignments


can and will be responded to (read and commented on) by such people, but


those responses will not constitute grades or formal actions of any kind, their


sole purpose being to illuminate.


      10. The questions on these accreditation exams admit of clear,


unambiguous and universally recognizable answers. A corollary is questions


relating to course-specific topics will not occur on these tests.


      11. Instructors are minimally policed. They can teach what they want,how they want.


      12. Instructors are encouraged to take performance-tests of their own


(similar to and sometimes identical with those taken by their own students)


and to publicly display their scores on these. Initially, instructors will


inevitably have the usual credentials (doctorates from brick-and-mortar


institutions, along with publications). And they are allowed to showcase


these, but with time these will become increasingly less important.


      13. There is no tenure.


      14. Termination is reserved for two kinds of circumstances: failure to


take on students that are making themselves available at agreed-upon rates


and gross misconduct (invoicing non-existent sessions, lying to students


about qualifications, and the like).


      15. There must be a wider variety of disciplines and degrees than in


current institutions of higher learning.


      16. The student’s situation should not be binary—it should not be


either ‘degree’ or ‘no degree.’ There should be a score that corresponds to


objective and verifiable accomplishments on the student’s part, a degree


being issued only when that score reaches a predetermined target.


      17. Disciplines that have no practical value should either be jettisoned


or modified so to have practical value. (Realistically, they will usually be


replaced with generalized versions of practical disciplines.)      18. Disciplines that do not admit of objective assessments should


either be jettisoned or modified so to admit of such assessments.


      19. Universally applicable tests of intelligence and critical reasoning


should be administered, to prove that the student is not only acquiring


subject-specific knowledge but is also becoming a better thinker. These will


be administered and graded free of charge. The student does not have to take


them, but if he does take them and his performance exceeds a certain


threshold, they count as credentials. There will be instructors who specialize


in helping students with these tests.


      20. DMO will always have past copies of these tests, and of all other


accreditation-exams, but DMO instructors will not create them. DMO will


contract with outside parties to generate the relevant tests, which will not be


revealed to DMO instructors until after they have been taken.


      21. The use of student evaluations should be minimized or eliminated.


Student input should concern the professionalism of the instructor. The


instructor's merit should be determined by student-performance, not by


opinion or sentiment.


      22. Students should be able to switch between instructors easily, so as


to prevent their education from being jammed up by personal conflicts with


instructors


      23. The contents of curricula should be publicly accessible, so thatstudents can start working on them prior to enrolling in DMO. This is to


ensure that instructors actually instruct, instead of just being gate-keepers.


      24. Hirings are to be made exclusively on proven or probable success


helping students pass accreditation exams. Therefore, publications are


irrelevant to hiring decision, and so are letters of reference.


      25. Mini-majors should be offered: miniature degrees in economics,


physics, and so on.


 


        Conclusion of Part 2


 


        Existing universities are failing in many respects. Most of the degrees


they issue have literally no objective significance and utterly fail to provide


definitive proof of merit. Moreover, universities are expensive and slow.


Finally, they are discriminatory, in that they prevent the very people who


need their services from receiving them. They do this in two ways. First, they


turn people away who want to study at them. (Though non-ideal, this is


forgivable, given their limited resources of space and manpower.) Second


(and far less forgivably), they turn their own students away from courses of


study that would actually benefit them: they offer very few practical courses


of study, and they load those courses of study with so many stumbling blocks


that people who could be creditable practitioners of the corresponding fieldsend up being exiled into useless, soft majors. Theoretically, universities are


supposed to instruct; but they don’t instruct, so much as they wall out people


who need instruction, choosing to open the gates only to people who can self-


teach their way through their majors.


      There is little hope of reforming universities. They don't want to be


reformed, and they don't stand to gain by being reformed. (See Part 1, as well


the Conclusion of the Present Work.) Nor are they asking to be reformed.


      But this doesn’t matter, since there is no need to reform them. In the


present work, we put forth a detailed plan for a university (DMO) that will do


what existing universities are failing to do, and nothing is preventing


anybody from implementing that plan.


      The essence of DMO is that it is results-based, not service-based.


DMO-instructors are instructors, not gatekeepers. They are paid directly by


students to help those students pass independently administered accreditation


exams, successful completion of which is always definitive proof of a well-


defined as well as useful form of competence. Consequently, instructor-


earnings depend only on the quality and volume of their work.


      Because each successfully completed examination has universally


recognizable and well-defined significance, a DMO-student need only a small


number of courses to provide definitive proof that he has a given skill or is


employable in a given respect. It also allows DMO to offer a much widerrange of courses of study than its conventional brick-and-mortar counterparts,


giving it the ability to absorb people into STEM majors who at conventional


universities would be exiled to the limbo of the liberal arts.


      A consequence of this model is that student-costs are always hewed to


the actual value of the instruction they are receiving. Thanks to the resulting


high-quality of instruction, DMO need not deny service to anyone, since its


reputation is based on how much it improves its students, not on how smart


they are to begin with.


      Once in existence, DMO will be the very embodiment of optimal


  knowledge-management. The instructors will have no choice but to charge


exactly what their services are worth; and because the instructors pay the


management, and not the other way around, the management will be forced


to hire and retain the best instructors, and they will also have every reason not


to bloat up their own ranks with redundant personnel, since the money for


such a person would come out of their own end.


 


        Conclusion of the Present Work


 


      Other things being equal, some universities would like to have higher


retention rates than they currently have. But other things are not equal. If


universities made the kinds of systemic changes to themselves needed toguarantee higher retention rates, they would alienate most of their current


customers.


      Also, universities don’t need higher retention rates. There are many


universities with retention rates that are well under 50% (and graduation rates


that are in the single digits), and not a single one of them is even close to


closing its doors. The only brick-and-mortar university that has even come


close to shutting down in the last twenty years is Sweet Briar, a private


women's college, and it had (and continues to have) a 71% retention rate.


(The national average is just over 50%.)


      Finally, even if universities do need them, they are doing much, apart


from some marketing, to increase them. They are not changing their prices,


their services or their business-model; and they are certainly not asking


outside experts to come in and house-clean.


      It has been suggested that universities might improve their retention


rates through judicious use of knowledge management. Though prima facie


reasonable, this suggestion is quite misconceived. The reason is that


universities depend for their very existences on poor knowledge


management. Some organizations survive by being efficient: they make their


money by providing people with well-defined results. Such organizations


need good knowledge management. Microsoft is in this category, along with


Nike, Walmart, and Hyundai.      Other organizations survive by being inefficient: they make their


money by providing services that don’t have definite results and by making


those services as expensive as possible. Organizations that provide


marketing, therapy, coaching and other similarly nebulous services tend to


fall into this category. Most marketing firms would go out of business


immediately if they were only paid for results, and it is therefore a marketing


firm’s financial interest to keep the ratio of services to results as high as it can


without entirely losing credibility. Such an organization wants to be able to


justify high billings without producing corresponding results, and it does this


by hiring useless ‘experts’, conducting various studies, having useless


meetings, and the like. Consequently, many people within such an


organization have strong incentives not to communicate efficiently, since


efficient communications would tend to expose them a useless. It also means


that it isn’t clear what is worth communicating, since the company’s


objectives are vague and internally incoherent.


        Universities fall into this category. They do provide some legitimate


services, but these only account for a fraction of their revenue, the rest


coming from overpriced ancillary services. For this reason, universities do


not have a well-defined bottom-line. In certain respects, they may want to


improve instruction, but that is hardly their endgame. They need to provide


enough instruction to maintain their prestige. But they don’t want instructionto be too good, since that will alienate most of their customers. So they need


some legitimate personnel and some illegitimate ones, and they need to


provide some legitimate services and some illegitimate ones. Their objectives


are therefore vague and incoherent, and it is correspondingly unclear what


kind of information university-employees should make one another aware of.


        Universities don’t want to be better, and they are right not to want to


be better, since their business would dry up if they were better. This does not


mean that all is lost. It just means that the way to provide the public with


better instruction is not to make universities better. The right way to provide


the public with better instruction is to create a new kind of educational


service that is results-based and whose revenue is hewed to its pedagogical


efficacy. In this work, we have seen in detail exactly how to do this.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


  


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


  


 


 


 



      [1] Be it noted that there is an entire industry dedicated to swindling


people who don't have college degrees by taking their money in exchange for


the temporary illusion that they can have a white-collar profession. Primerica,


Mary Kay Cosmetics, Herbalife, Equinox, Amway, Vector: These are all


multi-level marketing schemes. Each has the same structure. People are


recruited to be ‘sales representatives.' No college degree is needed (or had, in


most cases). The ‘sales representative' pays for leads and products and


training, all because he has been told that he will make this money back. He


finds that it is virtually impossible to make a single sale, and he would have


to make many sales to recover his losses. The only way he can make money


is by recruiting more sales representatives, to whom he sells the same bill of


goods that his own recruiter sold to him. And even if he is an extremely


successful recruiter, he is still extremely unlikely to make more than a


pittance or even just to break even.


      Why do these people do it? Up to a point, it is because they are


gullible. But ultimately it is because they want the prestige of a white-collar


career. They want to be ‘executives.' And each of these companies refers toits recruits as ‘executives.' At Primerica, the moment you become licensed,


you are a ‘team leader' and an ‘executive', and you are allowed to claim that


you have your own office. (You time-share an office with around thirty other


‘executives.')


 


      [2] This subject to the obvious counterexamples and qualifications,


e.g. ‘Dog’ the Bounty Hunter is financially successful despite not having a


college degree. But such counterexamples and qualifications are just that.


And when scrutinized, they tend to confirm the proposition in question.


Before having his own T.V. show, ‘Dog’ spent 18 months in prison in Texas


for drug dealing, which he wouldn’t have had to have done had he had a


college degree. And most people who go to prison don’t turn their


experiences into T.V. shows. In fact, the basis of that show’s success lay in


the fact that he was seen as an ‘everyman’ who made good, despite the odds.


      [3] https://www.cbsnews.com/news/25-universities-with-the-worst-


graduation-rates/


 


      [4] A high-prestige university, such as UCLA or Harvard, may make


some money selling adult-learning classes and the like, but the revenue from


such services is less than one-tenth of one percent of the revenue from


students who are enrolled in degree programs. 


      [5] Also, universities provide far less instruction than people assume.


Capable students tend to teach themselves. Students at Harvard and M.I.T.


tend to be auto-didacts. The professor may do a bit of explaining, but he is


more in the nature of an enforcer: he is there to make sure that students do the


assignments, and students who are not able to figure out on their own how to


do the assignments, mainly on the basis of a textbook and only to a minimal


extent on the basis of lectures, will not last. So a university could always


provide terrible instruction in every discipline, so long as the students there


were sufficiently able to teach themselves the materials. And this is not just a


hypothetical possibility: it is a fairly good approximation to how colleges


actually function. Students who do good work tend to be independently


motivated and teach themselves. The courses help them learn, but not by


teaching so much as by forcing them to do problem-sets, write essays, and the


like. Professors are there not so much to instruct as to police.


 


      [6] That is why the fact that universities sometimes want to raise their


retention rates doesn’t represent much of an opportunity for business


consultants. If an OMC wants to right-size itself, it is more than willing to let


people go: in fact, it will often hire consultants precisely to tell who to let go


of. But universities don’t want to right-size themselves by downsizing. Theydon’t even particularly want to right-size themselves, for the reasons already


given. And although they may sometimes want higher retention rates, the


changes they are willing to make themselves to have them are extremely


marginal, and university officials will be deeply uneasy about the idea of


someone from the private sector telling them where to let the ax fall, as it


were.


 


      [7] We often hear about law school graduates can’t find work and are


stuck with hundreds of thousands of dollars in student debt, and we often


hear about how lawyer-jobs are becoming more scarce, not just relative to the


number of applicants, but in absolute terms, owing in part to the automation


of some legal services. His this slowed the rate of applications to law school?


Not one bit. Application-rates are climbing. Is this because these applicants


are ignorant or lazy or defective in some way? Not necessarily.


      First of all, when recent law school graduates complain about their lot,


they are often comparing themselves to law school graduates who got six-


figure jobs right out of law school. A law school graduate today may be more


likely than in times past to have to wait before getting a job. But if a law-


school graduate lands what would be considered a low-end lawyer-job—if he


lands a position as a low-level counselor in an obscure government-agency or


as in-house counsel at a small college or regional bank---he will make farmore money and have far more job security than the vast majority of the


population. And most people who go to law school do get jobs as lawyers,


and those jobs are extremely lucrative and secure compared to most jobs. The


lawyers who have those jobs may self-identify as failures; they may wish that


they were star-lawyers at white-shoe law-firms making $500,000/year,


instead of being undistinguished lawyers making $90,000/year. But in


absolute terms they are doing well.


      There are law school graduates who simply fail to find jobs as


lawyers. But according to the American Bar Association, approximately


87.5% end up having stable employment as lawyers, and the mean salary is


$90,000.


            (http://www.abajournal.com/news/article/thanks_to_shrinking_class_size_a_greater_percentage_of_new_law_grads_find_e


      So yes—some law-school graduates never work as lawyers, but most


do, and they are prospering.


      Are these lawyers useful? No. Not in general. In fact, they tend to be


negatively useful. They make money because, owing to their position, they


can obstruct commerce, and people have to pay them in order to allow their


trade.


                       United Airlines vs. Alaska Airlines (Business)


 


        Summary of the Company


 


        According to United Airlines’ company overview webpage, United


Airlines operates approximately 4,600 flights a day to 354 airports across five


continents. In 2017, United operated more than 1.6 million flights carrying


more than 148 million customers. United is proud to have the world's most


comprehensive route network, including U.S. mainland hubs in Chicago,


Denver, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, San Francisco and Washington,


D.C.


 


      Target Customer, Marketing Environment & Marketing Mix


 


      Without a clear understanding of the target audience, a company will


not have a successful e-commerce presence, as stated in our textbook. There


is a broad customer market for airline companies because transportation


services are advantageous to both business and leisure travelers, which makes


it difficult to pinpoint the typical customer.


 


      Weighing the criteria depends on the customer. For example,customers traveling for business prefer convenience, on time arrivals, and


frequent flyer programs. However, customers traveling for leisure favor


affordable airfare and bag fees, customer service and cabin comfort.


 


 


 


        Targeting a market by choosing which group the airline would like to


appeal to allows the company to strategically position themselves against the


competition.


 


      Major Competitors


 


      Major competitors of United Airlines include Alaska, Virgin America,


Southwest Airlines, Delta Airlines, American Airlines, and JetBlue. Each


airline has different strengths and weaknesses that can be studied by United


and used as an opportunity to learn from the competition.


 


      Alaska Airlines leads the competition because it appeals to all


customers criteria including airfare, arrival times, baggage handling and


customer satisfaction. Alaska Airlines has also recently merged with Virgin


America. Southwest Airlines and Delta Airlines both lead the market in twospecific areas; airfare prices and customer satisfaction. American Airlines


attempts to meet all criteria but has mediocre results across the board.


Recently, JetBlue has slipped to the competition because of its smaller


network.


 


      United Airlines has struggled in the past with customer satisfaction


and complaints in the public eye. Because of the negative media attention,


United has shown improvement in that area, and still holds strong as one of


the top airline competitors.


 


 


 


 


                            Best and Worst Airlines in the U.S.


  


      SWOT Analysis


 


        Strengths


      Recognizable brand


        Worldwide service to 354 airports


      Hubs in 7 major U.S. cities


        Weaknesses


      Negative media attention regarding customer service


        E-commerce


 


 


        Opportunities      Studying competitors’ marketing strategies


        MileagePlus frequent flyer program


      Stocks


      Member lounges


      Threats


      Fuel costs


        Competitors


 


 


                              E-COMMERCE RATIONALE


 


      United Airlines wants to stand out when it comes to customer


experience and overall satisfaction. The rationale behind their e-commerce


strategy is to bring together services and packages to their customers who


visit the website. Nearly two decades ago they launched a subsidiary that was


dedicated to its e-commerce and wireless business platforms. Just like most


firms in the era of advancing mobile technology, United Airlines wanted to


jump at the opportunity in the rapidly developing e-commerce arena. United


Airlines launched a dashboard within their website that helps customers


search for travel package deals, flight information, and an option to speak to a


travel agent. United's new Web site lets customers research fares andschedules, check flight information, and access Mileage Plus account


information directly from the home page. United is also focusing on reducing


the amount of clicks a guest would have to conduct before navigating to their


desired information or purchase. Customer satisfaction would increase if the


website was easy to navigate. The guest would also be more likely to


purchase services if they could quickly find what they are looking for. United


Airlines focal point was to increase customer satisfaction and increase their


return on investment.


 


      United Airlines began ramping up their e-commerce model within the


consolidation phase of the e-commerce historical time-line. This was the era


when e-commerce changed to include complex services far beyond retail


goods. Many travel companies began taking advantage of the web to


strengthen sales and market to a broader audience. Airline companies also


started e-commerce plans which included vacation packages. This era was


very business driven and was carried by the lower prices of personal


computers and mobile devices. According to an article in Computer World


Magazine, “United announced plans to launch a 70-person e-commerce


subsidiary dedicated to online and wireless strategies. In addition to its Web


site, United has launched CollegeTravelNetwork.com, an online service


created to address the travel requirements of college students. It's alsodeveloping an online travel store with Aliso Viejo, Calif.-based retailer


Buy.com Inc. It is scheduled to debut this month (Colett).” This article was


written January 24, 2000, a time when most Airlines were really starting to


develop a strong e-commerce plan and broaden their web capabilities. A


recent search reveals that United’s additional travel websites, such as


  CollegeTravelNetwork.com, have failed and cease to exist. United Airlines


rationale was on target but they failed to execute in parallel endeavors.


      United Airlines rolled out a variety of online travel services to guests


nearly two decades ago. According to the same article by Computer World


Magazine, “the moves follow a steady stream of e-commerce activity by the


Chicago- based airline as it looks to capitalize on the $4.2 billion online


travel market, which is projected to grow to $16.6 billion by 2003, according


to Jupiter Communication Inc. in New York (Colett).” United Airlines has


been strategizing not only in the areas of marketing flight services but


competing with the online travel market. A recent visit to one of their


websites, vacations.united.com, presents a variety of vacation packages that


complement their flights. This website presents a vacation planning website


similar to that of competing travel planning websites. The website offers deal


packages joined with their flight services to major vacation destinations.


They also offer web services that can connect you to a company travel agent


who can quickly help you find the best deals. Looking through these variousonline services, I feel that United Airlines is focusing on providing


convenience and excellent customer service to their guests.


      This strategy was built roughly two decades ago and many other


competing airlines have also launched the same services. Delta Airlines also


offers travel packages to many top vacation destinations, connects customers


to travel agents, rental cars, and flight with hotel packages. Alaska Airlines


offers group travel arrangements for couples and guests planning wedding


celebrations. They also offer very competitive travel packages to top


destinations. Alaska Airlines also has a website feature titled “ask Jenn”


which is an instant message system with an airline representative that can


answer most questions about flight and travel arrangements. Looking through


these websites I believe most of the companies in the airline industry all have


the same strategy behind their e-commerce platforms, to provide mobile and


desktop customer service to their customers.


      Not much has changed since United Airlines created an e-commerce


unit and rolled out web services. There has been more of a focus on Mobile


e-commerce. The website is set up so that transactions can be made easily


when on the go, using a mobile phone, tablet, or laptop. The webpage also


has an android and iPhone hyperlink so guests can download the application


on mobile devices. United Airlines, like other companies in the industry,


understands that mobile transactions are increasing as those technologieskeep advancing. The mobile platform paved way for people to access the


internet from a wide variety of mobile devices and laptops. Individuals who


are always traveling, such as businessmen, use mobile devices to plan travel


arrangements. United Airlines recognizes that developing a fast and


convenient mobile e-commerce strategy will help increase transactions.


      United Airlines also presently uses social marketing to strategically


measure their market reach. United uses the steps in the social marketing


process to generate engagement, encourage visitors to share their likes, create


a foundation for community, and increase their brand strength. On the bottom


of United Airlines’ webpage there are links to many of the most popular


social networks. A visitor can click these links and be encouraged to join


United Airlines’ social community. United uses LinkedIn, Facebook,


Instagram, Twitter, Hub, and YouTube to measure market reach and build a


community of brand loyal customers. According to an article from the


Chicago Tribune, “Experts are starting to link companies’ social media


activities with their bottom lines. One report by J.D. Power & Associates


found a correlation between overall satisfaction with a company’s social


marketing efforts and consumer likelihood to buy something from that


company. It also affected the overall perception of the company. Members of


the social media team at United are sometimes dealing one-on-one with a


customer on Facebook or Twitter about a missed flight connection, orblasting out messages to hundreds of thousands about the airline’s newest


airfare promotion (Karp).” United Airlines believes that if it builds a strong


social marketing presence then customers will more likely buy flights and


travel services.


      I believe that United Airlines’ social marketing approach is sub-par


and fails to stand out from their competitors. United Airlines developed their


social marketing approach alongside competitors and only work on keeping


their presence known. According to the Chicago Tribune article, “Chicago-


based United Airlines, the world’s largest carrier, is not a leader in using


social media, at least yet. It ranks below industry average on many of the


newfangled social media metrics, such as interactions, response time and


Twitter followers. Even after several years of prominence for social media,


United and companies in many industries are still trying to figure it out —


trying to decide just how seriously to take it and what to use it for; fruitlessly


trying to calculate a return on investment. One thing is certain: Corporate


America, until recently, could mostly ignore Twitter, Facebook, Google Plus,


Pinterest, Instagram, YouTube, and LinkedIn. Now it does so at its peril.


United, like others, is winging it and learning on the fly (Karp).” United


Airlines social marketing attempts seem as only an act to stay in the game. A


recent visit to their Instagram account mostly shows pictures of their planes


in flight. I don’t feel any of the pictures are conveying a message of greatservice to their social community. United’s competitors, such as Alaska


Airlines, are sharing videos of their teams as they help improve services and


technology.


      United Airlines needs to take advantage of social media platforms and


convey a message that peaks travel consumers interests. According to an


Article in Forbes Magazine, “Every blog post, image, video, or comment you


share is a chance for someone to react, and every reaction could lead to a site


visit, and eventually a conversion. Not every interaction with your brand


results in a conversion, but every positive interaction increases the likelihood


of an eventual conversion. Even if your click-through rates are low, the sheer


number of opportunities you have on social media is significant (Demers)”.


United Airlines began their strategy in the consolidation era of e-commerce,


when building a model and developing a strategy was new to most travel and


airline companies. E-commerce is now in the reinvention period which


depends on social marketing. The increasing growth of social media now


transforms marketing. Many firms have created teams of marketers who


solely focus on social networks, word-of-mouth, viral marketing, and metrics


that highlight marketing reach through these platforms.


      Despite the weak presence on some social networks, United Airlines


does have a strong following on Facebook. With over 1 million followers


who share United’s photos and articles. They encourage their subscribers toshare personal travel photos and enter contests to win travel packages and


flights. They also have quick responses to their social communities’ questions


and concerns. United typically responds within an hour after receiving a


Facebook message. United Airlines social marketing is primarily focused on


their Facebook page. Focusing on Facebook is most likely due to the 2 billion


active users on the social network. United Airlines might want to focus on


other social networks as well; Twitter, Instagram, and Pinterest all having


hundreds of millions of subscribers.


      Since developing their online strategy, I believe that United Airlines


needs to still focus on staying competitive if they want to stand out in their


industry. According to a recent article by Time Magazine, United Airlines


comes in 9th in customer satisfaction and affordability. The article from Time


Magazine is titled “The 9 Biggest U.S. Airlines, Ranked from Best to Worst.”


According to the article, “the pool of U.S. airlines considered included the


nine largest domestic airlines. Criteria included average fair price, year-over-


year ticket pricing changes, and the cost per kilometer for passengers;


average departure and arrival delay time, number of on time arrivals, number


of cancelled flights, and amount of denied boardings; baggage and change


fees (Renzulli and Leonhardt).” United Airlines most likely would like to


improve the e-commerce strategy that they developed years ago and stay


competitive within the industry. They began developing their e-commercemodel during the early stages of consolidation. The plan was most likely to


have the same services and offerings as other airlines and travel companies.


United Airlines may be working on a new strategy that takes advantage of


social communities and viral marketing. Most companies are now trying to


find ways to offer packages based on personalization and tastes of their


customers.


 


 


        E-COMMERCE RECOMMENDATIONS






First of all, United Airlines has some enormous advantages over its current


competitors. It offers more flights to more destinations than most, if not all,


of its competitors. It’s fares are relatively affordable, being one of the less


expensive airlines to fly. United Airlines is a household name, with a well-


deserved reputation for high-quality affordable service.


      What United does not have is a coherent web-presence. On YouTube,


if one searches “United Airlines”, here (with only a few inconsequential


omissions) are the very first listings that come up:


      Video shows a passenger forcibly dragged off a United Airlines plane


      United Airlines apologizes after reports of flight attendant's bizarrebehavior


      Watch: United Airlines staffer fights with passenger over baggage


      United Airlines 737 900ER Economy Class Trip Report (accompanied


by a picture of an empty Airplane)


      Shame On You United Airlines


      Everything Wrong With United Airlines


      United (United’s Official YouTube Channel)


  https://www.youtube.com/user/united


      Ellen on United Airlines' Latest Headlines (Accompanied by photo of


grinning comedian presumably making fun of United)


      United Airlines 14 hour flight San Francisco to Hong Kong Flight


report!


      United Airlines: Woman claims United gave away her first class seat


to Texas lawmaker - TomoNews


        DISGUSTING! United Airlines' Dog "Accident" Sparks Outrage,


Student Walkout Threats, and More...


      Puppy dies after being put in overhead bin on United Airlines flight


      United Airlines Isn't The Only One Dragging People Off Planes!


      FS2004 - Midway Disaster (United Airlines Flight 553)


      FS2004 - September 11 - The South Tower Attack (United Airlines


Flight 175)      Martin Short Takes Shots at Bill O'Reilly, United Airlines and Jimmy


Fallon


      United Airlines...Fuck You


      United Airlines Commercial (Jimmy Kimmel Live)


      United Airlines passenger apparently dragged off flight after refusing


to give up seat


      United Airlines jet apparently loses engine covering midflight


      Jim Cramer On United Airlines Dog Death Incident | CNBC


      United Airlines gives away toddler's seat, forces mom to carry him


during flight


      Engine on United Airlines plane falls apart on flight to Hawaii


 


      Despite being a safe and affordable airline with excellent customer


service, United Airlines has the become the butt of the nation’s jokes. And its


own official YouTube channel does not meaningfully offset this. The


Channel’s official promo video has to do with the Special Olympics—


sporting events for physically and mentally challenged individuals. This is


obviously meant to make United look caring and non-corporate. But, first of


all, it has no relevance to anything relating to air-travel. Second, it


subliminally sends the message that United is associated with mentally


deficient people, which message is reinforced by the search-adjacent videosmaking of United. Third, even though United’s Commitment to the special


Olympics is admirable, it comes off as apologetic and therefore gives


credence to the (largely spurious) negative statements being made about it.


Finally, United has a number of outstanding strengths: it can get people to


practically any place on Earth in quickly, efficiently, affordably, and


enjoyable. And yet in its YouTube Channel, United is not showcasing these


strengths. It is actually burying them.


      Also, when continues the YouTube search for United, one finds that


many, if not most, of the videos are positive, reporting extremely good


cuisine, a comfortable cabin, courteous attendants and good service.


      Further, there are no videos that discuss United’s true strength: its


ability to get people to more destinations than practically any other airline, at


a price equal to or lower than most of its competitors.


      So here is what United needs to do in terms of its YouTube-presence


(and, by implication, in terms of its e-presence as a whole).


      First, it needs to focus on its strengths. Its functional strengths, not


some irrelevant and obviously PR-motivated strengths relating to its


tenderness of heart. What are its functional strengths?


      Its ability to fly to people to more places for less money than other


airlines.


      Its good food      Its comfortable cabins


      Its courteous staff


      Its in-flight entertainment and amenities.


      It should project strength and focus, and confuse and mislead


prospective customers with material that has no relevance to what United can


offer its customers.


        United’s guiding principle in terms of its web-presence should be:


Stick with the logo. United’s logo is excellent: it is an abstract image of a


globe—very elegant and functional, and instantly recognizable. The fact that


the logo is a globe indicates (correctly) that United has global reach—that it


flies everywhere. The fact that globe is abstract and geometrical suggests


(correctly) that United is functional and efficient.


        United’s current P.R. campaign (at least to the extent that its YouTube


presence makes it clear what this campaign is) does not emphasize how


functional United is. And this must change.


 


  


 








                                    REFERENCES


 


        Lauden, Kenneth C, and Carol Guericio Traver. E-Commerce 2016


Business, Technology, Society. Pearson College Div, 2016.


 


        “Company Overview.” – United Continental Holdings, Inc.,


      ir.united.com/company-information/company-overview.


      Kheel, Julian Mark. “The Best and Worst US Airlines in 2018.” ThePoints Guy, The Points Guy, 6 MCollett. “United Airline’s E-Commerce Unit


Takes Off” Computer World. 24 Jan.


2000, https://www.computerworld.com/article/2594042/united-airline-s-e-


commerce-unit-takes-off.html Accessed 21 May, 2018.


      Demers. “The Top 10 Benefits of Social Marketing”. Forbes. 11 Aug.


2014,


                https://www.forbes.com/sites/jaysondemers/2014/08/11/the-top-10-


benefits-of-social-


          media-marketing/#739937771f80 Accessed 20 May. 2018.


 


      Karp. “United Airlines Struggles to Understand How Social Media


Works”. Skift. 09 June, 2013, https://skift.com/2013/06/09/uniteds-social-


media-efforts-getting-off-the-ground/ Accessed 16 May 2018.


      ar. 2018, thepointsguy.com/guide/best-and-worst-airlines-2018/.


 


         Four Papers on Business-theory: Marketing Strategy, Joint Venture,


                        Counter-trade, Ethnocentric Staffing


 What is strategy? How does strategy relate to a firm's profitability?


 


      Strategy (in other words, marketing strategy) is the development on


the part of a firm of a long-term plan of action for remaining competitive in a


competitive and dynamic market. The default position for a firm is to react to


changes in the market and hope for the best. This is obviously not the best


approach---in fact, it isn’t really an approach at all. The best approach is a


deliberate approach. Marketing strategy is simply about having a deliberate,


pro-active attitude towards the market.


      Any viable marketing strategy answers three key questions:


 


      Where are we know?


      Where we want to go?


      How will we get there?


 


      Here is an example. Suppose that I am running an online tutoring


service. Right now, I am the only person on staff; so I have to do all of the


work. This involves me doing an inordinate amount of work: I have to spend


all day writing papers, solving math problems, and so on; which is


excessively labor-intensive and which does not pay particularly well, since


the people who need this knd of help tend to be students who have limitedmeans.


      That is ‘where I am.’


      What about ‘where do I want to go?’ I want to have an agency that


employs hundreds of tutors, much like Chegg or Varsity. I also want to


corner some part of the market that is still open. I know from personal


experience that one part of the market that is wide open is the part consisting


of relatively advanced students who need high-level tutors who can help with


dissertations and other advanced projects. If I can capture that market, then


my firm will have a stable place in the market; and it might even be in a


position to take over markets that the current online agencies (Chegg,


Varsity, Wyzant) control.


      What about: ‘How do I get there?’ ‘Getting there’ involves several


steps. First, I have to sharpen my vision for the agency: Do I want to compete


on quality or on price? Let us suppose that I want to compete on quality---


that I will let other agencies offer cheap tutorials and will myself focus on


providing people with good tutorials. In that case, I will be able to hire top-


people, since I will be able to offer them competitive wages. Then I have to


figure out mechanics: Will a student needs a tutor, will tutors an alert through


an app on their phone? Will they get an email? Or will they have to be logged


into the site?


      ‘Getting there’ involves answering a myriad of questions, sometechnical, some conceptual. For example, what is my brand? In other words,


what is my company concept? How can I have a public presence that is both


compelling and accurate?


        Marketing strategy is simply an attempt to answer the totality of these


questions in a way that helps the firm in question retain a competitive edge


and also hedge against the inevitably surprises that come with being in a


dynamic and competitive business environment.


 What is a joint venture? What type of joint venture is most common? Provide


an example of a joint venture.


 


      A joint venture is an agreement between two firms to carry out some


specific task. Consider the following. Smith develops technology that reads


people’s intentions directly off of changes in their brain-waves. Jones


manufactures cell phones. Smith and Jones decide to work together to create


a line of cell phones that do not even need to be physically dialed, as they


respond directly to changes in their owner’s brain-waves by dialing the


correct number. Smith and Jones do not want to form a single company; each


wants to retain his corporate autonomy. So they don’t want to merge. But for


this particular project, they need each other, since Jones needs Smith for the


software and Smith needs Jones for the hardware.


      A joint venture is not the same thing as a partnership. A partnership is


a single business venture that involves multiple parties. Profits are shared;


taxes are shared; and there is common management. In a joint venture, on the


other hand, there are two separate companies, two separate revenue-streams,


two separate sets of liabilities, and separate management.


      A joint venture is also not the same thing as a consortium. Aconsortium is a loose arrangement of companies that agree to cooperate with


one another but are otherwise not intertwined. Suppose that Publishing hoses


X, Y, and Z jointly control the book-market. But they decide that, instead of


competing with one another, they will divide up that market into three sub-


markets, with X controlling one of those sub-market, Y controlling another,


and Z controlling the third. Otherwise, X, Y, and Z are separate from each


other. This is a consortium.


      An example of a joint venture is Caradigm. Microsoft specializes in


computer-related technology and software. General Electric specializes in


appliances. The two teamed up to form Caradigm, a joint venture that


manufactures ‘smart’ medical technology, such as machines that help make


medical diagnoses more accurate.


      The most typical sort of joint venture is a 50/50 venture, in which each


party has 50% claim to the profits and to which each party contributes is own


people.


 Explain countertrade and its purpose


 


        Countertrade is the act of paying for goods/services with other


goods/services, instead of with money. Imagine the following. Country X has


wheat; country Y has oil; X needs oil; and Y needs wheat. Neither has


money. So they agree to exchange oil for wheat. This is an example of


counter-trade.


      The term ‘counter-trade’ tends to refer to exchanges made between


countries (or whole economies). But it is easily illustrated in with examples


of trade at the individual level. Imagine the following. Smith is a talented


piano teacher who has no money for rent. Jones desperately wants piano


instruction and he also has an extra room, but he has no money for piano


lessons. So Smith and Jones agree that Smith will get ‘free’ lodging if he


gives piano lessons to Jones, and Jones will get ‘free’ piano lessons if he


gives lodging to Smith.


      Why would Smith and Jones agree to such an arrangement? Couldn’t


Smith simply sell piano lessons on the open market and then pay for rent with


the proceeds? And couldn’t Jones simply rent out his extra room on the open


market and then pay for piano lessons with the proceeds?


      That would be the appropriate course of action in many contexts, but


not all. First of all, there is no reason to this if the exact thing that Joneswants is piano lessons from Smith and if, moreover, the exact thing that


Smith wants is a room in Jones’ house. In other words, if the exact thing


Smith would want to do with the proceeds from his lessons was rent a room


in Jones’ house and the very thing that Jones would want to do the proceeds


from renting out his room was buy lessons from Smith, then they might as


well engage in a direct exchange, without using the intermediary of currency.


      Also, there might be reasons why a direct exchange would not only be


feasible but necessary. First of all, even if the market-value of Smith’s


lessons is $100/hour, it doesn’t follow that Smith will actually make that


much from his lessons. He has to market himself, which is expensive. He has


to drive from lesson to lesson, which is expensive. He has to have safeguards


in place, which protect him in case a client’s check bounces. And so on. Also,


his personality might be such that, whereas some people love, many others


can’t stand him and aren’t willing to pay him anything for his services. So it


might be a lot simpler for Smith, and also less expensive, if he is paid in


lodging, rather than trying to get paid in currency. For similar reasons, it


might be easier and less expensive for Jones to be paid for his room in piano


lessons, rather than in currency.


      In general, ‘market-prices’ are really just averages of actual prices;


and the price that a given person/organization might actually receive for its


products/services might fall short of the market-prices. And when thishappens, it might behoove that entity to engage in counter-trade.


      Also, currency-based transactions presuppose a stable currency. If


there is hyper-inflation, the value of the rent-money that Jones charges for his


room might evaporate overnight, as might the value of the lesson-money that


Smith charges.


      Another possible reason for engaging in counter-trade is that the


product/services involved might be so valuable that constitute a kind of de


facto currency. What would you rather have? Oil or money? Probably oil,


since it is guaranteed to hold its value, whereas money is not.


      It is for these reasons, or reasons similar to them, that whole nations


engage in counter-trade. Iraq has always been oil-rich, even though it has


often been cash-poor; and Iraq therefore has a strong incentive to pay for


goods/services with oil, rather than with cash. And other countries may be in


a similar situation. For example, India tends to be wheat-rich, even though it


also tends to be cash-poor. Also, India cannot service its own oil-needs, and


its currency isn’t very strong. Finally, Iraq doesn’t have wheat but needs and


India has wheat. For this reason, Iraq and India have engaged wheat-for-oil


exchanges, this being an example of counter-trade.Why should a firm pursue an ethnocentric approach to staffing? What are the


disadvantages of this approach? Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of


a polycentric approach to staffing.


 


      Let X be a company that is headquartered in Madison, Wisconsin but


does business in Africa, Asia, the Middle East, Europe, South America, as


well as North America. X has an ethnocentric approach to staffing if hires


people locally for its non-local positions. So if it hires people in Madison (or


at least the United States) and then sends those people to manage its branches


in Afraid, Asia, etc., then X has an ethnocentric approach to staffing.


      The idea behind ethnocentric staffing is that the people who are hired,


being of the same culture as the parent company, will quickly adopt its


methods and understand its ways, whereas (so the ethnocentric theory goes),


people hired regionally may be slow to absorb the company’s methods and


vision and may steer it in the wrong direction.


      There are a number of advantages to the ethnocentric approach. First,


it will be easier for central management to coordinate with regional


employees. Second, it will be easier to train people for regional positions.


Third, it will be easier to instill the company’s vision in the minds of regional


employees. Fourth, there may be greater loyalty on the part of the localemployees, since the company will be their ‘lifeline’, as it were, whereas that


is not likely to be the case for locally hired employees.


      Also, in many cases, there may not be a sufficiently developed or large


labor market for it to be possible for companies to hire regionally. For


example, let’s say a medical services company wants to set up shop in a


backwards village in the middle of the jungle. It cannot hire locally; in fact,


the very reason there is a demand for its services may be the paucity of local


people with the requisite abilities.


      A polycentric approach to staffing is one that is not ethnocentric. So


under a polycentric approach, Company X hires people regionally. It does not


‘import’ its own people from headquarters into its different regional


branches. Rather, it hires people from those regions to staff those branches.


      There are several possible advantages to this approach. First, labor


might be considerably cheaper. Let Y be an American tech company that has


branches in India. It will be much cheaper for Y to hire Indians to staff its


Indian branches than it would be to hire Americans to do so.


      Also, local employees might have a better understanding of the local


legal and regulatory environments, as well as of its general customs.


      Also, they are also more likely to gain the trust of the locals, which


can help with finding clients and with avoiding legal and regulatory snares.


        Moreover, in some cases, the locals might actually have the requiredskills in greater abundance than in the locale of company-headquarters. For


example, let Z be a medical-services company based in Fairbanks Alaska that


has branches in India. Z will probably have an easier time staffing its Indian


branches with Indian physicians than it would staffing them with ‘exports’


from Fairbanks Alaska.


      Finally, in some cases, people hired ‘on-site’, instead of exported from


company-headquarters, may be more loyal to the company than would such


exports. This is likely to be the case if the company in question pays better


than its regional competitors. For example, let W be a medical services


company based in Chicago, Illinois that has branches in Bangladesh. W is


likely able to out-pay its regional Bangladeshi competitors several times over.


And in this case, locally hired Bangladeshi physicians might be far more


loyal to W than would American physicians, hired in Chicago, simply


because the latter could always return to the United States and find jobs that


paid as much if not more, whereas their Bangladeshi counterparts would not


have this option.


      In conclusion, whether an ethnocentric approach to staffing is to be


preferred to a polycentric approach or vice versa depends both on the nature


of the company in question as well as the conditions that obtain in locations


of that company’s regional branches. Depending on the values of these


variables in a given context, it might be less expensive, and also moreconductive to the company’s integrity, for that company to take an


ethnocentric approach; or, contrariwise, 


                         The Secret of IKEA’s Success (Business)




The opening case describes IKEA’s global strategy and the way the company


tailors its offerings to meet customer demands. When IKEA first expanded to


the United States in the 1980s, it saw disappointing sales as U.S. consumers


expected its products to be larger than was typical in Western Europe (where


IKEA was founded). Once IKEA developed larger sizes to accommodate


American tastes, sales improved. IKEA built on this experience when


expanding into China in the early 2000s and found success by reshaping its


stores and offerings to accommodate Chinese culture. 




What are the characteristics of IKEA’s global strategy? Who are its target


customers? How does the design of its stores and offerings fit into this


strategy and the market that IKEA is trying to reach?


How well does IKEA’s strategy translate in other cultures outside of Western


Europe? What are some advantages to maintaining a consistent global


strategy? What are some disadvantages?


 


      IKEA targets customers who are budget-conscious but not ‘cheap’. Its


strategy is one of efficiency and economy---of pleasing customers, and


getting their business, by being functional.      First of all, IKEA sells high-quality but affordable wooden furniture. It


thus appeals to people who are thinking in functional terms—people who


want to live tastefully but on a budget.


      These same people are likely to have a streak of do-it-yourself-ism and


self-reliance and are thus willing to do a little extra work if that’s what it


takes to remain within budge. And so it is that most of IKEA’s furniture


requires assembly: not labor-intensive complex assembly—but enough


assembly to keep the cost of said furniture low but not so much as to alienate


IKEA’s customers.


      This understated adaptiveness to customer-needs is expressed in other


aspects of IKEA’s business-model. For example, when IKEA first opened in


the United States, sales were poor, owing to the fact that IKEA’s furniture


was not large enough for American consumers. (IKEA had thus far done


business in Europe, where apartments, and therefore furnishings, tend to be


small.) IKEA dealt with this by adapting: it offered its American customers


American-sized (large) products. And sales promptly went through the roof.


      When IKEA opened up in China, it made similar concessions to


Chinese culture. The floor-plan of IKEA stores in China was made to mimic


that of Chinese apartments. And because many Chinese apartments have


balconies, IKEA’s China-stores had balcony-sections.


      IKEA provides its customers with a ‘total shopping experience.’Going to an IKEA is more like going to a museum than it is like going to a


normal store. The store itself is aesthetically pleasing, highlighting the


aesthetics of the furniture inside. And the store has a labyrinthine floorplan


which (literally and figuratively) draws in customers, encouraging them to


buy. Also, most IKEA stores are located in ex-urban areas, so that going to


IKEA is a journey-unto-itself—an occasion---rather than a causal and


insignificant experience.


      In conclusion, IKEA has a well-defined customer base (budget-


minded, middle class consumers) and a well-defined line of goods. But it is


willing to make targeted alterations to those goods to adapt to local needs,


and it subtly but non-manipulatively insinuates itself into the minds of


buyers, encouraging them to buy, which it does, ultimately, by making IKEA


be a concept as much as it is an actual purveyor of goods.


      And there it is: it is because IKEA is a concept, as opposed to a mere


retailer, that it does so well.


                             Strategy and Profitability (Business)


 


  What is strategy? How does strategy relate to a firm's profitability?


 


      Strategy (in other words, marketing strategy) is the development on


the part of a firm of a long-term plan of action for remaining competitive in a


competitive and dynamic market. The default position for a firm is to react to


changes in the market and hope for the best. This is obviously not the best


approach---in fact, it isn’t really an approach at all. The best approach is a


deliberate approach. Marketing strategy is simply about having a deliberate,


pro-active attitude towards the market.


      Any viable marketing strategy answers three key questions:


 


      Where are we know?


      Where we want to go?


      How will we get there?


 


      Here is an example. Suppose that I am running an online tutoring


service. Right now, I am the only person on staff; so I have to do all of the


work. This involves me doing an inordinate amount of work: I have to spend


all day writing papers, solving math problems, and so on; which isexcessively labor-intensive and which does not pay particularly well, since


the people who need this knd of help tend to be students who have limited


means.


      That is ‘where I am.’


      What about ‘where do I want to go?’ I want to have an agency that


employs hundreds of tutors, much like Chegg or Varsity. I also want to


corner some part of the market that is still open. I know from personal


experience that one part of the market that is wide open is the part consisting


of relatively advanced students who need high-level tutors who can help with


dissertations and other advanced projects. If I can capture that market, then


my firm will have a stable place in the market; and it might even be in a


position to take over markets that the current online agencies (Chegg,


Varsity, Wyzant) control.


      What about: ‘How do I get there?’ ‘Getting there’ involves several


steps. First, I have to sharpen my vision for the agency: Do I want to compete


on quality or on price? Let us suppose that I want to compete on quality---


that I will let other agencies offer cheap tutorials and will myself focus on


providing people with good tutorials. In that case, I will be able to hire top-


people, since I will be able to offer them competitive wages. Then I have to


figure out mechanics: Will a student needs a tutor, will tutors an alert through


an app on their phone? Will they get an email? Or will they have to be loggedinto the site?


      ‘Getting there’ involves answering a myriad of questions, some


technical, some conceptual. For example, what is my brand? In other words,


what is my company concept? How can I have a public presence that is both


compelling and accurate?


        Marketing strategy is simply an attempt to answer the totality of these


questions in a way that helps the firm in question retain a competitive edge


and also hedge against the inevitably surprises that come with being in a


dynamic and competitive business environment. 




What is a joint venture? What type of joint venture is most common? Provide


an example of a joint venture.


 


      A joint venture is an agreement between two firms to carry out some


specific task. Suppose that Consider the following. Smith develops


technology that reads people’s intentions directly off of changes in their


brain-waves. Jones manufactures cell phones. Smith and Jones decide to


work together to create a line of cell phones that do not even need to be


physically dialed, as they respond directly to changes in their owner’s brain-


waves by dialing the correct number. Smith and Jones do not want to form a


single company; each wants to retain his corporate autonomy. So they don’twant to merge. But for this particular project, they need each other, since


Jones needs Smith for the software and Smith needs Jones for the hardware.


      A joint venture is not the same thing as a partnership. A partnership is


a single business venture that involves multiple parties. Profits are shared;


taxes are shared; and there is common management. In a joint venture, on the


other hand, there are two separate companies, two separate revenue-streams,


two separate sets of liabilities, and separate management.


      A joint venture is also not the same thing as a consortium. A


consortium is a loose arrangement of companies that agree to cooperate with


one another but are otherwise not intertwined. Suppose that Publishing hoses


X, Y, and Z jointly control the book-market. But they decide that, instead of


competing with one another, they will divide up that market into three sub-


markets, with X controlling one of those sub-market, Y controlling another,


and Z controlling the third. Otherwise, X, Y, and Z are separate from each


other. This is a consortium.


      An example of a joint venture is Caradigm. Microsoft specializes in


computer-related technology and software. General Electric specializes in


appliances. The two teamed up to form Caradigm, a joint venture that


manufactures ‘smart’ medical technology, such as machines that help make


medical diagnoses more accurate.


      The most typical sort of joint venture is a 50/50 venture, in which eachparty has 50% claim to the profits and to which each party contributes is own


people.


 


  Explain countertrade and its purpose


 


        Countertrade is the act of paying for goods/services with other


goods/services, instead of with money. Imagine the following. Country X has


wheat; country Y has oil; X needs oil; and Y needs wheat. Neither has


money. So they agree to exchange oil for wheat. This is an example of


counter-trade.


      The term ‘counter-trade’ tends to refer to exchanges made between


countries (or whole economies). But it is easily illustrated in with examples


of trade at the individual level. Imagine the following. Smith is a talented


piano teacher who has no money for rent. Jones desperately wants piano


instruction and he also has an extra room, but he has no money for piano


lessons. So Smith and Jones agree that Smith will get ‘free’ lodging if he


gives piano lessons to Jones, and Jones will get ‘free’ piano lessons if he


gives lodging to Smith.


      Why would Smith and Jones agree to such an arrangement? Couldn’t


Smith simply sell piano lessons on the open market and then pay for rent with


the proceeds? And couldn’t Jones simply rent out his extra room on the openmarket and then pay for piano lessons with the proceeds?


      That would be the appropriate course of action in many contexts, but


not all. First of all, there is no reason to this if the exact thing that Jones


wants is piano lessons from Smith and if, moreover, the exact thing that


Smith wants is a room in Jones’ house. In other words, if the exact thing


Smith would want to do with the proceeds from his lessons was rent a room


in Jones’ house and the very thing that Jones would want to do the proceeds


from renting out his room was buy lessons from Smith, then they might as


well engage in a direct exchange, without using the intermediary of currency.


      Also, there might be reasons why a direct exchange would not only be


feasible but necessary. First of all, even if the market-value of Smith’s


lessons is $100/hour, it doesn’t follow that Smith will actually make that


much from his lessons. He has to market himself, which is expensive. He has


to drive from lesson to lesson, which is expensive. He has to have safeguards


in place, which protect him in case a client’s check bounces. And so on. Also,


his personality might be such that, whereas some people love, many others


can’t stand him and aren’t willing to pay him anything for his services. So it


might be a lot simpler for Smith, and also less expensive, if he is paid in


lodging, rather than trying to get paid in currency. For similar reasons, it


might be easier and less expensive for Jones to be paid for his room in piano


lessons, rather than in currency.      In general, ‘market-prices’ are really just averages of actual prices;


and the price that a given person/organization might actually receive for its


products/services might fall short of the market-prices. And when this


happens, it might behoove that entity to engage in counter-trade.


      Also, currency-based transactions presuppose a stable currency. If


there is hyper-inflation, the value of the rent-money that Jones charges for his


room might evaporate overnight, as might the value of the lesson-money that


Smith charges.


      Another possible reason for engaging in counter-trade is that the


product/services involved might be so valuable that constitute a kind of de


facto currency. What would you rather have? Oil or money? Probably oil,


since it is guaranteed to hold its value, whereas money is not.


      It is for these reasons, or reasons similar to them, that whole nations


engage in counter-trade. Iraq has always been oil-rich, even though it has


often been cash-poor; and Iraq therefore has a strong incentive to pay for


goods/services with oil, rather than with cash. And other countries may be in


a similar situation. For example, India tends to be wheat-rich, even though it


also tends to be cash-poor. Also, India cannot service its own oil-needs, and


its currency isn’t very strong. Finally, Iraq doesn’t have wheat but needs and


India has wheat. For this reason, Iraq and India have engaged wheat-for-oil


exchanges, this being an example of counter-trade.Why should a firm pursue an ethnocentric approach to staffing? What are the


disadvantages of this approach? Discuss the advantages and disadvantages


of a polycentric approach to staffing.


 


      Let X be a company that is headquartered in Madison, Wisconsin but


does business in Africa, Asia, the Middle East, Europe, South America, as


well as North America. X has an ethnocentric approach to staffing if hires


people locally for its non-local positions. So if it hires people in Madison (or


at least the United States) and then sends those people to manage its branches


in Afraid, Asia, etc., then X has an ethnocentric approach to staffing.


      The idea behind ethnocentric staffing is that the people who are hired,


being of the same culture as the parent company, will quickly adopt its


methods and understand its ways, whereas (so the ethnocentric theory goes),


people hired regionally may be slow to absorb the company’s methods and


vision and may steer it in the wrong direction.


      There are a number of advantages to the ethnocentric approach. First,


it will be easier for central management to coordinate with regional


employees. Second, it will be easier to train people for regional positions.


Third, it will be easier to instill the company’s vision in the minds of regional


employees. Fourth, there may be greater loyalty on the part of the localemployees, since the company will be their ‘lifeline’, as it were, whereas that


is not likely to be the case for locally hired employees.


      Also, in many cases, there may not be a sufficiently developed or large


labor market for it to be possible for companies to hire regionally. For


example, let’s say a medical services company wants to set up shop in a


backwards village in the middle of the jungle. It cannot hire locally; in fact,


the very reason there is a demand for its services may be the paucity of local


people with the requisite abilities.


      A polycentric approach to staffing is one that is not ethnocentric. So


under a polycentric approach, Company X hires people regionally. It does not


‘import’ its own people from headquarters into its different regional


branches. Rather, it hires people from those regions to staff those branches.


      There are several possible advantages to this approach. First, labor


might be considerably cheaper. Let Y be an American tech company that has


branches in India. It will be much cheaper for Y to hire Indians to staff its


Indian branches than it would be to hire Americans to do so.


      Also, local employees might have a better understanding of the local


legal and regulatory environments, as well as of its general customs.


      Also, they are also more likely to gain the trust of the locals, which


can help with finding clients and with avoiding legal and regulatory snares.


        Moreover, in some cases, the locals might actually have the requiredskills in greater abundance than in the locale of company-headquarters. For


example, let Z be a medical-services company based in Fairbanks Alaska that


has branches in India. Z will probably have an easier time staffing its Indian


branches with Indian physicians than it would staffing them with ‘exports’


from Fairbanks Alaska.


      Finally, in some cases, people hired ‘on-site’, instead of exported from


company-headquarters, may be more loyal to the company than would such


exports. This is likely to be the case if the company in question pays better


than its regional competitors. For example, let W be a medical services


company based in Chicago, Illinois that has branches in Bangladesh. W is


likely able to out-pay its regional Bangladeshi competitors several times over.


And in this case, locally hired Bangladeshi physicians might be far more


loyal to W than would American physicians, hired in Chicago, simply


because the latter could always return to the United States and find jobs that


paid as much if not more, whereas their Bangladeshi counterparts would not


have this option.


      In conclusion, whether an ethnocentric approach to staffing is to be


preferred to a polycentric approach or vice versa depends both on the nature


of the company in question as well as the conditions that obtain in locations


of that company’s regional branches. Depending on the values of these


variables in a given context, it might be less expensive, and also moreconductive to the company’s integrity, for that company to take an


ethnocentric approach; or, contrariwise, 


             Facebook: Why and How it Makes Money (Business)


 


      Today’s date is June 22, 2018. On May 12, I predicted that during the


next month Facebook would grow. I was right. On May 12, FB sat at 187.71,


and it is currently at 202.24, which represents growth of 7.65%. FB’s low


during this period was on May 18, when it hit 183.61; and its high was on


June 20, when it 203.55.


      My reasons for predicting that Facebook would grow were simply that


it has been growing. Apart from a hiccup in March 2018, when it fell from


185.09 to 152.22, Facebook’s growth during the previous year has been


steady and rapid. On June 22, 2017, it stood at 151.85; and on June 22, 2018,


it stands at 202.24. That means that it is grown 33% over the last years.


      But it was not just Facebook’s performance over the previous year that


led me to predict that it would grow. I personally use Facebook. All of my


friends use Facebook. I don’t know anyone who doesn’t have a Facebook


account (even though I do many people who don’t often use their accounts).


Also, Facebook doesn’t really have any well-defined competition. Facebook


provides a cyber-venue where people can set up virtual identities for


themselves. They can be whoever they want to be, and they can assemble


vast networks of Facebook ‘friends’ around themselves who can counted on


to support their cyber-identities. (If a Facebook ‘friend’ doesn’t toe one’sline, then one simply ‘unfriends’ that person.) So Facebook allows people to


create virtual neighborhoods for themselves, in which they are surrounded by


adoring yes-men and in which their views and their very selves are flooded


with constant validation.


      Facebook’s ‘rivals’ aren’t really rivals at all. Facebook’s main


competitor is Twitter. But Twitter is indeed about ‘tweeting’---blasting out


‘tweets’, a tweet being a short message (120 words or less), usually about


some news-development. When an author has a new book out on Amazon, he


will ‘tweet’ about it. Or when a politician announces a new policy or


position, he may tweet about it. Or if somebody posts to Quora.com (an


online discussion-forum, where people exchange information), he can tweet


about it.


      So Twitter is useful for receiving and getting updates. But that is


pretty much all that it is useful for. It is not useful for people who don’t have


independent followings. It is not useful for people who don’t have new


messages that are of general interest to blast out. Twitter doesn’t allow people


to feel special, at least not in the way that Facebook does. So Twitter doesn’t


really offer the same service as Facebook.


      But Facebook does offer the same services as Twitter. One can ‘blast


out’ updates to one’s profile. For example, if someone publishes a book on


Amazon, he can automatically create a Facebook post about. (On Amazon,and indeed on almost all websites, the Facebook-blast icon is right next to the


Twitter-blast button.)


      Also, Facebook allows people to create business pages for themselves.


So businesses have an interest in being present on Facebook. Facebook also


allows people/businesses to create video advertisements for themselves.


These are not free, and that is a major source of revenue for Facebook.


      But Facebook’s main source of revenue is from advertising purchased


by large companies, e.g. McDonald’s, Coca Cola, Visa, Budweiser and Nike.


It generates literally billions of dollars/year in advertising revenue from major


corporations.


        Facebook recently introduced a mobile app, so that people can post


and receive posts on their smart phones. The mobile app displays


advertisements. The mobile app is extremely popular with users, and


Facebook’s advertising revenue consequently sored with the introduction of


its mobile.


      Also, Facebook owns Instagram—a popular photo and video-sharing


site—which is itself a major source of advertising revenue, both from


micropreneurs and from mega-corporations.


      In conclusion, given what Facebook provides (a virtual identity,


complete with adoring ‘friends’) and given that nobody else provides it, its


growth for the near future seems assured.                             Gret Satell on Marketing (Business)


 


        Marketing is defined as “the action or business of promoting and


selling products or services, including market research and advertising.” In


his article “ 4 Principles of Marketing Strategy In The Digital Age”, Gret


Satell makes four suggestions to people who are trying to market a product or


service:


Clarify business objectives. (Are you trying to make immediate sales? Build


brand-awareness? Develop a loyal customer-base? Get a lot of customers? Or


get a few very wealthy customers?)


Identify emerging opportunities (If your service/product is threatened by a


competitor, will you embrace that competition and perhaps turn it to your


advantage? Or will you turn a blind eye to it and become a dinosaur?)


      Decouple strategy and innovation. (Be innovative when it comes to


products and services. But when it comes to marketing, be effective, not


necessarily innovative. If you are trying to cure a disease, be innovative. If


you are trying to make people aware of your cure, being innovative isn’t


necessarily the best idea.)


      Build open assets in the market. (Merely aking people aware of your


product is no longer enough to drive sales. In fact, it might simply make


people aware of the kind of product you are offering, which will in turn causepeople to google-search for a cheap alternative to your product. What you


have to do is build an interface—something that gets money from the


customer in exchange for product—right into your methods of making them


aware of the product. So, to give a real life example, you make people aware


of your business by building awareness of your business into your tutoring


sessions, telling your customers that if they want psychoanalysis online for


less, the should go to: www.freudinstitute.com)


      What this article makes clear is that marketing isn’t just about getting


people to be aware of a pre-existing product; it is about creating a product


that can be marketed in the first place and the marketing of which is to some


extent self-funding. We have moved beyond the 1950’s model of ‘make


people aware and they will buy’ to ‘make people’s being aware the same as


their buying.’


                 An Exercise in Rational Decision-making (Business)


        Scenario 1: You have worked at your company for eleven (11) years.


You have returned to college to earn a Bachelor’s degree in order to increase


your chances for a promotion. You are nearly finished with your degree,


when a supervisor’s position in a competing company becomes available in


another state. The start date is in two (2) weeks, during your final exam


period for your courses. The position offers a $15,000 per year salary


increase, a car allowance, and relocation expenses. Your former supervisor


works for the company and is recommending you for the position based on


your outstanding job performance; if you want the job, it’s yours. All of the


other supervisors at this level in the company have Master’s degrees, so you


know that you would be expected to earn your Bachelor’s degree and


continue on to a Master’s degree. Your present company offers tuition


reimbursement, but the new company does not.


 


      Step 1: Define the problem: The main problem here is new job starts


during exams, successful completion of which is itself a precondition for


getting the new job. The reason this is a problem—a dilemma, in other words


—is that the new job pays better than the existing job and, for that reason,


probably represents a career opening in other ways.


      Step 2: Analyze the problem: The situation is ambiguous in other,opposed ways. First of all, the existing job offers tuition reimbursement,


whereas the new job does not. This to some extent offsets the meaningfulness


of the new job offer. If tuition costs exceed $15,000, which is certainly


possible, then the new job may not be that much of an improvement on the


old one. Also, while the new company will cover relocation expenses, this is


a zero-sum gain, given that there is no need to have those expenses covered


unless the job-offer is accepted.


      Step 3: Generate options: There are four possible options. 1: Keep


one’s current job. 2. Take the second job and, moreover, do so within the new


employer’s time-frame (meaning that one must find a way to take one’s final


exams while also starting work at the new job in two weeks’ time). 3. Ask the


new employer if he will allow you to start the new job late. 4. Try to


reschedule final exams.


      Step 4: Options 3 and 4 may be non-starters: it is hard, if not


impossible, to get exams rescheduled (and, even if they are rescheduled, the


result could be a grade-destroying disruption of one’s routine). And the new


employer may not grant the extension. (If they need somebody in two weeks,


they are likely to pass you over if you cannot start in two weeks.) Option 2 is


possibly only if the new job is located nearby, which may not be the case.


Option 1 is the only option that is guaranteed to be a viable one.


      Step 5: The best option—and, arguably, the only real one—is to keepone’s current job and take one’s exams on schedule. And this is by no means


a bad option. First of all, the person who gave you a glowing


recommendation for the new job is your current boss; so he is likely to keep


his eye out for future options for you, both inside and outside of your current


positions, and some of those options may be even more lucrative than the job


you were just offered. Also, given that your current employer will reimburse


you for tuition, you will be free of a massive debt if you keep your current


job and may even be able to get advanced degrees without incurring debt.


Also, you have no history with the new employer, and things might not work


out there, in which case you would be left with a huge amount of debt and no


prospects. So Option 1 is the best one.


      Step 6: How to implement the solution: Option 1, in addition to be the


best option, is also the most conservative. And little has to be done to


implement it. Indeed, it is self-implement. Simply tell your current employer


that you like your current job (with him) so much that you want to stay, and


take it from there. Also, you can simply tell him the truth—that the new job


would be logistically hard for you to take and the expected pay-off doesn’t


quite counter-balance the likely downside.


                           Organizational Analysis of McDonals


                          Including SWOT Analysis (Business)


 


      The company that I will analyze is McDonalds.


      First of all, 81% of McDonalds restaurants are franchises. In other


words, they are not owned by McDonalds by itself. Rather, people buy the


rights to use the McDonalds name and to use McDonalds products and


methods. McDonalds itself owns only 19% of McDonalds restaurants.


      The McDonalds internal hierarchy is as follows:


 


      Chairman and CEO


      President and COO


      Executive Vice President


      Zone Manager


      Regional Manager


      Operations Manager


      Area Supervisor, District Manager


        General Manager


        Department Manager


      Shift Manager, Swing Manager, Floor Supervisor


      Crew Trainer      Crew member


 


      Three facts about McDonalds organizational structure deserve special


attention.


      First, McDonalds has a global hierarchy. It has outlets in practically


every country in the world. But the activities of each and every store, whether


a franchise or McDonald’s owned, is under the control of McDonalds’ CEO.


In this respect, McDonalds has a fairly standard corporate structure.


      A more distinctive feature of McDonalds’ organizational structure is


that its main divisions are performance-based. Until 2015, McDonalds’ main


divisions were geographical, there being divisions for: (a) US, (b) Europe, (c)


Asia/Pacific, (d) Middle-East/Africa, and (e) other countries, including


Canada and Latin American countries. In 2015, McDonalds replaced these


divisions with performance-based divisions: (a) US, (b) international lead


markets, (c) High Growth Markets, and (d) Foundational Markets.


        McDonalds is also divided into three functional groups: (i) Human


Resources Group, (ii) Supply-chain and Franchising Group, and (c) a Legal


Group.


        McDonalds has to provide food of uniformly high quality to literally


hundreds of millions of customers every day. For this reason, the nature of


work within McDonalds, whether at the level of a crewmember or of mid-level executive, is highly routinized and subject to automatic checks and


controls. Because McDonalds has to provide extremely fast and virtually


flawless service to so many people, there is practically zero tolerance of


errors and virtually every aspect of daily-work, setting aside the very highest


echelons of the company, are routinized. This can lead to a dull and


demoralizing experience for most McDonalds workers, which is responsible


for the fact that “you should work at McDonalds” is considered the highest


insult to someone who has professional ambitions. Overall, the work-


environment at McDonalds is humane but discouragingly dull.


      Let us now examine McDonalds’ strengths and weaknesses. Here are


its main strengths:


 


        *Consistently good food


      *Low prices


        *Extremely wide availability


        *Extremely fast service


      *Clean and aesthetic restaurants


        *Household name


      *Excellent name brand recognition


      *High consumer confidence in brand


      *42% market share        *Universally beloved items, e.g. Big Mac, Fried, Chick McNuggets


              *The ability, because of its size, to order products and service at


      low rates, giving it an ‘unfair’ competitive advantage over rivals; for


      example, McDonalds’ has a special arrangement with Coca Cola


      whereby it can buy Coca Cola for less than any of its (McDonalds’)


      competitors.


              *High-level of food innovation


              *Menu that varies (within limits) depending on the region


              *Generally sanitary and aesthetic restaurants


              *Few or no health-related concerns, unlike other chain-


      restaurants, e.g. Denny’s.


              *Is making vigorous and successful efforts to minimize its


      impact on the environment.


              *Consistently successful marketing campaigns, unlike its rivals,


    e.g. Burger King, which often resorted to somewhat ill-willed (and for


    that reason unsuccessful) marketing campaigns, such as the infamous


      ‘Herb’ commercial of the ‘80s.


 


      At the same time, McDonald’s has non-trivial and growing


weaknesses:


               *Growing competition from fast-food rivals (KFC, Burger,


      Wendy’s, Starbucks)


              *Competition from chains outside of the fast food-category (e.g.


      Starbucks, which recently introduced breakfast meals to compete with


      McDonalds’ breakfast meals)


              *Competition from restaurant chains that provide food that is


      healthier and better and that, although not exactly ‘fast food’, is still


      made and served quickly, e.g. Chick-a-fillet, Chipotle, Veggie Grill and


      Native Foods.


              *The (probably correct) perception that McDonalds is


      responsible for a great deal of obesity and poor health.


              *The widely held association between ‘person who eats at


      McDonalds’ and ‘loser who has no self-respect.’


 


 


              Ultimately, however, McDonalds’ strengths exceed its


      weakness. First of all, McDonalds has many healthy options on its


      menu that are surprisingly delicious. So despite the efforts its


      detractors, McDonalds cannot be painted with the same dark brush as


      Marlborough or other unambiguously health-destructive companies.


      Also, McDonalds is the second most popular fast-food chain in China,      which has a population of 1.3 billion. So over all, McDonalds’


      corporate health is excellent, notwithstanding a mild slowing of its rate


    of growth over the last few years.        Analysis of Case 2: Why the Candidate Should Decline the Job Offer


                                    (Business/Ethics)


 


      Under the circumstances described, I would have to decline the job


offer. There are, at least arguably, some circumstances under which it is


morally acceptable to take a job for which one has not yet received the


requisite training. It would be acceptable so long as two conditions held.


First, the candidate has a reasonable expectation that he can acquire the


requisite skills in a sufficiently timely manner that he will be able to fulfill his


legal and professional obligations to his employer. Second, the stakes are


low, in the sense that, should he fail to learn the requisite skills sufficiently


quickly, there would be no adverse affects (for either the company or for


society) of a serious nature.


      In the scenario in question, neither of these conditions is likely to be


fulfilled. First of all, practically any job relating to the building or use of


spacecrafts is going to be enormously complex and will likely require skills


that are not easily or quickly acquired and that a given person, no matter how


intellectually gifted, can predict with certainty that he will acquire within a


tiny window of time. Second, if the candidate in question takes the job and--


as is likely--is not able to do the job adequately, the consequences would


likely be serious. First, there is a distinct chance that his incompetent willslow down or possibly even put an end to the project in question. This would


have disastrous financial and logistical consequences for the company in


question. Also, the purpose of the mission in question might be to help with


scientific, possibly even medical, research, in which case the candidate's


incompetence could slow down and or diminish the quality of that research.


Moreover, the mission in question might even be a part of a larger


international diplomatic or peace-keeping effort, in which case the


candidate's incompetence could potentially have negative consequences on a


geopolitical scale.


      To be sure, if the candidate in question is sufficiently talented at the


subject in question, he may well be able to take the job without hurting


anyone and without being remiss in his obligations to the company. But


unless the candidate knows with certainty that he will able to learn the


requisite skills, he cannot legitimately take the job in question, for the reasons


just stated.


      I would like to illustrate these points with some examples from my


own life.


      I work for a tutoring agency. I am listed as a math and economics


tutor. In order to get to be listed with the tutoring agency as a math tutor or an


economics tutor, one has to pass assessment-tests in those disciplines. I pass


those tests. But sometimes the agency wanted me to help clients who neededhelp with material far more advanced than anything covered by those


assessment tests. Because I like a challenge, I initially always accepted these


clients, confident as I was that, even though I did not at that instant have the


requisite abilities, I could acquire them quickly enough.


      And around 75% of the time I was right: I was able to master the new


material in question quickly enough that I could fulfill my responsibilities to


both the client and to the agency. But around 25% of the time I was wrong.


And the results were not good. First of all, the client was charged for my


time, even though I wasn't able to help the client. (Sometimes the agency


would refund the money. But in order for this to happen, the client had to go


through a rather arduous process.) Second, even when the client was refunded


his money, he could not be refunded the time that he lost working with me,


which was sometimes more valuable than the lost money, since oftentimes


the client's needs were time-sensitive.


      Also, by taking on a client whose needs I couldn't adequately service, I


was making the tutoring agency look bad, which, though probably not a


breach of contract on my part, is a breech, it seems to me, of some kind of


implicit, ethical understanding that an employee has with his employer.


      Be it noted that in the cases just described, the stakes were extremely


low. In working with these clients, I was not helping launch a rocket into


outer space; I was not involved in scientific or medical research; and themoney and time that were lost were infinitesimal compared to what would be


lost, in the way of both money and time, in the case of an incompetent


employee of an aerospace company.


      There is one thing about my tutoring experience that I should point


out. Sometimes, when I 'rolled the dice' by taking on a client who needed


help with the material that I was not yet familiar with, I was not only able to


help the client, but do a particularly good job with him. For it sometimes


turned out that I had a knack with that material, which fact, combined with


the freshness and enthusiasm that I could bring to this (to me) new material,


enabled me to go 'above and beyond', as it were, in the way of helping the


client.


      But even though this did sometimes happen, I could not, when taking


on such a client, predict with reasonable certainty that it would happen. For


all I knew, I was just as likely as not to fail the client. Which, in fact, often


happened. And which, when it did happen, was a minor catastrophe---the


proportions of which paled in comparison to those of the catastrophe that


would likely result in the situation where someone takes an aerospace-job for


which he is not qualified.


      When one takes a job, one is entering into a contract. And according to


the terms of that contract, one must be qualified to perform that job


adequately. If one cannot perform that job adequately, then one cannot ingood faith take that job. We must therefore conclude that, given only the


information described in the scenario in question, the person who is offered


the job should decline the job-offer.


         Internal vs. External Stakeholders: An Analysis of Three Companies


                                    (Business/Finance)


 


 


      In this paper, I will describe a what a corporate stakeholder is, paying


special attention to the difference between internal and external corporate


stakeholders; and I will do this by (i) describing two small companies and


then using these examples to (ii) describe Amazon.


      A ‘stakeholder’ in a given corporation (or ‘corporate stakeholder’) is


anyone whose fortunes depend on those of that company. An ‘internal


stakeholder’ is anyone who has a financial or otherwise direct interest in the


company, e.g. shareholders, sole proprietors, investors, employees. An


‘external stakeholder’ is anyone who depends on the company, but does not


have a direct financial interest in it, such as customers/clients or other


beneficiaries (including labor-unions that might benefit from the company’s


welfare).


      To give a trivial example, I run small corporation that provides people


with online piano lessons. It is publicly traded. I own most but not all of the


stock. I have also have 10 employees.


      The internal stake holders in that company are myself and the other


people who own equity in the company. I am the primary internal stakeholderof this company.


      My company’s chief external stakeholders are clients. This is because


we provide a relatively unique service and our clients would have a very


difficult finding another person or company to satisfy their demand for that


service. Other external stakeholders in this company include the companies


whose technology we use. For example, we use an app called ZOOM, which


makes it very easy to conduct real-time online meetings (including music


lessons).


      Here is another example. A friend of mine is a psychoanalyst and


popular author who founded, runs, and is the primary shareholder in a


company, called The Freud Institute (www.freudinstitute.com) that provides


people with online psychoanalysis and psychotherapy, with a special focus on


the treatment of OCD. The Freud Institute is publicly traded.


      The internal stakeholders are my friend, the owner and CEO, as well


as the various shareholders, including the angel investors, each of whom has


equity in the company. The company’s employees (these being my friend and


his small staff of psychologists, as well IT-personnel), are also among its


internal stakeholders. The external stakeholders are the clients, all of whom


depend on the company, since it provides a unique, as well as effective,


service.


      When we are dealing with a company of scale, such as Amazon, thestory is commensurately more complex. Amazon’s internal stakeholders


include all those who are financially invested in the company. Jeff Bezos, as


the CEO and primary shareholder, is the primary internal stakeholder. But all


of Amazon’s millions of shareholders are internal stakeholders, as are all of


its hundreds of thousands of employees.


        Among Amazon’s external stakeholders are all its various customers,


including the schools and government-agencies that depend on their being to


have ready access to the instructional and educational materials that Amazon


makes available. Also, included among its external stakeholders are the


various businesses, including sole-proprietorships, that use Amazon’s


platform to ply their trade. Thus, businesses such as Loreal, Levi’s, and


Centrum are all external stakeholders, since, although they do not necessarily


own shares in Amazon and aren’t employees of it or even contractors, profit


by using Amazon to sell their products. Also, the millions of authors who


self-publish on Amazon and sell their work through KDP (Kindle Direct


Publishing) are either internal or external stakeholders of Amazon, depending


on where exactly one draws the line between the two classes of stakeholders.


      Amazon has many other external stakeholders. Given how much the


entire United States depends on Amazon for both commercial and


entertainment purposes, the USA as a whole is an external stakeholder in


Amazon. Also, many T.V. Shows (e.g. Sex and the City, the Sopranos, theVikings, Six Feet Under) and Movies (e.g. Insomnia, the Boiler Room,


Shutter Island, Casino, Goodfellas) are watched through Amazon Prime


Video. If Amazon were to cease to exist or discontinue its video services, the


owners and distributors of these shows and movies would suffer or would at


least have to change their business-model.


      Also, Amazon employs large numbers of people overseas, especially


in Asia. Many regional and even national economies in this area are external


stakeholders in Amazon. Also, to promote good will between itself and


communities in these areas, Amazon has many pro bono outreach programs,


which provide food, medical assistance, and other forms of social assistance


to these communities. And the beneficiaries of these programs are external


stakeholders in Amazon.


      Why it is important to know about who represents you in the Texas


Legislature. Be specific.                        Variables in a Marketing-study (Business)


 


      The marketing variables that I want to study are:


 


      Men vs. Women


      Married vs. Single


 


      The study is conducted as follows:


      100 single men are randomly chosen. (They are known to be single


men, but otherwise are randomly chosen.)


      100 single women are randomly chosen. (They are known to be single


women, but otherwise are randomly chosen.)


      100 married men are randomly chosen. (They are known to be married


men, but otherwise are randomly chosen.)


      100 married women are randomly chosen. (They are known to be


married women, but otherwise are randomly chosen.)


      Each member of each of these four groups has to play a video game


called ‘store credit.’ In that game, they are given one unit of store credit,


which they can use towards the purchase of one item in a virtual store. Inside


this store there are 10 items, one of which is the inflatable lounger, 2 of


which are male-specific, 2 of which are female-specific, and five of which(not including the lounger) are gender-neutral. Each item in the store costs


one virtual unit of currency. In real life, the items are all price-comparable.


      Out of each group of 100, some whlle number of individuals will buy,


corresponding to the percentage of buyers in the corresponding groups of


people. So if there is a 37 in a given cell in the table, that means that 37/100


people in the corresponding group chose to buy the lounger, i.e. that people


in that group are 37% likely to buy the lounger.


 


      Results:


 


      Men Women


 


      Single 88 45


 


      Married 62 21


 


 


      The dependent variable is the probability of buying


 


      The dependent variable is the probability of a given person in a given


group of buying.      The two main effects are that men buy more than women and single


people buy more than married ones. The main interaction effect is that gender


and marital status blunt existing tendencies to purchase.


                     Target:  Corporate Case-study (Business)


 


      Target is a ‘discount-retailer’, similar to Sears or Walmart, a


‘discount-retailer’ being a store where goods are sold for a lower price than at


most retailers. Discount-retailers are generally able to charge less because


they offer wider-variety than other stores and therefore have a larger


customer-base, thus being able to stay afloat while charging less per product.


This holds of Target. At the same time, Target distinguishes itself from other


discount stores, especially Walmart, by providing a dramatically more


aesthetic shopping experience thus creating a sense of elegance, while also


providing reasonably competitive (though not hyper-competitive) prices.


      Target was originally founded in 1902 by George Dayton under the


name The Goodfellow Dry Goods underwent several name-changes, finally


settling on Target in 1962. The first Target store opened in Minneapolis,


Minnesota in 1962.


      After Walmart, Target is the second largest discount-retailer in the


United States, generating $934 billion in revenue in 2017. There are some


important differences between Target and Walmart, which help explain both


why Target does less well than Walmart but at the same time does better than


all but the one of its many competitors.


      First of all, why does Walmart outperform Target? Because Walmartis simply about low prices, so it spends little on aesthetics. A Walmart store


is essentially a giant warehouse; it has no ‘style.’ By contrast, Target has a


distinctive style and a warm feel to it, much more similar to that of an old-


fashioned department store. At the same time, Target offers lower prices than


most other retailers (though not nearly as low as Walmart, charging around


20% more on average than Walmart).


      So Target’s customer-base consists of budget-conscious professionals,


whereas Walmart’s consists of people who simply want to minimize


expenses. These differences are reflected in a number of different ways.


Walmart takes food stamps; Target does not. Walmarts tend to be located in


low-income neighborhoods; Targets tend to be located in more upscale


venues.


      Since the 1970’s Target’s growth has been exponential: In 1962, there


were 24 Target Stores; now there are 1,916. Also, Target has always been


opportunistic and quick to enter new markets. It was first retailer to stock


Amazon Kindle Reading devices. When Circuit City fell in 2009, Target


absorbed much of its business by offering a wider range of electronics. And


as of 10 years ago, most Target stores contain entire grocery-stories.


      Walmart does considerably more business than Target, for the simple


reason that its prices are much lower. But Target has been much more


aggressive than Walmart in moving into the realm of e-commerce. And thisfact, coupled with the decidedly more welcoming shopping experience that


Target offers, may enable Target to remain competitive in the years to come.


 


                   Prejudice as Psychological Resistance (Psychology)


 


        Freud’s thought sheds great light on the resistance that many people


to change and to ugly truths about themselves, and for this reason Freud’s


thought is particularly helpful when it comes to understanding the


phenomenon of prejudice. It will help if we first make some general remarks


about prejudice and then map Freud’s thought onto these points.


        Prejudice is prejudgment: If somebody is prejudiced against women,


he prejudges women, meaning that he forms a negative opinion of them


before he has enough information to have an informed opinion. One of the


very purposes of Freud’s theoretical system is to elucidate the nature


prejudices of the second, emotionally-driven. The reason is that such


prejudices are nothing other than what Freud refers to as resistance: “When


we undertake to cure a patient, writes Freud, “to free him from the


symptoms of his malady, he confronts us with a vigorous, tenacious


resistance that lasts during the whole time of the treatment.” (Freud,


Sigmund. A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis (p. 130). Kindle


Edition.) In other words, when the analyst tells the patient what is wrong


with him, the patient fights the analyst, refusing to believe what he is being


told, simply because he doesn’t want to believe it. Of course, there are cases


where the analyst is wrong and the patient ‘resists’ him for that reason, buthere are concerned with cases where the patient resists for the very reason


that the analyst is right. And that is the basis of the patient’s resistance, it is


because the patient benefits in some way from the delusion of which the


analyst is trying to disabuse him.


        According to Freud, getting humanity to accept psychoanalytic


thought involved getting it to overcome two prejudices. “One of these


assertions offends an intellectual prejudice,” Freud writes, “the other an


aesthetic-moral one.” (Freud, Sigmund. A General Introduction to


  Psychoanalysis (p. 10). Kindle Edition.) The intellectual prejudice is that


mental activity must be conscious, this being the exact opposite of the


psychoanalytic principle that “the psychic processes are in themselves


unconscious, and that those which are conscious are merely isolated acts and


parts of the total psychic life.” (Freud, Sigmund. A General Introduction to


  Psychoanalysis (p. 10). Kindle Edition.) The “aesthetic-moral” prejudice is


that the psychological role of sexuality in humans is relatively restricted,


being confined to activities that relate more or less directly to sex, whereas


  psychoanalysis alleges that the role of sexuality in the human mind extends


far beyond the desire to have intercourse, as it is also involved in the


development mental illness as well as in intellectual and artistic creation.


“Those instinctive impulses which one can only call sexual in the narrower


as well as in the wider sense,” Freud writes, “play an uncommonly largerole in the causation of nervous and mental diseases, and…these same


sexual impulses have made contributions whose value cannot be


overestimated to the highest cultural, artistic and social achievements of the


human mind.” (Freud, Sigmund. A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis


(p. 10). Kindle Edition.)


        Freud’s explanation of these prejudices is that “it is a predisposition


of human nature to consider an unpleasant idea untrue.” Human beings want


to see themselves as pure, and therefore not as comprising unconscious


depths that are teeming with bestial impulses. “Society thus brands what is


unpleasant as untrue,” Freud writes, “denying the conclusions of


  psychoanalysis with logical and pertinent arguments.” In other words,


people come up with arguments to legitimate their prejudices against


psychoanalysis. But because these arguments “originate from affective


sources,” Freud writes, “society holds to these prejudices against all


attempts at refutation.” (Freud, Sigmund. A General Introduction to


  Psychoanalysis (p. 11). Kindle Edition.) In other words, because these


arguments are intended to safeguard prejudices, people refuse to see the


errors in them and refuse to change their minds.


      “When we undertake to cure a patient,” Freud writes, “to free him


from the symptoms of his malady, he confronts us with a vigorous, tenacious


resistance that lasts during the whole time of the treatment.” (Freud,Sigmund. A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis (p. 130). Kindle


Edition.) This resistance is rooted in fear: the patient fears what the analysis


is going to reveal about him, this fear being manifested as resistance. At the


same time, the patient does want to improve, this being why he entered into


psychoanalysis in the first place, and to this extent he is willing to overcome


his fear of the truth about himself. If the patient’s fear prevails, his prejudices


against the truth remain and he won’t change.


        In general, prejudices represent fear of change; and when people stop


feeling threatened by change, they stop being prejudiced. Before women had


the right to vote, men felt threatened by the prospect of women having that


right and were prejudiced against them acquiring that right. Now that it is


taken for granted that women should be able to vote, men don’t feel


threatened by their being able to do so and are no longer prejudiced against


it.


        But we must bear in mind that people don’t see their prejudices as


prejudices, since they always rationalize them. “The patient” writes Freud,


“produces all the phenomena of this resistance without even recognizing it


as such. (Freud, Sigmund. A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis (p.


130). Kindle Edition.) When women were fighting for the right to vote, the


men who were prejudiced against this did not believed their opposition to it


be based in reason: their motivations were emotional in nature, but theyrationalized those motivations, convincing themselves that they were


legitimate. Though they are speaking falsely, prejudiced people are speaking


sincerely when they say that they are not prejudiced, since people who are


prejudiced don’t know it. It follows, sadly, that human beings will always


have their prejudices; for as we know from Freud, people believe what they


want to believe as long as they can find an excuse to believe it, and they will


fiercely resist attempts to disabuse of them of their delusions.


                     A Freudian Analysis of Prejudice (Psychology)


 


        Prejudice is prejudgment. If Smith refuses to hire Brown, without even


considering her credentials, simply because Brown is a woman, then Smith is


have a prejudiced response to Brown. But there are two very different kinds


prejudice. There is the kind where somebody has drawn an overly broad on


the basis of insufficient data, and there is the case where somebody is


emotionally committed the falsehood in question. If Smith’s reason for not


hiring women is that, owing to his not having the relevant information, he


honestly but mistakenly believes that no woman is qualified for the job in


question, then Smith’s prejudice is of the first kind. If Smith’s reason is that,


owing to a deep-seated resentment of women, he positively refuses to


consider the idea that a woman might be qualified and goes out of his way to


rationalize away information to the contrary, then Smith’s prejudice is of the


second.


      One of the very purposes of Freud’s theoretical system is to elucidate


the nature prejudices of the second, emotionally-driven. The reason is that


such prejudices are nothing other than what Freud refers to as resistance:


“When we undertake to cure a patient, writes Freud, “to free him from the


symptoms of his malady, he confronts us with a vigorous, tenacious


resistance that lasts during the whole time of the treatment.” (Freud,Sigmund. A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis (p. 130). Kindle


Edition.) In other words, when the analyst tells the patient what is wrong with


him, the patient fights the analyst, refusing to believe what he is being told,


simply because he doesn’t want to believe it. Of course, there are cases where


the analyst is wrong and the patient ‘resists’ him for that reason, but here are


concerned with cases where the patient resists for the very reason that the


analyst is right. And that is the basis of the patient’s resistance, it is because


the patient benefits in some way from the delusion of which the analyst is


trying to disabuse him.


      In light of these points, suppose that Smith’s refusal to hire Brown


embodies a deep-seated prejudice towards women. In that case, Smith’s


decision represents a resistance on his part to admitting to some truth about


women that he finds threatening. That truth might be that women are


intellectually equal to men and that he might therefore lose his job to a


woman. Or might be a part of him self-identifies as a woman and he has


developed a generalized scorn for women as a way of distancing himself


from that side of himself. Whatever the case, Smith’s prejudice is a form of


fear-driven flight from some painful truth. This is true of prejudice in general.


      A related point is that prejudice always involves fear of change.


Whatever it is that Smith is afraid of—it might be finding a new job or


finding a new gender-identity--- Smith’s prejudice towards women involveshis wanting the status quo to remain the same. This is true of true of prejudice


in general, and it is a point that Freud often makes in connection with


resistances to psychoanalysis. Discussing patients of his whose conditions


spared them having to perform military service, Freud writes: “If they were


treated as malingerers and if their illness was made highly uncomfortable,


they recovered; if after being ostensibly restored they were sent back into


service, they promptly took flight once more into illness. Nothing could be


done with them.” (Freud, Sigmund. The Problem of Lay Analysis. Kindle


Locations 101355-101358. ) These patients held onto their illnesses when


they benefited from them and recovered from them when they didn’t. “And


the same is true of neurotics in civil life”, Freud then says. “They complain of


their illness but exploit it with all their strength; and if someone tries to take it


away from them, they defend it like the proverbial lioness with her young.”


(Freud, Sigmund. The Problem of Lay Analysis. Kindle Locations 101355-


101358.)


      And there we have it: people hold onto their prejudices as long as they


stand to gain from them and drop them as soon as they don’t. Smith will be


prejudiced towards women as long as Smith feels that he stands more to gain


than to lose by having this prejudice, and as soon as he begins to feel


otherwise, that prejudice will begin to melt away. In general, prejudices are


defenses against change; and when people stop feeling threatened by change,they stop being prejudiced. Before women had the right to vote, men felt


threatened by the prospect of women having that right and were prejudiced


against them acquiring that right. Now that it is taken for granted that women


should be able to vote, men don’t feel threatened by their being able to do so


and are no longer prejudiced against it.


      But we must bear in mind that people don’t see their prejudices as


prejudices, since they always rationalize them. This is a point that Freud


makes when discussing resistance:


 


              The patient, moreover, produces all the phenomena of this


      resistance without even recognizing it as such; it is always a great


      advance to have brought him to the point of understanding this


      conception and reckoning with it. Just consider, this patient suffers


      from his symptoms and causes those about him to suffer with him. He


    is willing, moreover, to take upon himself so many sacrifices of time,


      money, effort and self-denial in order to be freed. And yet he struggles,


    in the very interests of his malady, against one who would help him.


      How improbable this assertion must sound! (Freud, Sigmund. A


      General Introduction to Psychoanalysis (p. 130). Kindle Edition.)


 


      If Smith consciously knows that he has no good reason not to hireBrown but still decides not to hire her, his decision, though hateful and


wrong, is not about prejudice. Prejudice always involves denial and


rationalization. When women were fighting for the right to vote, the men who


were prejudiced against this did not believed their opposition to it be based in


reason: their motivations were emotional in nature, but they rationalized


those motivations, convincing themselves that they were legitimate. Though


they are speaking falsely, prejudiced people are speaking sincerely when they


say that they are not prejudiced, since people who are prejudiced don’t know


it. It follows, sadly, that human beings will always have their prejudices; for


as we know from Freud, people believe what they want to believe as long as


they can find an excuse to believe it, and they will fiercely resist attempts to


disabuse of them of their delusions.


               Freud on Sublimation: Why His Analysis is Still Relevant


                                      (Psychology)


 


      Freud often discusses ‘sublimation’, this being the process of directing


instincts away from their original aims towards aims of a non-instinctual and


constructive kind:


 


              We believe that civilization was forged by the driving


      force of vital necessity, at the cost of instinct-satisfaction, and


    that the process is to a large extent constantly repeated anew,


      since each individual who newly enters the human community


      repeats the sacrifices of his instinct-satisfaction for the sake of the


      common good. Among the instinctive forces thus utilized, the


      sexual impulses play a significant role. They are thereby


      sublimated, i.e., they are diverted from their sexual goals and


      directed to ends socially higher and no longer sexual. The sexual


      instincts are poorly tamed. Each individual who wishes to ally


      himself with the achievements of civilization is exposed to the


      danger of having his sexual instincts rebel against this


      sublimation. Society can conceive of no more serious menace to


    its civilization than would arise through the satisfying of the      sexual instincts by their redirection toward their original goals.


    (A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis, Chapter 1)


 


      To clarify: A person’s ability to be more than an animal depends on


his being to ‘sublimate’ his instinctual derives (i.e. to direct away them away


from their original ends, e.g. the sexual act, and press them into the service of


objectives that are non-animalistic and ‘constructive’, e.g. scientific


endeavor). But an instinct can never be entirely sublimated, as there is always


some portion of them that must be discharged directly. And instincts that are


not discharged through sublimation tend to be a threat to the social order.


      To illustrate: Suppose that Jones has done some horrible injustice to


Smith and that Smith is therefore homicidally angry towards Jones. If Smith


simply bludgeons Jones, Smith will not in any way grow as a person. But


suppose that Smith channels his rage into an attempt to improve the social


conditions that led to the injustice in question: in that case, Smith will


develop as a person and, in so doing, he will also contribute to society. This


is what Freud is referring to when he discusses ‘sublimation.’


        Sublimation of this kind very much seems to exist. People are not in


general able to vent rage directly; the best they can do in most cases is to


channel their rage into self-improvement: they become writers, athletes,


physicians, or some such. Much the same seems to be true of sexuality. Mostpeople are not able to have sex whenever they want to with whomever they


want to, and at least some of this undischarged sexual energy is expressed in


artistic creation (for example): instead of ravaging attractive women, one


paints them (or writes novels about them).


      How this ties into the 21st Century: In the past, men used to have to


sublimate their libido by cultivating a long-term relationship with a single


woman, and they had to sublimate much of the remainder of their libido by


converting it into the platonic love involved in raising children properly. But


in the 21st Century, it is common for single men to stay single, opting for


‘flings’ rather than relationships and families; and it is also common for men


in marriages to become single, oftentimes with the result that they revert to


their previous ‘swingle’ status.


      This means that there are two respects in which men are no longer


required to sublimate their sexuality. First, they don’t have to cultivate long-


term monogamous relationships (which, though partly about the sexual act,


are largely about love and moral responsibility). Second, they don’t have to


sublimate their libido into (non-sexual) love and concern for children.


      It is obvious how children are negatively affected by this: children


need a father. (If, as some maintain, mental illness is on the rise among


children, the absence of ‘present’ fathers is a likely factor.) Where women are


concerned, the effects are more ambiguous. A woman may have a lot to gainby getting out of a long-term relationship with a woman, even if she has


children, or by not getting into one in the first place. But women desire and


benefit from the emotional and financial security that long-term relationships


tend to bring; and this may be why, according to some sources, women are


not happier now than they were fifty years ago: what their gains in power and


freedom have added to their happiness their loss of security has taken away.


         Failure to Sublimate: A Freudian Analysis of the Peter Pan Syndrome


                              (Psychology/Current Events)


 


      A concept that is central to Freud’s thought is that of sublimation, this


being the process of preventing an instinctual drive from discharging itself


directly and forcing it to discharge itself in a way that is both non-instinctual


and also conducive to the development of the individual. For example, for


sexual impulses to be sublimated is for them to be “diverted from their sexual


goals and directed to ends socially higher and no longer sexual.” (Freud,


Sigmund. A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis (p. 10). Kindle Edition.)


A person is sublimating his sexuality, if instead of discharging it in the act of


sex, he expresses it by producing art or literature concerning sexuality or by


studying the psychology of human sexuality.


      In this paper, it will be argued that there are some important respects


in which men in the 21st century are no longer required to sublimate their


sexuality. Whereas a man in earlier times was required to sublimate his


sexuality by channeling it into stable long-term emotional and financial


relationships with his wife and children, men today have the option of never


‘settling down’ and of opting instead for a never-ending series of casual


relationships. Consequently, men are less likely than they were in times past


to be dependable husbands and fathers and they are also less likely to marryor have children in the first place. This perpetual infantilism on the part of


men harms anyone who depends on them, including wives, girlfriends,


children, and even themselves.


      In Chapter 1 of his General Introduction to Psychoanalysis, Freud


writes: “Society can conceive of no more serious menace to its civilization


than would arise through the satisfying of the sexual instincts by their


redirection toward their original goals.” (Freud, Sigmund. A General


Introduction to Psychoanalysis (p. 10). Kindle Edition.) Here Freud is


speaking specifically about sexuality, but what he is saying is true of all


instinctual drives. Failure to sublimate instincts of any kind is a threat to


civilization, since civilization obviously isn’t possible unless people control


their urges. If sexuality and aggression were redirected “towards their


original goals”, the result would be anarchy, not civilization.


      Freud holds that sublimation is not only necessary for civilization but


sufficient for it: “[C]ivilization was forged by the driving force of vital


necessity, at the cost of instinct-satisfaction, and that the process is to a large


extent constantly repeated anew, since each individual who newly enters the


human community repeats the sacrifices of his instinct-satisfaction for the


sake of the common good.” (Freud, Sigmund. A General Introduction to


Psychoanalysis (p. 10). Kindle Edition.)


        Sublimating an instinct is very different from simply not acting on it.Sublimating an instinct is a way of discharging it and is therefore a way of


avoiding the instinctual frustration that results from simply abstaining from


acting on it. When sexual abstinence does not involve sublimation, Freud


writes, its “pathological power is unimpaired” (Freud, Sigmund. A General


Introduction to Psychoanalysis (p. 156). Kindle Edition). The “pathological


effect of abstinence” (Freud, Sigmund. A General Introduction to


Psychoanalysis (p. 155). Kindle Edition) is avoided only when “sexual desire


relinquishes either its goal of partial gratification of desire, or the goal of


desire toward reproduction, and adopts another aim, genetically related to the


abandoned one, save that it is no longer sexual but must be termed social.”


(Freud, Sigmund. A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis (p. 155). Kindle


Edition.) In other words, sheer abstinence leads to psychopathology, and


sexuality must therefore either be sublimated or directly gratified if


psychopathology is to be avoided.


      There is one last preliminary point to make before we can map these


points onto the topic of 21st century men. According to Freud, sublimation


only works up to a point. It is not possible to sublimate an instinctual drive


completely; some portion of that drive will remain unsublimated and will


therefore lead to instinctual frustration unless acted on directly:


“Sublimation”, writes Freud, “can never account for more than a certain


small fraction of the libido, and finally most people possess the capacity forsublimation only to a very slight degree.” (Freud, Sigmund. A General


Introduction to Psychoanalysis (p. 156). Kindle Edition.) In other words,


sublimation mitigates but does not eliminate the need to express instincts


directly, and instincts must to some extent be directly gratified.


      In Freud’s time, sex outside of marriage was heavily stigmatized. (For


women, the stigma was extremely strong. For men it was much weaker but


still non-trivial.) And although there were obviously ‘Casanovas’ in Freud’s


time, it was as a general rule much harder for men, and exponentially harder


for women, to gratify their sexual desires without getting and staying


married. It was very difficult for a man to have a fulfilling sex life without


getting married. Consequently, it was necessary for men to sublimate much


of their raw sexuality into the non-sexual libido that is involved in building


and maintaining a long-term relationship.


      All of this has changed. A man is not looked down for having sex


outside of marriage or for not getting married or for getting married and then


divorcing. So a man’s being sexually fulfilled no longer depends on his being


in a committed relationship, and he is therefore able to express his sexuality


in a relatively unsublimated way: he can simply have a series of sex-based


‘flings’, not having to bother with long-term relationships or the heavy


responsibilities involved therein.


      In some ways, this is positive, not just for men but also for women. Solong as marriage was considered a sacred and inviolable institution, men and


women were locked into restrictive gender roles, with women having little


choice but to be homemakers, making it virtually impossible for them to have


careers. As for the man, he was locked into heavy financial responsibilities to


his wife and children, forcing him to spend his days toiling on their behalf.


Also, when marriages were sexually or otherwise unfulfilling, the husband


and the wife had little choice but endure the situation. Nowadays, people are


not locked into unhappy marriages; and both men and women have many


more personal and professional freedoms than they used to.


      At the same time, there are casualties. First of all, children need both a


mother and a father, and the likelihood that a child will grow up without both


parents is now incalculably higher than it used to be. Also, even though


women need and deserve to have the ability to choose between different men,


women do tend to be considerably more relationship-oriented than men, and


because men now have such a casual attitude towards relationships, women


have extremely little assurance that a man they are with is in it for the long-


term. Also, men are extremely willing to lie about whether they intend to be


in relationships for the long term, and although men have probably always


had some inclination to deceive women about their intentions in this regard,


they can now do so with little or no fear of censure from society.


      But there is a deeper problem with today’s ‘hook-up’ culture---thatwhen sexual gratification is too available, life tends to become cheap and


emotionally hollow, this being why, as Freud takes pains to explain,


excessive sexual permissiveness tends to accompany civilizational decline:


“In times in which there were no difficulties standing in the way of sexual


satisfaction, such as perhaps during the decline of the ancient civilizations,


love became worthless and life empty, and strong reaction-formations were


required to restore indispensable affective values.” (Freud, Sigmund. On The


Universal Tendency To Debasement In The Sphere Of Love. Kindle


Locations 56931-56933). In a word, when sex is overly available, the result is


a certain loss of maturity and moral fiber, today’s hook-up culture being a


case in point.


                         Psychology Assignment (Psychology)


 


      This assignment should be pretty easy - just need to hear your


thoughts on a few items. To complete this assignment you must do the


following:






1. Go to the discussion page and under the thread, "Research paper


topics/questions/comments" go ahead and just give a sentence or two


regarding what topic you had in mind for the final paper. If you have


questions, are a bit confused (I'm sure many of you will have questions -


don't worry!) then go ahead and post your questions. Feel free to view other


students' comments as well and respond to them if you'd like. Please Make


sure you have read ALL assignment sheets.


 


      I am going to answer the question “why do people lie/deceive?” There


are, I believe, two different, but equally correct, answers to this question: a


psychological answer and an evolutionary answer. The former answers the


question ‘why do individuals believe it to be in their interest to lie?’ The


latter answers the question ‘why is it in the interest of the survival of our


species for species-member to lie to/deceive one another?’ These answerswill not conflict with each other, but will rather supplement each other.


 


      2. In the text entry box below or as an audio recording (I'm hoping you


can record directly into this assignment) answer the following questions. This


will not be open to other students. Only I will be able to listen/read your


work. 




a. Ok so the first week is over. What are your general thoughts? What has


worked for you, what hasn't? I like this class. I feel that it has given me a


chance to address deep questions in a way that isn’t politically driven. And it


has helped make it clear to me that socially acceptable positions are not


always scientifically correct positions. 




b. Introduce yourself. Tell me a bit about yourself - you know the usual -


what are you doing with your life? What meaning does your life have...jk.


But yeah, tell me why you are taking this class. What are your academic and


career goals? Why are these your goals? If you don't have anything specific -


why don't you?


 


      I am from Armenia. I moved to this country four years ago. I really


love it here. There are lot of opportunities that are hard to find elsewhere. Iam going to major in business, and I aspire to be a corporate lawyer. I am


taking this class because I believe that it will help improve my writing and


reasoning skills, which are very important in the legal profession.




c. Tell me one thing you want me to know about yourself


 


      I am very ambitious, but family and friends are extremely important to


me. 




d. Finally - if you have any questions - go ahead and ask!


 


      What other classes do teach and what classes would you like to teach?


           Attachment Theory and Mental Illness (Clinical Psychology)


 


      The basic tenet of Attachment Theory (AT) is that a person’s


emotional attachments influence the way in which he deals with problematic


situations and, moreover, that the way in which he deals with problematic

                                                  [89]
situations influences his relations to others. AT is not a single theory.

                                                                                    [90]
Rather it is a cluster of theories that are all based on the just-stated tenet.


      The first question that arises is whether that tenet is correct. The


answer is clearly ‘yes.’ It is a matter of common knowledge that people who


have healthy and secure attachments, particularly in early life, are


psychologically healthier than people who do not. In fact, a knowledge of this


fact seems to be embodied in parental instincts, given the fact that parents,


especially mothers, are naturally inclined to bond with their children,

                                                      [91]
especially when they are young and vulnerable.


      In any case, there is no denying that healthy early-life relationships,


especially with caregivers, is conducive to psychological health, this being


the basic tenet of AT. One of the main objectives of the various theories


composing AT is to make it clear exactly how early-life attachments affect

                                                                              [92]
one’s personality, including one’s emotional attachments to others.


Another such objective is to make it clear how to treat people who did not

                                                                              [93]
have the benefit of unambiguously positive early-life attachments.        Granting that the basis of AT lies in commonsense, its beginnings as a


scientific discipline can be traced to Sigmund Freud (1856-1939), who


explicitly stated on several occasions that a person's character-architecture as


an adult is largely a consequence of his relations in early life to his parents


and who, moreover, tried to work out in detail exactly how early-life

                                                                              [94]
attachments to parents determine a person’s psychological profile. Stated


as simply as possible, Freud’s position was that a psychologically healthy


adult is someone whose parents loved him but did not spoil him, it being the


mother’s job is to provide love and the father’s job to provide discipline. A


mother’s love leads to self-love, according to Freud, and a father’s discipline


leads to self-discipline, with a person’s success as an adult depending on his

                                                                        [95]
having a healthy combination of self-love and self-discipline.


      Though foreshadowed by Freud’s work, AT came into existence in

                                                            [96]
earnest with the work of John Bowlby (1907-1990). Bowlby was a


psychoanalyst who studied the effects of separating children from caregivers.


Bowlby observed that the children who reacted the most violently to


separation from caregivers were the first to be given substitute-caregivers and


were therefore the most likely to survive. On this basis, Bowlby hypothesized


that these extreme behaviors were survival mechanisms that were reinforced


by natural selection.


      Bowlby coined the term “attachment behavioral system” (ABS) torefer to the behaviors and attitudes that determine how a given person forms

                                                      [97]
relationships and also deals with abandonment. Bowlby held that a


person’s ABS is largely determined by the nature of his early-life


relationships with caregivers. Bowlby also held that in order to become a


healthy adult, a child needed to have at least one stable attachment with a


caregiver.


        Research based on Bowlby’s work led to the hypothesis that there are


four basic attachment patterns in infants: Secure, Anxious-ambivalent,

                                          [98]
Anxious-avoidant, and Disorganized.


      Infants with secure attachments to their caregivers are happy and self-


confident while in the presence of the caregiver; they boldly explore the room


and initiate relations with others. When they caregiver leaves, they are


distressed but functional, and they are unambiguously happy when she

                                                                          [99]
returns. Such infants have nurturing and dependable caregivers. 


      Infants with anxious-ambivalent attachments are cautious and


concerned; they do not boldly explore their surroundings. When the caregiver


is present, they are worried that the caregiver will soon leave. They are


distressed when the caregiver leaves, but do not greet the caregiver when she


returns. Such infants have emotionally withdrawn and unreliable caregivers.

[100]


      Infants with anxious-avoidant attachments are not distressed when thecaregiver leaves, and they avoid the caregiver when she returns. They tend to


focus on toys and other purely physical aspects of their environment and have


a diminished interest in other people. Such infants have abusive caregivers.

[101]


      Infants with disorganized attachments respond with fear to returning


caregivers. They may actively avoid the caregiver; they may pretend to be


unconscious; they may rise up defiantly; or they cycle through all of these


behaviors. Such infants have extremely abusive or highly unreliable

 [102]
caregivers.


      Further research strongly indicates that these four attachment patterns

                                                          [103]
are present not just in infants but also in children.


      Children with secure attachments have positive relations with others.


They see others as helpful and that is how others regard them. They do not

                                                        [104]
hesitate to ask others for help but are not clingy.


      Children with anxious-ambivalent attachments are insecure. They

 [105]
cling to their primary caregivers and avoid their peers.


      Children with anxious-avoidant attachments have trouble dealing with


stress and are reluctant to enlist the help others. They tend to develop


antisocial behavior patterns, such as lying and bullying, and they tend to self-

 [106]
isolate.


      Children with disorganized attachments may either bully others orisolate themselves from others. Such children are extremely reluctant to ask

 [107]
for others for help, and they tend to be disruptive and hard to manage.


      There is good evidence that a child’s attachment pattern tends to be


identical with the one that he had as an infant, but it is an open question

                                              [108]
whether they are categorically identical.


      In the 1980s, it was discovered that these attachment patterns, or

                                              [109]
analogues thereof, are present in adults.


      Adults with secure attachments tend to be happy with their


relationships. They enjoy the company of their friends and partners but are


not clingy. They are not reluctant to ask for help but are not needy.


      Adults with anxious-ambivalent attachments are clingy and desperate.


They feel incomplete unless in a relationship. But when in a relationship,


they alienate their partners by being jealous and emotionally demanding.


      Adults with anxious-avoidant attachments are loners who regard


interpersonal relationships as encumbrances. They deal with emotional


conflicts with others by withdrawing. They value independence and focus


their energy on developing themselves.


      Adults with disorganized attachments alternate between clinging to


others and withdrawing from others. They tend to have unpredictable mood


swings and have difficulty forming lasting relationships.


      There is some evidence that adults can have different attachment                                                  [110]
patterns from those they had earlier in life.


      There is extremely strong evidence that inadequate early-life


attachments give rise not only to maladaptive personality traits but to full-

                            [111]
blown psychopathology. According to Mikulincer and Shaver (2012),


“attachment insecurities (of both the anxious and avoidant varieties) are


associated with depression, clinically significant anxiety, obsessive-


compulsive disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), suicidal


tendencies, and eating disorders.” According to Kuczynski (2012), the


explanation that OCD, PTSD, and eating disorders all involve fear- or


trauma-driven self-isolation. The obsessive-compulsive is the quintessential


loner, hiding not just from the world but from his own emotions, especially


his own rage, by barricading himself behind irrational, and therefore fantasy-


based, obsessions and compulsions. Compulsive eaters, as well as


compulsive non-eaters, are engaged in a similar form of escapism. Those


afflicted by PTSD have suffered extreme trauma and have shut themselves


off from the world as a way of coping. In any case, it is an empirical fact that


people whose early-life attachments are of the anxious-ambivalent variety


attachments are more likely than others to be afflicted by such disorders, and


the most obvious explanation is that such people’s early-life attachments


dispose them to deal with trauma not by connecting with others but by


withdrawing.      Later in the same article, Mikulincer and Shaver (2012) write that


“Anxious attachment is associated with dependent, histrionic, and borderline


disorders, whereas avoidant attachment is y associated with schizoid and


avoidant disorders.” Assuming this true, what is the explanation? Kuczynski


(2012) puts forward a plausible answer. Schizoid and other psychotic


disorders involve a scrambling of the subject’s very grasp of reality: not only


are his emotions out of alignment with reality; his grasp of reality itself has


been undermined, and he is therefore alienated from reality in the most


radical way possible. The reason, according to Kuczynski, is that the early-


life attachments of those with such disorders were negative, as opposed to


ambiguous, disposing them to flee from reality in the most radical way


possible. By contrast, those with histrionic, borderline, and dependent


disorders, have a fundamentally non-delusive grasp of reality, but their


emotions are not appropriate to the information thereby made available to


them. The reason, according to Kuczynski, is that early-life attachments of


those with such disorders were ambivalent, disposing them to keep their


distance from external reality without altogether abandoning it. In any case,


whatever the correct explanations are of these facts, it is an empirical fact that


people who suffer from schizoid and other psychotic disorders tend to have


avoidant early-life attachments and that people who suffer from borderline,


histrionic, and dependent disorders, as well as anxiety-mediated disorders,tend to have ambivalent early-life attachments.


        Although people with the afflictions thus far discussed have more


relationship-issues than others, they value relationships, and they within


limits are able to form and maintain meaningful attachments to others. This is


not true of everyone. In particular, psychopaths do not form meaningful


attachments with others and have no desire to do so. In this context, a


‘psychopath’ is defined as someone who lacks conscience and whose


behavior therefore consistently embodies a callous disregard for others, a


high degree of manipulativeness and deceitfulness, and in some cases a high


degree of impulsivity, often leading to reckless behavior, including drug

                              [112]
addiction and promiscuity.


        Psychopaths use others; they do not have relationships with them,


except of a purely pragmatic kind. (More precisely, to the extent that a given


person is a psychopath, he cannot have meaningful relations with others.) The


question arises: What kind of early-life attachments are psychopaths likely to


have had? This question has been researched and definitively answered:


Psychopaths are likely to have had attachments of the disorganized variety to


caregivers. Although there is some evidence that some people are ‘genetic’


psychopaths, most psychopaths were treated either coldly or cruelly by key


caregivers in early life, their attachments to said caregivers strongly tending

                                      [113]
to be of the disorganized variety.      Before moving forward, let us organize the points thus far made.


Inadequate early-life relationships, especially with caregivers, adversely


affect mental health and make it difficult to maintain healthy relationships. If


a given adult has a mental illness, the kind of mental illness that he has is in


part determined by the way in which his early-life attachments to caregivers


were inadequate. Anxious-ambivalent early-life attachments are dispositive


of neurosis. Anxious-avoidant early-life attachments are dispositive of


psychosis. Disorganized early-life attachments are dispositive of


psychopathy. The neurotic tends to be distrustful of others and ambivalent


towards actual and prospective partners, making it difficult for him to form


and maintain healthy relationships. The psychotic’s grasp of external reality


is damaged, making it hard for the psychotic to engage any aspect of the


external world, with the result that attachments are disrupted, and sometimes


leading to wholesale disengagement from it, with the result that attachments


are undermined. The psychopath cannot have meaningful relations with


others and does not wish to have such relations.


        Psychopaths do not benefit from psychotherapy and they cannot have

                                      [114]
meaningful relations with others. But neurotics and psychotics can benefit

                                                                            [115]
from therapy, and they can have meaningful relations with others, making


it necessary to ask what therapists do to maximize the likelihood of their


having and maintain such relations. Although we obviously cannot provide adefinitive answer to this question in this context, we can provide some useful


fragments of such an answer.


      First of all, good adult relationships are not the solution to the


problems caused by bad early-life relationships. Good adult relationships are


consequences of solutions to the problems caused by bad early life


relationships. Suppose that Smith is an adult who has OCD in consequence of


his having insecure early life attachments. It may well be that Smith does not


have any healthy relationships. But if so, that is a consequence of his OCD;


and the problem that Smith must solve—and that his therapist, if he has one,


must solve---is that he has OCD. If by some stroke of good luck, Smith does


manage to initiate and maintain a good relationship, that will indeed improve


his life and is likely to make the problems caused by his OCD more tractable.


But Smith will be impaired until he has either eliminated his OCD or found a


way to function despite it. Moreover, as long as Smith has OCD, it will


dramatically decrease his ability to initiate positive relationships or, if does


manage to do so, maintain them.


      In general, as long as a person is seriously mentally ill, his ability to


establish or maintain healthy relationships is seriously compromised. Indeed,


people with mental illnesses tend to form relationships that validate their


symptoms, rather than alleviating them. People with borderline personality


disorder, for example, are likely to seek romantic partners who are likely toabandon them and who are therefore likely to reinforce their fears of


abandonment; and when a borderline finds a partner who will not abandon

                                                                      [116]
her, she often unconsciously manipulates him into doing so.


      To be sure, becoming psychologically healthy involves having healthy


relationships. But unless mental issues are addressed on their own terms,


unhealthy relationships are likely and healthy ones are unlikely.


      The very first healthy relationship that a therapist should help his


patient have is with himself. The patient-therapist relationship must be secure


if the therapist is to help the patient. No matter how insightful the therapist is,


he cannot help the patient except by way of a secure relationship with him.


Indeed, a secure patient-therapist relationship will by itself do more in the


way of helping the patient have healthy relationships than any amount of

                                                                  [117]
intellectual insight on the therapist’s part possibly could.


      I would like to end by noting two observations I have made from my


own practice. First, when I have been able to help patients, it was not by


helping them get what they wanted; it was by helping them use their


judgment. Whenever I have had a patient who insisted that she needed a


boyfriend having such and such characteristics, the patient never benefited


from efforts on my part to help her find such a person. Sometimes she did,


and sometimes I helped her do so; but the relationship would simply run its


course, and the patient's problems persisted. When I have given patients whatthey wanted, I was enabling them and making their problems worse. When I


have given patients what they needed, I was actually helping them. And what


they needed was always to develop their ability to make informed decisions.


It is not always within a therapist’s power to eliminate symptoms or to gratify


desires, but it is always within a therapist’s power to help the patient make


rational decisions. Patients who develop good judgment improve, and those


who lack it don’t; and therapists are therefore under a categorical obligation

                                                                          [118]
to help their patients learn how to be rational and autonomous.


 


Bibliography


 


Bowlby, J. 1969. Attachment, Vol. 1 of Attachment and loss. London:


Hogarth Press.


 


Cassidy, Jude & Shaver, Phillip. 2016. Handbook of Attachment: Theory,


Research, and Clinical Applications. New York: The Guilford Press.


 


Cleckley, Hervey. 1950. The Mask of Sanity: An Attempt To Clarify Some


Issues About the So-Called Psychopathic New York: Martino Fine Books.


 


Davila J, Burge D, Hammen C. Why does attachment style change? J PersSoc Psychol. 1997;73:826–838.


 


Fields, Alan. 2016. Human Psychology 101: Understanding The Human


Mind And What Makes People Tick. Make Profits Easy Press. Takoma,


Washington.


 


Freud, Sigmund. 2016. The Ego and the Id. New York: Simon & Schuster.


 


Hare, Robert. 1993. Without Conscience: The Disturbing World of the


Psychopaths Among Us New York: The Guilford Press


 


Kennedy, J. H., & Kennedy, C. E. 2004. Attachment theory: Implications for


school psychology. Psychology in the Schools, 41, 247-259.


 


Kernberg, Otto. 1984. Object Relations in Clinical Psychoanalysis. London:


Rowman & Littlefield.


 


Kernberg, Otto. 1984b. Severe Personality Disorders. New Haven: Yale


University Press.


 


Kernberg, Otto. 1985. Borderline Conditions and Pathological NarcissismLondon: Rowman & Littlefield.


 


Kernberg, Otto. 2004. Aggressivity, Narcissism, and Self-Destructiveness in


the Psychotherapeutic Relationship. New Haven: Yale University Press.


 


Kernberg, Otto. 2004b. Contemporary Controversies in Psychoanalytic


Theory, Technique, and Their Applications. New Haven: Yale University


Press.


 


Kuczynski, John-Michael. 2012. Empiricism and the Foundations of


Psychology. Advances in Consciousness Research Volume 87. Philadelphia:


John Benjamins.


 


McGuiness, Joe. 1983. Fatal Vision. New York: Penguin.


 


Mikulincer M, Shaver PR. Attachment in adulthood: structure, dynamics, and


change. New York: Guilford; 2007.


 


Mooney, Carol. 2010. Theories of Attachment: An Introduction to Bowlby,


Ainsworth, Gerber, Brazelton, Kennell, and Klaus. Redleaf Press. St. Paul,


MN. 


Prior, V. & Glaser, D. (2006). Understanding attachment and attachment


disorders: Theory, Evidence and Practice. Jessica Kingsley Publishers.


 


Holmes, J. (1993) John Bowlby and Attachment Theory. Routledge.


 


Rogers, Carl. 1961. Becoming a Person. London: Houghton Mifflin


Company.


 


        Schimmenti, Adriano. The Relationship Between Attachment and


Psychopathy: A Study with a Sample of Violent Offenders Current


Psychology September 2014, Volume 33, Issue 3, pp 256–270.


                     Why We Lie (Psychology/Evolutionary Theory)


 


        Research Question


 


      Clearly state your research question. Normally, this will take the form


of: Why and how did ______ evolve in humans?


 


      How and why did deception evolve in human beings? That is my


question.


 


      Please note that most of your will have to “operationalize” whatever


word you put in that blank. So for example if my question was about religion


- I would have to define what mean by religion.


 


      Make sure you do so in this section.


 


      Deception: The intentional misleading of a sapient being. This can be


done through explicit verbal representations or in a purely ‘implicit’ manner


(e.g. by leaving false but incriminating evidence).


 


      State your hypothesis. Tell me why you think this. 


      Hypothesis: Deception evolved in human beings for two reasons.


First, stealth is necessary to survive, for both carnivores and herbivores.


Second, deception is necessary to survive and to succeed in society. So there


has been both natural and selection for deceivers among both pre-society as


well as society-internal people.


 


      References


      Please list at least one peer reviewed journal article that you feel is


related to your topic. You do not have to summarize it, just list it here. Please


use AJPA formatting - https://laverne.libguides.com/citations/ajpa (Links to


an external site.)Links to an external site.


 


 


      Ayala, Francisco. “The Biological Roots of Morality.” Biology and


Philosophy (3): 232-252 (1987).                        Unconditioned Stimuli (Psychology)


 


      After viewing the video available in this week's content, come up with


your own example of classical conditioning. Identify the NS, UCS, UCR, CS


and CR for your example.


Come up with your own example for operant conditioning. What is the


operant response? How can this behavior be increased with positive


reinforcement? Negative reinforcement


Using a second example of operant conditioning, how can the behavior be


decreased using positive punishment? Negative punishment?


 


      Neutral Stimulus


        Unconditioned stimulus


        Unconditioned response


        Conditioned Response


        Conditioned stimulus


 


 


      An example of a conditioned response: Smith lives at home. When the


doorbell rings, it is usually for some insignificant reason (somebody asking


for donations or some such), and he doesn’t have any particular response toit. But then Smith develops a raging drug habit. Since he doesn’t like to leave


home, he has his drug dealer deliver his drugs to his home. As a result, when


the doorbell rings, he is elated, since he associates the sound of the door bell


with the euphoria of drugs.


      Here the neutral stimulus is the doorbell. The unconditioned stimulus


is Smith’s experiencing pleasure in response to taking drugs. The conditioned


stimulus is the sound of the door bell after Smith comes to respond positively


to it in consequence of his associating it with drug-induced euphoria. The


conditioned response is the just-stated positive response to the door bell.


 


      An example of operant conditioning: Tim works at a quarry. His job is


to put rocks in a bag. In order to get paid his usual wage, Timmy has to put


10 rocks in a bag per hour. For every extra rock that he bags, he is given a $1


bonus. As a result, Timmy’s level productivity increases. Here the operant


response is Timmy’s bagging more rocks than he usually would. And


because Timmy is rewarded for each uptick in his level of productivity, his


productivity increases with each additional reward: and so it is that that the


target-behavior (Timmy’s bagging rocks) increases with positive


reinforcement.


 


      Another example of operant conditioning: Jim also works at a quarrybagging rocks. Jim’s supervisor is sadistic. No matter how many rocks Jim


bags, his supervisor whips him. But the more rocks he bags in a given unit of


time, the fewer whippings he receives. As a result, Jim’s level of productivity


(the number of rocks he bags in a given unit of time) increases. And because


the extent to which Jim is penalized decreases with each uptick in his


productivity, his productivity increases with each punishment: and so it is


that the (Jimmy’s bagging rocks) increases with negative reinforcement.


                   Goring and Lombroso on Criminality (Psychology)


 


 


      1.            Who was Charles Goring? (what was his occupation, what was


he known for, etc.) (1 paragraph)


 


      Charles Goring (1870-1919) was a British medical doctor who is


known today for his attempt to study criminality in a statistical and scientific

                  [119]
manner (p. 517). Throughout the ages, there have been different views on


what causes crime. Some have believed crime to be motivated by demonic


possession. (Obviously this is now a fringe view, but it may well have been


the default view back when religion had a tighter grip on thought.) Others


hold that criminality is a consequence of environmental pressures: criminals


are made, not born. This is the ‘liberal’ view, which became prominent


during the enlightenment and was developed by social contract-theorists.


Then there is the hereditarian view: criminals are born, not made. Views of


this kind have probably existed in some form as long crime itself has, and


they may even be the view that people are naturally inclined to take; but it is


a fact that a great deal about a person’s psychology is genetically


predetermined, and such views on criminality seem to have support in this


fact Goring’s contribution to the study of crime lay not so much in his viewsabout crime, as in his attempt to study in a non-prejudicial, thoroughly


statistical manner (p. 516). He personally believed that criminality was a


consequence of genetically determined mental and physical ‘feebleness’ of


some kind (p. 518). This view is dubious and his own researches provided


little support for it; but his careful methods of research are seen by many as


inaugurating the ‘scientific’ study of criminality, this being why is still


acclaimed.


 


              2.            Describe the study that Goring did and the purpose of that


      study. (1 paragraph)


 


      Goring tried to look for the basis of criminality in statistical


correlations (p. 519). He conducted a study in which he tried to correlate


criminality, or certain forms thereof, with certain mental and physical traits.


There were 37 physical traits, which included hair-color, nose-shape, head-


shape left-handedness, and six mental traits, which included ‘temper’, degree


of egoism, and degree of intelligence (p. 517). Goring’s initial study failed to


reveal robust correlations. He dealt with this by trying to correlate these


physical and mental characteristics with different criminal subpopulations


(e.g. violent offenders, non-violent swindlers, sex-offenders). Though this too


yielded paltry results, it was in many ways a prototype for modern statisticalstudies.


 


              3.            What was Goring’s view on Lombroso’s work? Include in


    your response a discussion of Goring’s 3 critiques. (1-2 paragraphs)


 


      Cesare Lombroso was a thoroughgoing hereditarian about crime,


meaning that he believed criminality to be a consequence of one’s inborn


‘nature’, not of environmental influences. In and of itself, this view is not


without merit, but the particular version of it that Lombroso held was not


very plausible. Lombroso seemed to hold that criminals looked like criminals,


with bulbous eyes, heavy brows, and hunched backs. Criminals, in


Lombroso’s views, are ghouls who are born that way, like the proverbial


hunchbacked henchman of the mad scientist in the movies. Goring was


opposed to this view, a version of which he himself, as to Lombroso’s


unscientific way of arriving at this view. Goring held that there were three


respects in which Lombroso’s work failed to be scientific. First, Lombroso’s


research was based on impressions (‘so and so is disfigured’), not on


measurements (‘so and so’s index finger has length n’). Second, Lombroso


categorized traits as either being normal or deviant, instead of regarding them


approximating to greater or lesser degrees to some statistical norm. (The


second criticism seems to be a corollary of the first.) Third, because of theimpressionistic, non-measurement-based nature of Lombroso’s work, his


‘results’ are hard to reproduce (p. 517).


      In my view, Goring's critique of Lombroso is rather shallow. The


reason Lombroso's ‘results' are hard to reproduce is that they are obviously


false. People with hunchbacks and web-fingers are not particularly likely to


commit crimes, and people with normal backs and fingers are not particularly


likely not to commit crime. If Lombroso had been right that criminals had


distinctive physiognomies, then it would have behooved him to correlate


degrees of criminality with spinal deformities and the like. But since those


correlations aren't there in the first place, there is nothing to measure, this


being why Goring’s own researches yielded so little. ‘Criminal’ is not a


biological category. A ‘criminal’ is somebody who breaks the law: and who it


is that breaks the law, and why, varies from context to context. In some


situations, e.g. Cambodia under Pol Pot, it was non-psychopathic not to break


the law; in others, Denmark in 1970, it was the other way around. Goring


went to great lengths to generate ‘scientific' statistics, but those statistics all


embodied the dubious supposition that ‘criminal' is a biological or zoological


category, like ‘raccoon' or ‘marigold', and can be studied as such.


 


              4.            What did Goring see as the “real cure” for criminality?


      Explain fully. (1 paragraph) 


      Goring believed that the only real way to control crime was to prohibit


criminals from reproducing (p. 523). Goring believed that criminality could


be lessened by appropriately the criminally inclined. But he saw how high


recidivism rates were among criminals, even those who in his view had been


appropriately ‘educated’, and he therefore believed that the only real solution


was to prevent them from reproducing. This reasoning is not entirely


misconceived: if people who carry the gene for a certain disease are not


allowed to reproduce, then there will be fewer occurrences of that disease;


and if, as Goring seemed to believe, there is a criminal ‘gene’, then not


allowing people with that gene to reproduce will lower the rate of crime. But


the existence of a criminal ‘gene’ is doubtful. As for the high rate of


recidivism among ‘appropriately educated’ criminals, that is likely a


consequence of their limited economic opportunities.


 


              5.            Explain how Goring’s cure for criminality and other


      Positivists translate into the views of the Nazis and their treatment of


      Jews during World War II. (1-2 paragraphs)


 


      The Nazis obviously believed in ethnonationalism, and they also had


certain views about moral and biological ‘purity’ that they wished to uphold.While it is certainly possible, even likely, that certain Nazis read works by


Lombroso, Goring, and other positivists (genetic determinists), they probably


had independent motivations for their political and racial platform. Frankly,


the works of Lombroso and Goring are academic in nature and are not very


compelling; so it’s unlikely that they did much to contribute to the rise of


National Socialism, though they may on occasion have been cited by Nazis in


defense of certain measures of theirs. Also, while the Nazis do seem to have


targeted people with physical and mental disabilities for extermination, it is


not 100% unclear that this was their bone of contention with Jews. Indeed,


Nazi propaganda suggests that the Nazis regarded Jews as worthy


adversaries, not as learning-disabled unfortunates.


 


      6.            Describe your overall experience at the Jewish Museum. (What


was your overall impression? What was most memorable to you?) (1 page)


 


      I believe that my experience of the Jewish Museum in Rome was


colored by the fact that I am both Jewish and American. To the Jewish part of


me, the museum felt familiar; and to the American part of me, it felt


unfamiliar. I was struck by the elegant austerity of the museum and by the


way its aesthetics contrasted with those of Rome itself. Italy is a great cultural


capital and was the source of much great painting and sculpture. In someways, the Jewish Museum of Rome is a part of this artistic tradition, and in


other ways it is not. Its architecture is quintessentially Greco-Roman. From


the outside, it looks like a cathedral. On the inside, however, it is very


different. There are no paintings or sculptures. There are elegant decorations


and there is great attention to aesthetics, but no paintings or stained-glass


depictions of cherubs or angels or anything of the sort. The reason for this is


Orthodox Judaism strictly forbids the creation of iconic representations. My


rabbi explained to me that this derives from the ancient Hebrew belief that


sculpting and painting could be used to create monuments to false gods,


along with the belief that attempts to depict G*d detracted from his greatness.


The result is that the Jewish Museum of Rome, unlike a traditional


Occidental museum, has a rather minimalist quality.


      I very much admired the elegant minimalism of the Jewish Museum,


but a part of me was also relieved to rejoin the more visually oriented


‘outside’ world and all of its teeming imagery. I myself am an enthusiastic


‘gamer’ and need my daily dose of explosive, video-based imagery. The


Jewish Museum’s tone was ascetic and disapproving of such indulgences. I


have read about Amish villages; and from what I know, they are similarly


austere. One has to admire the Amish, because of their self-discipline and


self-reliance, but a part of me feels that life should be more than an exercise


in moral purity. My reaction to the Jewish Museum of Rome was similarlyambivalent.


 


                                   Legal Brief (Law School)


 


                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS


 

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION

QUESTION PRESENTED

STANDARD OF REVIEW

STATEMENT OF THE CASE

SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT

ARGUMENT

CONCLUSION

                                 TABLE OF AUTHORITIES


 


      Boyd v. United States, 116 U. S. 616, 630 (1886),


      City of Los Angeles v. Patel, Supreme Court 2015


      Ferguson v. Charleston, 532 US 67 - Supreme Court 2001


      Gonzales v. Raich, 545 U.S. 1, 12 (2005)


      Katz v. United States, 389 US 347 - Supreme Court 1967


        Maryland v. King, 569 U.S. 435, 463 (2013)


      Michigan Dep't of State Police v. Sitz 496 U.S. 444, 455 (1990)


      New York v. Burger, 482 U.S. 691, 699 (1987)


      Smith v. Maryland, 442 U.S. 735, 740 (1979)


      United States v. Miller, 425 U.S. 435, 443 (1976)


      United States v. Montoya, 382 F.3d 911, 915 (13th Cir. 2007)


 


                             STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION


 


      The United States District Court for the District of West Dakota had


jurisdiction pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3231. In Case No. 18-CR-0909 (VGG),


the District Court entered the judgment on December 12, 2018. On December


13, 2018, Ms. Collins filed a timely notice of appeal. See FED. R. APP. P.


4(b)(1).


      In Case No. 18-6028, the United States Court of Appeals for the


Seventeenth District entered the judgment on February 1, 2019, the same day


Ms. Collins filed a timely petition for Writ of Certiorari, which was granted.


                                   QUESTION PRESENTED


 


      The government’s case against. Donatella Collins rested entirely on


information obtained through a warrantless and suspicionless search of a


medical base containing medical records. Collins moved to exclude this


information, and the District Court denied this motion, claiming that


individuals have no expectation of privacy in medical records held in third-


party databases and claiming also that the search was administrative and


therefore exempt from 4th Amendment warrant requirements. The District


Court denied Collins subsequent appeal on the same grounds, as well as on


the grounds that enforcement of the Controlled Substance Act constitutes a


public health imperative and therefore supersedes 4th Amendment


protections. Accordingly, the parties are direct to address the following


questions:


 


        Whether an individual has a reasonable expectation of privacy in


medical records that are held by a third party,


 


        Whether a search that is conducted solely for the purpose of obtaining


information on the basis of which to arrest and convict, and serves no strictly


regulatory function, qualifies as an administrative search, and 


        Whether violations of laws regulating the sale and possession of


narcotics are a sufficiently grave and imminent threat to public health and


safety as to warrant suspension of 4th Amendment protections.                                  STANDARD OF REVIEW


 


      The  question  at  hand  is  whether  the  government’s  search  of  the


defendant’s  medical  records  violated  the  defendant’s  4th  Amendment


protections against unreasonable search and seizure. This is a question of law,


not of fact, and is therefore to be decided de novo. See United  States  v.


Montoya, 382 F.3d 911, 915 (13th Cir. 2007): “When reviewing an appeal


from the denial of a motion to suppress evidence, an appellate court reviews


legal questions de novo and factual findings for clear error.”


      The government must show that the information obtained from the


search of the database containing Collins’ medical records did not violate a


reasonable expectation of privacy on her part and did not violate her rights of


property, security, and personal liberty. Accordingly Boyd v. United States,


116 U. S. 616, 630 (1886), sets a relevant standard, namely that “any forcible


and compulsory extortion of a man's own testimony or of his private papers


to be used as evidence to convict him of crime or to forfeit his goods, is


within the condemnation.” In other words, convictions cannot be based on


private  effects,  including  “papers”,  which  obviously  includes  electronic


records.


      Katz v. United States, 389 US 347 - Supreme Court 1967 directly


speaks to the question whether Collins’ medical records were in fact private,offering  the  following  test,  now  adopted  by  U.S.  Courts:  “[T]here  is  a


twofold requirement, first that a person have exhibited an actual (subjective)


expectation of privacy and, second, that the expectation be one that society is


prepared to recognize as ‘reasonable.’”


      Also relevant is City of Los Angeles v. Patel, 135 S. Ct. 2443, 2452


(2015), in which the Court ruled that a warrantless search is justified only if


“the  primary  purpose  of  the  search  [is]  distinguishable  from  the  general


interest in crime control.” If the government’s search in this case was for the


purpose  of  investigating  and  prosecuting  crime,  then  it  was  not  an


administrative search.


      Finally, in Ferguson v. Charleston, 532 US 67 - Supreme Court 2001,


the Court Ruled that a warrantless and suspicionless search can be justified


on public health and safety grounds only if the “hazard giving rise to the


alleged special need must be a concrete danger, not merely a hypothetical


one.” In other words, for the government to be justified in conducting a


warrantless and suspicionless search of Collins’ medical records, the


government would have had to have had to have known of a specific threat


posed by Collins’ activities that they could only stop by searching her


medical records. The mere possibility that Collins’ criminal activities might


have harmed public health would not be enough to justify such a search.


                                  STATEMENT OF THE CASE


 


      The Drug Enforcement Agency (“DEA”) arrested Donatella Collins


for distributing and possessing with intent to distribute large quantities of


Percocet and Oxycodone, both of which are controlled substances. The DEA


arrested Collins on the basis of information contained in the West Dakota


Controlled Substances Database (“Medical Database”). The Medical


Database contains records of all physician prescriptions made in the


corresponding geographical area. These records indicated that Collins had


obtained prescriptions for quantities of Percocet and Oxycodone that


exceeded what any possible medical condition could have required to use.


These records also indicated that Collins had “doctor shopped”, in that she


had gone to several different doctors and had made multiple appointments


only with physicians who continually prescribed her the controlled


substances in question. The DEA had no information besides that which it


had obtained from the Database on the basis of which to arrest Collins.


      Collins was indicted on multiple counts of distributing and possessing


with intent to distribute controlled substances. Collins’ attorney moved to


suppress the information that the DEA had obtained from the Database on the


grounds that Collins’ medical records were private and therefore that the 4th


Amendment required the DEA to have probable cause before searching thoserecords for information on the basis of which to arrest or investigate Collins.


Had this motion to suppress been granted, the case would have been thrown


out, but the presiding judge, the Honorable Victoria Gelberg, denied the


motion. Judge Gelberg provided three arguments for her position. First, no


probable cause was needed to search Collins' medical records or to use them


as the sole basis for arresting her, since those records were being held by a


third party, namely the Database. Second, Collins had little or no reasonable


expectation of privacy owing to the fact that the medical profession,


specifically the issuing of prescriptions, is so highly regulated. Third, warrant


requirements are waived when law enforcement has “special need” for


“specified information” about individuals, especially when the information in


question relates to activity involving a highly regulated industry, both factors


being operative in Collins’ case.


      Collins then plead guilty to the charges. However, her attorney later


filed a motion with the US Court of Appeals for the 17th District to vacate


the plea on the grounds that the government’s case against her was based


entirely on information obtained from an illegal search of private medical


records of hers. The Court rejected this motion on the following grounds.


First, information kept by third parties is not private and therefore do not fall


within the scope of the 4th Amendment. Second, the highly regulated nature


of the issuing of prescription drugs further weakens any expectation ofprivacy that Collins might otherwise have had and allows prescription drug


records to be searched and used as evidence without probable cause. Third,


enforcement of drug laws is a public health imperative and therefore permits


both warrantless and suspicionless searches.


                               SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT


 


      Patient records are quintessentially private and fall squarely within the


scope of the 4th Amendment protections against unreasonable search and


seizure. Without doctor-patient confidentiality, many people who need


medical attention either altogether avoid physicians and therefore won’t


receive it or will withhold critical information physicians and therefore won’t


receive the care they need. If medical records cease to be treated as private,


then doctor-patient confidentiality is undermined, leading to a true public


health crisis. Using the Controlled Substances Act, or any other law or


“statutory regime”, as a justification for undermining doctor-patient privilege


would cause a true public health hazard, and it is therefore very nearly the


opposite of the truth to claim, as both of the aforementioned Courts do, that


the need to enforce drug laws constitutes a public health imperative. For this


very reason, it is also irrelevant that the prescription drug industry is highly


regulated. Regulations justify waivers of Constitutional protections only


when enforcement of those regulations is needed to avert a health or safety


disaster; and in this case, the disaster would be caused, not prevented, by


regulation-driven violations of Constitutional protections.


      Acts performed under the threat of having medical care withheld are


performed under duress. Therefore, if the patient signs over his medicalrecords to a third party, knowing that his only option is to be denied medical


care, he is acting duress. It is therefore irrelevant that records of medical


prescriptions are held by third parties: patients consent to this only because


their medical care depends on it, and their consent is therefore tendered under


duress. The law requires patients to sign over their medical records to third


parties, the alternative being non-receipt of medical care, and their doing so


does not constitute a legitimately tendered waiver of Constitutional


Protections.


                                           ARGUMENT


 


        According to the 4th Amendment of the Bill of Rights of the United


States Constitution:


 


              The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses,


      papers, and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures shall not


    be violated; and no warrants shall issue but upon probable cause,


      supported by oath or affirmation and particularly describing the place


    to be searched and the persons or things to be seized.


 


      Medical records are textbook cases of “papers and effects.” Also,


given the highly personal nature of medical records, one’s “person” is clearly


violated by unreasonable searches of such records. Accordingly, in Boyd v.


United States, 116 U. S. 616, 630 (1886), the Supreme Court wrote that 4th


Amendment Protections:


 


              [4th Amendment Protections] apply to all invasions on the part


    of the government and its employees of the sanctity of a man's home


    and the privacies of life. It is not the breaking of his doors, and the


      rummaging of his drawers, 647*647 that constitutes the essence of the      offense; but it is the invasion of his indefeasible right of personal


      security, personal liberty and private property . . . . [Emphasis added.]


 


        Donatella Collins' medical records were searched without cause and


use to prosecute and incarcerate her. This constitutes an "invasion of [her]


indefeasible right of personal security, personal liberty, and private property.”


Importantly, the Court in Boyd. v. United States writes:


 


              Breaking into a house and opening boxes and drawers are


      circumstances of aggravation; but any forcible and compulsory


      extortion of a man's own testimony or of his private papers to be used


    as evidence to convict him of crime or to forfeit his goods, is within the


      condemnation.


 


      In other words, the very essence of an unreasonable search and seizure


is the warrantless obtaining and subsequent use as evidence to convict of


personal information, this being exactly what happened to Collins.


      When explaining why she denied Collins’ first motion to suppress the


information obtained from the Medical Database, Judge Gelberg writes that,


according to the Supreme Court, “individuals do not have a reasonable


expectation of privacy in records held by third parties. Smith v. Maryland,442 US 735 - Supreme Court 1979] at 743–44; United States v. Miller, 425


U.S. 435, 443 (1976).” But neither of these two cases is relevant. In Smith v.


Maryland, the defendant had ‘mugged’ (assaulted and robbed) a woman, who


then gave a description of the assailant to the police. The assailant then called


the woman on the phone and left obscene and threatening message. On the


basis of this information, the police wiretapped the defendant’s phone and


thereby obtained proof of his guilt. The defendant moved to have this


information suppressed on the grounds that his 4th Amendment rights had


been violated by the wiretap. The Supreme Court ruled that they had not.


      In Smith v. Maryland, the police obtained a warrant for the wiretap,


and the purpose of the wiretap was not to ‘fish’ for incriminating information


but was rather to corroborate independently obtained such information. Also,


by continuing to use his phone to harass the victim, the defendant had turned


his phone into the locus of an ongoing crime, voiding any expectation of


privacy that he might have, much someone is voiding his expectation of


privacy in his own home if he throws rocks at pedestrians from his window.


The case of Donatella Collins is not comparable. When the DEA searched her


medical records, they had no probable cause and had not obtained a warrant,


and they had no independent evidence of a crime.


      In United States v. Miller, the defendant’s vehicle had been found to


contain untaxed alcohol and illegal distillery equipment. On this basis, thepolice obtained warrants for the defendant’s bank records, which confirmed


that he was running a bootlegging operation. He was convicted and appealed


the conviction on the ground that his the search of his bank records violated


his 4th Amendment rights. The Supreme Court upheld his conviction, saying


that his 4th Amendment rights had not been violated.


      In Miller, there was probable cause for a search of the defendant’s


bank records and a warrant had been obtained. The search and use of Collins’


medical records, by contrast, was both suspicionless and warrantless.


      Gelberg later writes that “prescription drug records are not in the


possession of the patient, or even the hospital or physician with whom the


patient may share an expectation of privacy. See Ferguson v. City of


Charleston, 532 U.S. 67, 78 (2001). In Ferguson, the Supreme Court


overturned convictions of illegal drug use and drug-related crimes on the


grounds that the evidence of such crimes was derived from warrantless and


suspicionless searches of patient medical records conducted for purposes of


law enforcement, not for reasons of public safety or health. Delivering the


opinion of the Court, Justice Stevens writes that because “the immediate


objective of the searches was to generate evidence for law enforcement


purposes in order to reach that goal”, those searches and the use of


information derived from them to investigate and prosecute “is inconsistent


with the Fourth Amendment.” Ferguson therefore supports Collins’ motionto suppress.


      Gelberg later writes that there are few or no 4th Amendment


protections against “administrative searches”, meaning searches that are


conducted by government agencies for regulatory purposes. In defense of this


claim, Gelburg cites New York v. Burger, 482 U.S. 691, 699 (1987) and City


of Los Angeles v. Patel, 135 S. Ct. 2443, 2454 (2015). Neither case is on


point. In Burger, the defendant operated a junkyard without a license, a


violation of law, and also did not keep records, also a violation of law. The


police came to conduct a routine inspection, which the defendant permitted,


and arrested him when they discovered stolen vehicles, leading to a


conviction for trafficking in stolen vehicles. The defendant appealed his


conviction on the grounds that the search of his business violated his 4th


Amendment rights. The Supreme Court upheld the conviction on the grounds


that the defendant knew that his business was subject to routine inspections


and therefore had a diminished expectation of privacy.


 Burger is not on point. First of all, the defendant personally consented


to the inspection. Second, and more importantly, the inspection was routine


and was not conducted in order to search for incrimination information.


Collins was not running a business that was subject to routine inspections;


nor was she running a business, such as a junkyard, that must be regularly


inspected to prevent behaviors (such as improperly disposing of toxic waste)that can immediately have massive consequences for public safety. In fact,


Collins had a heightened expectation of privacy, given that the records of


hers that were searched were medical records. Nor is Patel on point, since, in


it, the Supreme Court ruled that hotel owners are not required to turn over


guest records to police unless the latter have a warrant, such records being


protected by the 4th Amendment.


      In stating its reasons for rejecting Collins’ motion to have her guilty


plea vacated, 17th District Court puts forth the same arguments as Gelburg,


making the same claims as Gelberg as to their being supported by Miller,


Burger, Patel, and Smith. Since we have already considered these arguments,


we need not review them afresh. The 17th District Court also claims that


Dep't of State Police v. Sitz, 496 U.S. 444, 455 (1990) and Maryland v. King,


569 U.S. 435, 463 (2013) are on point. Neither case is in fact on point. Sitz


concerns the legality of DUI checkpoints, the Supreme Court Ruling that they


are in fact Constitutional and do not violate 4th Amendment rights. A drunk


driver is an immediate and extreme threat to public safety, since such a


person is operating heavy machinery in a manner that is likely to result in


loss of life and limb and is also likely to cause public roadways and other


public utilities to be unusable. Consequently, the 4th Amendment does as


little to protect drunk drivers from DUI checkpoints as it does to prevent


police from detaining a drunkard who is brandishing a weapon in a crowdedpublic square. Collins was not an immediate or extreme threat to public


safety, there being no immediate or grave threat to public safety that the DEA


was averting by searching through her records, and Sitz is therefore


irrelevant.


 Maryland v. King is also irrelevant. In Maryland, the Supreme Court


ruled that the police were within their rights to take DNA samples from


people whom they had already arrested. The Court’s position in Maryland is


that if the police already had strong enough evidence to arrest a given person


for a given crime, then it could use DNA samples, obtained through cheek


swabs, to corroborate said evidence, in much the way they can use


fingerprints. Consequently, Maryland concerns cases where the police


already have enough information for an arrested to be warranted and does not


concern suspicionless or warrantless searches for information. Since the


search of Collins medical records was suspicionless and warrantless, there


being no evidence apartment from the information thereby obtained to


investigate or arrest Collins, there is no parallel with Maryland.


      Both of the courts involved in Collins case obliquely suggest that drug


dealers are such a threat to public safety that their 4th Amendment


protections are voided, and both courts seem to regard the highly regulated


nature of the medical industry as being proof of this. Both contentions are


false. If an industry is highly regulated, it follows that people involved in ithave to comply with regulations and laws specific to their professions, and it


therefore follows that they are more exposed than they would otherwise be to


civil and criminal indictments following from regulatory activity. The DEA


officers who conducted suspicionless and warrantless searches of her medical


records were not regulators and were not functioning as regulators. Their sole


purpose was to find evidence on which to make arrests. This was not


regulatory activity that led to an arrest, as was the case in Burger, and as


would be the case if a stockbroker were arrested for stock-fraud following a


routine SEC-audit of his records.


      Katz v. United States, 389 US 347 - Supreme Court 1967 is on point.


In Katz the Supreme Court overturned a conviction on the grounds that the


information leading to that conviction was obtained through warrantless,


suspicionless electronic surveillance of a public phone used by the defendant.


Concurring with the Court’s opinion, Justice Harlan wrote: “[T]here is a


twofold requirement, first that a person have exhibited an actual (subjective)


expectation of privacy and, second, that the expectation be one that society is


prepared to recognize as ‘reasonable.’” This two-prong litmus test has


become the standard by which courts have come to adjudicate putative


violations of 4th Amendment protections, and there is no doubt that in


Collins’ case, the government has failed both prongs of this test. It failed the


first prong, since exchanges with one’s physician, including the recordsresulting therefrom, are, and for many centuries have been, the Common Law


privacy gold standard. Hence the requirement that insurance companies


handle patient medical records in accordance with guidelines that “assure that


such information is provided and utilized in a manner that appropriately


protects the confidentiality of the information and the privacy of individuals


receiving health care services and items” (Health (Insurance Portability and


Accountability Act of 1996 Pub. L. 104-191, 110 Stat. 1936 (2012) SEC.


1128 (C) B (ii) CONFIDENTIALITY), and the related requirement that


“Each person….who maintains or transmits health information shall maintain


reasonable and appropriate administrative, technical, and physical


safeguards… to ensure the integrity and confidentiality of the information…


[and] to protect against any reasonably anticipated…threats or hazards to the


security or integrity of the information; and…unauthorized uses or


disclosures of the information; and …otherwise to ensure compliance with


this part by the officers and employees of such person (Health Insurance


Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, Pub. L. 104-191, 110 Stat. 1936


(2012) SEC. 1173 (2) SAFEGUARDS).


      The government’s behavior fails the second prong since Collins own


behavior, however criminal it may have been, was predicated on the very


supposition that her exchanges with the physicians in question were her


business and nobody else’s. Indeed, the government tacitly admitted as muchin its very method of investigating this case. It did not approach any of


Collins’ doctors directly, knowing that they would have had deeply


entrenched professional resistances to divulging patient information, and


consciously used the Medical Database as a workaround. It is not a defense


of the government's behavior that Collins was abusing her expectation of


privacy, since rights don’t cease to exist when criminals take advantage of


them.


        Moreover, rights don’t cease to exist when statutes are enacted that


violate them, rendering null and void the 17th District Court’s claim that:


“The very statutory regime permitting this investigation, the CSA, supports


the finding that Congress does not view these records as inherently private


and weakens the asserted expectation of privacy." If the CSA (Controlled


Substance Act) warrants violations of Constitutional Rights, then it is the


CSA that must be modified, not those rights. Moreover, while there may be


cogent reasons for strictly regulating the buying and selling of certain


substances, it cannot plausibly be held that public safety and health require


the government to strip drug dealers and users of Constitutional protections.


      Finally, the arguments put forth by both courts, along with the


Government’s suspicionless and warrantless search of the Medical Database,


are inconsistent with the CSA itself. According to Title 21 United States


Code (USC) Controlled Substances Act Part E (b), law enforcement isauthorized to enter ‘controlled premises’ (meaning databases or physical


locations containing records of transactions involving controlled substances,


such as prescriptions or pharmacy records) only “[f]or the purpose of


inspecting, copying, and verifying the correctness of records, reports, or other


documents”---in other words, to ensure compliance with regulations, not to


conduct criminal investigations. Moreover, the officer conducting such an


inspection must “upon stating his purpose and presenting to the owner,


operator, or agent in charge of such premises (A) appropriate credentials and


(B) a written notice of his inspection authority”---advance notice must be


given and the inspections must be done overtly, not with stealth. Finally,


warrantless inspections are permissible only under the following five


circumstances:


 


      (1) with the consent of the owner, operator, or agent in charge of the


controlled premises;


      (2) in situations presenting imminent danger to health or safety;


      (3) in situations involving inspection of conveyances where there is


reasonable cause to believe that the mobility of the conveyance makes it


impracticable to obtain a warrant;


      (4) in any other exceptional or emergency circumstance where time or


opportunity to apply for a warrant is lacking; or      (5) in any other situations where a warrant is not constitutionally


required.


 


      We have already shown that (2) does not apply in this case, and it is


self-evident that (3)-(5) also do not apply. Only (1) can credibly be argued to


apply, and the government’s entire case therefore rests upon the


government’s contention that, since Collins was not herself the proprietor of


the Medical Database, (1) permitted the government to search said database.


However, (1) grants no such authority to the government, given that, as


previously established, Collins’ expectation of Doctor-patient confidentiality


followed her into the Database. Consequently, the government’s case, resting


as it does on information obtained through an illegal search, is without


foundation.


 


                                         CONCLUSION


 


        According to the two Courts that denied Collins’ two motions, Collins


medical records were not protected by the 4th Amendment for the following


three reasons. First, they were held by third parties. Second, the drug-


prescription industry is highly regulated and therefore exposes those involved


in it to lower expectations of privacy. Third, drug dealing is a threat to public


safety, much like drunk driving, and therefore warrants a curtailing of 4th


Amendment rights.


      Each of these arguments is misconceived. When patients agree to let


third parties keep their records, they do so either because they expect their


doctor-patient privilege to continue to be honored or because their need for


medical care outweighs their concern over potential violations of privacy and


confidentiality. Consequently, when patients sign over their records to third


parties, they either don't relinquish their expectation of privacy or they do so


under duress (and therefore, in effect, not at all). Second, if an industry is


highly regulated, that does indeed expose those involved in it to legal


obligations additional to those borne by all citizens, and it therefore exposes


them to civil and criminal liability resulting from regulatory activity. But this


is irrelevant in Collins’ case, since in searching through her records, the DEA


were not functioning as regulators.      It cannot plausibly be maintained that people who illegally sell


oxycodone and Percocet constitute a sufficiently clear and present threat to


public safety to warrant suspensions of their Constitutional rights. What


would be a threat to public safety would be the lack of medical care and


inadequate medical care resulting from the erosion of doctor-patient privilege


that would result if patient records were stripped of 4th Amendment


protections, as they would be if the 17th District Court’s ruling were upheld.


      Finally, when statutes are enacted that are incompatible with


Constitutional Protections, it is those statutes that must be modified, not those


protections. According to the 17th District Court, the “statutory regime”


constituted by the CSA demands an erosion of 4th Amendment Protections.


If this is true, then it is the CSA that must be modified, not those protections.


                                   Motion to Quash


 


      IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF OKLAHOMA COUNTY


                            STATE OF OKLAHOMA


 


 


THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA,)


                                                )


Plaintiff,)


                                                )


                                              )Case No. CF-2048-6728


                                                )


Sandi Koufax)


                                                )


                Defendant.)


 


    MOTION TO QUASH AND DISMISS FOR INSUFFICIENT


EVIDENCE


 


COMES NOW the defendant Sandi Koufax, by and through undersigned


counsel, Petra Martinez, and moves that the charge against her be quashedand dismissed for insufficient evidence on the grounds that the State’s


evidence is wholly insufficient to establish that Ms. Koufax committed


assault and battery with a dangerous weapon on March 3, 2017. In support,


Ms. Koufax shows the following: Ms. Koufax is charged with one Count of


Assault and Battery with a Dangerous Weapon in violation of  21 O.S. 21-


645. Randy Johnson, the alleged victim and the State’s only witness, states in


his own testimony that he was not afraid for his own well-being and,


moreover, that he did not have a reasonable apprehension of injury, this being


an element of assault (Curry v. Streater, 213 P. 3d 550 - Okla: Supreme


Court 2009). Moreover, Mr. Johnson explicitly states that Ms. Koufax lacked


an apparent ability to execute the threat of any kind of violence, this too


being a necessary element of assault (Curry v. Streater, supra).


Consequently, the necessary elements of assault are lacking here, and the


indictment must therefore be quashed. 


                                BRIEF IN SUPPORT


    A. Statement of Facts


      Ms. Koufax was shopping at the Dollar Tree Store, where Mr. Johnson


worked as a clerk. According to Mr. Johnson, Ms. Koufax left the store and


the buzzer went off, indicating that Ms. Koufax was in possession of an item


that had not been paid for. According to Mr. Johnson, he ran outside the store


to confront Ms. Koufax, claiming that he asked her to give back a pair of pink


pants that he saw her shove in her purse. (PH Tr. at 10) Ms. Koufax refused,


and Mr. Johnson called the police (PH Tr. at 10) Mr. Johnson alleges that,


while talking with the police, Ms. Koufax struck him several times in the face


“using  her  fists.”  (PH  Tr.  at  11)  By  his  own  admission,  Mr.  Johnson


responded not by fleeing but by shoving Ms. Koufax to the ground, then


forcibly taking her purse from her and running back into the store. (PH Tr. at


12) Mr. Johnson emphasizes that he was not at this point in any way afraid of


Ms. Koufax. He emphasizes his ability to deal with any threat that she might


have represented, point out that “I been in enough altercations…that I kinda


know how to defend myself”. (PH Tr. at 11)  Mr. Johnson makes it clear that,


instead of fleeing from Ms. Koufax, he gently pushed her, which caused her


to “go down”, owing to her “wobbly” and enfeebled condition. (PH Tr. at 12)


      Mr. Johnson alleges that he then ran behind a counter, at which pointMs. Koufax allegedly threw M&M’s and other small items at Mr. Johnson


(PH Tr. at 12). According to Mr. Johnson, Ms. Koufax then picked up a


ceramic  bowl,  with  the  apparent  intention  of  throwing  it  in  his  general


direction. (PH Tr. at 12) He indicates that he was not afraid of being struck


by said bowl, for the reason that “I was dodging everything she was throwing


at me.” (PH Tr. at 15). Mr. Johnson indicates that there was a glass cigarette


case behind him and that, had Ms. Koufax been able to throw the ceramic


bowl, she would have shattered the cigarette case. (PH Tr. at 12) Mr. Johnson


claims that he then charged at Ms. Koufax and tackled her. He explicitly


states  that  his  intention  was  to  prevent  Ms.  Koufax  from  damaging  the


cigarette case: “And she grabs one of those [ceramic bowls] and she's fixing


to throw it. And, you know, if I jumped out of the way then it woulda hit the


cigarette case behind me and shattered the glass.” (PH Tr. at 12-13) Later in


the proceedings, Mr. Johnson confirms that this was indeed his intention: “I


was  dodging  everything  she  was  throwing  at  me.  And  if  I  dodged  the


cigarette case was right behind me. So I didn't want it to hit the cigarette case


or  it  would've  broken  the  glass.”  Mr.  Johnson  testifies  that  after  he  had


charged at Ms. Koufax, with the intention of preventing her from shattering


the cigarette case, and while he was in the process of forcibly subduing her,


she struck him with the ceramic bowl: “So I run around the counter, you


know, so she wouldn't throw it. And she hits me in the side of the head withit.”  (PH Tr. at 13).


      There is an ambiguity in Mr. Johnson’s testimony. At one point, he


indicates that he and Mr. Koufax were on different sides of the counter and


that he therefore had to run from out behind the counter in order to prevent


her from throwing the ceramic bowl at the cigarette display: “When she rared


--  when  she  picked  it  up  and  did  like  this  (indicated)  I  came  around  the


counter  really  quick  to  stop  her,  basically  what  I  did.”  (PH  Tr.  at  16).


Immediately thereafter, however, Mr. Johnson says that when Ms. Koufax


attempted to throw the ceramic bowl, he and she were on the same side of the


counter. Defense counsel asked Mr. Johnson: “So when she went to throw it


you guys were on, the same side of the counter?”, to which he replied: “Yeah.


Yeah. I was standing right next to her.” (PH Tr. at 16). Notwithstanding this


ambiguity in his testimony, Mr. Johnson is adamant that his objective was to


prevent damage to the display case and was not concerned that Mr. Koufax


was going to harm him.


      There  are  discrepancies  between  Mr.  Johnson’s  testimony  and  Ms.


Koufax’s testimony. Ms. Koufax agrees that she left the store with a pair of


pink pants that stole, and she agrees that Mr. Johnson followed her. But Ms.


Koufax claims that Mr. Johnson simply grabbed her from behind (PH Tr. at


20), leading to a struggle between them, which eventuated in Mr. Johnson’s


through Ms. Koufax on and the ground (PH Tr. at 20) and forcibly grabbingher purse from her and running into the store with it. (PH Tr. at 20)  In


agreement  with  Mr.  Johnson’s  testimony,  Ms.  Koufax  alleges  that  Mr.


Johnson came out from behind the counter, except that, according to Ms.


Koufax, Mr. Johnson grabbed her hand, then grabbed and forcibly pushed her


backwards. Ms. Koufax claims that she does not recall striking Mr. Johnson


with a ceramic bowl. (PH Tr. at 22) 


 


    B. The testimony of the state’s sole witness, Mr. Randy Johnson,  is


          unambiguously  to  the  effect  that  he  was  not  in  imminent


          apprehension of harmful or offensive contact with Ms. Koufax,


        and one the elements of assault is therefore absent. 


 


      Ms. Koufax did not put the alleged victim imminent apprehension of


fear of harmful or offensive contact with her, and for this reason there are no


grounds for an assault charge against Ms. Koufax: See Adams v. Garvin


Cnty. Bd. of Cnty. Comm'rs, 2016 U.S. Dist.: “The elements of assault are:


(1) that the defendant acted intending to cause a harmful or offensive contact


with the person, or an imminent apprehension of such a contact, and (2) the


other person is put in such imminent apprehension. OUJI No. 19.1”  In


particular, Mr. Johnson’s testimony makes it clear that when Ms. Koufax


allegedly struck him with the ceramic bowl, it was in response to Mr.Johnson’s charging her and subduing her with the intention only of preventing


her from damaging a cigarette case. On direct examination, Mr. Johnson


testifies: “And she grabs one of those and she's fixing to throw it. And, you


know, if I jumped out of the way then it woulda hit the cigarette case behind


me and shattered the glass. So I run around the counter, you know, so she


wouldn't throw it. And she hits me in the side of the head with it.” (PH Tr. at


12-13) .” Mr. Johnson is effectively saying that because he was afraid for the


cigarette case and was not afraid for his own safety, he charged Ms. Koufax


and attempted to wrest the ceramic bowl from her, this being the immediate


cause of the alleged battery. Simply put, the precipitating cause of the alleged


battery was the absence on Mr. Johnson’s part of imminent apprehension of


harmful or offensive contact. Mr. Johnson’s later testimony confirms this: “I


came around the counter at that point in time so that she wouldn't throw it


right there and destroy the cigarette cabinet. And when I came around the


counter she hit me in the head with it.”


        Assuming it accurate, Mr. Johnson’s testimony establishes that Ms.


Koufax was far too incapacitated to be such a threat. “[S]he rared back, tried


to hit me again. And I blocked it and, like I said, she was pretty wobbly and


she fell into… this huge display of Coke and chips…and just starts wallerin'


around.” (PH Tr. At 13)  In other words, Ms. Koufax wasn’t even able to pick


herself up, her attempts to do so merely resulting in her ‘wallering around.’ Inother words, Ms. Koufax was unable to stand up and could only thrash about.


     An element of assault is “an apparent ability to execute the threat”


of violence. (Curry v. Streater, supra.) Ms. Koufax lacked this ability, and


there was therefore no assault. Consequently, there was no assault and battery


with a dangerous weapon, since “The elements of assault and battery with a


dangerous weapon are the commission of an assault and battery upon another


by means of any deadly weapon as is likely to produce death. 21 O.S. 1981,


652.” (Ashinsky v. State, 780 P. 2d 201 - Okla: Court of Criminal Appeals


1989.) Consequently, the elements requisite for a charge Assault and Battery


with a Dangerous Weapon in violation of  21 O.S. 21-645 is absent.


      Accordingly, this case must be dismissed.


      WHEREFORE,  based  on  the  above  and  foregoing,  Ms.  Koufax


respectfully requests that this Honorable Court grant his Motion to Quash and


Dismiss for Insufficient Evidence.


                                                        Respectfully submitted,


 


                                                            _______________________________


                                                      Petra Martinez, OBA #16137


                                                        Martinez & STOUT

                                                                      rd
                                                        3033 NW 63 Street, Suite E-


105                                                        Oklahoma City, OK  73116


                                                        (Tele) 405/ 605-8639


                                                        (Fax)405/ 605-8640


                                                        (Email)


petramartinez@gmail.com


      ATTORNEY FOR Ms. Koufax


 


 


                            Certificate of Service


 


      This is to certify that on the date of filing, a true and correct copy of


the  foregoing  instrument  was  hand-delivered  to  the  Oklahoma  County


District  Attorney’s  Office,  320  Robert  S.  Kerr,  Okc,  OK,  73102,  Attn:


Clayton Niemeyer.


 


                  __________________________________


              Petra Martinez


 


 


 


 Legal Negotiation Exercise Reflection Paper 2: The Negotiation – Clients


                                    (Law School)


 


      Please write a 2-4 page reflection paper on the following questions, as


well as anything else you want to share about the experience.


 


              1.            Now that you have completed the negotiation, do you


      think your attorney prepared you adequately? If not, what did you think


    you should have been better prepared for?


 


 


      My sister and I were adequately prepared, but this was because we


prepared ourselves; it was not, I am sorry to say, because our attorney


prepared us. Before entering into negotiations, we should have had known the


following:


 


      *How much money my brother was receiving from the V.A.


      *How much money he was receiving from other parties


      *What his assets were (stocks, bonds, properties, etc.)


      *Whether he was completely unable to work, partly unable to work, or


able to work (but choosing not to).      *Whether his alleged inability to work, which he claims to be the


result of a hand injury, is to any degree a consequence of psychological or


emotional impairment and, if so, whether he has violent or anti-social


tendencies.


      *How much money (if any) he was spending on attorney fees


      *What his emotional disposition towards us was and, in particular,


what had been motivating him to behave so selfishly towards us (was it mere


selfishness or was it active malice?)


      *Whether or not he is psychologically well and, if not, whether he is


physically dangerous (relevant because we have children and will soon be his


neighbor).


 


      Had we had this information, we could very possibly have negotiated


a much better deal for ourselves. We entered negotiations assuming that


Robert had no funds and that his behavior was motivated by financial


desperation, not by ill will. But we did not know that to be the case, and we


still don't. The house in question is large and Robert could have shared it with


us at little inconvenience to himself. He did not do so, forcing us to pay high


rents, even though, as Robert well knew, my sister and I (unlike Robert) have


children, have grueling jobs, and pay high rents. In retrospect, Robert’s


behavior embodied callous indifference towards the welfare of me, my sister,and our children; and he wouldn’t even talk to us until we forced him to do so


by ceasing to pay the mortgage. In light of these facts, Robert’s behavior


might have been driven by active ill will towards us, and not by financial


desperation. Therefore, contrary to what we have been assuming, Robert


might have had money. Also, given how poorly Robert treated us, I am not


entirely comfortable with the idea that he will be our neighbor. Additionally,


Robert’s lack of character throughout all of this casts doubt on his credibility,


making it unclear whether he is in fact disabled and unable to make a living.


Had it turned out that Robert was simply malingering, my sister and I would


have entered negotiations with a very different, and much less compromising


mindset.


      It was probably not our attorney’s job to get us this information, but it


was, I believe, his responsibility to at least make it clear that this information


might be helpful to us. Our attorney did not do this; he simply took


everything Robert said at face value and accepted his offer without question.


It might turn out that Robert, who is now our new neighbor, is emotionally


antagonistic towards us, or that Robert uses his new position as our neighbor


to find a new way to sponge off of us, our attorney. If so, our attorney is to be


blamed for not making us aware of these possible outcomes.


 


              2.            Did you achieve your goals? Do you feel satisfied with    the outcome of the negotiation? Why or why not? Did you attorney


      prepare you for achieving everything you wanted?


 


      For the most part, we did succeed in achieving our objectives. Our


main objective was to reclaim our fair share of the property that our father


had left us while not alienating or dispossessing our brother; and we did


achieve that goal.


      That said, I am not entirely satisfied with the outcome of the


negotiation. This is because I now question whether our objective was the


right one. My brother did not exhibit any empathy towards me, my sister, or


our families. This makes me think that we made too many concessions to


him, and it makes wonder whether he is someone I want to be living next


door to my children or myself. Time will tell; he may turn out to be an


excellent neighbor and uncle to my children. But I believe that, in light of his


previous behavior, our attorney should have made some inquiries into his


mental health and his attitudes towards me and my sister, which, judging by


his past behavior, were not positive.


 


              3.            Do you think your attorney did an effective job of


      representing your position? Why or why not? Do you think your


      attorney could have achieved a better outcome if s/he had done      anything differently?


 


      I do not believe I was particularly well-prepared. My brother’s


behavior had been callous and possibly a bit deranged. For that reason, I


should have been less quick to assume that he had the same degree of familial


warmth towards me and my sister that she and I have towards him, and I also


should have done more to find out what his actual financial and professional


situation was. That said, I believe that my attorney should at least have


alerted us to the possibility that my brother was not well-disposed towards


and therefore was not somebody we would want to have as a neighbor. I


believe this to be a part of a pattern on my attorney’s part of taking the least


confrontational path. I am not saying that we necessarily should have been


more confrontational; nor am I saying that the outcome was a bad one. What


I am saying is that I don’t have enough information to know whether the


outcome was a good one. My attorney should have provided me with the


relevant information or at the very least with the need to have it.


 


              4.            Do you think you and your attorney used your


      confidential information effectively in the negotiation? If not, why not?


 


      I did not disclose anything to my attorney that had to be keptconfidential.


 


              5.            What did your attorney do well? What do you think s/he


      could have done better?


 


      My attorney did show up to proceedings, and he had clearly read the


relevant documents, filed the relevant paperwork, and so far as I could tell


was familiar with the relevant points of law. Also, my attorney did not


undermine me and my sister in our attempt to secure a decent outcome,


which we succeeded in doing. I would therefore say that my attorney did


technically fulfill his obligations.


      I would not say that he fulfilled them distinction, however. My


brother's behavior prior to these proceedings had been positively anti-social.


He had taken over a five-bedroom house and refused to let either me or my


sister or any mutual family members so much as stay there, let alone live


there; and he did this knowing that my sister and I work full-time jobs, have


families, and are under financial stress. And he did it without ever paying


rent: he made me and my sister pay his way and gave us nothing in return. To


me, this suggests a low degree of morality on my brother's part. This should


have indicated to my attorney that we might not want to be living next door


to Robert. It also suggests that should have looked more closely into Robert’spsychological condition before deciding to be neighbors with him. As my


new neighbor, is Robert going to find a new way to sponge off of my


resources? If we refuse to give him money, will he threaten me or my family?


The answer to each of these questions may well be ‘no', but I don't know that;


and I believe that, in light of these unknowns, my attorney probably should at


the very least have me and my sister to reconsider whether we wanted Robert


to have the cottage along with access to the driveway. I am not trying to be


alarmist, but there is nothing in Robert's behavior in all of this that indicates


any degree of goodwill towards me or my sister; and I’m a bit disappointed


that I am having to worry about all this now, after an agreement has been


reached.


 


 


              6.            What, if anything, surprised you about the negotiation


      experience?


 


      What surprised me was the extent to which the proceedings were


influenced by the personalities involved. I had previously seen the law as


dispassionate in nature and assumed that legal proceedings, including


negotiations, were conducted in an unemotional, strictly law-driven way.


This turned out not to be the case. Obviously the law was relevant, but I cameto see that the law permits a number of different outcomes, it being up to the


attorneys involved, and possibly also their clients, to decide which specific


outcome is actualized.


      Another thing that I came to see is that, before retaining an attorney,


one should do more to think about what one wants one’s attorney to do. As


they are represented on TV and in the movies, lawyers are fearless and are


always looking for new angles of attack. If this case is any indication,


lawyers are rather passive and will do what they are professionally required


to do but cannot be counted to do much more than that.


 


 


              7.            Overall, do you think this exercise was a good learning


      experience?


 


      I do. Before I took part in this exercise, I thought that a given case was


determined by the law along with the facts of the case. I now think that the


law and the facts of the case are a framework that excludes certain outcomes


while permitting a wide range of other possible outcomes, it being up to the


attorneys, their clients, and other human beings involved to determine which


of those outcomes becomes the actual one.


                                       Adverse Possession


 


        Camero & Camero Law Associates


      305 NW 5th St


        Oklahoma City, OK 73102


 


      7 February 2019


 


      Mr. Jason Williams


      313 NE 21st St


        Oklahoma City, OK 73105


 


      Dear Mr. Williams,


 


      I  am  writing  you  concerning  the  dispute  with  your  neighbor  Mr.


George  Smith.  Mr.  Smith  is  in  effect  claiming  that  he  has  come  into


possession of this land through what is known as adverse possession, this


being the process of taking ownership of land to which one does not have


title  by  occupying  it.  In  order  for  Mr.  Smith’s  claim  to  hold  up,  five


conditions have to be met. First, George Smith must have represented himself


to others as the owner of the land. Second, he must not have concealed hisoccupancy of the land in question. Third, he must not have occupied the land


with  you.  Fourth,  he  must  not  have  been  occupying  the  land  with  your


consent. Fifth, he must have been occupying the land without interruption for


at least fifteen years.


 


      If  Mr.  Smith  does  satisfy  all  five  conditions,  you  have  two  years


starting from the date of the beginning of your dispute with Mr. Smith to


dispute Mr. Smith’s claim. Also, if Mr. Smith has been polluting or damaging


the property in question, that might weight against him in a court of law.


Additionally, if land that originally belonged to Mr. Smith is on your side of


the fence, then you might have an adverse possession claim to that land.


 


      I would suggest hiring an Oklahoma real estate lawyer to determine


whether  or  not  all  five  of  the  above  conditions  have  been  met  and  also


whether  Mr.  Smith  has  been  polluting  the  land  in  question  or  otherwise


weakening his claim to it. If it turns out that his claim still holds, I would


suggest having your lawyer reach out to Mr. Smith and propose a friendly


compromise, to which, for many reasons, Mr. Smith may prove amenable.


 


        Sincerely,


       Joaquin Camero, Attorney at Law


        Camero & Camero Law Associates


      Tel. (210) 602-6109


          joaquincamero@hotmail.com


 


             I am more than my LSAT Scores (Law School Application)


 


      I am an extremely proud person, and I always try to avoid making


excuses of myself. In this context, however, I believe I owe it to all parties to


explain why my LSAT are not an accurate reflection of my abilities as a law


student or lawyer.


      English is my second language. Not only is it my second language:


Before I went to college I was completely immersed in a Spanish-speaking


culture. All of my friends, family and professional acquaintances spoke


Spanish and Spanish alone. When it became incumbent on me to learn to


become professionally, and not just functionally, fluent in English, I did so


quickly, and with great joy. But it is very easy for native speakers of English


to underestimate the degree to which sensitivity to linguistic nuances affect


one’s ability to do well on standardized tests, especially on the LSAT.


      I am not making excuses. I want to provide my future clients with


maximally good service, and to that end nothing less than complete and total


fluency will suffice. My LSAT scores, which were average, were a wake-up


call for me. Since then, I have spent every spare moment of every day


immersing myself in the subtleties of English legalese. I have also much


more conscious of the logical nuances that are buried within the linguistic


nuances in legal documents.      There are people who come to this country not speaking English and


who ace the LSATS a few years thereafter. Such people are to be admired,


but I don’t know that they are to be used as a reference-point. I have known


many people who are functionally fluent in English and who, when working


in their native language, are geniuses, but who can barely function at a


professional level when speaking English. I believe that such people are more


the norm than the exception.


      My objective, I would like to emphasize, is to be exception, not the


rule: I want to be a superlative law student and lawyer---and I will be. I will


be because I intend to be, and because I have the discipline, focus, and


attention to detail necessary to do so. It is my responsibility, however, to


avail you of all the relevant facts about myself, and English being my second


language (and one that I did not begin to learn until mid teens) is, I believe,


not without relevance.


      I also believe that my performance on the LSAT was marred by the


fact that I was working two jobs, completing an MBA, and working every


day on behalf of a prisoner of the State of Texas whose rights had been


violated and who, thanks in part to my efforts, was released less than one


month ago. This is not an excuse. There are many people who work two jobs


and are sleep-deprived on the day of the LSAT but who perform brilliantly


nonetheless. Echoing what I said earlier, however, such superlative cases arenot always the best yardsticks. They are not to be discarded as mere statistical


outliers, but their significance, if I may wax philosophical, is that they raise


the bar and is not that they are the bar.


      I would like to confess that I was reluctant to write this statement. I


take great pride in being self-reliant. Looking back, this may have hurt me at


some junctures, as there have been many times when I declined assistance


from which I could have benefited. This happened during my first year of


college. Having just suffered tremendous personal and financial loss, I


refused any kind of help from anyone, and I certainly could have used it. But


I turned my situation around, got A’s in classes that I had previously barely


passed, and graduated with high honors. I was able to carry out this turn


around because it became important to me to do well in college, and I will


excel in every aspect of my legal studies because it is a personal mission of


mine to do so.


      As I would like to believe that my written work indicates, my


command of the English language has now reached the point where I will


have no difficulty dealing with the intricacies of legal English. I thank you


for the giving me the opportunity to clear up this matter and thank you for


your consideration.


                     Describe Your Background (College Application)


 


      Tech specs: Minimum three full paragraphs (one paragraph for each


question), maximum five paragraphs, worth 10 points (does not need to be a


classically structured essay i.e. no need for intro and conclusion).


 


        Self-reflection on class


      1 How would you describe your class background?


 


      I was a solidly middle class. My father was the manager of a


pharmacy, and my mother was a stay-at-home mom. We lived well but not


opulently. One day my father sustained an injury while on the job. (Even


though he was a manager, he sometimes had to stack boxes, either as part of


his regular duties or because he had to fill in for an absent employee.) After


that, he was more or less bed-ridden. He had health and disability insurance,


but they were inadequate. They simply didn’t pay what they had agreed to


pay. My mother had to get a job as a waitress, and we had to move to a


smaller house in a worse neighborhood.


      It wasn’t all bad, though. We were still together. And, even though my


father, being incapacitated, was unhappy, we still had good times. Also, my


father had played the market over the years (not, as it turns, with greatsuccess); and he tried to teach me the tricks of that trade. But it was very


complicated, and I was never really able to identify trends in the market that


would result in a windfall for me. Also, some of the concepts, e.g. price-to-


earnings ratio, were hard to understand and even hard to apply in practice.


        Anyway, I am now in college and, so I believe, am on my way back to


a respectable middle-class existence. But my experiences have made realize


how fragile one’s economic condition is, and these movies are opening my


eyes to the wealth-disparities that are responsible for the precariousness of


what I used to believe to be a ‘solidly middle- class’ mode of existence.


 


 


      2 What do you think about wealth and inequality in the US today?


Engage with the films, readings, and lectures.


 


      I have lived in the middle class and also in the lower class (albeit in


the upper echelons of it---in the ‘upper lower class’, as it were). I did not find


life in either category particularly unpleasant (even though life in each


stratum had its share of problems). Life in the middle class was fairly


‘luxurious’. We had a large house, lived in a quiet and peaceful suburban


neighborhood, and had a number of amenities. But my father seemed to be


working all the time—he left home at 7:00 am and did not come back untilaround 7:00 pm. And I always secretly wondered if all that work was really


worth it.


      When my father was laid off, we downshifted into the lower class. Our


apartment and neighborhood were rather squalid and dingy and depressing.


But we will had food, heat, internet and all of the other basic amenities.


      While in college, I have become friends with some people who come


from the ‘top 1%’ of this country—the so-called ‘super rich’, and I have been


to their houses and vacationed with them. Here is what I noticed. They had


very nice houses. Many of them had servants. And one or two had tennis


courts in their back yards!


      But the ‘bread winner’ in one of these super rich households seemed


to be working all the time and had little time for his/her children. The


children were in some respects in a very good place. They did not have to


work (at least not in a serious way) during college, which left them time to


focus on their studies. (Which some of them did, resulting in good grades and


well-developed minds. Others squandered their money and time, partying and


doing drugs.) And when they left college, they did not have any debt. But the


parent or parents who were responsible for their money did not, it seemed,


spend enough time with them. So their wealth was a mixed bag, I thought.


      It was clear to me from my personal experience that there are massive


income disparities in this country, and the movies, especially WealthInequality in America, made the precise extent of those disparities very clear


to me. But I didn’t really see all that many structural differences between my


life, during the lower-class part of my upbringing, and those of my super-


wealthy friends. I got the feeling that better health care was available to the


latter. And I also saw with my own eyes that those who were born into super


wealthy families seemed, in some cases (not all), to have the option of not


working. But, strangely, a lot of them did have to work. (Apparently, their


wealthy parents did not want them to be ‘on the dole’, to use an expression


that my one of my super rich friend’s father would use.)


      So yes, there are massive income disparities. But the really important


things---food, lodging, leisure time—seem to be available to members of all


classes. The one really important thing that does not seem to be available to


poor people is good health care.


      Of course, these points do not hold universally. The Isle of Flowers,


with its graphic footage of children rummaging through piles of garbage for


food, made it clear that, in some societies, being lower class means not


having enough food (and certainly not enough clean food), possibly not


having clean water, almost certainly not having adequate health care,


probably not having a decent education, and very likely living a short (and in


many ways unpleasant) life. But in the United States, even the poor (with the


exception of the absolute poorest, such as homeless people) don’t seem tohave it quite so bad.


 


 


 


      3 How do you think you are or are not affected by wealth inequality?


 


      There are a couple of ways. First, because of my straitened family


circumstances, I have to work. This takes time away from my studies, which


I feel limits me. It actually limits in a couple of ways. First, it makes it harder


for me to get the kinds of grades that I probably need to get to pull myself up


socioeconomically. Second, it makes it hard to absorb the information in


question, which means that my mind is not being benefited as much from my


education as it could be. Also, even though I work, which offsets expenses to


some extent, I will still have a lot of debt after college. And while I don’t


know exactly how it will impact my life, the impact probably won’t be


positive.


      So I think the main way that my socioeconomic status affects my life


is that it takes away time—time that I sorely need, especially at this crucial


juncture of my development.


      But quite frankly, that isn’t so much a consequence of ‘the injustices


of capitalism’ as it is of the fact that education is very expensive. And I don’tknow why it is so expensive, and the movies we watched didn’t really


address that question. My father put himself through college on the basis of a


part-time job. He lived without roommates in what he described as a pretty


nice apartment. And he had no debt after college. All of which probably ties


in in some way to the growing income disparities in this country. But I don’t


immediately see the nature of the tie-in, and the movies, though informative,


did not shed light on that particular topic.


                               Personal Statement (Law School)


 


      Personal Statement: Please attach a document of no more than two


(2) double-spaced, typed pages. One of the goals of the Admissions


Committee, at Texas A&M University School of Law, when making


decisions is to admit a diverse student body that will contribute to a


collaborative and progressive learning environment. Academic background


and strength of performance, though important, are not the only criteria


evaluated in the application process. For this reason, a personal statement,


written by you, is required as part of the application. In this statement we


seek information about you and your interest in transferring to Texas A&M


University School of Law.


 


      I am a proud Latino-American who was raised bilingual and bi-


cultural. Whereas others who are similarly bicultural tend to view their


identities in political terms, I view my identity in economic terms. While I


doubt that all Latino-Americans are in ideological lockstep, I do not doubt


that all Latino-Americans wish to have meaningful and prosperous careers.


And this is just what is happening: the Latino-American community is


becoming increasingly significant as an economic force. For this reason,


Latinos are increasingly likely to become doctors, lawyers, and entrepreneurs,with the result that Latinos are increasingly in need of business-related


services, e.g. financial services, marketing services, IT-services, and, of


course, legal services.


      My objective is to become a tax lawyer who services the burgeoning


Latino-American business-sector. Given how complex the US Tax Code is, it


is very hard for a business owner to prepare his own taxes without either


overpaying dramatically, thereby cutting into his already thin margins, or


exposing himself to civil or criminal liability, thereby jeopardizing his very


freedom. Moreover, Latino entrepreneurs are likely to need legal


representatives who are fluent in both Spanish and English and who are


equally at home in both Latino-American society and mainstream American


society. The rapid proliferation of Latino-run American businesses therefore


represents an opportunity for someone of my linguistic and cultural


background.


      It also represents an opportunity that my skills and personal


experience give me the ability to service. I have personally known many


aspiring Latino-entrepreneurs. Those who succeeded were always realistic


about the financial and legal dimensions of running a business, always


making sure that, before any problems arose, they had adequate funding and


competent legal representation. The ones who tried to keep start-up costs low


by foregoing adequate legal representation ended up spending far more intaxes than they would have spent on a competent tax-attorney, and as a result,


they did not have enough capital reserves left over to run the business. These


were not incompetent people. They often had very good products and


services to offer, and many of them organized their businesses intelligently


and cost-effectively. But they didn’t realize, until after it was too late, that


taxes are a business’s greatest operating expense, and they ended up having


to close shop, often with nothing to show for their efforts besides massive


back-taxes.


      At first, I found this discouraging. But I soon came to realize that I


could help improve the situation. I have always been very comfortable with


numbers and with complex procedures; and I have always had an affinity for


business, having received a bachelor’s (from Texas A&M) in International


Business Administration and an MBA (also from Texas A&M) with a


specialization in finance. In addition, I have worked with or for innumerable


small to mid-sized businesses in Texas. Coupled with my cultural


background, my training and experience in business make me unusually


capable of servicing the complex needs of the exploding Latino-American


business community.


      For this reason, it is very important to me that I practice law in Texas


and also, consequently, that I receive my J.D. from an institution, such as the


Texas A&M University School of Law, that commands the respect of thevarious different business communities in Texas, while also giving me the


legal training needed to be of assistance to them. I need a top-notch legal


education from an institution that will give me the skills and the backing


needed to provide the best possible legal service to a very specific


community within Texas. There are few law schools, if any, that can do as


good a job of this as the Texas A&M University School of Law, and it is


therefore my ardent desire to have the privilege to study there.


 


        Addendum: Please attach a document, no longer than one (1)


double-spaced, typed page, pertaining to any area of the application for


which you would like to provide clarification or additional explanation.


 


      I wish to provide legal services for businesses in Texas; and I want to


ensure that when I begin my career, I am already able to provide all of my


clients with the best possible legal representation. This will not be possible if


I attend a law school where my training is purely theoretical, since my initial


clients will have to suffer from my lack of experience; but it will possible if I


attend a law school, such as the Texas A&M University School of Law, that


gives its students the opportunity to provide people with actual tax-related


and business-related legal services. The Entrepreneurship Law Clinic will


give me just the kind of experience that I need to understand the basics ofpracticing business-related law, and the Low Income Tax Law Clinic will


give me just the kind of experience that I will need to understand the basics


of practicing tax law.


      I have known many people who went to law school and specialized in


a given area, only to find out that they lacked the experience necessary to


help their clients. I do not want to be in that position. Also, the very fact that


Texas A&M offers these clinics to its students shows that it wants its students


to be well-prepared and to be able to help people of limited means to


overcome the legal hurdles that are holding them back in life. While I wish to


prosper as an attorney, I wish to do so by making life easier for people,


especially for aspiring entrepreneurs. My distinct impression is that the Texas


A&M University School of Law makes it possible for its graduates to do


both. For this reason, as well as those stated previously, no law school is as


well-equipped as the Texas A&M University School of Law to give me what


I need to launch my legal career.


             My Career as a Computer Security Expert (Job Application)


 


      After graduating from college, I plan on working full-time as a


computer-security specialist. A computer-security specialist prevents


individual computers as well as computer-networks from being accessed by


unauthorized users and from being corrupted by malware and viruses.


      The field of computer-security developed in the 1990’s, at more or


less the same time that the internet developed. As the internet became more


and more widely used, security-issues became increasingly severe: criminals


quickly learned how to commit theft and to defraud computer-users in a


variety of ways. And the field of computer-security had to keep pace with


these bad actors, who, as a rule, are extremely clever and determined.


      The first computer-security specialists were ‘computer nerds’ who


enjoyed working with computers and who understood the security-issues to


which individual users and networks were vulnerable. In some cases, these


very people were themselves hackers or ex-hackers.


      The early computer specialists tended not have to have formal


credentials, and even today many security-specialists have little or no formal


training. But over the years, as the computer-security profession became


more and more established and as companies came to depend on them more


and more, it has increasingly become the norm for security-specialists to haveundergraduate, and sometimes graduate, degrees in computer science.


      In the computer-security field, there are no accreditation procedures


comparable to the Medial Boards or the Bar Exam. Generally, entry into the


field of computer-security is based on competence, not on accreditations.


      The length of training varies depending on the level of ability of the


person in question, but it usually corresponds to length of time that it takes to


get an undergraduate degree, this being 4-6 years.


      There are few formal barriers to getting an internship, but


demonstrable competence in the field, along with evident willingness to


learn, are de facto requirements; and evidence of formal training, such as a


degree, also helps.


      The potential employers are companies that have computer-networks.


Included in this category are financial organizations, schools and universities,


medical research organizations, hospitals, law enforcement agencies, all


government (including military) organizations, and companies that develop


proprietary technologies, including computer-related technologies.


        Potential employers can be located anywhere where there are


computer-networks.


      The work environment depends on the institution in question. At


financial institutions, they tend to be formal and conservative. At start-ups,


the environment is more relaxed (but the amount of work done at start-upsmight actually exceed what is done at a commercial bank). Oftentimes,


computer-security experts work from home.


      The income range varies enormously, depending mainly on the


responsibilities of the specialists in question. If he is working in a subordinate


capacity for a small start-up, he might make $30,000/year or less. If he is in


charge of computer-security at Goldman Sachs, he might make upwards of


$2,000,000/year. As a general rule, companies don’t employ security-


specialists unless they have a strong need for them and are therefore willing


to pay dearly for their services. The average is probably in the low six-figures


range.


      The typical day of a cyber-security expert involves the following


tasks:


 


        *Auditing code, to make sure that it is secure.


        *Looking for ways that a company’s computer network could be


broken into.


        *Looking for ways that a company’s facilities could be physically


broken into (prevention of physical theft of documents and other sensitive


materials).


      *Writing reports.


        *Discussing said reports with the employer and with other security-experts.


        *Discussing possible ways to fix problems with the employer and


other experts.


 


      The pros of this field are:


 


        *Stimulating work


      *High salaries


        *Requires creativity


      *A changing and dynamic work environment


      *Low likelihood of one’s skills becoming economically irrelevant


 


      The cons include:


 


      *A great deal of intense and intellectual challenging training,


including training in high-level mathematics that many are not able to


understand


        *High-stress work environment


      *One’s employment depends on one’s skill-level and performance:


there is no equivalent of a partnership or of tenure


      *Work is not limited to the work-day: it is expected that security-specialists will self-educate in their down-time: one cannot ‘leave work at the


office.’


      *Lack of predictability.


 


      This sort of work appeals to highly intelligent and creative people. It


appeals to people who do not like routine and desire the intellectual


equivalent of adventure. It does not appeal to ‘button down’ people who like


security and routine. Ironically, the computer-security business is not for


people who demand safety and security; it is for people who are able to deal


with uncertainty and whose desire to learn outweighs their desire for the


comfort of routine. It also appeals to people who want to be relevant and to


work in an area that won’t become part of the rubbish heap of obsolete


professions (e.g. insurance salesman, travel agents, horse-shoe makers).


      The field of computer security is highly dynamic, and it is ideal for


people, such as myself, who are interested in crime and its prevention. I have


always been interested in true crime, this being my favorite book-genre, and


this, along with my passion for computers, is what led me into this field. A


list of the top 10 computer-related crimes (listed according to their suspected


impact on society) will make it clear just how appealing the computer-


security field is to someone who, like myself, is interested in crime:


                 1. Phishing/spoofing: Use of fake-websites/misleading emails


        to lure people into giving up security-related information, such as


          bank-account numbers (e.g. the well-known ‘Nigerian Monarch’


        Scam, whereby someone pretending to be a deposed Nigerian


          monarch asks for $10,000 in funds, with the promise of


          reciprocating with $10,000,000 in funds);


                2. Blackmail/extortion: Use of the internet to extort/blackmail


          people into doing one’s bidding (e.g. threatening to post


          compromising footage on Facebook/YouTube unless money is


        handed over);


                3. Accessing stored communications: Availing oneself of


          computer-stored information, such as social security numbers of


          bank-records, to which one does not have legal access (e.g. a bank-


        teller helping himself to customer credit-card information and then


          using said information to make purchases);


                4. Online gambling: Gambling at illegal online Casinos;


                5. Non-delivery of merchandise: Accepting money for a


          product or service posted online but then not delivering said


          product/service (e.g. someone who posts on ad for a car on


          Craigslist and takes money for it but does not deliver said vehicle to


          purchaser—which vehicle may not even exist);                6. Electronic harassment: Using the internet to harass


          someone, e.g. making libelous or unflattering claims about a given


          person to all that person’s Facebook friends;


                7. Child pornography: Use of the internet to


            sell/publicize/disseminate sexually themed photographs of minors;


                8. Prostitution: Use of the internet to advertise/perpetrate acts


        of prostitution (e.g. having a website where one advertises one’s


        erotic services (cf. the following website


              https://pornstars4escort.com/daphne-rosen-escort/ )


                9. Drug-trafficking: Use of the internet to purchase illegal


        narcotics (cf. the following website


              https://pornstars4escort.com/daphne-rosen-escort/


              https://deluxepharmacy.net/no-rx/buy-vicodin-es-7-5mg-online/


                  10.                  Criminal copyright infringement: Use of the


          internet to copy and possibly sell materitl to which one does not own


        the copyright (cf. the following website, which sells illegal pdf’s of


          copyrighted books http://www.trickswant.com/analytic-


          philosophy.pdf )


 


      As this list makes clear, computer-security is not a career for the faint-


hearted, but rather for those with a sense of adventure and a desire to live onthe edge. And there are therefore few careers that are as interesting, or as


economically relevant, as computer-security.


                                 Business School Application


 


                                              Essays


 


      Essay 1 (500-750 words)


      What are your motivations for applying to TRIUM in relation to your


current short and long term professional objectives?


 


      As an owner of two night vision camera patents, I am fascinated


with the process that an idea must endure in order to become a


marketable and manufacturable product. Military technology and


readiness has been and will continue to be on the forefront of industry,


leading the world in technological breakthroughs and advancements. Not


only is this an exciting industry to be in, but one that continues to grow


in parallel with national security obligations and concerns.


      My short term goal is almost complete. Throughout a 20 year


career within Naval Special Warfare as a Navy SEAL in a Tier One


organization, I have learned how to follow exemplary leaders and


learned how to lead exemplary men. My expertise is currently focused on


requirements and acquisitions specifically within the United States


Special Operations Command (SOCOM). Industry uses SOCOM astheir test bed for research, innovation and evaluation. It is here that


products are imagined, forged, redesigned and polished until they are


either rejected or accepted as the next advancement in military


readiness. I have gained access to an elite network next to none and been


privileged to expand that network into the civilian industry by working


numerous government Special Access Program of Records advancing


next generation soldier systems and technologies.


       I have a strong network, and I want to acquire the skills


necessary to put my network to the best possible use. An EMBA from


Trium will give me precisely those skills. In addition, it will expand my


network in much needed ways. In particular, it will connect me to people


who can mediate between my network, which is largely military-based,


and the non-military organizations that I would be dealing with as an


entrepreneur. Thus, TRIUM will supplement my existing skill-set and


network in ways that will enable me to maximize the amount of good


that I can do with them.


 During the first twenty years of my professional life, I acquired


experience and proficiency as both a soldier and an engineer. I now want


to acquire comparable proficiency and expertise in the world of business.


To this end, I need to acquire a top-notch understanding of every aspect


of business. And while I am instinctively drawn to business and naturallyhave strong entrepreneurial tendencies, I have much to learn about


finance, public relations, and other aspects of business management that


are critical to my future success. My short-term goal is therefore to


acquire this knowledge-base. My long-term goal is to put this knowledge,


once I have it, to the most productive and lucrative use. I aspire to attend


TRIUM because I know that it will greatly help to accomplish both my


short-term and long-term goals.


      I have been privileged to serve with the elite of the United States


Military. Now I want to learn from the elite of both business and


academia, and no institution can do as much as TRIUM to connect me to


these communities.


      There is a more specific reason why an education from TRIUM


would be singularly helpful to me. As a Navy SEAL, my job was to the


do the jobs that members of the other branches of the military could not


do. My job was to solve problems that nobody else could solve. A Navy


Seal has to think outside the box; he has to think quickly; he has to be


willing to deal with uncertainty and with changing situations; and he has


to have courage. These are the very attributes that business leaders have,


and they are the very attributes that success in the business world


demands. My goal is to optimize operations in the corporate world in the


same way that, as a Navy Seal, I was optimizing operations in themilitary world. In order for me to transfer my strengths from a military


to a business context, I need to learn from the best, and that means that I


need to study at TRIUM.


                                                                      As I then run my own


business and assist other companies in the decision making process of


navigating the government processes, I will be able to utilize my


experienced gained from the business leaders that TRIUM has to offer.


      My long term goal is to understand and be able to work on the


international market. Companies which have global presence are ones


that stay relevant and succeed through economic downturn. I


understand how to navigate the requirements and acquisitions process


within defined groups such as United States law enforcement and the


Department of Defense Special Operations commands. Once a product


exceeds the demands of these elite organizations, the next step is a


national to theatre transition where military products are manufactured


and fielded to larger conventional forces. It is this insight and process


companies must understand to expand their clientele. My hope is that


TRIUM will give me a better understanding of the broader business


landscape, not only to include the larger US market, but more


importantly the international markets. Whether expanding my own


consulting business or leading Revision Military Ltd, my goal includeshelping companies succeed in untapped markets both domestically and


worldwide.


 Even though I have a military background and (in some respects) a


military outlook, I also have a deep respect for thinkers and scholars and for


what they can do to improve the world. My father was a professor of


philosophy, and I was always struck by his acuity and originality. I want to


study from people who are similarly insightful about business. I need such


insight in order to have the kind of impact on the business world that I aspire


to have, and I know that will find the mentorship that I am looking for at


TRIUM.


 


                                                                                 


 


      Essay 2 (up to 500 words)


      As a senior executive, how will you use TRIUM’s unique approach to


navigate the current business landscape to ensure success for your business?


 


        TRIUM’s unique approach gives students a broad range of


faculties and tools with which to promote success in their respective


businesses. The reason I chose this program is three-fold; network,


variety of business disciplines taught, and access to internationalacademia and markets.


        Without a great network to draw upon, it is hard for any person


or company to expand. I currently have an extensive high-powered


network within the US government military at the highest level. TRIUM


will broaden and round out my network within industry which is


necessary for an executive working in the global market. TRIUM has


unparalleled access to international markets and its distinguished faculty has


equally unparalleled insight into the complex dynamics of such markets.


TRIUM has unparalleled access to international markets and its distinguished


faculty has equally unparalleled insight into the complex dynamics of such


markets.


                                                                     I have travelled the world


and been exposed to a variety of different cultures and have thus had


occasion to acquire first hand knowledge of African, Asian, South


American and European culture. I want to learn more about these


cultures and to be able to put my knowledge of them to practical use. I


can think of no institution that would better prepare me to do so than


TRIUM, with its unsurpassed reputation in the area of international


business.


      Of the many MBA programs that I have looked into, TRIUM is by


far the most comprehensive and diverse in its offerings. LSE, NYUStern, and HEC            offer unsurpassed instruction in economics,


finance and marketing, respectively, and apart from TRIUM there is no


MBA program that could possibly give me access to so many different


faculties of such high quality. TRIUM’s excellence in the area of


international business is particularly important in the present business


era, given the pronounced trend towards economic globalization and


international cooperation.                                              


      I stand to gain an enormous amount by attending TRIUM. In


particular, I stand to acquire instruction in the area of international


business that I could not be given elsewhere. At the same time, I believe


in due course I will be able to give back to TRIUM. I already have a


large network of distinguished and high-ranking military colleagues,


many of whom are themselves establishing themselves in the arena of


business, and I believe that this network of mine will interact


synergistically with the high-powered network that I generate through


TRIUM.


                                                                                 


 


      Essay 3 (up to 500 words)


      Share a work experience that changed your professional outlook.


Describe any challenging aspects and outcomes. 


        Collaboration rather than competition is the key to success. My


strongest attributes are my ability to network and find value in every


person or organization. One of the greatest compliments I have ever


received was from a fellow coworker describing me as “the glue in every


situation.” There are two dimensions to this compliment      . First,   I am


unusually able and willing to fix problems as they arise.           Second,   I


                       know how to identify the people who have the skills needed


to solve a given problem, and I am able to get those people to work do


      On my eighth deployment as a Navy SEAL at a Tier One


command, I was called on for a unique project in a remote and


dangerous location in Afghanistan. Due to political infighting within


several specialized US Government agencies, all tactical operations had


been shut down at this particular location. Because of my skills as a


negotiator and collaborator, I was specifically selected to fly out to this


austere location in order to de-escalate the situation. Upon arrival, I


assessed the strengths and weakness of all assets. Instead of removing the


problem assets, I reorganized, redelegated and changed how missions


were executed. I then took charge of these teams   and included members


of the US Navy SEALs and local Afghan forces. Within one week,


operations were back up and running and our teams launched on fivetargets capturing seven terrorists within a short five week period.     The


“new” organization was so successful that higher headquarters asked us


to slow down.


      This experience changed my professional outlook in several


positive ways. I learned that my own strengths go beyond skills as a Navy


Seal: I learned that interpersonal skills and leadership. I learned that I


have abilities that are valuable outside the military and, more


specifically, within the business world. I can unite people under a single


vision, and I can get them to set aside their differences and work as a


team in pursuit of a common objective, and one         of my greatest


strengths is my ability     to bring people of varying backgrounds and


cultures together and drive them towards a single vision. I also learned


that success is rarely gained from the skills of the individual or even one


team, but rather a compromise and collaboration of strategic vision


towards a shared objective that benefits all parties involved.


      The United States 4x100 swimming relay team pulled off a miracle


 comeback from behind during the 2008 Beijing Summer Olympics. In a


speech by one of the team members about the struggle in achieving goals,


Garrett-Weber said, “when you share success, people will come out of


the woodwork to be on your team.” I choose TRIUM because of its


people and network of diverse expertise and cultures. With this networkand collaboration I will be able to glue together any team for ultimate


success beyond reproach.


 


      Essay 4 (optional – in any medium)


      Is there anything else you would like to add that would help the


Admissions Committee with their decision?


      I live for challenges. I chose a military because I wanted to take the


most challenging path possible. Within the military, I always took the most


difficult path. I chose the Navy Seals because of the challenges involves in


joining and staying with them. I thrive on adversity, and I know how to turn


adversity into victory.


      And that is why I want to go into business. I want to help


entrepreneurs and companies do what I did in the military. I want to help


companies grow, especially when they seem to be on the brink of collapse. I


know that I have in within me to do this. But I cannot do it alone. I need wise


and experienced mentors to elicit the ability from deep inside myself. More


specifically, I need knowledge---knowledge of finance, of marketing, of


economics, and indeed of every aspect of business.


      I have the vision and the will needed to succeed, and I need to


supplement them with knowledge. TRIUM will give me that knowledge, and


that is why it is my ardent wish to be a part of it. 


                       How I Benefited from this Course (Sociology)


 


      I benefited immeasurably from this course, both intellectually and


personally. I never used to think of myself as a writer, but Professor Martin


changed that, helping me learn how to express myself in writing and to


appreciate the writing of others.


      The timing of this class was ideal. I moved here from another country


just a few months ago. The experience was jarring, to say the least, and I


often felt vulnerable and disoriented. The process of drafting my personal


narrative helped me clarify my thoughts and gave me a much-needed sense of


control. In this last essay, I not only tried to express thoughts but to share a


vision, to this end taking great pains to give an accurate and vivid description


of a Chinese New Year Celebration.


        Although I have found every assignment to be challenging and


rewarding, I found the play review to be especially so. The play was a true


accomplishment, beautifully written and skillfully presented. Because I was


so absorbed in the play, it was hard for me to analyze it as I was watching it,


and it was psychologically difficult for me to do so. I also found myself


inadvertently planning out my essay, which distracted me from the play,


which distracted me and made the process of drafting the original play review


harder than it would otherwise have been. There is also the fact that I read thewrong book before watching the play, which, though funny in retrospect, left


me a tad confused while watching the play. Fortunately, I am suitemates with


two theatre majors, who gave me the right book, which I immediately read,


and who also arranged for me to interview one of the stage managers. The


interview proved most enlightening, helping me understand the stage


techniques that were used as well as complexities relating to the lighting and


other aspects of the production process.


      This is my first e-portfolio, and I have greatly enjoyed the process and


hope that my enjoyment of it came through in my work. I chose to use a light


shade of blue sun-kissed water for the background on each page, having


always had a special love for the ocean. I also included some videos of my


home on the welcome page, hoping in this way to give my fellow students a


better idea of who I am. I poured my heart into this portfolio, and I think that


will give it lasting emotional value to me and I hope that it makes it valuable


to others as well.


      Ten weeks ago, when my advisor suggested that I enroll in a WRD103


class, I was a little bit skeptical. I tend to be more comfortable in emotionally


disengaged classes (such as Computer Science and Math) and have always


felt out of my element in classes where I had to engage the emotional side of


my nature. This class awaked some part of me and helped connect with a


creative side of myself that my other classes did not speak to. I had troubleduring the first few weeks, becoming flustered when I was called upon to


speak, not always being to say what I was thinking. As the weeks passed,


however, I became a little more collected and found myself thoroughly


enjoying the class. It helped that Professor Martin always had time to talk and


always made me feel very much at ease. Most importantly, this class made it


much easier and also more pleasant for me to express myself in writing, and


for that I am deeply appreciative.


                       Personal Statement (Law School Application)


 


      As a proud first-generation Latino-American, I have always had


tremendous admiration for the American legal system. The legal system in


Mexico, where I was born and raised, is much more concerned with rights


than it is with freedoms. On paper, that legal system is admirable. But in its


attempt to protect individual rights, it has undermined commercial freedoms:


because of tight regulations, it is difficult for the impecunious to start and run


a business. This has held back the economy, leading to depressed wages and


limited job opportunities. The American Legal system does a remarkably


good job of balancing individual freedoms with commercial rights. Lawyers


are necessary to maintain that delicate balance, and that is why I want to be a


lawyer.


      It is also why I want to specialize in tax law. In order to function and


to protect the rights of individuals, the government needs funds and it


therefore needs to tax. At the same time, the American Tax Code, much like


the American legal system as a whole, balances the need to fund civic


institutions with the need to allow people to transact and generate wealth. It


does this through a complex set of provisions, including allowances for


business deductions, that ensure that the people and businesses in the highest


tax-brackets can honor their tax-obligations while still providing the servicesthat led to their prosperity. As Adam Smith wrote in 1776, when a tax-code is


too rigid and punitive, revenues from taxes drop off and corruption displaces


law.


      My desire to study at the University of Houston Law Center is in


many ways a consequence of my admiration of the American Legal system.


Renowned for many different strengths, the University of Houston Law


Center is particularly well-known for its practical, no-nonsense approach to


legal instruction. That is what I need. While I have tremendous respect for


theoretical jurisprudence, my objective is to help real people with real legal


issues. I also want specialized, high-quality instruction in the area of tax law,


since I want there to be as little delay as possible between my graduation-date


and the time I can provide the best possible service for my clients. For this


reason, there is no law school better suited to my needs or better able to help


contribute to society than the University of Houston Law Center.


      I am always trying to improve myself. I spoke very little English


before my arrival in this country at the age of 16, but I did not let that hold


me back. Even though this has led me to underperform academically,


especially on standardized tests, I am a lifelong learning and I see problems


as opportunities. Instead of letting my English-language difficulties hold me


back, I focused on quantitative disciplines, eventually receiving my MBA


with a specialization in finance. My studies in business school helped meunderstand my native country’s economic difficulties and have helped me


understand the deep importance that the American legal system has had in


this nation’s continuing success. With the benefit of a University of Houston


Law Center education, I can be a part of that success and can help others be a


part of it as well. I thank you for considering my application.


                       Supplementary Essay (Law School Application)


 


 


      I live in Houston Texas (specially, in 77017), which is in many


respects a diverse and dynamic city. In a city of this size, there are inevitably


many pressing issues; and in a city as culturally rich and diverse as Houston


—as blessed by a wealth of different cultures and as cursed by the manifold


difficulties striking equitable balances between so many different viewpoints-


--state legislators have awesome responsibilities. It is their responsibility to


make sure that the school board does its job, that city workers do their jobs,


that hospitals, parks and basic public services are in working order. Further,


state representatives must see to it that municipal workers do their job while


also seeing to it that their district is hospitable to business. And it is


proverbially difficult for representatives (or officials of any kind, for that


matter) strike this balance. Our state representative in 77071 is Mary Ann


Perez. Frankly, I myself have very little information about Representative


Perez, so I cannot pass judgment. But her website


(http://votemaryannperez.com/) provided next to no information about her


views, which I found disconcerting, especially since one’s state


representative is in many ways one’s go-to when one has problems within


one’s own community. Obviously senators and congresspersons, having asthey do both local and nation-level responsibilities, cannot be expected to


respond promptly to strictly local problems. And precisely because state-


representatives are there to step into that breech, it is especially helpful to


know who one’s state representative is and how well he/she represents your


interest.


 


 


 


 


                   The American Dream (College Application)


 


 


      The American Dream can be summed up in one word: opportunity.


The essence of Americanism is opportunity. Everybody has the opportunity


to improve their lives. People are not locked into pre-existing social


arrangements. Whatever circumstances they are born into, they are able to


change and improve their lives. That is what the American Dream is.


      And it is not just a dream: it is to a considerable extent a reality. It


isn’t simply that, in the United States, people are supposed to be able to


change their lives for the better. They actually do so; it is practically a regular


occurrence. In fact, although it may not be the norm, it is certainly a norm.


 In this country, people whose parents did not go to college themselves


frequently go to college and make good lives for themselves, with the result


that, although they themselves started out at one social tier, their own


children are born into a higher social tier, with correspondingly more


opportunities and fewer obstacles to capitalizing on those opportunities. And


there are similar opportunities for change and growth for those who are born


into higher social tiers: they are not required, as they are in other cultures, to


repeat what their parents did. They do not have to assume a position in the


proverbial ‘family business.’ They can strike out on their own. I personallyhave known children of investment bankers who became writers and


professors, and I have known children of professors and writers who became


investment bankers—or who went on to start some entirely new business or


even new kind of business.


      The American Dream isn’t simply about being able to move up within


some pre-existing social structure. It is also about being able to change that


structure. Bill Gates came from a well-to-do family. He could have just


completed his degree at Harvard and more or less just coasted, working as a


computer scientist or financier. But he didn’t just coast; he invented a new


product—nay, a new kind of product: the personal computer. And he didn’t


just invent that product: he made it available to literally billions of people for


a modest price.


      Bill Gates is not alone in this. Think about todays’ IT and tech-giants:


Mark Zuckerberg, Elon Musk, Sergei Brin, Larry Page, Jeff Bezos. All of


these people are Americans, either by birth or by naturalization, and all of


them chose to ‘set up shop’ in the United States.


      Why did they make this choice? Because this country is hospitable to


big ideas and to big innovations. It is hospitable in a purely logistical, as in,


the laws of this country do not discourage it and even encourage it, there


being tax-breaks for start-ups as well as government-sponsored business-


education programs.      I would not go so far as to say that at the moment I embody the


American Dream. But I aspire to embody it. I want to become a dentist. I


have always wanted to become a dentist. People ask me ‘Why do you want to


become a dentist, Jonathan?’ And I have no ready response. I honestly


believe that, just as certain people are cut out for finance and others for the


military, so some people really want to help others by fixing their teeth. I


believe that an interest dentistry is a specific evolutionary deviation---that


such an interest pre-dates tens of thousands of years the existence of dentistry


in anything like its modern form


      In any case, given my passion for dentistry, it is clear how I need the


American Dream to come through for me: I need the opportunity to learn the


craft of dentistry; I need to learn how to help people as a dentist; and I


therefore need to attend the possible schools and programs. And the


American Dream is coming through for me in that respect. Because I have


worked so hard at my classes and been rewarded with correspondingly high


grades, it is overwhelmingly likely that I will have the privilege of being


accepted to one of the prestigious institutions to which, in pursuit of my own


private American Dream of becoming a dentist, I am seeking admittance


 


                     Geico Job Application (Application Essay)


 


        Describe how you exemplify 3 of GEICO’s core values: Integrity,


Service, and Growth. (450-600 words)


 


      Geico is a household name, and it’s a household name because it


provides people with a valuable service. It allows people to wake up in the


morning knowing they are protected. That is why I personally get my car


insurance from Geico: it provides a great product at a great price.


      Geico wouldn’t be the company that it is if it didn’t live up to its core


values: Integrity, Service, and Growth. Geico could probably charge a little


more or provide slightly less good service and still get away with it. But it


doesn’t: and that’s integrity. Geico could probably just ‘coast’. But it doesn’t:


it is always on the go, always expanding: and that’s growth. And Geico


doesn’t have to give back to the community; it could just keep its earnings


and look the other way. But it doesn’t, because it cares: and that’s service.


      And that is how I try to be. I never take the easy way out. If I have a


tough assignment, I do it. And if I can’t do it initially, I will just keep trying.


When I was young, schoolwork didn’t come easy to me. I struggled. At first,


I was so frustrated that I thought I’d never make it to high-school, let along


through it. But I kept my nose to the grindstone. And I not only became adecent student: I became an outstanding one, achieving great prowess in


science and math. That is why I am heading to the University of Georgia,


where I will complete my degree in biology.


      I take pride in my integrity. I take pride in doing the right thing, even


when the going gets tough. I take pride in it because it’s the right thing to do


and also because down the line it is the prudent thing to do. I could have just


slacked off. But I didn’t, and now I am reaping the rewards. And I’m proud


of that.


      But I’m also humble. Nobody can go it alone. Everybody needs


somebody. I had good people on my side: good parents and good friends. But


not everybody is so lucky. Whenever I pass by a homeless person, I realize


that. That is why I spend at least one day a week doing charity work with my


Church. We provide food, medicine, and emergency shelter to the homeless.


We really make a difference, and I’m part of that—and I’m proud of that. I


am proud to serve my community.


      But the thing that I most proud is my ability to grow. When life gives


me lemons, I make lemonade. If I have to do a tough assignment, I do it. I


don’t wallow. Sometimes the first step is pretty hard; sometimes I have to


conquer insecurities to get the ball rolling. But I always face my fears; I don’t


let them stop me. I just what has to be done. If I’m out of shape, I start


exercising. If I don’t know the material for a class, I study harder. If my workisn’t good enough, I work even harder than before. And I do this because that


is how to grow: one grows by challenging oneself, by doing the things that


one has trouble with—until they become the things that one is best at! That is


why I am about, and that is what Geico is about. And I really respect that


about Geico, and that is why I would be honored to work for you.


                       Personal Statement (Law School Application)


 


 


      When I was 15, my older brother Enrique was arrested for capital


murder. I was stunned. Enrique was my hero. I had a tough childhood, and he


was always there for me. I did not know how to emotionally process his


arrest. There were too many ambiguities. In his way, Enrique was a fiercely


moral person: tough, loyal, a ‘stand-up guy,' as they say. But he wasn't afraid


to break the law. That was part of what made admire him. He did what he


wanted to do. He wasn't a ‘square'; he was ‘cool.' Most of all, he never


backed down from a fight.


      This time was no exception. He was insulted and he fought back, as he


always did. But something went wrong. What was supposed to be a fist-fight


turned into a gun-fight, and the other man died. I wasn’t there, so I don’t


know the specifics. But that’s the gist of it. Within a year of his arrest,


Enrique pled guilty to capital murder. He never discussed the specifics of the


incident, nor did he ever claim that he was innocent. I got the feeling that he


realized that he had made a terrible mistake and wanted to salvage what was


left of his life.


      What made this traumatic for me was not that my hero had taken a


fall. It was that he stopped being my hero, because I now saw where hismachismo and heroism led—nowhere. I had been following in Enrique’s


footsteps—skipping school, being a ‘tough guy’, having no well-defined


goals beyond being ‘cool.’ The life ‘plan’ of mine imploded the night


Enrique was arrested. But I didn’t have an alternative plan. And for a while,


driven by rage at my brother, and maybe even at myself, I redoubled my


efforts to be a ‘tough guy', like my brother. But it didn't quite work, and I


didn't know what to do. People talk about their ‘mid-life crisis': I was having


a mid-adolescence crisis.


        Meanwhile, Enrique was stoically silent. It was painful for me to visit


him, but I did. He said little, just asked me how I was. I always got the


feeling there was something he wanted to say to me but couldn’t. I think he


sensed that I hadn’t changed enough to understand what he wanted to tell me.


      I went to college, but my performance was half-hearted and lack-


luster. I left college and worked at some dead-end jobs to support myself. I


would occasionally touch base with my old friends, but I no longer identified


with them. They were on the exact same path as Enrique, living in the same


fantasy-world as him, and I knew how foolish it was. As time went by, I


heard of arrests, followed by long sentences. I knew there was nothing there


for me. But I also knew that there was no future for me stacking boxes,


making Subway sandwiches, or whatever it was I was doing that month to


pay the bills.      I realized that I had to make a choice. I could wallow or I could have a


future. Really, there was no choice. Enrique’s situation made that clear to me.


I decided to re-enroll in college. I visited my brother and told of my decision.


“Me allegro,” he said, smiling for the first time in all the years I’d visited


him. “Estas tomando la decision correcta.” (I’m glad. You’re making the right


decisión.) He opened up to me for the first time in years, if not ever. He told


me that he had struggled in school because of a learning disability—a fact I’d


never known. He told me about his tough guy routine was really about


cowardice---that, if he had actually been tough, he would have focused on


preparing for a career, instead of being the neighborhood tough guy.


      This hit me like a ton of bricks, and it removed any last hint of doubt


that I might have had about going back to college. I plunged back into my


studies. There was only one problem. I still didn’t know what I wanted to do


with my life! But I was suddenly seized with a desire to help my brother, and


I decided to do just that while figuring out my own situation. I found out that


my brother would serve the minimum amount of time if he got a college


degree. I told him about it, and he was reluctant at first. But he did it, passing


the entrance exam with flying colors. He got his degree a few years later, and


last month he was paroled and now getting his master’s in psychology.


        Meanwhile, I did respectably in college, though I still didn’t quite


know what my end-game was. I knew I liked business and had a knack fornumbers and finance. I had several lucrative jobs in banking and finance, and


eventually got my MBA. But something was missing. I was happy, but I


wasn’t fulfilled. I came to realize that, even though I enjoyed finance, it


wasn’t what I valued. I wanted to make a difference, and because of the


situation with Enrique, I had some idea where a difference could and should


be made, and I knew that I had to become a lawyer to make that difference.


        Incarceration is mainly about punishment and deterrence, but to some


extent it is about rehabilitation. My brother the genuinely rehabilitative thread


that runs through the criminal justice system, and he latched onto it. And now


he’s a better person. Before he went to prison, he had no intention of


contributing to society, and now he does—and he’s doing so. He made a


terrible mistake and had to be punished. But situations are multidimensional,


and penal systems should make allowances for that fact. Time spent in


prison, even for serious crimes, should not be completely wasted. Of course,


prison should not be pleasant. But as I discovered from my brother’s case,


when people go to prison, they usually do so mainly because they don’t know


what else to do. They feel ‘stuck’ and trapped and powerless, and they lash


out. Most prisoners will eventually leave prison, and we owe it to society to


make sure that they can function in society. Prisoners don’t give back to


society; ex-prisoners sometimes do. I would like prisons to have more of a


‘correctional’ component than they currently do. To do that I not only need tobe a lawyer but need high-level guidance. Unlike other law programs, UNT


Dallas is genuinely dedicated to instructing students in both the academic and


practical aspects of the practice of law; and unlike other law programs, UNT


Dallas is very genuinely concerned to improve the criminal justice system.


For these reasons, no law school is better to help me in my ambitious and


idealistic quest than UNT Dallas. Thank you for your consideration.


 


                 Breaching Patriarchal Throwness with a Hatpin (Feminist


                                    Theory/Politics)


                            A Feminist Breaching Experiment


 


      A ‘breaching experiment’ involves a person’s deliberately behaving in


an unconventional way so as to elicit overt manifestations of the


psychological forces underlying that convention. To take a rather trivial


example, someone might choose to greet people by hugging them instead of


shaking hands. If some people responded with extreme enthusiasm, that


would suggest that the purpose of handshake-greetings is indeed to suppress


certain kinds of emotion that people would rather act on. If, on the other


hand, other people reacted with horror or fear, that would suggest that the


purpose of handshake-greetings was to provide people with a sense of safety


and security, possibly from perceived external threats and also possibly from


emotions of their own that they would rather keep tightly controlled.


      The concept of a breaching experiment was first articulated by Harold


Garfinkel (1967), who described their purpose as being to disrupt the


“background expectancies” (1967, p. 36) that members of a given society use


as “a scheme of interpretation (1967, p. 36)”, the objective being to bring to


the surface the prejudices, presumptions and emotional commitments in


which those expectancies are rooted: “Procedurally”, Garfinkel (1967, p. 37)writes:


 


              [I]t is my preference to start with familiar scenes; to produce and


      sustain bewilderment, consternation, and confusion; to produce the


      socially structured facts of anxiety, shame, guilt, and indignation; and


    to produce disorganized interaction should tell us something about how


    the structures of everyday activities are ordinarily and routinely


      produced and maintained (Garfinkel 1967, pp. 37-38).


 


      In other words, by acting counter-conventionally, one causes people to


act in ways that expose the forces responsible for the conventions being


violated.


      One problem with breaching experiments is that they may be too


successful in the way of provoking emotional responses. For example, with


the just-described hugging-experiment, some people, even men, might


respond to unsolicited hugs as acts of aggression, and others, perceiving them


as advances, might respond with inappropriate counter-advances. Such an


experiment, unless designed and conducted judiciously, could alienate people


and possibly even have legal consequences. This is clearly true of breaching


experiments that involve violations of law or of religious customs. However


arbitrary a given convention might seem, it is likely to have deep emotionalroots, and it may be unwise to violate it.


      It was with such considerations in mind that I designed my own


breaching experiment. I wanted my experiment to involve my acting in a way


that is natural to me and expresses who I am, while also involving


unconventional and deliberately provocative behavior. At the same time, I


wanted my experiment to be ‘safe’, in the sense that I would not myself or


others in physical or legal harm and would not alienate family or professional


associates. I thus decided on a rather simple but (so I believe) powerful


experiment: During one of my biweekly online sessions with my ESL


(English as a Second Language) Instructor, I would wear a giant, explosively


bawdy Victorian Era women's hat that I have, and I would see how my rather


straight-laced and, in every sense, stereotypically masculine instructor would


respond.


      Some background information is necessary here. I am an artist, and as


an artist, I focus on jewelry and other decorative clothing-relating. Of course,


jewelry, though worn by both sexes, is primarily for female use, Jewelry,


especially when worn by women, has multiple functions, including enhancing


beauty and also expressing individuality. Much the same is true of decorative


women's clothing, as the photo below illustrates:


          When meeting with my ESL Instructor, I wore a very similar hat,


complete with a gauzy vale that half hid my face. I had not told my instructor


that I would wear this hat, and prior to this point, I had not behaved at all


unconventionally. When my instructor saw the hat, he looked startled but


quickly suppressed this reaction and quickly returned to a semblance of his


usual, tightly controlled, highly professional demeanor. As was his wont, he


did focus on the lesson, refraining from asking questions that fell outside its


scope, including questions about my odd attire.


        However, I noticed throughout the lesson that he seemed troubled.


Ordinarily, he never missed a beat, always being quick to understand and


cogently respond to my queries. This time, however, he did a number of


double-takes, obviously due to distraction. Also, a certain levity that he


usually had, a certain gaiety underlying his professionalism, seemed absent.


He usually seemed to enjoy our lessons, but this time his performance,


though adequate, seemed labored and stilted.


      Apart from a one or two oblique and cryptic remarks (along the lines


of ‘that's quite a chapeau you're wearing today, Moneerah!'), my tutor (let's


call him ‘John') did not explicitly mention my hat and didn't ask why I was


wearing it, and therefore had to rely on non-verbal queues for information


about his mental state. Nonetheless, it was clear from his stilted and


uncharacteristically anxious behavior that he was put off, more so than couldbe explained by my wearing an out-of-date article of clothing. Also, female


acquaintances of mine, even professional acquaintances, responded very


differently when I ‘surprised’ them, as I occasionally did, by wearing


similarly unconventional items of clothing or jewelry. They responded with


laughter and merriment; they were not ill at ease.


      For this reason, I believe that John's reaction was largely gender-based


and was rooted in extremely archaic views of his concerning gender-


relations. Some background about this particular kind of hat will help put this


in context. In 19th Century Britain, custom strictly forbade ‘proper' women


from wearing clothing that was at all revealing, and women thus wore


clothing that completely hid their bodies along with hats that shrouded their


faces. At the same time, their clothing, though concealing their bodies, was


also flamboyantly feminine. Whereas women today often dress much like


men---often wearing jeans. T-shirts, sneakers, and other gender-neutral,


functional items of clothing---Victorian and Edwardian Era female attire was


always expressively and, one might even say, outrageously feminine: Dresses


were exaggerations of the female figure, tightly cinched in at the waist and


exploding everywhere else; and women would seldom even leave the house


without wearing highly decorative hats, like the one depicted above. Thus,


women were expected to act with extreme self-restraint in matters relating to


physical relations while also being expected to be hyper-feminine.      At this time, women in Britain (and elsewhere) did not have the right


to vote and had limited economic and legal rights. They relied largely on their


husbands for protection, making them vulnerable to unwanted advances from


men and even outright assault. As a result, some women took to stabbing


male assailants with the oversized pins that kept their oversized hats affixed


to their hair. (See the photos above.) Because of the resulting ‘hatpin peril,'


hatpins came to be seen as weapons and it became illegal for women to wear


oversized hats. So by a curious reversal, these exaggeratedly and


oppressively feminine hats became instruments of a rather lethal feminine


backlash against men, which happened to coincide with the beginnings of the


women's suffrage movements in the United Kingdom and the United States.


      While the ‘hatpin peril' was still in progress, the spectacle of a young


woman wearing an oversized hat, complete with a hatpin, must have aroused


complex emotions in men. On the one hand, they were surely drawn in by the


exaggeratedly feminine clothing and intrigued by the suggestively half-


hidden faces. On the other hand, they were threatened by the prominently


displayed hatpins and very likely also saw these hatpins as acts of defiance


against a patriarchal, arousing outrage. But these feelings of indignation were


probably experienced only half-consciously, since the hat pins, being internal


to clothing styles that represented submission to the patriarchy, were


correspondingly ambiguous.      The results of this breaching experiment are best understood in terms


of Heidegger’s concept of throwness. Dasein has both active and passive


modalities, and throwness is one of Dasein’s passive modalities. According


to Heidegger, Dasein, though fundamentally free, has to exercise its freedom


within the constraints set by physical health, emotional ties to others, and


social conventions and rules. One is, as it were, ‘thrown’ into a world that


comes ready-made with various pre-existing facts, including facts relating to


one’s physical condition as well as rules and preconceptions as to how


people, oneself included, must act.


      There are both objective and subjective aspects to throwness. The


objective aspects include out facts relating to society and also to one’s


biological condition. The subjective aspects include the psychological


mechanisms, including the prejudices and preconceptions, involved in one’s


reactions to these objective facts. A person’s having a certain anatomical


configuration is an objective fact and thus corresponds to the objective


dimension of that person’s throwness into the world. That person’s


psychological reaction to his or her anatomical configuration---how that


person ‘owns’ his or her biological condition---corresponds to the subjective


aspect of his/her throwness.


        Heidegger refers to the subjective component of throwness as


“fallness”: “ ‘Fallenness’ into the 'world'”, Heidegger writes, “means anabsorption in Being-with-one-another, in so far as the latter is guided by idle


talk, curiosity, and ambiguity” (Being and Time, p. 220). The idea is that one


is “fallen” in so far as one is simply ‘drifting’ with the flow of one’s whims


and other people’s expectations. Thus, fallenness is not an inevitable


consequence of throwness; rather, it is a consequence of throwness only to


the extent that one is not taking charge of own existence. This is what


Heidegger is referring to when he writes:


 


              Thrownness is neither a 'fact that is finished' nor a Fact that is


      settled.1 Dasein's facticity is such that as long as it is what it is, Dasein


      remains in the throw, and is sucked into the turbulence of the "they's"


      inauthenticity. Thrownness, in which facticity lets itself be seen


      phenomenally, belongs to Dasein, for which, in its Being, that very


      Being is an issue. Dasein exists factically (Being and Time, p. 220).


 


      My breaching experiment involved a disruption of an objective aspect


of John’s ‘fallenness’ by way of a disruption of his ‘throwness.’ In this


context, John’s ‘throwness’ consists in his coming into existence in a world


that is, at least historically, largely patriarchal; and his falleness in this


context consists in his psychological acquiescence to any preconceptions


associated with that state of affairs. By wearing this hat, complete with itssimultaneously decorative and lethal hatpin, I was sending an ambiguous yet


disruptive message to John, that message being to the effect that the


patriarchy is crumbling. This message aroused feelings of fear and concern


and, for that reason, so I suspect, caused John to rethink some of his


preconceptions about women.


      I should point out that John’s reaction to the breaching experiment was


complex; and though this was in part due to the ambiguous nature of the


message I was sending, it was also due, I suspect, to the complex nature of


John’s belief- and value-systems---my point being that John may not quite be


the paradigm of patriarchal conservatism that this discussion might lead one


to believe. Indeed, if John's feelings had been uniformly patriarchal or


chauvinistic, he might have dismissed the situation, regarding it as a joke or


as a mere oddity, and not been troubled or ‘disrupted' by it. Somebody who is


a dyed-in-the-wool male chauvinist doesn't feel threatened by female lawyers


or doctors, as he simply dismisses them without further thought. This, I think,


illustrates an important fact about breaching experiments, namely, that they


operate on veritable ‘breaches' or faultlines---places of conflict--in a person's


worldview, a corollary being that breaching experiments are ineffective


where there are no such fault lines.


        Significantly, I believe that, even though it was my intention only to


disrupt John's worldhood, my breaching experiment may also have disruptedmy own. As a 21st Century female, I have internalized various post-


patriarchal views as to how women ought to behave. Women in our time are


expected to behave in much the same way as men, and in many contexts are


even expected to dress in much the same way (e.g. the go-to outfit for both


genders is sneakers, jeans, and a t-shirt, whereas in previous times the


genders had very different go-to outfits). When I donned my Victorian Era


Hat-and-hatpin, I felt myself thrust back in history to a time when women


were expected to dress, act, and think very differently from men. Most


women today, myself included, are glad that we live in times that are so


much more enlightened in terms of gender relations. However, I did find


myself very much enjoying wearing this exaggeratedly feminine, Victorian


Era chapeau, and the reason, I believe, is that it allowed me to express a side


of myself and my womanhood that women are discouraged from expressing


in our time. Women are now expected to be straightforward and businesslike;


and this costume-hat was anything but straightforward and business-like, and


almost demanded that I act and think with a degree of coquetry and


subterfuge that would otherwise be impossible. The experience of


psychologically time-traveling back into this other era, when women were


forced to be so different from men, coupled with the fact that I was able to


make this psychological journey with far more ease than I would have


thought possible, disrupted some of my own post-patriarchal views aboutwomanhood and gender-relations, as it led me to think that, whereas in the


past, women were forced to be different from men and thus forced to


suppress an important side of themselves, women in our time are forced to be


the same as men and thus forced to suppress a different equally important


side of themselves.


      It is fitting that my breaching experiment ended up having such


complex and ambiguous results, since the ambiguous nature of gender and


gender-relations lies at the center of my breaching experiment. While


representing women's submission to a patriarchal order, jewelry and other


decorative attire, such as my chapeau, have also represented pride and self-


individuation. Throughout history, large, proud displays of jewelry and


fashion have been a way for all people to advertise their wealth and status.


But for women, they have been especially important in this respect, as they


have been historically been barred from owning property in many


civilizations, and jewelry for ages functioned as a socially acceptable way to


concentrate wealth while also adorning the body. But jewelry can sometimes


have a hidden utility for women. Historically excluded from the owning and


operating of weapons, women have often had to improvise their own means


of defense against attackers (typically of the male variety), a prime example


of this being the famous ladies’ hat pin that we have been discussing, which,


as we have discussed, became a self-defense strategy against “mashers”(sexual predators) on the emerging public transportation systems of the early


twentieth century. The historical significance of the resulting “Hatpin Panic”


is that it led to increased awareness of violence against women,


empowerment of women to travel alone, and helped initiate the women’s


Suffrage movement. This piece combines the proud plumage of the peacock


with a flash of danger at the barely-concealed combination of adornment and


weapon.


      So we see that, within this simple garment, there is a great deal of


historical significance and a great deal of ambiguity. What I did not count on,


when designing the experiment, was that my own worldview (and


worldhood) would be breached. In retrospect, however, I should have


expected as much, given that it is hard for one person to disrupt another’s


worldhood without disrupting one’s own, since both parties are likely to have


many preconceptions in common owing to their both being ‘thrown’, to use


Heidegger’s term, into a common set of historical circumstances.


                           Cornell West on Malcolm X (Politics)


 


      There are many perspectives to take on Malcolm X. Some see him as a


hero, a champion of civil rights; others see him as excessively concerned with


race and therefore unnecessarily divisive. Some see him as someone who


wanted to build a new and better society; others see him as a hate-filled


demagogue who wanted to destroy more than the wanted to create. In his


article Firebrand, Professor Cornell West takes the position that Malcolm X


was a hero. Indeed, there is not a single critical word of the man in this


article, the purpose of which, it would appear, is not to discuss specifics


relating to Malcolm X’s vision for the United States or to his achievements,


but simply rather to cast his decidedly complex legacy in an unambiguously


positive light.


      Malcolm X (1925-1965) was an African Civil Rights Activist working


at the same time as Dr. Martin Luther King. However, Malcolm X and


Martin Luther King had very different views as to what the African American


community should strive for and what methods they should use. Martin


Luther King wanted integration and equality. Malcolm X wanted separation,


famously saying “no white man wants integration, no sane black man wants


integration.” Born Malcolm Little, he changed his last name to “X” as a way


of casting off his ‘slave name’, as he called it, and also as a way of sendingthe message that African-Americans had been stripped of their identity by


white Europeans and had to reclaim it.


      Also, whereas Martin Luther King believed civil disobedience to be


the road to social reform, always urging his followers to refrain from


violence, Malcolm X was skeptical about the effectiveness of peaceful


methods, his famous rallying cry being “by any means necessary.”


      Finally, whereas Martin Luther King was a Christian minister,


Malcolm X converted to Islam, becoming the head of the Nation of Islam.


Malcolm X rejected Christianity and embraced Islam because he saw the


former as white and the latter as black or at least as compatible with the


interests of blacks.


      Not even Malcolm X’s bitterest detractors deny the magnitude of his


accomplishments. Thanks in large part to Malcolm X’s leadership, the Nation


of Islam demands and receives integrity, self-respect, and respect for others


from its millions of followers. Firebrand does not discuss Malcolm X’s


specific accomplishments, however. Indeed, it does little in the way of stating


facts as to who Malcolm X was, when he lived, or what he achieved. It


consists rather of skillfully rendered characterizations of this great and


controversial figure.


      We would expect no less of Cornell West. After receiving his Ph.D. in


philosophy at Princeton, Cornell West held professorships in ReligiousStudies, Philosophy, and Africana at a number of prestigious institutions


including Princeton and Harvard. Dr. West’s work focuses on race relations


between whites and blacks in America, his position being that despite the


appearance of racial progress, blacks are still discriminated against, albeit in


subtler ways than in times past. Indeed Dr. West says as much in this article.


He describes what he believes Malcolm X would say to Martin Luther King


if the two met today: “Brother Martin,” says Malcolm X, “Marcus Garvey


and others have told us the vast majority of black people will never be treated


with dignity. They will always live lives of ruin tied to the prison system…


Some [African Americans] may go all the way to the White House, but even


there’s still going to be crack houses, the prison-industrial complex,


unemployment getting worse and worse.”


      Cornell West approves of these sentiments. Indeed these are his


sentiments, expressed in his words, albeit through the character of Malcolm


X. We don't know that Malcolm X would have agreed, especially given that


Malcolm X did not have fixed views and towards the end of his life


expressed guarded optimism about race relations.


      There are several places in the article where Cornell West ‘quotes’


Malcolm X, except that it is not the historical Malcolm X who is quoted, but


rather a fictionalized version of Malcolm X created by Cornell West. “What


do you think would happen after 400 years of slavery and Jim Crow andlynching”, West ‘quotes’ Malcolm X as saying. “Do you think you would


respond non-violently? What’s your history like? Let’s look at how you have


responded when you were oppressed. George Washington—guerilla fighter!”


These might have been Malcolm X’s sentiments, but they are West’s words,


as is each of the other ‘quotations’ of Malcolm X that occurs in the article.


      It is an extremely effective technique, and West uses it very skillfully.


It wasn’t until after I’d had some to process the article that I realized that it


was less about what Malcolm X thought and more about what Cornell West


thinks.


      And that’s what this article is really about. It's not a historical piece


about Malcolm X. (Apart from the date of Malcolm X's death, the only


biographical fact about Malcolm X that is referenced is that he was a Sunni


Muslim leader.) Nor is it an exposition of Malcolm X's thoughts. (Malcolm X


is not actually quoted even once. Nor is it said what specifically he believed.)


Malcolm X is eloquently characterized. “He was music in motion,” West


writes. “He was jazz in motion…He could be lyrical and funny, and in the


next moment, he’d shift and push you against the wall.” These are


characterizations, not statements of historical fact. It is being said what kind


of person Malcolm X was, not what he did. The same is true of each of the


descriptions occurring in this article.


      This raises the question: Is this article really about Malcolm X? Thisarticle expresses very definite views, and although it attributes those views to


Malcolm X, it doesn't site any quotations or other historical data, opting


instead for evocative hypotheticals and broad characterizations. This suggests


that Malcolm X is functioning as a foil for Cornell West's own views. This is


not to denigrate Dr. West. Far from it—his literary powers are in full


evidence here, as is the depth of his convictions.


       Fork etiquette (Anthropology)


 


        Dinner Fork


      When used in conjunction with a knife to cut and consume food in


Western social settings, two forms of fork etiquette are common. In the


European style, the diner keeps the fork in his or her left hand, while in the


American style the fork is shifted between the left and right hands. The


American style is most common in the United States, but the European style


is considered proper in other countries.


        Originally, the traditional European method, once the fork was


adopted as a utensil, was to transfer the fork to the right hand after cutting


food, as it had been considered proper for all utensils to be used with the right


hand only. This tradition was brought to America by British colonists and is


still in use in the United States. Europe adopted the more rapid style of eating


in relatively modern times.


      European style


      The European style, also called the continental style, is to hold the


fork in the left hand and the knife in the right. Once a bite-sized piece of food


has been cut, it is conducted straight to the mouth by the left hand. For other


food items, such as potatoes, vegetables or rice, the blade of the knife is used


to assist or guide placement of the food on the back of the fork. The tinesremain pointing down.


      The knife and fork are both held with the handle running along the


palm and extending out to be held by thumb and forefinger. This style is


sometimes called "hidden handle" because the palm conceals the handle.


        American style


      In the American style, also called the zig-zag method or fork


switching, the knife is initially held in the right hand and the fork in the left.


Holding food to the plate with the fork tines-down, a single bite-sized piece is


cut with the knife. The knife is then set down on the plate, the fork


transferred from the left hand to the right hand, and the food is brought to the


mouth for consumption. The fork is then transferred back to the left hand and


the knife is picked up with the right. In contrast to the European hidden


handle grip, in the American style the fork is held much like a spoon or pen


once it is transferred to the right hand to convey food to the mouth. Though


called "American style", this style originated in Europe.


      Hybrid style


      Etiquette experts have noted that the American style is in decline,


being replaced in the United States by a hybrid of the American and


European styles. In this style, the fork is not switched between hands between


cutting and eating, and is also deployed "tines-up" as a scoop when


convenient. 


 


 


 































 


 


  


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


  


 


 


 


 


 


  


 


 


 


 


 


 


  


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


  


 


 


 


 


 


  


 


 


 


 


 


 


  


 


 


 


 


  


 


 


 


 


 


 


  


                         McClatchey on Race and IQ (Current Events)


 


 


      This assignment is a follow up to the McClatchey HS Race and IQ


article and your first responses. My goal here is to make you question your


initial reaction and challenge the way you approached the article and


questions. At a minimum, I want to show you a different perspective to this -


one that I argue is extremely important to understand.


        Questions - Please answer them in the text box below:


 


              1.            Most people attack the student and his experiment as


      racist? Why? If you think it is actually racist - tell me what specifically


      about it makes it racist? Make sure you think about this before


      answering. If you do not think it is racist - why isn't it?


 


      I do not think it matters whether it is ‘racist’, whatever that means.


What matters is whether it is a legitimate science project. A hypothesis is put


forth (namely, race correlates with IQ). That hypothesis is either true or false.


That is the only question that matters. The psychology of the person who puts


forth the hypothesis is irrelevant, unless it corrupts the way in which he


attempts to answer the question at hand.      Also, what exactly does it mean to say that this person is ‘racist’? If it


means that he believes there to be non-trivial psychological differences


between the races, then, yes, he is racist---but in that case, the charge that he


is racist is trivial and question-begging, since the very thing that he is trying


to show that is ‘racism’, in this sense of the word, is empirically justified.


      Is he ‘racist’ in some other sense? Does he hate black or Hispanic? We


don’t know. And for what it is worth, I rather suspect not. Somebody who


hated them probably would probably simply accept some invidious


stereotypical characterization of them, without bothering to look into the


merits of that characterization.


      My guess, for what it is worth, is that he feels that his education has


been compromised by people who have race-based agendas and whose


primary agendas are not education-related in nature .


      But this point is entirely speculative, and the very fact that it is


speculative confirms the emptiness of the allegation that this person is


‘racist.’


 


 


              2.            What if the actual results are true? What if there are actual


    IQ differences between populations of humans? Does this change how


      you view the experiment and aftermath? In other words, do you still      think it is racist? Or do you still agree that it should have been taken


      down?


 


      This person’s project concerns groups of people. But merit always has


to be judged on person-by-person basis. Given only that I belong to some


group of people whose members are unusually likely to be good physician, it


does not follow that I personally am a good physician. And if I am applying


for a position as a physician, my personal merits have to be assessed. It is


irrelevant what the merits are of other members of some peer-group of mine.


      Also, it is never racist to look for answers to open empirical questions.


The person who is doing this experiment is not prejudging anything. He is


asking a question and citing relevant data. What is prejudicial is to denounce


this person’s project as ‘racist’, without even seeing what the relevant facts.


Obviously people who describe this person as ‘racist’ are assuming a priori


that the results of the experiment will be unfavorable to people of color. If


they were certain that the facts were on their side, they would welcome


empirical inquiry into the matter. But they are so convinced that the data is


unfavorable to their cause, that, before even examining that data, they


denounce anyone, such as this student-scientist, who proposed to examine it.


So the student is the least prejudicial of all of the parties involved, since his


view is to at least wait and see what the data is before making assumptions asto what that data will show.


 


              3.            Most of you will have assumed that the student's


      conclusion is not true - meaning most of you think there are no IQ


      differences between human populations. How did you come to this


      conclusion? Do you have any evidence that points to this? Have you


      done any research on this?


 


      I myself did not come to that conclusion. There are obviously


differences between individuals, and there are obviously differences between


groups of people. Whether there are differences (relating to IQ) between


different ethnic groups is another matter. But if one looks at the histories of


different ethnicieis, and different sub-ethnicities, it is not so unreasonable to


suppose that there are differences in IQ (and possibly in values) between


different (sub)ethnicities. Consider the tiny nation of Scotland---it produced


Hume, Smith, Maxwell, Reid, Scott, and many others who made massive


intellectual contributions to civilization. Are we really so sure that Scots are


configured in exactly the same way as members of each and every other


ethnic group?


      To be sure, given only that the nation of Scotland produced great


economists, whereas the nation of Samoa has not (to my knowledge), itdoesn’t follow that Somoans are innately less talented at economics than


Scots. But the supposition that there is some innate difference is one possible


explanation, and it cannot be ruled out a priori.


 


              4.            Most of you agreed with the taking down of this


      experiment. Try to take the opposite position on it. Why is it a bad idea


    to shut down science and scientific experiments? It doesn't appear as if


      school officials had any evidence that points to his conclusion being


      incorrect - should they have shut it down without any research or


      discussion?


 


      The school officials are timid bureaucrats who are taking the path of


least resistance. Today’s society being what it is, one will have less of an


uphill battle on one’s hand if one shuts down ostensibly ‘racist’ projects than


if one green-lights them. But I don’t agree with the decision. What about


freedom of speech? What about freedom of thought? And suppose that this


project, or some follow-up project, proved that blacks (some other group of


color) had some intellectual aptitude that whites lack? Wouldn’t we want to


know that? Couldn’t that fact possibly be of relevance to educational


curricula? But if we pre-emptively prohibit such projects from being


undertaken, we will never know. It is not possible to block off one avenue ofinquiry without blocking off a number of intersecting avenues of inquiry.


 


              5.            Whether or not you agreed with shutting down the


      experiment - answer this. If we disagree with something or perhaps


      have questions on something - is there a better way to engage with it


      rather than shutting it down? Explain your answer.


 


      Yes there is. One can say: In protecting this student’s right to ask


questions, we are protecting everybody’s right to do, including those whose


viewpoints are opposed to this student’s. Also, the assumption embodied in


not shutting down the project is that there will be mayhem of some kind—


possibly even riots. But that, it seems to me, is a racist assumption. (In my


personal experience, the people who responded the most adversely to


supposed instances of ‘racism’ were whites who wanted to virtue-signal their


non-racism.)


 


      Rubric


      10 points - Student demonstrates critical thinking; well thought out


responses. All questions are answers in this manner.


      5 points - Student demonstrates critical thinking/well thought out


responses in 4 or less questions      0 points - Student does not answer questions. Student answers


questions with minimal effort. Critical thinking is not apparent in most


answers.


                   Freedom of Speech: Its Scope and Limits (Politics)


 


      What are your initial reactions to what you read?


 


      My initial reaction was straightforward. A science project was done. It


attempted to solve an anomaly (namely, why are people of certain ethnicities


disproportionately well represented in an academic program designed for


gifted students?). And that project put forth a prima facie reasonable (and


data-consistent) hypothesis that, if correct, certainly would eliminate the


anomaly. Is that hypothesis correct? I don’t know. But that is not the relevant


question. The relevant question is: Is it sufficiently reasonable, and


sufficiently explanatory of the data-set in question, that it ought to be


considered? And the answer is ‘yes.’




Do you agree with the school taking down this science experiment? Why or


why not?


 


      No, I don’t agree with what the school did. First of all, freedom of


speech should always be protected. Freedom of speech does not protect


speech that is intentionally taunting or aggressive or inflammatory. But this


does not fall into that category; the results of sober, if politically incorrect,scientific investigations are ipso facto non-inflammatory. It is only if people


make them inflammatory—by politicizing them, usually with inflammatory


reactions of their own---that they become inflammatory. But in that case, it is


the reaction to the original speech-act, not that speech-act itself, that is


inflammatory and that therefore doesn’t deserve to be protected as free


speech.


      In any case, if the schools’ policy is to encourage free thought and free


discussion---which includes free scientific inquiry—then it should have


suppressed this project. If the school’s policy is to suppress the truth in the


interests of political or social stability, that is fine, but it must not then make a


grand show—as this school almost certainly does—of being interested in


‘getting to the bottom of race relations in this country.’ Sometimes truth ahs


to be suppressed, for reasons of civil peace and order. But, first of all, this is


one of those times. Second, if that is what is being done, then the school has


to be honest about it. Also, if the school is so afraid that members of the


groups in questin will react violently, then that issue ought to be addressed.


And if it doesn’t fear as much—which, in my view, it probably shouldn’t---


then there is no need to suppress the project in the first place.




Imagine you were this student's teacher. He comes up to you and poses this


research question - he wants to know if there are differences in IQ betweenracial groups. How do you respond and why?


 


      As a teacher, it is one’s duty to answer questions honestly, if not


always accurately. (This assumes that the questions are relevant; if the


question is irrelevant, I would not answer it, on the grounds that it is indeed


irrelevant.) So that the question fell within the scope of the class I was


teaching, I would answer the student by saying that reputable scholars, e.g.


William Shockley and Francis Crick, have indeed generated data that is


consistent with the hypothesis that there are disparities in intelligence


between different groups. At the same time, I would point out that other


reputable scholars have put forth other ways of modelling the data. Finally, I


would say that IQ-tests are an extremely narrow and only limitedly reliable


measure of intelligence, with the qualification that they do have some


evidential value.




Can you spot something potentially disingenuous with the newspaper article


(Hint: It's something to do with the title)?


 


Frankly, I thought that the article was fairly sincere and balanced. The title of


the article--- High school science fair project questioning African American


intelligence sparks outrage---made the science fare project in question seemmore tendentious and aggressive than it actually was. In and of itself, that


project was fairly innocuous and embodied standard scientific practice.


Imagine the following. Scientist X is studying a colony of ants and notices


that the ants separate into different groups, with each group specializing in


some task that is of a different difficulty level from the tasks done by each of


the other groups. In that case, if the scientist posited that those groups were


populated by ants of different intellectual levels, he would just be using


scientific sound judgment. In this case, the student-scientist is, arguably,


behaving in much the same way. It is true that someone with a racist agenda


could use that project to further his own aims, but the project itself was


simply science. And science is often incompatible with our desires, as


Darwin’s theory aptly illustrates.




 


 


 


                     Defending Freedom of Speech (Ethics/Politics)


 


      What are your initial reactions to what you read?


 


      My initial reaction was straightforward. A science project was done. It


attempted to solve an anomaly (namely, why are people of certain ethnicities


disproportionately well represented in an academic program designed for


gifted students?). And that project put forth a prima facie reasonable (and


data-consistent) hypothesis that, if correct, certainly would eliminate the


anomaly. Is that hypothesis correct? I don’t know. But that is not the relevant


question. The relevant question is: Is it sufficiently reasonable, and


sufficiently explanatory of the data-set in question, that it ought to be


considered? And the answer is ‘yes.’




Do you agree with the school taking down this science experiment? Why or


why not?


 


      No, I don’t agree with what the school did. First of all, freedom of


speech should always be protected. Freedom of speech does not protect


speech that is intentionally taunting or aggressive or inflammatory. But this


does not fall into that category; the results of sober, if politically incorrect,scientific investigations are ipso facto non-inflammatory. It is only if people


make them inflammatory—by politicizing them, usually with inflammatory


reactions of their own---that they become inflammatory. But in that case, it is


the reaction to the original speech-act, not that speech-act itself, that is


inflammatory and that therefore doesn’t deserve to be protected as free


speech.


      In any case, if the schools’ policy is to encourage free thought and free


discussion---which includes free scientific inquiry—then it should have


suppressed this project. If the school’s policy is to suppress the truth in the


interests of political or social stability, that is fine, but it must not then make a


grand show—as this school almost certainly does—of being interested in


‘getting to the bottom of race relations in this country.’ Sometimes truth ahs


to be suppressed, for reasons of civil peace and order. But, first of all, this is


one of those times. Second, if that is what is being done, then the school has


to be honest about it. Also, if the school is so afraid that members of the


groups in questin will react violently, then that issue ought to be addressed.


And if it doesn’t fear as much—which, in my view, it probably shouldn’t---


then there is no need to suppress the project in the first place.




Imagine you were this student's teacher. He comes up to you and poses this


research question - he wants to know if there are differences in IQ betweenracial groups. How do you respond and why?


 


      As a teacher, it is one’s duty to answer questions honestly, if not


always accurately. (This assumes that the questions are relevant; if the


question is irrelevant, I would not answer it, on the grounds that it is indeed


irrelevant.) So that the question fell within the scope of the class I was


teaching, I would answer the student by saying that reputable scholars, e.g.


William Shockley and Francis Crick, have indeed generated data that is


consistent with the hypothesis that there are disparities in intelligence


between different groups. At the same time, I would point out that other


reputable scholars have put forth other ways of modelling the data. Finally, I


would say that IQ-tests are an extremely narrow and only limitedly reliable


measure of intelligence, with the qualification that they do have some


evidential value.




Can you spot something potentially disingenuous with the newspaper article


(Hint: It's something to do with the title)?


 


      Frankly, I thought that the article was fairly sincere and balanced. The


title of the article--- High school science fair project questioning African


American intelligence sparks outrage---made the science fare project inquestion seem more tendentious and aggressive than it actually was. In and of


itself, that project was fairly innocuous and embodied standard scientific


practice. Imagine the following. Scientist X is studying a colony of ants and


notices that the ants separate into different groups, with each group


specializing in some task that is of a different difficulty level from the tasks


done by each of the other groups. In that case, if the scientist posited that


those groups were populated by ants of different intellectual levels, he would


just be using scientific sound judgment. In this case, the student-scientist is,


arguably, behaving in much the same way. It is true that someone with a


racist agenda could use that project to further his own aims, but the project


itself was simply science. And science is often incompatible with our desires,


as Darwin’s theory aptly illustrates.




 


              1)              Does contractualism deal with any of the above views?


      Yes. Contractualism obviously deals with the dying-promise situation.


      You entered into a contract with the person when you agreed to put


      flowers on that person’s beloved’s grave, and you are not contractually


      bound to carry out that promise.


 


              2)              Would the contractualist approach undermine the QALY      view? Yes. The QALY view is strictly utilitarian in nature and is


      therefore anti-deontological and therefore anti-contractualist. The


      QALY view is basically: if X’s death brings more net joy then X’s life,


      then don’t waste resources trying to save X. The contractualist position


    is: If you have a contract (whether explicit or implicit) with someone,


      then it must be honored, even if violating it increases overall welfare.


      And if somebody is alive, then others--- in particular, medical people


      from whom that person is seeking treatment---are likely to have


      contractual obligations to that person.


 


              3)              Would contractualism ever answer specifically the


      ageism objection? The ageism objection to QALY is to the effect that it


      discriminates against people on the basis of their age. Contractualism


      would agree with the ageism objection on this point. According to


      contractualism, a deal is a deal, whether the person has many good


      years ahead or few. And that is also, in effect, the import of the ageism


      objection.


 


 


           Why College Admissions Should Continue to be Based at least in                    part on Standardized Test Scores (Public Policy)


 


      In her article “Is it finally time to get rid of the SAT and ACT College


Admissions Tests”, Valerie Strauss claims that by basing admissions-


decisions on SAT and ACT scores, colleges and universities are somehow


perpetuating some kind of systemic bias against those who are


underprivileged. To this end, Strauss cites the fact that people from higher


socioeconomic strata outperform those from the lower socioeconomic strata


on SAT’s and ACT’s, the implication being that those tests ‘rig’ college


admissions in favor of those who are already well-to-do. In this paper, a case


will be made that Strauss’s suggestion, if implemented, would have


disastrous consequences: instead of resulting a fair college admissions


system, it would eliminate a metric that helps educators evaluate their own


effectiveness and would consequently result in worse education for


everybody, rich and poor alike.


      The first point is that if economically underprivileged people are


underperforming on a test, the right response is to educate them better; it is


not to get rid of the test. Consider the following hypothetical. In country X,


each citizen must, upon turning 18, to two years of some kind of physical


labor; and tests of physical ability are used to determine exactly who does


what. If a given person cannot do a single push-up, then that person is notgiven a job that requires enormous amounts of physical strength. If someone


cannot run more than ten feet without passing out, that person is not assigned


a job that involves great physical endurance. In country X, wealthy people


are more healthy than poor people, simply because wealth people in X have


better medical care than poor people, are better nourished, drink cleaner


water, and so on. Consequently, wealthy people in X vastly outperform poor


people on these tests of physical aptitude. How should the government


respond? Should it declare these physical tests to be ‘unjust’? Should it get


rid of all tests that expose the differences in fitness and health between rich


and poor? No. That would be the worst possible course of action, as it would


hide the injustices in question. The right response is to keep using those


metrics and to improve the performance of those whose performance is


currently substandard.


      Strauss’s reasoning, if relativized to this hypothetical, would require


the government of X to get rid of these fitness tests. This would make it hard


to know whose fitness-levels had to improved and would perpetuate the


whatever it was that was lowering the fitness levels of poor people. It would


also make it hard to know whether attempts improve health and fitness were


effective. Similarly, if the SAT’s and ACT’s ceased to be used, the result


would simply be to cloak—not to fix—whatever it was that was responsible


for the differences between rich and poor in respect of their scores on thesetests. Hiding inequalities does not eliminate them; it exacerbates them and


makes them harder to correct.


      Further, Strauss’s suggest that we scrap the SAT’s and ACT’s would


deprive universities of an enormously valuable metric. On average, people


who score high on these tests stay in college and do well in college, whereas


people who score low do poorly and are highly likely to drop out. See Figures


1-3.


 


      Figure 1 First Year GPA by SAT Score


 













 


      Adapted from “The Use of Clustering Models and Constructive


Methods to Explain Professional Trajectories and Other Economic Drivers,”


by June Gerard, 2016, Proceedings of the Scottish Mathematical Society 119,


p. 61. Reprinted with permission.


       Figure 2 Graduation Rates by SAT Score


 










 


 


      Adapted from: “Regression Models in Educational Statistics,” by


Barry Posner, 2017, Modern Statistics and Statistical Methods 54, p. 66.


Reprinted with permission.


 


 


      Figure 3


 


      Figure 5 Graduation Rates by First-Year GPA      Adapted from: Belnap, Noel. Towards Higher Graduation Rates.


Community Scholar, 16(7), 13.


 


        Figures 1-3 show that those who do well on the SAT tend to well in


college and also to graduate, and they also show that those who do poorly on


the SAT tend to do poorly and not to graduate. For what it is worth, this is


consistent with my personal experience. To my knowledge, the people I


know from high school did well on the SAT’s and ACT’s are flourishing in


college, and those who did poorly are struggling and some have even dropped


out.


      Straus writes: “For years, questions have been raised about the validity


and value of SAT and ACT scores in college admissions. The College Board


has paid for research touting the “predictive value” of SAT scores in


forecasting how students will do in college and beyond, but critics have


questioned the research.” We have just seen statistical proof of the claim thatthey are predictive of academic success. To be sure, there are enormously


gifted people who do poorly on standardized tests and there are people who


lack substance who do well on them. These are not perfect tests by any


stretch of the imagination. But given a thousand people who scored in the top


5% on the SAT’s and a thousand who scored in the bottom 5%, the former


group is much more likely to yield college-ready students than the latter, and


universities would be foolish to spurn the use of SAT’s and other such


metrics.


      Also, granting that standardized fail to measure creativity and insight


and granting that their diagnostic value is indeed quite limited, they are one


of the few meaningful data-points that college admissions have. Grades often


reflect biases, either positive or negative, on the part of instructors, and


‘extra-curricular activities’, though laudable, are not little relevance to


scholarly potential.


      I have a much older sister, and when she was growing up, my parents


did not have enough money to send her to a good school. As a result, her


education suffered and her SAT scores were mediocre. When I was growing


up, my parents had the resources to send me to a good school, with the result


that I did well on the SAT’s and am currently doing respectably in college.


Part of what my motivated my father to earn more was his knowledge that he


needed to do so to give me a good education, and my sister’s less thanoptimal test scores.


      Strauss tries to muddy the waters by linking the SAT’s to cheating on


the part of people of means: “Is it finally time for colleges and universities to


stop requiring applicants to take the SAT and ACT college admissions


exams?” Strauss asks at the beginning of her article. “The question, long


asked by testing critics, is being revived with new urgency amid the


explosive college admissions bribery scandal rocking the world of higher


education. As part of an investigation they called Operation Varsity Blues,


federal prosecutors last week charged some 50 people, including famous


Hollywood actresses and wealthy financiers. The alleged schemes included


hiring impostors to take SAT and ACT exams, or rigging the test by asking


for additional time to take it even when that wasn’t necessary.”


      This is not good reasoning. Obviously, these people were wrong to


cheat, but the right response is not to get rid of the SAT but simply to make


sure that people don’t cheat on it. Suppose that people bribed officials to be


given life-saving medication that was in short supply. By Strauss’s reasoning,


we should get rid of the medication. By my reasoning, we should prevent


fraudulent use of it.


 


      In the United States, College admissions are to a large extent


determined by one’s performance on the SAT or ACT. To be sure, one’sscores on these tests are not the only relevant factor, but admissions-


committees give them enormous weight. Someone with low board scores will


have a tough time getting into a top school, let alone being scholarship


money. Is this right? Should one’s performance on a four-hour multiple-


choice test determine where one goes to college or even whether one does so?


Author and education-writer Strauss answers with a resounding "no", and she


brilliantly defends her answers in her Washington Post Article "Is it finally


time to get rid of the SAT and ACT college admissions test?" According to


Strauss, SAT and ACT scores are no less a reflection of socioeconomic


privilege than of actual merit. In defense of this, she cites the statistical fact


that people from impoverished backgrounds do worse on these tests than


people from wealthy backgrounds. Lest it be thought that wealthy test-takers


might simply be more intelligent than poor ones, Strauss points out that the


wealthy, unlike the poor, have the option of hiring private instructors to boost


their performance on such tests. “[K]ids from poor families do worse than


kids with money”, Strauss writes. “Wealthy parents can provide benefits that


many poor families can’t, such as tutors [and] learning opportunities.” For


good measure, Strauss reinforces this already weighty claim by quoting Bob


Schaeffer, Director of Public Education at Fair Test. “How”, Schaeffer asks,


“can any college admissions office tell whether the ACT/SAT score they


receive reflects an applicant’s actual test-taking skills or whether it wasinflated by test-coaching ‘steroids’?” (Strauss, 3) This is consistent with my


personal experience. When raising my oldest sister, who is twelve years older


than I am, my parents had little money and therefore little to invest in her


education. When raising me, my parents did have resources and invested


heavily in my education. As a result, I outperformed her on the SAT by a


hefty margin, her Math score being 450 and mine being 750. My sister is


actually mathematically gifted; but because of her straitened circumstances,


she was forced to teach herself material that I had the privilege being taught


by qualified instructors. My sister's low SAT scores closed off a lot of


opportunities that would have been available to her had she had better


instruction. She is obviously not an isolated case, and I am therefore inclined


to agree with Strauss that SAT and ACT scores are quite as much a measure


of wealth as they are of merit. Less than one month ago, Strauss points out,


the FBI arrested over 50 wealthy financiers and famous actors for either


hiring impostors to take their SAT's for their children and for other forms of


SAT-related fraud. This shows us that people with money have the option not


only of inflating but of falsifying their children’s test-scores; and according to


Strauss, it constitutes an additional reason to marginalize the relevance of


SAT and ACT scores to college admissions. Once again, Strauss quotes Bob


Schaeffer, according to whom the wealthy have used a wide variety of ruses


to falsify their children’s scores: “Those…schemes”, writes Schaeffer, “haveincluded hiring impersonators to take the exams; making phony “disability’


claims to gain extra test-taking time; paying to change wrong answers or fill


in missing responses; and bribing proctors and test-site supervisors to ignore


these illegal acts.”(Strauss). I attended an elite private school in Thailand, and


many of my classmates were given unlimited amounts of time to take tests


because their parents had bribed psychiatrists to claim that they had medical


conditions, such as ADHD, that warranted such dispensations. It was


disturbing to me to see friends of mine cheat their way into having high test


scores.


      “In some cases,” Strauss writes, “test administration in an entire


country has had to be canceled at the last minute because of credible cheating


allegations.” (Strauss, 2). In 2017, the SAT's were canceled in Thailand,


when it was discovered that a number of students had been using high-tech


glasses to have the answers fed to them. I remember a friend of my sister’s


sobbing when she found out that she would not able to take the test. In


situations where cheating is rampant, those who choose not to engage in it are


penalized for their own integrity; and this, as Strauss points out, is yet another


reason why SAT and ACT scores should be optional for college applicants.


      Strauss's arguments are compelling. Money can be used to inflate or


even falsify SAT and ACT scores. So long as college admissions are based


on such scores, people from wealthy families have an unfair advantage andthose who have the integrity not to cheat are at an unfair disadvantage. The


poor will continue to be unfairly deprived of the blessings of a college


education so long as college admissions are based on SAT and ACT scores,


and Strauss is therefore right that making these tests optional would do much


to level the playing field.


                     Being a Voter in Texas (Current Events)


 


      Why it is important to know about who represents you in the Texas


Legislature. Be specific.


 


 


      I live in Houston Texas (specially, in 77017), which is in many


respects a diverse and dynamic city. In a city of this size, there are inevitably


many pressing issues; and in a city as culturally rich and diverse as Houston


—as blessed by a wealth of different cultures and as cursed by the manifold


difficulties striking equitable balances between so many different viewpoints-


--state legislators have awesome responsibilities. It is their responsibility to


make sure that the school board does its job, that city workers do their jobs,


that hospitals, parks and basic public services are in working order. Further,


state representatives must see to it that municipal workers do their job while


also seeing to it that their district is hospitable to business. And it is


proverbially difficult for representatives (or officials of any kind, for that


matter) strike this balance. Our state representative in 77071 is Mary Ann


Perez. Frankly, I myself have very little information about Representative


Perez, so I cannot pass judgment. But her website


(http://votemaryannperez.com/) provided next to no information about herviews, which I found disconcerting, especially since one’s state


representative is in many ways one’s go-to when one has problems within


one’s own community. Obviously senators and congresspersons, having as


they do both local and nation-level responsibilities, cannot be expected to


respond promptly to strictly local problems. And precisely because state-


representatives are there to step into that breech, it is especially helpful to


know who one’s state representative is and how well he/she represents your


interest.


             Three Takeaways from The Young Turks’ ‘Iceland does the


                          Unimaginable’ (Current Events)


 


      Takeaway 1: In the US, bankers seem to have an almost special status.


This may be a consequence of our nation’s high regard for wealth. Or it may


be a consequence of the fact that they use their immense wealth to influence


legislation and law-enforcement.


      Takeaway 2: In the US, regulators rationalize their failure to


prosecutor bank-fraud on the grounds that, because banks are so big, doing so


could disrupt the economy. But the real reason is likely that these regulators


are ‘on the pad’, i.e. have been bought off.


      Takeaway 3: The spuriousness of this excuse on the part of regulator’s


is evidenced by that fact that in Iceland, where they sent their top bankers to


jail for fraud, the economy picked up as a result.


            Three Takeaways from WSJ Video about the European Union


 


      One reason that the Economic Union was created in order to bind


nations together in such a way that it would not be in their interest go to war


with each other. Thus, it was at least in part the traumatic experience of


World Wars I and II that led Europe to see itself as needing to be


economically unified. 


      Another reason for establishing the EU was to consolidate the various


European economies into a single super-economy that would be competitive


no the world market.


 


      Because the EU comprises so many different economies and because


it requires various different governments to agree on monetary policy, it takes


a very long time to make decisions, with the result) that it cannot act quickly


enough in crisis situations. And this is what happened with Greece: Greece


couldn’t pay its debts, and because the EU couldn’t act quickly enough to


contain the situation, Greece’s economy dragged down the other economies


of the EU with it.


 


 


             Summary and Analysis of Tomatoland (Politics/Current Events)


 


        Tomatoland, by Barry Estabrook, is about the tomato industry in


Florida, where about 70% of American tomatoes are grown. The book


carefully describes the inhuman conditions under which workers in this


industry labor, and it also discusses the manifold health consequences for


these workers (and to a lesser extent all tomato-consumers in the US) of the


heavy-duty chemicals and pesticides involved in the growth of tomatoes in


Florida. The author repeatedly points out that Florida tomatoes are extremely


bland and unsavory, especially as compared with tomatoes grown without


pesticides, the point being that all of this loss and suffering is for naught. The


author also describes the failure of the legal system to improve any aspect of


this situation: it ignores the fact that slave labor is involved (and, indeed,


heavily relied on); it ignores the abysmal working conditions of non-enslaved


workers; and it ignores the adverse health effects of the industrial chemicals


used in the process, which include sky-high cancer rates and limbless


offspring. Finally, the author discusses some attempts that politicians and


activists have made to remedy the situation, and he also discusses cases


where people have produced quality-tomatoes without dehumanizing their


workers and without using lethal chemicals.


      The book starts out by describing the origins of the American tomatoindustry. Tomatoes, like potatoes, were unknown to Europeans until the


Spanish were introduced to them by the Aztecs and Incas. These tomatoes


were small and did not have the smooth, near-spherical shape had by the


tomatoes we currently use. The large, round tomatoes that we are familiar


with are the handiwork of Alexander Livingston, an American entrepreneur


and horticulturalist. Livingston first cultivated such tomatoes in the 1820s.


Livingston’s distinctively round and succulent-looking tomatoes were a hit,


and the American tomato-industry was born.


      In the 1870s, Florida became a tomato-producer, owing mainly to the


fact that, thanks to recently built railroads, it was possible to quickly transport


produce from Florida to the Northeast. Because of Florida’s climate,


tomatoes can be grown there year-round. But with this qualification, so the


author says, Florida is in many ways a terrible place to grow tomatoes.


Because Florida is so hot, tomatoes have to be drenched in chemicals to keep


them from being eaten by vermin. (In cooler climates, by contrast, chemicals


need not be used, at least not in such abundance, granting that year-round


tomato-growth is not a possibility in such places.)


      The author then shifts his discussion to the various chemical used in


the growth of Florida tomatoes, going into great detail about the staggering


costs both to human life, especially (but not exclusively) those of the workers


involved, and to Florida’s ecosystem. After discussing the damage done tovarious native species (e.g. alligators and herons unable to reproduce and


dying in droves), the author carefully describes the plight of the workers


involved. (In this context, the author is discussing people who ‘choose’ to


have these jobs.) If it rains, the workers cannot work and therefore aren’t


paid. If there is moisture on the crops, they have to wait, without pay, until it


dries before they can start working. On a good day, after working 12 hours,


they are lucky to take home $70. Because they don’t have automobiles, they


have no choice but to live near the tomato-fields, and landlords charge them


outrageously high-rents, which eat up most of their salaries. They are often


made ill by the chemicals they are handling and oftentimes cannot afford


gloves or other basic protective gear. Because of these toxins, their children


are unusually likely to be born with severe defects, including not having


limbs or genitalia. But these workers don’t have insurance and therefore can’t


pay for medical treatment for themselves or their children. And if a worker so


much as complains of illness while on the job, he is likely to be fired and left


without any source of income. Because the workers are undocumented, they


are not protected by unions and, indeed, have minimal legal protections of


any kind.


      The workers’ lack of legal protections brings the author to what I


found to be the most poignant and informative part of the book: the


discussion of the huge role of slave labor involved in the Florida tomato-industry. Many of the people picking tomatoes in Florida are veritable slaves.


The companies that own the fields have agreements with human-traffickers


who supply them with these workers, the latter having been abducted and


forced to work, with no benefits and minimal pay, under the most brutal


conditions. If they try to escape, they are beaten or killed.


      In the last part of the book, the author describes attempts that people


have made to improve the situation. He talks about various civil rights and


legal activists who are trying to improve working conditions, as well as purge


the entire industry of slave labor. He also discusses the case of a Princeton


graduate who started a successful tomato-business in Pennsylvania that,


although not as lucrative as its sinister Florida counterparts, is relatively


successful financial and also produces higher-quality tomatoes.


      I found this book to be readable and engaging, mainly because it was


so loaded with very specific and very striking (usually strikingly grim)


information about a relatively large sector of the American economy. There


are very few statistics and very little analysis, but there is a wealth of


carefully described, first-hand facts, and that this is this book’s greatest


strength.


      It is also its greatest weakness. The author doesn’t explain why the


Florida tomato-industry is so fraught with injustice. Why are conditions for


workers so poor in this particular industry, and why is slave-labor used in thisparticular industry? Does this industry require the use of slave labor? Are its


profit-margins so thin? If so, why? And why does the US government look


the other way? Is the Florida tomato industry such an important part of the


US economy that the government won't adequately police it? Is the United


States actually without the financial resources to defray the costs of not


dehumanizing workers in this industry?


      The author does mention one or two cases of reasonable successful


companies that grew tomatoes without resorting unfair labor practices and


without using ecocidal amounts of toxic chemicals. But each of these


‘companies’, as the author also points, though only in passing, was really just


a single person, and that person did not have an operation of scale. The reader


is thus left without an answer to the question: What is the alternative to the


current state of affairs?


      At no point does the author explicitly put forth an economic


explanation of the situation. So far as any such analysis is provided, it is


confined to the usual mantra that ‘corporations’ are to blame. Nor does the


author say how the situation can be improved. He spends a great deal of time


talking about the efforts of various activists, along with the politicians (e.g.


Bernie Sanders) who are sympathetic to them. But from what we can gather,


these activists and politicians have done very little to improve the situation.


      This is not surprising. It isn’t activists and politicians who improvelabor-conditions. It is economic development. When the industrial revolution


first began in Britain, working conditions were appalling and injury- and


fatality-rates were sky-high. Thanks to industrialization itself, Britain


eventually became wealthy enough that it no longer needed to rely on


exploitative labor practices, at which point labor unions became powerful and


labor laws were put in place. Regulation can only do so much. If companies


don’t have the money to pay their workers, they will either go out of business


or use slave-labor, and there is nothing that regulation by itself can do to


change this. Regulators can shut down companies that have unfair labor


practices—and they should do so. But regulators cannot magically give these


companies the funds that they need to pay their employees an honest wage.


And if an industry-sector is sufficiently large, the government may choose


not to regulate, especially if regulation will cause that sector to implode.


Therefore, it has to be figured out how this industry-sector can be so


modified that it doesn’t need to rely on unfair labor practices---and Estabrook


says nothing about how to do this. Nor does Estabrook say anything as to


how tomatoes can be mass-produced without using toxic chemicals.


      In sum: I enjoyed this book enormously, because it was so rich in first-


hand facts, as opposed to empty statistics and abstract analysis. The problem


discussed by the author is malfeasance on the part of tomato-growers in


Florida, specifically in connection with grossly exploitative labor practicesand also in connection with their use of environment- and health-destroying


chemicals. The author doesn’t put forth an argument at all: he states facts.


These facts make it clear that there is a problem, and they make it clear what


that problem is (slave labor, underpaid workers, illness among workers and to


some extent among the general public, and destruction of wildlife). What the


author doesn’t say that is that people responsible for these horrors are


obviously aware of them, and they wouldn’t continue to perpetrate them


unless they had extremely strong financial incentives for doing so. And the


author also doesn’t say why they have these incentives or how they honorable


conduct on their part can be incentivized. So yes—Tomatoland is replete with


solid evidence for specific factual claims, e.g. claims relating to worker-


illness and worker-exploitation. But explanations are proposed and a fortiori


no evidence or reasoning is adduced in their favor. The author did do a


creditable job of explaining the history of Florida’s tomato-industry, but he


doesn’t even try to identify the financial pressures that are responsible for its


continued existence or for its abhorrent practices. As earlier stated, what I


found most striking about this book was the discussion of slave labor in this


industry-sector: I do not believe that the author is exaggerating. This is not an


acceptable situation, and we as a nation must address it. But it seems to be


entirely off of our national radar—a fact that I also find striking (and


disturbing). 


       A Demographic Analysis of Dropout-likelihood and Dropout-


rationality


 


 


 


                                            Abstract


      In the fall of 2017, approximately 5 million people enrolled in college


in the United States, and 56% of them had dropped out by the end of the


school year (National Center for Education Statistics, 2019). In the present


work, we will find that, contrary to what is generally assumed, people who


drop out tend to be rational to do so. First, we will establish (1) that the


greater the likely financial pay-off of a college degree, the less likely one is to


drop out. Then we will establish (2) that the more likely a college degree is to


lead to an emotionally satisfying career, the less likely one is to drop out. 


      Claim (1) will be established on the basis of analysis of existing


statistics. IQ is directly correlated with SAT-scores and SAT-scores are


directly correlated with graduation-probability. The higher a given college-


graduate’s SAT-scores, the greater the probable financial benefits of a college


degree and the smaller the probable costs. The costs of college to those who


score in the top percentile on the SAT are negligible compared to the gains. It


therefore tends to be irrational for such people to drop out, and their drop-outrate is less than 1%. Strikingly, the dropout rate for those who score in the top


percentile on the SAT are invariant with respect to gender, ethnicity, and

                                                        th
personal finances. For those who score in the 40 percentile or below, the


costs of a college degree a exceed the benefits. It therefore tends to be


rational for such people to drop out of college, and over 60% of them do so.


Dropout-rates within the class of low IQ dropouts are not invariant with


respect to gender, ethnicity, and personal finances, minorities and males


being marginally more likely Caucasians and females to drop out, and the


socioeconomically underprivileged being non-marginally more likely than


the socioeconomically privileged to do so. The higher the SAT, the more


invariant dropout-rates become with respect to these variables.


      Within the class of low (<110) IQ graduates, those whose careers are


based on vocational training received outside of college earn approximately


20% more than those whose careers are based on their college degrees.


Within the class of low IQ persons who do not have vocational certifications,


those with college degrees earn only marginally more than those without


college degrees and earn less after student-debt is adjusted for. Moreover, the


jobs that members of the one group are likely to have coincide for the most


part with those that members of the other group are likely to have.


        Earnings therefore depend on IQ, vocational training, and college-


degree. For those on the lower end of the IQ spectrum, vocational training ispositively dispositive of high net earnings in those on the lower end of the IQ


spectrum and a college degree is dispositive of low net earnings. In those on


the upper end of the IQ spectrum, a college degree is dispositive of high net


earnings and vocational training does not in general have an appreciable


effect either way. More precisely, the aforementioned variables generate the


following earnings hierarchy:


      (i)         Low IQ non-graduates without vocational training


      (ii)   High non-graduates without vocational training


      (iii)                       Low IQ graduates without vocational training


      (iv)   High IQ non-graduates without vocational training


      (v)         Low IQ non-graduates with vocational training


      (vi)   High IQ non-graduates with vocational training


      (vii)                       High IQ graduates with vocational training


      (viii)                 High IQ graduates without vocational training


 


      Claim (2) cannot be established on the basis of existing statistics. This


is not statistics are inherently incapable of settling the matter; it is simply


because the existing statistical data does not exist. Consequently, the present


researcher had to generate that data on his own, by administering a carefully


constructed questionnaire the just-mentioned eight-groups of people, the


defeasible presumption being that career-satisfaction levels will, to at leastsome degree, track, earnings levels.


      1.             


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Keywords: College Retention, Economic Rationality, Vocational Training, Life-Satisfaction

 


                                      Table of Contents

List of Figures

Chapter 1: Introduction to the Study

Introduction

Background of the Study

Problem Statement

Purpose of the Study

Research Questions and/or Hypotheses

Advancing Scientific Knowledge and Significance of the Study

Rationale for MethodologyNature of the Research Design of the Study

Definitions of Terms

Assumptions, Limitations, Delimitations

Summary and Organization of the Remainder of the Study

Chapter 2: Literature Review

Introduction to the Chapter

Identification of the Gap

Identification of the Gap (Continued): The Statistical Data

Theoretical Foundations and/or Conceptual Framework

Review of the Literature

Literature Review: Vocational Careers

Literature Review: Earnings on the Part of Non-vocationally trained

Non-graduates

Literature Review: Financial Costs and Benefits of Low IQ Degree

Summary

Chapter 3 Methodology

Introduction

Statement of the Problem

Research Questions and Hypotheses

Research Methodology

Research Design

Population and Sample Selection

Instrumentation

Validity

Reliability

Data Collection and Management

Data Analysis Procedures

Ethical Considerations

Limitations and Delimitations

Summary

References

Appendix A.                                        List of Figures


      Figure 1 ACT vis-à-vis Likelihood of Having a 4.0 Average Freshman


Year


      Figure 2 Graduation Rate by SAT Score Nation-wide


      Figure 3 Colleges by Graduation Rates and Average SAT Scores


      Figure 4 Colleges at the Extremes Ranked by SAT Score Percentile


and Graduation Rate


      Figure 5 IQ by SAT


      Figure 6 Income by SAT


      Figure 7 IQ by Major (Bar Graph)


      Figure 8 Unadjusted Income by College Major


      Figure 9 Income by College Major Adjusted for Debt


      Figure 10 Income by College Major Adjusted for Debt and Taxation


      Figure 11 Unadjusted Average Pay for jobs/careers for Low IQ


Graduates without Vocational Training


      Figure 12 Average Pay for jobs/careers for Low IQ Graduates without


Vocational Training Adjusted for Debt


      Figure 13 Average Pay for jobs/careers for Low IQ Graduates without


Vocational Training Adjusted for Debt and Taxes


      Figure 14 Non-debt-adjusted average pay for Vocationals


      Figure 15 Debt-adjusted average pay for Vocationals      Figure 16 Debt- and tax-adjusted average pay for Vocationals


      Figure 17 Comparison of Average Earnings, adjusted for debt and


taxation, for vocationals, low IQ graduates, and low IQ non-graduates.


      Figure 18 Comparison between average pay for vocationals and low


IQ Graduates Adjusted for Debt and Taxation


      Figure 19 Unadjusted Salaries for Low IQ Non-graduate Non-


vocationals


      Figure 20 Debt-adjusted Salaries for Low IQ Non-graduate Non-


vocationals


      Figure 21 Debt- and Tax-adjusted Salaries for Low IQ Non-graduate


Non-vocationals


      Figure 22 Debt- and Tax-adjusted Salaries for Non-graduate Non-


vocationals, Low IQ Graduates, and Vocationals


      Figure 23 G*Power Calculations                          Chapter 1: Introduction to the Study


      Introduction


      College dropout rates are currently over 50% and have been for over a


decade (Pevin, 2015). This is often described as a ‘tragedy’ (Wolf, 2017) or a


‘scandal’ (Kirp, 2019). On the face of it, this is understandable. Dropping out


is a form of quitting, and quitting is in many contexts a form of failure. Also,


a college degree has come to be associated in the popular psyche with ‘the


good life’---two cars in the driveway, a house in the suburbs, and so on


(Corn, 2017). Also, just as Hillary Clinton said, college graduates do on


average earn approximately $1,000,000 during their lifetimes than non-


graduates (Bartik, 2016). Finally, it is obvious to many people that if they


hadn’t gone to college, they wouldn’t have the careers that they do have: they


wouldn’t be investment bankers or physicians or attorneys (Altoni et al.,


2016).


      The truth is, however, that the dropout rates are not high enough.


There is relatively definitive evidence of this of a purely objective, statistical


nature. We will discuss this evidence in detail in the present work, but the


upshot of it is easily stated: Those with high IQ’s economically benefit from


college, and those with low IQ’s don’t. The reason for this, quite simply, is


that people with low IQ’s derive little economic benefit from academic


courses of study and are economically better off learning and practicing atrade. Not only is this the obvious, off-the-cuff explanation: it is, as we will


go to great lengths to show, a matter of demonstrable statistical fact. These


claims will be established on the basis of rigorous statistical analysis.


      Of course, money isn’t everything. Given only that someone with a


low IQ stands to earn more money practicing a trade than he does using his


college degree, it doesn’t follow that he is more fulfilled if he takes the first


path. That said, we will show that he is in fact more fulfilled. We will show


on the basis of survey-data that low IQ college graduates, not including those


whose careers are based on vocational training received outside of college,


are among the least fulfilled sub-populations in the country. The happiest


sub-population, as those same surveys indicate, consists of high IQ college


graduates, and the second happiest is vocationally trained college non-


graduates.


      We will establish this by administering a carefully constructed


questionnaire to eight groups of people. The groups in question are:


      (i)         Low IQ non-graduates without vocational training


      (ii)   High IQ non-graduates without vocational training


      (iii)                       Low IQ graduates without vocational training


      (iv)   High IQ non-graduates without vocational training


      (v)         Low IQ non-graduates with vocational training


      (vi)   High IQ non-graduates with vocational training      (vii)                       High IQ graduates with vocational training


      (viii)                 High IQ graduates without vocational training


      2.            The survey uses a seven-point Likert-scale, making it possible


to condense questionnaire-results into a single figure and therefore making it


possible to establish quantitative comparisons between survey-results.


      3.            Survey results will establish the following ‘fulfillment-


hierarchy’:


      (ix)   Low IQ non-graduates without vocational training


      (x)         High non-graduates without vocational training


      (xi)   Low IQ graduates without vocational training


      (xii)                       High IQ non-graduates without vocational training


      (xiii)                 Low IQ non-graduates with vocational training


      (xiv)                       High IQ non-graduates with vocational training


      (xv)   High IQ graduates with vocational training


      (xvi)                       High IQ graduates without vocational training


      The reasons for targeting these specific groups is that, as we will see,


dropout-likelihood and dropout-rationality depend on IQ and vocational-


training.        Background of the Study


              There is plenty of statistical data concerning college-dropoutism,


but this data has not been properly interpreted. Attempts have been made to


correlate dropout-rates with ethnicity (Shapiro et al., 2017), distance from


home (Patterson Silver Wolf et al., 2017), relationship-status (Adams et al.,


2016), eating disorders (Lipson et al., 2017), mental health (Eisenberg, 2016),


video game usage (Schmitt et al., 2015), and personal finances (Britt et al.,


2017)---all to little or no avail. What the statistical data makes absolutely


clear is that people with extremely high SAT/ACT scores (henceforth ‘test-


scores’) seldom drop out and that people with low test-scores usually drop


out. The data also makes it clear that test-scores correlate with IQ (Armstrong


et al., 2017), warranting the conclusion that dropout-likelihood correlates


inversely with IQ. This is invariant across genders, ethnicities, relationship-


statuses and the like. Further, the statistical data makes it clear towards the


lower end of the IQ spectrum, the economic benefits of a college degree


become marginal at best and also those benefits are directly dependent on IQ,


with those in the gifted range economically benefitting enormously from


college.


      Be it noted that the statistical data does not directly disclose any of


this, even though, when scrutinized, it clearly does indicate as much. The


correlation between dropout-likelihood and IQ is readily enough established.The correlation between dropout-rationality and IQ is not as easily


established, granting that the difficulties in establishing it are ultimately


purely technical in nature. Neither correlation is particularly hard to establish


given the available statistical data, making it hard (but also, given our


purposes, unnecessary) to explain why these correlations have not yet been


established.


  A consequence of the fact that it has not thus far been established


exactly who drops out is that it also has not been established how


economically rational it is for those who drop out to do so. A consequence of


this latter fact, in its turn, is that economic dropout-rationality has not yet


been correlated with emotional dropout-rationality. In other words, the degree


to which it is economically rational for a given person to drop out of college


has not been correlated with the degree to which his doing so conduces to his


having an emotionally fulfilling career.        Problem Statement


      Prior to this study it was not known exactly who dropped out or why;


nor, therefore, was it known to what extent it was rational for those who


dropped out to do so. The purpose of this study is to answer each of these


questions, with special attention being paid to the relationship between


dropoutism and career-satisfaction. An expected consequence of this study


will be a need to reframe our thinking about college-dropouts and college-


dropoutism. Thus far, we have regarded dropouts as being the failures


(Hollander et al., 2017) and those trying to prevent them dropping out as the


heroes (Moriña et al., 2017; Bullard, 2018).


      This study will show that it is the other way around. Forcing people to


go to college who are not inclined to do so deprives them of income and


professional fulfillment and is also enormously expensive for society as a


whole. There are many reasons for this. First of all, there are many people


who are happy and financially successful as auto-mechanics---or electricians


or plumbers or as practitioners of some other trade---who would be miserable


if, instead of learning their trade, they had gone to college. Many such people


are gifted at their trade, and many people need their services and pay


handsomely for them. Those same people would in many cases not be faring


as well had they opted for a college-based path. They would often struggle


with the coursework and either drop out, in which case they are likely to self-identify as failures, or choose a major that gives them no marketable skills, in


which case they are likely to be failures.


      Also, trades (e.g. auto-repair, plumbing, carpentry) are inherently


useful. A person with an IQ can become a master plumber or auto-mechanic;


and if they do, they will never have to worry about employment. Also, many


people who learn trades launch successful businesses of their own based on


those trades, and 70% of successful small to medium-sized business are


started in this way. But liberal arts degrees, however much intrinsic value


they may have, tend to provide those who have them with very little in the


way of marketable skills. There is no obvious way for an intellectually


average or even moderately intelligent person to monetize a degree in English


or History or Philosophy. If someone is intellectually gifted, he may be able


to find a way to leverage into a successful career of some kind; he may


become a journalist or professor or financier. But these are long-shots even


those who are intellectually gifted, and for most they are simply out of the


question. The result is that most people with liberal arts degrees find


themselves in an extremely competitive job-market with little to offer to


prospective employers and no skills on the basis of which to become self-


employed.


      It is assumed that STEM degrees, unlike degrees humanities and social


sciences degrees, are inherently useful. This position is misconceived. Firstof all, most STEM are intellectually out of reach for most of the population,


including most of the college population. Second, most STEM degrees,


including those that are within the intellectual reach of the average college


student, are not inherently useful. A degree in biology does not by itself


qualify anyone to do anything. In the case of someone who is intellectually


gifted, a degree in biology may eventuate in that person’s being a physician


or researcher, but usually only on the condition that the person in question


spend years in graduate school or medical school. But these are low-


probability outcomes for someone of average or even moderately high


intelligence, and a degree in biology opens up very few professional avenues


for such a person. To be sure, somebody with a bachelor’s degree in


petroleum engineering or computer science is for that reason alone likely to


have excellent professional prospects, the same being true, albeit to a lesser


extent, of someone with a bachelor’s in chemistry. But less than 20% of


college students are able to complete even the first year of any given one of


these majors.


      As for mathematics and physics, degrees in these fields, in and of


themselves, do very little to make those who have them employable. To be


sure, people with bachelor’s degrees in these fields are relatively likely to


achieve professional success, but their becoming successful usually involves


their spending years after college becoming proficient in areas (e.g.programming, architecture, finance) that are only tangentially related to their


undergraduate degrees. But all of this is moot, given that less than 10% of all


college students are able to complete even the first year of either of these


majors.


      Today (July 3, 2019), the Washington Post reported that only 27% of


people with college degree have jobs in areas relating to their college degrees


(Plummer, 2019). By contrast, over 90% of those with vocational degrees


have jobs in the areas of their degrees (Wladawsky-Berger, 2018). This is


understandable. A credential in HVAC or plumbing or computer-


maintenance makes one very useful; a degree in English or Religious Studies


does not. A consequence is minor economic downturns greatly effect


employment- and income levels of college graduates but have little effect on


those of tradespersons (Alonso, 2015; Jahn et al., 2015; Friedman, 2018;


Arnold, 2018; Levin-Waldman, 2018).      Purpose of the Study


      The purpose of this study is to determine how rational it is for those


who drop out of college to do so. This will involve figuring how exactly who


drops out of college, i.e. we must first identify the characteristics that dispose


someone to drop out of college. Having done this, we must correlate dropout-


likelihood with probably average future earnings and also with probably


average degree of career-satisfaction.


        Ultimately, what we refer to as ‘rationality’ coincides not with


economic rationality but with emotional rationality. Stated simply, for a


person to be rational is for him to make decisions that conduce to his


emotional well-being. This often involves making decisions that conduce to


one’s financial well-being. But economic rationality cannot be identified with


rationality since someone who makes decisions that make wealthy but


suicidally depressed is ceteris paribus less rational than someone who makes


decisions that make him fulfilled but only moderately wealthy (Bennett,


2016).


      This is not a purely theoretical point. Setting aside those who simply


don’t earn enough to satisfy basic needs, there is surprisingly little correlation


between happiness-levels and income (Easterlin, 2015). Happiness is more


easily correlated less with how much they earn than with how they earn it


(Oishi et al., 2015). Lawyers who earn under $100,000 have extremely lowrates of career-satisfaction, and most entrepreneurs who earn more than


$25,000/year have extremely high rates of career satisfaction (Hessels et al.,


2018).


      Because rationality clearly involves being able to make decisions that


conduce to one’s own emotional well-being, we cannot go so far as to


identify rationality with economic rationality (Christiansen, 2017). But there


are important reasons not to disregard the concept of economic rationality.


First of all, if people who are dropping out of college are rational to do so,


that suggests that instead of wasting resources trying to keep them in college,


we should use resources to identify and improve access to alternative


professional paths. Second, economic rationality is completely objective:


whereas people’s emotional self-assessments, though prima facie credible,


may be replete with rationalizations, there is no denying how much a given


person earns or what kind of work he does to earn it (Ervas, 2017). In this


study, consequently, we will investigate both the economic and the emotional


rationality of college-dropoutism.      Research Questions and/or Hypotheses 


      This study will investigate in what ways and to what degrees the


consequences of dropping out of college depend on IQ and receipt of


vocational training. Given the fact that many ‘high-IQ’ careers (e.g.


physician, investment banker, professor) are simply out of the question for


those who do not have college degrees, there exists a reasonable, if


defeasible, presumption to the effect that it is in general more rational than


not for those in the intellectually gifted range to graduate from college. What


is less obvious is whether the same is true of those on the other end of the IQ


spectrum. Day-to-day experience suggests that, where such people are


concerned, a college degree tends to lead to a tedious and low-level office


job. Day-to-day experience also suggests that, when such people receive


vocational training and careers based thereupon, their work, though arduous,


tends to be both lucrative and fulfilling. To put it bluntly and informally,


auto-mechanics, super-intendents, welders, Emergency Medical Technicians,


and Web-designers seem to enjoy their work, whereas secretaries, probation


officers, intake-coordinators, low-level administrators, and office-workers do


not seem to enjoy their work. Of course, these claims, being based only on


personal experience, cannot be asserted with confidence, it being the purpose


the present study to subject them to systematic scrutiny.


        Consequently, the following research question guides this qualitativestudy:


      RQ1: To what extent are those who drop out of college behaving


rationally in doing so?


      There are two versions of RQ1, namely:


      RQ1: To what extent are those who drop out of college being
            F


financially rational in doing so? In other words, to what extent does their


doing so lead to increased earnings?


      And:


      RQ1: To what extent are those who drop out of college being
            E


emotionally rational in doing so? In other words, to what extent does their


doing so lead to increased career-satisfaction?


      In order to answer RQ1, we must first answer some other questions, in


particular:


      RQ2: Who drops out of college? In other words, what characteristics


are dispositive of a person’s dropping out of college? (Is it poverty, mental


illness, physical illness, unstable home life, low IQ, etc.?)


      RQ2 can be answered on the basis of existing statistical data, the


answer being:


      HQ2: The higher a given person’s IQ, the less likely he is to drop out


of college.


      RQ1 is also to be answered on the basis of statistical analysis. The
            Fnull-answer is:


      HQ1: A person’s IQ does not in general have any bearing, positive
            F0


or negative, on whether it is financially for that person to drop out of


college.  


      The expected answer is:


      HQ1: The higher a given person’s IQ, the less financially rational it is
            F


for him to drop out of college.


 


 


      RQ1: is not to be answered on the basis of existing statistical data.
            E


We will attempt to answer it on the basis of survey data. The null answer is:


      HQ1: A given person’s dropping out of college may conduce to
            E


increased career-satisfaction or to decreased career-satisfaction; and whether


it does the one as opposed to the other is completely random and of his


major, his intelligence level, and indeed any other given fact about him.


      The expected answer


      HQ1: Categorizing people by IQ and college degree status generates
            E


the following career-satisfaction hierarchy:


      (i)         Low IQ non-graduates without vocational training


      (ii)   High non-graduates without vocational training      (iii)                       Low IQ graduates without vocational training


      (iv)   High IQ non-graduates without vocational training


      (v)         Low IQ non-graduates with vocational training


      (vi)   High IQ non-graduates with vocational training


      (vii)                       High IQ graduates with vocational training


      (viii)                 High IQ graduates without vocational training


      HQ1 is the ‘expected’ answer in three senses. First, it is consistent
            E


with statements made, but not adequately supported, in credible publications


(Looseley et al., 2019). Second, it is consistent with my personal and


professional experience. Third, it is consistent with small, informal studies


that I have conducted in anticipation of the present study.       Advancing Scientific Knowledge and Significance of the Study


      This study has manifold practical and theoretical significances. First of


all, if the hypotheses stated above are correct, then the enormous resources


that are being spent trying to prevent people from dropping out of college


should instead be spent trying to build alternatives to college (Bok, 2017).


Also, right now, k-12 education is essentially college-prep education


(Harbour, 2015), and the current study is likely to show that this is


misconceived: where many students are concerned, possibly most, the focus


should not be on getting them into college, but on constructing alternatives to


college. Also, as we will see, when low persons in the non-gifted IQ range


have careers that they find fulfilling, those careers are based on vocational


training, not on college degrees, and, what is more, those careers service vital


and otherwise insufficiently serviced economic sectors. Right now, thanks to


the exclusive focus on getting people, regardless of their talents, into and


through college, many people are being steered away from careers that they


would enjoy and be good at and that would benefit society. Governments and


government-related bureaucracies being what they, might cannot necessarily


expect the existing educational establishment to right-size itself, and the


private sector may therefore have to step into this breech.


      This study also has significance of a purely theoretical kind for the


fields of psychology and economics. According to the hypotheses statedabove, entrepreneurs have higher levels of career satisfaction than ‘corporate


wage-slaves’ who earn three times as much, and people who practice traces,


such as plumbing and auto-repair, are happier than probation officers and


administrators who earn twice as much. If correct, this tells us a great deal


about human motivations, and it also tells us that what drives economic


progress is not the desire for money so much as it is the desire for money that


is acquired in a way that is consistent with one’s values and personality


(Pagenelli, 2015).      Rationale for Methodology


              There are three different investigative methodologies:


quantitative, qualitative, and mixed. Quantitative methodologies attempt to


assign numerical values to relevant factors and to investigate relations of


dependence and predictability holding among such values (Hempel, 1965;


Curtis et al., 2016); Salmon, 2017). Suppose for example that violent crime in


Small Town USA has increased 500% over the last decade. A quantitative


analysis of this phenomenon would try to find some numerically determinate


variable (or variable-set) x (e.g. consistently decreasing funding for law-


enforcement) such that changes in x correlated with the rise in crime in Small


Town. Qualitative methods investigate causal relations holding among forces


that either have not yet been quantified or cannot be quantified in any


principled way. A qualitative analysis of the rise in crime in Small Town


might involve case-studies of specific criminals, or interviews with criminals


or victims of crime or law-enforcement personnel, the purpose being to elicit


relevant information (e.g. information about changes in cultural norms). A


mixed methodology is one that involves elements of both qualitative and


quantitative methodologies (Rudestam & Newton, 2015). When applied to


the rise in crime in Small Town, such an approach might involve a


combination of the methods must described.


      There are two components to this project: a purely statisticalcomponent, in which the demographics of dropoutism are investigated, and a


survey-based component, in which the psychology of dropoutism is


investigated. In each case, the methodology used is quantitative. But there are


important differences between the methodologies used, owing to the fact that,


whereas the statistics needed to investigate the financial aspects of


dropoutism already exist, the statistics needed to investigate its consequences


for career-satisfaction do not yet exist, requiring us to generate those statistics


ourselves. Consequently, the methodology used in the one case related only


to the analysis of statistics, whereas the methodology used in the other case


related both the analysis and to the generation of statistics.                    Nature of the Research Design of the Study


      Both parts of the inquiry were quantitative and causal-correlational in


nature. The statistical part correlates dropout rates with IQ and subsequent


earnings; the psychological part correlates earnings with levels of career-


satisfaction. The statistical part involved nothing more than finding


correlations so tight that they were obviously causal and then using


commonsense to infer what the operative causal relations were. For example,


there is an extremely tight connection between low SAT score and high


freshman dropout-likelihood, but it is obvious that a low SAT score is not


itself the cause of someone’s dropping out of college. An inability to do


academic work is the cause, and this inability is manifested both in low SAT


scores and also in poor performance in first-year college classes, the latter


often being the immediate precursor of (voluntary or involuntary) permanent


departure from college (Mabel et al., 2018).


      The psychological part involved administering surveys whose results


could be represented as a single variable. Our objective here is to compare


earnings with levels of career-satisfaction. Earnings are given by a single


figure (e.g. $170,000/year), and we therefore need career-satisfaction to be


represented by a single quantity if we are to correlate it with earnings and,


consequently, if we are to determine how emotionally rational those who


drop out are in doing so, i.e. if we are to determine degrees of dropout-
                                                                                  Erationality (Chen et al., 2016)        Definitions of Terms


      Dropout. In this context, a ‘dropout’ is somebody who drops out of


college and does not return. Somebody who takes a year off is not a dropout.


        Dropoutism. The phenomenon of people dropping out of college.


          Dropout-likelihood. The probability that a given person will drop out


of college.


        Dropout-probability. Synonymous with “dropout-likelihood.”


        Dropout-rationality. The degree to which it is rational for a given


person to drop out of college.


        Dropout-rationality. The degree to which it is economically rational
                E


for a given person to drop out of college.


        Dropout-rationality. The degree to which it is emotionally rational
                F


(i.e. conducive to career-satisfaction) for a given person to drop out of


college.


          Dropout-non-vocational. Somebody who drops out of college and


then receives vocational training


        Dropout-vocational. Somebody who drops out of college and then


receives vocational training.


        Dropoutism. A neologism used to denote the phenomenon of people


dropping out of college.


        Economic Rationality. Ability to make decisions that maximizeearnings. The concept of economic rationality is well defined, given that


earnings can be quantified. Some scholars have attempted to broaden the


concept of economic rationality to include other variables, such as quality of


life, but these extensions of the concept of tend to strip it of operational


significance. Importantly, economic rationality, narrowly construed,


correlates with other quantifiable variables, such as health and longevity,


which in their turn bear on quality of life.


        Graduate. In this context, a ‘graduate’ is someone who graduates from


college.


        Graduation-likelihood: The probability that a given person will


graduate from college.


      IQ. Short of ‘intelligence quotient.’ Existing ways of determining IQ


are deeply flawed, as is evidenced by the quite routine occurrence of people


who apparently do poorly on IQ tests but whose professional


accomplishments unambiguously indicate extremely intelligence. That said,


however unreliable the standard IQ tests may be with respect to geniuses and


other outliers, they have proven reliable and useful and reliable when dealing


with large populations, and IQ scores generated by such tests are therefore


useful in the context of this study.


          Graduation-probability: Synonym of “graduation-likelihood.”


        IQ-comparable (adjective). x and y are IQ-comparable if they are inthe same IQ range.


        IQ-comparables (noun). x and y are IQ-comparables if they are IQ-


comparable.


        Non-dropouts. A neologism used to denote someone who has either


graduated or is currently in college and has not dropped out of college thus


far. 


        Non-attendant. A neologism used to denote someone who simply


doesn’t attend college at all.


        Rationality. Ability to make decisions that maximize one’s welfare.


The concept of rationality simpliciter is of limited utility, owing to the


absence of clear benchmarks, and often gives way to the better-defined


concept of economic rationality.


      RQ. Given a particular IQ, the corresponding RQ is the ratio of


average lifetime earnings of college graduates with that IQ to average


lifetime earnings of non-graduates with that IQ. So RQ corresponding to IQ


103 is the ratio of average lifetime earnings of graduates with an IQ of 103 to


average lifetime earnings of non-graduates with an IQ of 103.


        Test-score. Refers only to SAT and ACT scores. Oftentimes, the terms


“SAT score”, “ACT score” and “SAT/ACT score” will be used; but


whenever “test-score” is used, it is used to refer only to SAT/ACT scores.        Assumptions, Limitations, Delimitations


              It is assumed that the statistical data that we are not ourselves


generating is reliable. This assumption is warranted, given that in each case


that data was collected by a reliable agency, such as the National Center for


Education Statistics. We are also assuming that is administering the survey


that we are using will in fact administer it to populations of the appropriate


types. For example, when we task the survey company with administering


our survey to people who have vocational certifications, we are assuming that


they are in fact doing so. This assumption is warranted given that we are


using a reputable survey-service.


      There is one very serious delimitation, namely that it cannot be ruled


out that survey-results express wishful-thinking and rationalization (Daviaux


et al. 2016). This is inherent in all psychological surveys (Taswell, 2015).


That said, there are three ways in which we are hedging against this


possibility. First, we will always have information about the respondent’s


economic-situation, simply the company that is directly administering the


survey will target people according to their demographics, including their


earnings. Second, each population will be issued multiple different surveys;


and if there is a tendency for a given population to respond disingenuously on


a given survey, its answers on that survey are likely to conflict with its


answers on the other surveys (Cosco et al., 2016). Finally, the surveys beingused are already widely used and their efficacy has been established.        Summary and Organization of the Remainder of the Study


              Chapter 2 will review the existing literature relating to the topic


of this study, along with the relevant statistics. The statistical data is


abundant. The literature, however, tends to be inconsistent with or non-


explanatory of the statistical data. In Chapter 2, we will state the relevant


statistics in detail and provide creditable models of them.  In Chapter 3,


methodology will be discussed. We will identify the underpinnings of the


statistical work done in Chapter 2 and will also explain exactly how we will


be using surveys to elicit information relating to career-satisfaction. In


Chapter 4, we will analyze the survey results, and we will also restate, this


time in more detail, the results of our statistical analysis of dropoutism; and


we will compare those two bodies of data. In Chapter 5, we will identify the


changes in public policy and also in personal conduct that are indicated by


the contents of Chapter 4.


              Chapters 1-3 are already complete. The survey has already been


constructed; the survey-company has verified that it can send the requisite


number of surveys to the relevant populations; and the researcher has already


familiarized himself with the survey software. Chapter 4 should be complete


before October 2019, and Chapter 5 by January 1, 2010.


                               Chapter 2: Literature Review      Introduction to the Chapter


      It is easy to find out how many people don’t graduate from college


(NCES, 2019a). It is also easy, though not quite as easy, to find out how


many people within a given demographic fail to graduate from college


(NCES, 2019b). It is not possible to find information to the effect that a


person's likelihood of dropping out is a function of his having characteristic


X, for some appropriate value of X. Blacks are less likely to graduate from


college than whites (Shapiro et al., 2017), but 43% of blacks have college


degrees and 43% of whites don't (Stout et al., 2018), and being as opposed to


white, or vice versa, therefore cannot be the missing value of X in “X is why


people drop out.” Similarly, males are more likely to drop out than females


(Strumbos et al., 2016); but the differences are marginal, and “being male” is


therefore not the missing value of X. Dropout-rates cannot even be explained


in terms of poor financials. High-performing college students from


impoverished backgrounds are less likely to drop out than poor-performing


students from wealthy backgrounds (Korn et al., 2015; Yeager et al., 2016),


and extremely high performing students from impoverished backgrounds


have only marginally higher rates of dropoutism than comparably performing


students from wealthy backgrounds (Hoxby et al., 2013). So poor financials,


though obviously a contributing factor, are not the or even a principle factor.


Religious people are less likely to graduate than non-religious people(Tentsho et al., 2019); and people who have formally diagnosed as having a


serious mental illness are less likely to graduate than those who have not been


so diagnosed (Naslund et al., 2015). Even if we form the intersection of each


these ‘less-than' groups---even if we consider the class of socioeconomically


disadvantaged, religious, mentally ill, minority males--the resulting group


still has a graduation rate of around 25%, showing that none of the


characteristics is more than marginally responsible for the phenomenon of


dropoutism.


      Given that we don’t know what causes people to drop out, we don’t


know how economically rational it is for people who drop out to do so. We


are given extremely broad statistical claims, e.g. ‘college graduates out-earn

 
non-graduates by $1,000,000’ (Witteveenet al., 2017), that supposedly settle


the issue—but clearly don’t. Does staying in college always conduce to


higher earnings? If not, when does it do so? We do not have answers to these


questions.


      Nor do we have an answer to the question: How emotionally rational


is it for people who drop out of college to do so? In other words, to what


extent does their doing so conduce to their fulfillment or career-satisfaction?


The presumption is that dropouts tend to end up slaving away at menial, low-


paying jobs, whereas graduates tend to end up having intellectual demanding,


high-paying careers. But this presumption is indeed just that.  In this chapter,we will review the literature, along with the statistics, bearing on these


matters. The literature is of little use, we will find, but the statistical data is of


use, if properly interpreted.                     Identification of the Gap


      Who drops out of college and why, and what are they gaining and


foregoing by doing so? These questions have not been answered. There is an


abundance of literature concerning the demographics of dropoutism, but the


claims therein made, even if correct, have little or no explanatory force.


      Within the last five years, it has been alleged, by scholars publishing


in reputable journals, that dropoutism is ‘linked’ to:


        *Ethnicity (Boyraz, 2016)


        *Drug/alcohol abuse (Ho, 2016)


      *Mental illness (Mitchell, 2016)


        *Religious belief (Li, 2017)


      *Video game usage (Cochran, 2018)


      *Absence of easily accessed academic advisers and psychotherapists


(Lovelace, 2017)


      *Poor dormitory and living conditions (Li, 2019)


      *Level of parents’ education (Stewart, 2015)


        *Parents’ combined income (Stewart, 2015), and


        *Relationship status (DeLuca, 2016).


      Only 30% of African Americans graduate from college. Therefore,


there is a ‘link’ between race and dropout-likelihood (Tate, 2017).


      Dropouts are more likely than non-dropouts to play video-games.Therefore, there is a ‘link’ between video-game usage and dropout-likelihood


(Dunckley, 2016).


      Dropouts are more likely than non-dropouts to have experienced


serious childhood trauma. Therefore, there is a ‘link’ between childhood-


trauma and dropout-likelihood (Dube, 2018).


      Dropouts are more likely to be religious than non-dropouts. Therefore,


there is a ‘link’ between religious belief and dropout-likelihood.


      Dropouts often cite relationship issues when explaining why they


dropped out. Therefore, there is a ‘link’ between relationship-status and


dropout-likelihood (Legg, 2017).


      Dropouts more likely than non-dropouts to self-describe or be


formally described as depressed or otherwise mentally ill. Therefore, there is


a ‘link’ between depression/mental illness and dropout-likelihood (Marsh,


2017).


      People from low-income homes are more likely than those from high-


income homes to drop out. Therefore, there is a ‘link' between parents'


income and dropout-likelihood (Jaschik, 2015).


      People whose parents did not complete college are more likely to drop


out than those whose parents did complete college. Therefore, there is a ‘link’


between parents’ education-level and dropout-likelihood (Casey, 2018).


      Dropouts are (in 2019) more likely than to be male than female.Therefore, there is a ‘link’ between gender and dropout-likelihood (Samuels,


2017).


      Let us scrutinize these claims. 30% of African Americans do graduate


from college. So the ‘link’ between ethnicity is at best weak (Paul, 2018).


        Non-dropouts are as likely as dropouts to claim to be suffering from


‘serious relationship issues.’ (Greenburg, 2011).


        Although may cases of dropping do appear to be precipitated by


mental illness, depression and suicidal ideation are in fact markedly more


common among non-dropouts, being particularly high in those who enroll in


doctoral programs (Wong, 2018).


        Students from “low-income” homes are indeed 600% more likely high


income students to drop out, if ‘low income’ and ‘high income’ are taken to


mean, respectively, “annual income of less than $30,000” and “annual


income of more than $250,000”—but only because the graduation rate in the


second group is less than 3%. Therefore, the ‘low parental income’ theory at


most describes an ancillary factor.


      Religious students are only around 10% more likely than non-religious


students to drop out. Also, this figure varies enormously depending on the


religious denomination. Mormons have an exceedingly low drop-out rate, as


do Orthodox Jews (Saxe et al. 2013).


        Non-dropouts are as likely as dropouts to be dissatisfied withdormitory-conditions, with their social lives, and with the degree of access to


student-advisers and psychotherapists (Beiter et al. 2015).


      Dropouts are at most only marginally more likely than non-dropouts to


play video-games excessively or to abuse drugs/alcohol, and there is some


indication that video-game usage helps prevent those with severe depression


from dropping out of college (Parker, 2019).


      There are deeper problems with these studies. Maybe people who drop


out drink/do drugs/play video games because they don’t want to be in


college. In other words, maybe their desire to drop out is the cause, and their


engaging in these maladaptive behaviors is the effect. This is not a mere


theoretical possibility, as we are about to say.


      Also, maybe soon-to-be dropouts are right not to want to be in college.


Maybe they are depressed about being in college because they suspect that it


is a waste of their time and money. Indeed, this is likely the case, we will


find.


      African Americans with test-scores (SAT/ACT scores) in 90th


percentile and above are minimally likely to drop out and are less likely to do

                                                            th
so than their white counterparts.  Students in the 95 percentile above have


less than a one percent change of dropping out, regardless of gender,


ethnicity, religious denomination, drug/alcohol use, mental


illness/depression, relationship-status, and indeed any other given variable.             


      A related fact is that students who drop out are overwhelmingly likely


to be struggling academically, which is consistent with what we have said


about IQ vis-à-vis dropout-likelihood and also with the fact, noted by Allen et


al. (2017), that ACT-scores are predictive of graduation-likelihood.


  


      Figure 1 ACT vis-à-vis Likelihood of Having a 4.0 Average Freshman


Year      Adapted from: Jeff Allen and Justin Radunzel, “Relating ACT


Composite Score to Different Levels of First Year College GPA.” ACT Table


4, May 2017.


 

                                                                          th
        Approximately 80% of students with test scores in the 40 percentile


or below drop out of college (Rothwell, 2017); and this figure is almost


invariant with respect to gender, ethnicity, religious denomination,


drug/alcohol use, mental illness/depression, relationship-status, and indeed


any other given variable (Cooper, 2014). The totality of this data suggests


that ethnicity, relationship status, etc. contribute to dropoutism only in those


in the middle-range, suggesting that they function only as contributory


causes.


      Also, there is a complete absence of data concerning the immediate


aftermath of a person’s dropping out. It may be that their rates of depression,


drug-use, etc. decrease. This is an open empirical question. If the answer is


‘yes’, then college was, to so speak, the disease, and dropping out the cure.


      More importantly, what are the economic prospects of those who drop


out? Do they lose opportunities or gain them? We can’t answer that until we


can identify some variable that correlates tightly with high dropout rates and


then correlate that same variable with economic prospects. The literature has


not identified this X-factor.      Another deeply striking fact about the scholarly literature is that it


always takes it as a given that dropping out is failure. It is not asked why


students drop out. Nor is it asked what they gain by doing so. Sometimes it is


asked what they would have lost by not dropping out; but the answers


subsequently given are strictly financial in nature and, more importantly,


don’t involve consideration of important sub-divisions within the class of


non-graduates, in particular, the distinction between those who receive


vocational training and those who do not.        Identification of the Gap (Continued): The Statistical Data


      The academic literature is disappointing. The statistics are more


illuminating. There are two statistics that are especially important: those


relating IQ to test-scores (SAT/ACTS scores) to graduation rates, and those


relating test-scores to IQ. The higher the test-score, the higher the likelihood


of graduation (See Figures 1-9); and the higher the IQ, the higher, the test-


score (See Figures 10-11). In each case, we are dealing with strictly


monotonic correlations; and these nearly monotonic correlations explain


many of the weak correlations earlier discussed.


 























      Figure 2 Graduation Rate by SAT Score Nation-wide        Retrieved from: http://blog.numbersbox.com/2015/05/pell-grants-test-


scores-and-graduation.html and http://www.hamiltonproject.org


 


































 Figure 3 Colleges by Graduation Rates and Average SAT Scores


      Adapted from: http://blog.numbersbox.com/2015/05/pell-grants-test-


scores-and-graduation.html and https://oedb.org/rankings/graduation-rate/#table-rankings and https://www.cbsnews.com/news/25-universities-


  with-the-worst-graduation-rates/ and http://www.hamiltonproject.org


 
































      Figure 4 Colleges at the Extremes Ranked by SAT Score Percentile


and Graduation Rate


        (Descending) Adapted from: https://www.collegeraptor.com/college-


  rankings/details/MedianSAT and https://oedb.org/rankings/graduation-rate/and https://blog.prepscholar.com/sat-percentiles-high-precision-2016


 































 


 Figure 5 IQ by SAT


      Adapted from:


      http://theunsilencedscience.blogspot.com/2012/04/racial-amplitudes-of-


scholastic.html


      The statistical data relating to ACT/SAT scores is independentlycorroborated by the fact that the graduation rate of a given college is a


function of the average SAT scores of its students: the higher the average


SAT score, the higher the graduation rate. To be sure, we are not dealing with


strictly monotonic correlations. First of all, schools falling into special


categories, e.g. theological seminaries, may have different graduation-rates


from test-score-comparable liberal arts colleges. Also, there are cases average


test-scores at colleges differ marginally (i.e. by less than 15 percentiles) but


where the one has a higher graduation-rate than the other. But within these


limits, average SAT/ACT-score correlates strictly monotonically with higher


graduation-rates. See Figure 9.


      Once it becomes clear who drops out and why, it becomes possible to


answer important questions that have not yet been systematically


investigated, let alone answered, namely: What are the prospects for


dropouts? What do they stand to gain by dropping out and what do they stand


to lose? What kinds of careers do they subsequently have? Are they satisfied


with those careers? How do their levels of career-satisfaction compare with


those of non-dropouts? Answering these questions involves dealing with


important theoretical issues, which we will now discuss.         Theoretical Foundations and/or Conceptual Framework


              The phenomenon of dropoutism has thus far been studied from


cultural, political, and emotional perspectives. It has been taken for granted


that high dropout rates are a ‘tragedy’, and scholarship has consisted, with


few or no exceptions, to find someone or something to blame. In some cases,


the blame is placed on psychopathology: dropouts are alleged to be drug


addicts, alcoholics, victims of childhood trauma, or simply mentally ill. In


other cases, the blame is placed on classism or racism: dropouts do not have


the right skin color or do not come from the right background. In other cases,


blame is placed on inhospitable university environments: there are not


enough student counselors or dormitories are too crowded. 


        Universities have vigorously implemented policies based on these


analyses. They have built new and better recreational facilities and


dormitories (Taylor, C. G., 2017); they have hired additional academic


advisers and, in many cases, have made round-the-clock tutoring services


available to students (Han et al., 2018); and they have hired extra


psychologists and substance-abuse specialists (Uddin et al., 2019).


Meanwhile, dropout rates are not only climbing but accelerating (Facchini et


al., 2019).


              The reason is that dropoutism is not a political or psychological


or cultural issue; it is an economic issue.  The less a person stands to benefitfrom a college degree, the more likely he is to drop out. The dropout rate for

                                  th
those with SAT’s above the 85 percentile is less than 25%, and the


economic and professional benefits to such a person of a college degree are

                                                                                        th
extremely high. The dropout rate for someone with the SAT’s below the 40


percentile is almost 75%, and the benefits of a degree to such a person are


minimal. See Figures 12-15.


              Strikingly, philosophy majors are the only humanities majors


whose earnings are comparable to those of upper end STEM-majors, and


economics majors are the only social science majors to have such earnings.


This is consistent with the high IQ of those with degrees in these disciplines.


See Figures 15-20.


 








      Figure 6 Income by SAT


 


      Adapted from: https://pumpkinperson.com/2016/02/11/the-incredible-


correlation-between-iq-income/


  


      High IQ students who graduate are overwhelmingly likely to befinancially successful and to have rewarding careers. The outcomes for low


IQ graduates are very different. If they do not get vocational training, they


end up unemployed, intermittently employed at menial jobs, or continuously


employed in low-level administrative positions. The less someone stands to


gain by staying in college, the more likely he is to drop out. If they do get


vocational training and have careers based thereupon, they have moderately


high incomes and rewarding careers, but are worse off than IQ-comparable


people who skipped college altogether and started their vocational careers


earlier.


        Outcomes for low IQ non-graduates are highly polarized. Those who


do not get vocational training are much more likely than IQ-comparable


graduates without vocational training to be unemployed or turn to crime.


Those who do get vocational training are far less likely than IQ-comparable


graduates without vocational training to be unemployed and under-employed,


and they out-earn such graduates by a wide margin. Job-satisfaction for low-


IQ graduates without vocational training is extremely low, and it is extremely


high for vocationally trained low IQ graduates and non-graduates. Low IQ


graduates vocationally trained graduates earn less than low-IQ vocationally


trained non-attendants. Low IQ vocationally trained non-attendants are more


likely than IQ-comparable vocationally trained dropouts to earn more


$100,000+ annually, and the latter are more likely than IQ-comparable non-vocationally trained graduates to do so.


      In order to understand these results, we must know what low IQ


graduates are likely to major in, since this affects how they are likely to be


employed. Let us now turn to this matter and to the corresponding body of


literature.      Review of the Literature


      In order to understand the economic prospects of dropouts, we must


know what people of a given intelligence-level are likely to major.


Fortunately, this information is readily available and does not have to be


inferred.

























      Figure 7 IQ by Major (Bar Graph)


      Adapted from http://www.randalolson.com/2014/06/25/average-iq-of-


    students-by-college-major-and-gender-ratio/   and


http://www.hamiltonproject.org


  


 


 






































       Figure 8 Unadjusted Income by College Major


      Adapted from http://www.hamiltonproject.org


  Figure 9 Income by College Major Adjusted for Debt


      Adapted from http://www.hamiltonproject.org 






































 Figure 10 Income by College Major Adjusted for Debt and Taxation


      Adapted from http://www.hamiltonproject.org


       This information makes it possible to identify where low IQ college


graduates are likely to be employed. Low IQ graduates are obviously likely to


have had low IQ majors, these being Criminal Justice up to Psychology


(inclusive). Choosing psychology as the cut-off was not arbitrary, since it is


much more internally IQ-differentiated than psychology and since the career-


outcomes of business-majors are correspondingly more diverse, economically


and otherwise.


        Non-vocationally trained graduates with degrees in low IQ majors


who find stable employment are overwhelmingly likely to end up in the


following professional areas (Abel et al., 2014 and Nunley et al., 2016):


      *Probation and parole services


        *Corrections and prison administration


      *Social work


        *Elementary school teaching and administration


        *Flight-attendant and airport ground-attendant


      *Secretarial


        *Human resources


        *Drug-counseling


        *Convenience store management


        *Intake-coordination


      *Customer service      *Sales and telemarketing


        *Military and Coast Guard


          *Restaurant-management



































 Figure 11 Unadjusted Average Pay for jobs/careers for Low IQ


Graduates without Vocational Training      Adapted from: www.glassdoor.com









































  Figure 12 Average Pay for jobs/careers for Low IQ Graduates


without Vocational Training Adjusted for Debt      Adapted from: www.glassdoor.com


 



























      Figure 13 Average Pay for jobs/careers for Low IQ Graduates without


Vocational Training Adjusted for Debt and Taxes


      Adapted from: www.glassdoor.com


        Averages annual salaries in these professions are approximately


$38,000; adjusted for debt, $32,000; adjusted for debt and taxation $19,000.


      Most people with degrees in low IQ majors who do not have jobs


falling into one of these categories do not have stable employment.       Many of the just-mentioned career-paths require credentialing, in


some cases a master’s degree, additional to the bachelor’s degree.


      The presence of people from high IQ majors (religious studies and


above) in these professions is less than 1%.


        Non-vocationally trained recipients of low-IQ degrees make up less


than 1% of all successful (earning at least $20,000/annually) entrepreneurs.      Literature Review: Vocational Careers


        IQ-comparable people with vocational training, be they graduates or


non-graduates, tend to work in the following areas (Bureau of Labor


Statistics, 2019): 


        *General automotive


        *Carpentry


      *Plumbing


      *Nursing


        *Respiratory therapist


        *Electrician


      *Civil Engineering Tech


        *Pharmacy Assistant


        *Dental Assistant


        *Machining


        *Pipe-fitting


        *Phlebotomy.


      *Welding


      *Network administration


      27% of successful entrepreneurs worked in these areas and then


became entrepreneurs by becoming self-employed in those same areas


(Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019).      Average annual salaries in these areas, not adjusted for debt, are


approximately $48,870.
































 Figure 14 Non-debt-adjusted average pay for Vocationals


      Adapted from: www.glassdoor.com Figure 15 Debt-adjusted average pay for Vocationals


      Adapted from: www.glassdoor.com


  


 Figure 16 Debt- and tax-adjusted average pay for Vocationals


      Adapted from: www.glassdoor.com      Figure 17 Comparison of Average Earnings, adjusted for debt and


taxation, for vocationals, low IQ graduates, and low IQ non-graduates.


      Adapted from: www.glassdoor.com Figure 18 Comparison between average pay for vocationals and low


IQ Graduates Adjusted for Debt and Taxation


      Adapted from: www.glassdoor.com      Literature Review: Earnings on the Part of Non-vocationally


trained Non-graduates


      The presumption is that those with neither college degrees nor


vocational training are in the worst economic position possible. This statistic


provide little support for this position. First of all, the probable careers of low


IQ graduates overlap to a high degree with those of low IQ non-vocationally


trained non-graduates. 70% of employed non-graduates with no vocational


certifications, as well as 40% of low IQ graduates, have jobs falling into one


of the following categories (Kroeger et al., 2016):


      *Server


        *Cashier


        *Warehouse/factory worker  


        *Insurance-sales


        *Custodial


        *Agricultural worker


      *Police Officer/Sheriff’s deputy


        *Military (infantry/non-commissioned officer)


      *Security guard


      *Hotel desk-worker/bellhop


      The average for these positions is $40,877.


        Approximately 15% of low IQ graduates go into education and socialworkers, and 15% go into various other professions (e.g. lab technician) that


either formally or informally require college degrees (Howell et al., 2015).


        SAT/ACT-scores in these professions are on average slightly lower


than those in low IQ majors (Hutchinson).




















 Figure 19 Unadjusted Salaries for Low IQ Non-graduate Non-


vocationals


      Adapted from: https://www.glassdoor.com


  Figure 20 Debt-adjusted Salaries for Low IQ Non-graduate Non-


vocationals


      Adapted from: https://www.glassdoor.com 


 Figure 21 Debt- and Tax-adjusted Salaries for Low IQ Non-graduate


Non-vocationals


      Adapted from: https://www.glassdoor.com Figure 22 Debt- and Tax-adjusted Salaries for Non-graduate Non-


vocationals, Low IQ Graduates, and Vocationals


      Adapted from: https://www.glassdoor.com      Literature Review: Financial Costs and Benefits of Low IQ Degree


      The lowest IQ majors are social work, education, psychology, criminal


justice, and variants thereof. People graduating with degrees in these fields on

 
average have around $25,000 in student-loan debt (Schmeiseret al., 2016).


Since work in the corresponding fields often involves getting a master's


degree or some other advanced degree, they usually have to take on more


debt before they can be employed in those fields (Webber et al., 2017).


Consequently, the average amount of student loan debt for licensed social


workers is approximately $60,000; for licensed psychologists, $65,000; for


schoolteachers, $45,000; probation and parole officers, $32,000 (Bowen,


2018).


      The median monthly amount of payments on student loan debts in


these fields are $600, and it takes people employed in these fields an average


of 25 years to pay off their student loan debts. This makes sense when it is


taken into account that these are interesting bearing loans and also that


median annual salaries in these fields just slightly $20,000 (Popescu, 2018).


      Student loan debt for non-attendants with vocational training is


$8,000; for dropouts with vocational training, $13,450; and for graduates


with vocational training, $31,000. The average amount of time needed to


repay student loans for non-attendants with vocational training is two years;


for vocationally trained dropouts, four years; and for vocationally trainedgraduates, 11 years (Odinet, 2019).


      Literature Review: Career Satisfaction


      How fulfilling are careers based on low IQ majors in comparison with


careers based on vocational training? There is very little literature, and very


few statistics, bearing directly on this question. There is considerable


literature and statistical data indirectly bearing on it.


      First of all, there is literature, as well as statistical data, concerning


levels of career satisfaction among probation and parole officers, social


workers, and the other careers that graduates with low IQ majors tend to end


up with.


      This body of literature is sparse and internally contradictory, with


some authors saying that career-satisfaction is very low and others saying that


it is moderately high, with each school of thought having its own statistics.


No definitive conclusions can be drawn from it.


      The higher the average SAT scores at a given college, the lower its


dropout rate and the higher the earnings of its graduates. Harvard’s average


board scores are in the top 1%; its dropout rate is less than 1%; and annual


graduate earnings are in the top 1%. The average SAT scores at Fort Valley

                        th
State are below the 45 percentile for the nation; the dropout rate is over

                                                            th
70%; and annual graduate earnings are below the 45 percentile. Within these


two extremes, dropout rates and graduate-earnings are strictly orderedaccording to average student test-score.


      Also, the higher the average test-scores at a given college, the smaller


the percentage of students who earn degrees in low IQ majors. In fact, some


high IQ majors, notably philosophy, are not even offered at the lower-end


schools; and many low IQ majors are not offered at higher-end schools.


              When surveyed, dropouts seldom cite difficulty with coursework


as their reason for dropping out. They are more likely to cite financial


difficulties, trouble balancing schoolwork with family and personal


relationships, homesickness, and inability to focus (Daley, 2010; McDermott


et al., 2019). 


      The statistics tell a different story. Less than one percent of students

                            th
with test scores in the 85 percentile and above drop out; more than 95

                                                  th
percent of students with test scores in the 40 percentile and below drop out.


Students in the first category take on 250% debt for every year spent in


college than do students in the second category, but 80% of students in the


first category pay back their student loans within 10 years, whereas only 20%


of students in the second category do so (Webber, 2016).  A student’s


dropout-likelihood is therefore a function not of the size of his financial


obligations but of his eventual ability to meet those obligations, and it is


therefore a function of the financial benefit to him of a college degree. The


greater than benefit, the lower the dropout-likelihood.          Summary


      The people who stand to lose money by dropping out almost never do,

                                                                                  th
the dropout rate being next to zero for those with test-scores above 85


percentile, these being the people who benefit the most from a college degree.


For people in this category, the financial benefits of a college degree are


unambiguous.


      For those who do drop out, those benefits are ambiguous. The lower a


person’s IQ, the more likely he is to drop out of college, and the greater are


the financial benefits to him of vocational work.


      This is not to say that those who drop out are always making the right


choice. In many cases, they are not. Although unemployment among


vocationally trained non-graduates is lower than that of college graduates,


unemployment among non-graduates, on the whole, is more than twice as


high. For those in the middle of the bell curve, the situation is objectively


ambiguous: they stand to gain as much by staying in college as they do by


opting for a vocational career. That said, the more economically rational it is


for a given person to drop out, the more likely he is to do so. Dropout-


likelihood tracks dropout-rationality. 
                            F


      What is not clear is whether dropout-likelihood tracks dropout-
                                                                                E


rationality. This is not easily deduced from information about the financial


implications of dropping out. It is in principle deducible from other objectivedata, such as suicide rates, rates of drug abuse, and the like. But, firstly,


supposing that low-IQ college graduates had the same rates of suicide, drug


use, etc. as vocationally trained IQ-comparables, it wouldn't necessarily


follow that they were equally satisfied with their careers. Second, the relevant


data simply isn't available. For these reasons, we will ascertain relative


degrees of career satisfaction through the use of surveys.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


                                   Chapter 3 Methodology


      Introduction


      The purpose of this quantitative-correlational study was to determine


the causes of dropoutism. This involved finding a principled way of


determining the financial and emotional prospects for those dropping out, the


reason being people considering dropping out likely make their decision on


the basis of at least some kind of awareness of the advantages and


disadvantages of doing so. When scrutinized, the statistical data clearly


indicates that dropout-likelihood is a direct function of dropout-rationality.
                                                                          F


      This finding is at odds with the vast majority of scholarly and non-


scholarly literature on the matter, the premise of which is that dropping out is


a form of failure is therefore a consequence of intellectual, emotional, or


financial deficits of some kind (Xiao et al., 2017; Welton et al., 2015;


Vasquez et al., 2015; Lavine et al., 1029; Swidey, 2016; Rivera-McCutchen,


2016). A strikingly high percentage of scholarly articles on this matter


attribute dropoutism to mental illness (Bishop, 2016), even though the actual


data is totally inconsistent with this (Kosyluk et al., 2016). In fact, those who


are behaving the most rationally are those who are either maximally likely to


drop out or maximally likely not to do so, since in those cases the financial


consequences of dropping out are unambiguous; and people at those extremes


categorically make the rational decision. The more remote a given student isfrom those extremes, the less the consequences of dropping out differ from


those of not doing so and, consequently, the less obviously rational that


person’s decision must necessarily be.


        Researchers and journalists tend to focus on the middle-of-the-road


cases and are quick to pounce on even the feeblest indication of pathology on


the student’s part. They blame it on depression (Ho et al., 2016), alcoholism


(Kiciman et al., 2018), general lack of self-restraint (Nevarez, 2017), and the

 
like, even though there is literally no indication that these mid-range


dropouts are more depressed or debauched than those who don’t drop out.


        Researchers and journalists are quick to seize upon ‘findings’ on the


part of university psychologist to the effect that 40% of college students are


“binge drinkers” and that upwards of a third of college students are “seriously


depressed” (Sharma et al., 2018). What isn’t reported is that if these figures


were correct, then universities would have rates of depression comparable to


those of most Federal prisons and alcoholism rates higher than among those


who end up there (Holliday et al., 2016).  Most importantly, if such a higher


percentage of students are mentally ill drug addicts, the first question to ask


is whether universities are the right place for them. Finally, we have found


that college students are strikingly sane, at least when it comes to deciding


whether or not to drop out. Also striking is that those at the lower end of the


IQ spectrum are quite as rational in this regard as those at the upper end.      Prior research has not correctly explained why students drop out or


whether they are behaving in a financially rational manner in doing so. Nor,


therefore, has it been explained whether they are behaving in an emotionally


rational manner. In the pages to come, we will address this issue.        Statement of the Problem


      Prior to this study, it was not known to what extent people who drop


out of college are in doing so behaving in either a financially or emotionally


rational manner. We have found that they are behaving in a financially


rational manner. This suggests that they are also behaving in an emotionally


rational manner. In the pages to come, we will determine whether or not this


is in fact the case.


      Enormous resources are expended trying to prevent people from


dropping out of college. Given that students tend to be serving their own


financial interests by dropping out, those resources should be invested in


college-alternative educational and professional tracks, so as to maximize the


pay-off for them of leaving college, instead of being used, as they are now, to


delegitimate their doing so. Should it turn out that students who choose


vocational training over college higher degrees of career satisfaction than IQ-


comparable college graduates, then there is that much more reason to


reallocate resources in this way.      Research Questions and Hypotheses


      Our objective in this study is to answer the following question:


      RQ1: To what extent are those who drop out of college behaving


rationally in doing so?


      There are two versions of RQ1, namely:


      RQ1: To what extent are those who drop out of college being
            F


financially rational in doing so? In other words, to what extent does their


doing so lead to increased earnings?


      And:


      RQ1: To what extent are those who drop out of college being
            E


emotionally rational in doing so? In other words, to what extent does their


doing so lead to increased career-satisfaction?


      We have already answered RQ1. the answer being:
                                            F


      HQ1: On balance, those who drop out of college are to a statistically
            F


significant degree improving their levels of career satisfaction.


      Now must now answer RQ1. There are three answers to this question:
                                        E


      HQ1: Those who drop out of college are thereby doing more to
            ER


increase their level of career-satisfaction than to diminish it.


      HQ1: On balance, those who drop out of college are not thereby
            EN


appreciably increasing or diminishing their levels of career-satisfaction.      HQ1:  Those who drop out of college are thereby doing more to
            EI


diminish their level of career-satisfaction than to increase it.


      For reasons already discussed, we will answer this question on the


basis of data generated by surveys that we administer. Whenever we


administer a survey to a given group, we must also administer it to the


appropriate complement-group. For example, if we were interested in levels


of emotional satisfaction among people who drink tomato juice, we would


want to survey consumers of tomato-juice as well as non-consumers. In the


context of this study, there are several pairs of complement-groups.


      Given that we are comparing dropouts to graduates, we must


administer surveys to members of both groups and compare the results.


      Given that a person’s dropout-likelihood is inversely proportional his


IQ, the most important comparison to make is between low IQ dropouts and


low IQ graduates, and we must administer surveys to both populations and


compare the results.


      Given that dropouts with vocational training considerably out-earn


dropouts without vocational training, and also out-earn IQ-comparable


graduates without vocational training, we must administer surveys to


dropout-vocationals and dropout-non-vocationals and compare the results.


      Given that low IQ graduates often receive vocational training and then


have careers based on that training, we must administer surveys to membersof that group and compare the results with those from surveys administered


to low IQ non-graduate vocationals.


      The groups just mentioned are those on whose members a college


degree confers relatively little benefit. In order to understand the results of


the just-mentioned surveys, we must also administer surveys to high IQ


college graduate and then compare the results with those of the above-


mentioned surveys. We will also want to administer surveys to high IQ non-


graduates. The results will directly help us understand how people with high


IQ’s benefit from college, and it may shed indirect light on the benefits, or


lack thereof, to other populations.


      The relevant independent variables are therefore (i) IQ, (ii) graduate or


non-graduation, and (iii) vocationally trained or not.  The independent


variable in this case is degree of career-satisfaction.


      The researcher had no choice but to construct his own questionnaire,


owing to the fact that no existing questionnaire sufficed for the purposes of


this investigation. There exist many time-tested questionnaires that measure


satisfaction with one's job, i.e. with one’s current position. But one’s level of


satisfaction with one’s career is often very different from one’s level of


satisfaction with one’s career. (A given physician can love being a physician


but hate his current position.) Nor were any of the many existing life-


satisfaction questionnaires usable, since career-satisfaction and life-satisfaction, though linked, are distinct. (A given person can have love his


career but have relationship or family-difficulties that leave him unfulfilled.)


There exist many questionnaires relating to satisfaction with certain specific


career-paths, but these were obviously too narrow for our purposes. Further,


it was necessary that our questionnaire not assume that the respondent


actually had a career, given that many of the respondents were likely to be


unemployed, intermittently employed, or menially employed. So even if there


did exist reputable career-satisfaction questionnaires, we might not have been


able to use them. Finally, we needed a questionnaire that could be used


effectively with each of the following populations:


      * Low IQ non-graduates without vocational training,


      * Low IQ non-graduates with vocational training


      * Low IQ graduates without vocational training


      * Low IQ graduates with vocational training,


      * High IQ non-graduates without vocational training


      * High IQ non-graduates with vocational training


      * High IQ graduates without vocational training


      *High IQ graduates with vocational training


      This fact imposed significant constraints on the structure of the


questionnaire to be used. It had to be intelligible to people who varied widely


in education-level, intelligence, and profession. It also had to elicit relativelyspecific information without leading the respondents towards a given answer.


No existing questionnaire of the appropriate kind satisfied these constraints,


leaving it to the researcher to construct one.


      A professional service was used to administer the survey to people


according to custom variables, College Degree Status, Vocational Training


Status, SAT/ACT-score, and college-major. Therefore, respondents did not


have to answer questions relating to their test-scores or college majors and


only had to answer questions relating to career-satisfaction. All questions


were required.


      The possible to answers to each question were:


        1=Strongly Disagree


        2=Disagree


      3=Slightly Disagree


        4=Neither Agree Nor Disagree


      5=Slightly Agree


      6=Agree


        7=Strongly Agree


      The answers generated seven-point Likert-scale representing career-


satisfaction.


      The minimum sample size was 115 for each of the eight populations


surveyed, with a total of 920.      Figure 23 G*Power Calculations


      For the purposes of our G*Power calculations, we operated on the


assumption that we were generating a parametric two-tailed Pearson’s


correlation. Technically, this is not the case. The variables in our case are,


respectively, (a) membership in one of the eight populations in question and(b) survey-score. Neither of those variables is continuous, the reason being


that, as is the case with any survey-generated correlation, (DiNunno, 2011)


both of the variables range over finite sets of integers. That said, this


inaccuracy is innocuous when computing sample sizes for surveys, provided


that, for computational purposes, the correlation in question is treated as two-


tailed Pearson correlation (Nardi, 2019).


      Surveys will be professionally administered online.The survey-service


estimated the completion rate to be 76%. Consequently, surveys have to be


sent to at least 151 people/target-population, making for a total of 1,208


surveys to be sent, with approximately 850 of them likely to be completed.      Research Methodology


              The methodology used in this study is quantitative. When


determining the economic rationality of dropoutism, we used a relatively


strictly statistical method. We found a numerical variable, namely SAT/ACT


score, this being a proxy for IQ, that statistically correlated to an extremely


high degree (ρ<.02) with graduation-probability. We then looked at future


earnings of both graduates and dropouts. We then correlated IQ with the


financial costs and benefits of a college degree. Benefits vary directly with


IQ, we found, and costs vary indirectly, and they cancel each other out in the


middle range of the IQ spectrum. 


              When determining the emotional rationality of dropoutism, our


methodology was also quantitative. Having correlated dropout-probability


with dropout-rationality, it remained only to see whether dropout-rationality
              FF


correlated with dropout-rationality. Given that dropout-rationality is
                          EF


expressed as a dollar amount and therefore as a single number, it is necessary


that dropout-rationality also be expressed by a single number if it is to be
            E


compared with dropout-rationality. Prior to this study, dropout-rationality
                          FE


had never even been ascertained, let alone expressed as a single figure, and


we ourselves had to figure out (i) how to assign dropout-rationality quotients
                                                                E


to people and (ii) whose dropout-rationality was what.
                                    E              This was readily done. First of all, dropping out is emotionally


rational to the extent that doing so makes one more fulfilled than similar


people who graduated. Given that the benefits of a college degree reliably


correlate with IQ and IQ alone, two people are to be regarded as ‘similar’ just


in case they are IQ-comparable. Therefore, for people of a given intelligence


level, dropout-rationality is hewed to, and may therefore be identified with,
              E


the extent to which they are more fulfilled than IQ-comparable graduates.


      Having thus operationally defined ‘dropout-rationality’, we must find


a way to correlate degrees of career-satisfaction with graduation-status. Given


the veritable absence of career-satisfaction surveys, apart from ones that were


extremely demographic-specific, we have no choice but to construct a survey


of our own, which we will administer, using a professional survey service, to


randomly chosen samples of each of the eight populations in question.


(SAT/ACT-scores served as proxies for IQ.) The results are expected to


enable us to rank the following the groups by average level of wellness and


consequently to rank groups (1), (2), (5) and (6) according to dropout-
                                                                                E


rationality.


      (i)         Low IQ non-graduates without vocational training


      (ii)   High non-graduates without vocational training


      (iii)                       Low IQ graduates without vocational training


      (iv)   High IQ non-graduates without vocational training      (v)         Low IQ non-graduates with vocational training


      (vi)   High IQ non-graduates with vocational training


      (vii)                       High IQ graduates with vocational training


      (viii)                 High IQ graduates without vocational training      Research Design


      The methodology used in this phase of the study is both correlational


and non-experimental. The study is correlational because we were


investigating the dependence of one set of variables (personal and financial


fulfillment) on another. An experimental approach is neither possible (given


that the variables, e.g. IQ and educational status, were ones that we could not


alter) nor necessary (given how many people there are who differ in the


relevant respects but are otherwise comparable).


      Eight different groups will be surveyed, and respondents therefore


must be pre-screened for test-scores (this being the best available proxy for


IQ), college degree, and vocational training. Since IQ, college degree, and


vocational training are the independent variables in this study, they must be


screened for. Apart from those variables, sampling must be random, so that


results are in no way predetermined by selection-bias.


      The minimum sample size for each of the seven groups was 115. Since


eight groups were surveyed, the total number surveyed (meaning that they


complete a survey) will be 920. Given the predicted response-rate of 76, the


number of people to whom surveys will have to be given is 1,208.


      The objective of the surveys is to rank populations in terms of career-


satisfaction, where the populations are defined by (i) their average IQ’s, (ii)


their either having or not having college degrees and (ii) their either being ornot being vocationally trained. Our concern is not ‘absolute’ but rather


relative levels of career of satisfaction. Should it turn out that low IQ


graduates without vocational training have moderate degrees of career-


satisfaction, that would not be as meaningful as it would be should it turn out


out that low IQ dropouts with vocational training have high levels of career


satisfaction. 


      Since the survey uses a seven-point Likert scale, survey results for


individuals will  expressed in a single number. Results for populations will be


averaged, and these averages will be used to generate rankings among the


populations surveyed.        Population and Sample Selection


      There are eight targeted populations:


      (1) Low IQ non-graduates without vocational training,


      (2) Low IQ non-graduates with vocational training


      (3) Low IQ graduates without vocational training


      (4) Low IQ graduates with vocational training,


      (5) High IQ non-graduates without vocational training


      (6) High IQ non-graduates with vocational training


      (7) High IQ graduates without vocational training


      (8) High IQ graduates with vocational training


      Within the United States, each of these populations is in the millions.


The general statistical rule of thumb is that given a population of over


1,000,000, if n% group of 115 randomly chosen members of that population


has a given characteristics, then n±5% of the population have that


characteristics (Nardi, 2018). For example, given population of 1,000,000, if


115 members of that population are randomly chosen and 75 (65%) of them


like chocolate ice-cream, then 65±10% of the original population like


chocolate ice-cream. In other words, between 60% and 70% of the original


population like chocolate ice-cream.


      But these points only hold when the information that is sought about


the population in question can be given with a simple “yes” or “no” (Beckeret al., 2016). For example, if the question is "do you prefer to chocolate to


vanilla?", then, if 115 randomly chosen members from a population of


1,000,000 are surveyed, there is a 5% error margin. But this error margin may


shrink even if sample-size and population-size are held fixed. It shrinks if the


answers to the survey questions involve rankings (e.g. “Strongly agree,


Agree, Slightly Agree…”) and the answers are bunched around one of the


extremes. Suppose the survey question is “how good a job do you feel


Senator X is doing?”, and 115 people are randomly chosen, with all political


affiliations, economic strata, ethnicities, etc. being evenly represented; and


suppose that the respondent has to answer with a number between 1 and 10


(1=completely bad and 10=perfect). If 98% of the answers are 1’s, or if 99%


are 10’s, then the error margin drops to under 5% (Hopkins et al., 2018).


      Also relevant is the case where a survey is asking for a ranking, as


opposed to a simple ‘yes’ or ‘no’, and, moreover, the survey is attempting to


elicit that information through multiple different versions of the same query.


If answers on individual questionnaires tend to be bunched around one of the


extremes and if, moreover, averages of survey-responses in their turn are


bunched around extremes, then the error-margin is lowered considerably.


Suppose, as before, that we are trying to find out how Senator X’s


constituents feel about the job he is doing, except that this time, instead of


just asking “is he doing a good job?”, we ask a number of different versionsof this question, e.g. “has your financial situation improved since X took


office?”, “has the quality of tap water improved?”, “is your neighborhood


more safe?”, etc., with the possible answers, as before, being a ranking of 1


through 10, with 1 being maximally bad and 10 being maximally good.


Under this circumstance, if answers on a given survey tend to be bunched


around one of the extremes and if, moreover, the overwhelming majority of


survey-responses are bunched around the same extreme, then the error-


margin is much lower than ceteris paribus it would otherwise be (Benjamin


et al., 2018).


      Finally, and perhaps most importantly, a 5% error margin may be


more than acceptable in some contexts. Here is an example of such a context.


The objective of a given survey is to establish a ranking of some kind among


different populations. The survey is administered and survey-results are in. It


turns out that, even after taking the error-margin into account, those results


generate unambiguous ranking. Under these circumstances, the error-margin


is of no consequence, even if it is wide in absolute terms. Contrariwise, if the


error-margin has to be extremely narrow to establish the ranking in question,


then the ranking is that much less worth establishing, since its extremes are


that much closer to each other. We have seen how dropout-rationality
                                                                    F


depends on the variables in question; if dropout-rationality depends on them
                                                      E


in a similar way, then wide error-margins can be tolerated.         Instrumentation


              Since there no pre-existing career-satisfaction questionnaires,


we had to come up with our own. That said, we had two sources of support in


the existing literature. First, there is an abundance of cogent literature as to


what constitutes a ‘dream job’, which is a tolerable synonym for ‘ideal


career’ (Li et al., 2016). Second, there were reputable job-satisfaction surveys


with questions that, when answered affirmatively, are consistent with the


respondent’s having a position that he regards as being a career and a


fulfilling one at that (Khamisa et al., 2015).


              The best and most research suggests that a ‘dream job’ for a


given person is one that satisfies three conditions: The job-holder is good at


it; it is work that he regards as benefiting the world; conditions are supportive


and conduce to a ‘state of flow’, including reasonable pay, schedule that fits


one’s lifestyle, non-antagonistic co-workers, and the like.


      Importantly, although reasonable pay is necessary for a dream job,


satisfaction-returns on pay over and above that amount quickly diminish


(Türkoglu et al., 2017; Deeba et al., 2015). This entails that compensation is


not what makes a job reasonable: if the person likes the job, he will do it for a


reasonable amount; and he doesn’t like it, no amount of money will make it


fulfilling for him, even though enough money induce to keep doing it.


Another interesting fact is that a job's being a dream-job doesn't depend on itsnot being stressful. If X is John's dream job, it will continue to be his dream


job even it becomes increasingly stressful, provided the stress-levels are not


incapacitating; and if X is not John's dream job, decreasing job-related stress,


even to the point of non-existence, won't turn X into a dream job.  


              In terms of questionnaire-design, the basic desiderata for


psychometric tests, such as this one, are as follows (Sijtsma et al., 2017;


Nardi, 2018). 


        Questions must be clear. “Are you paid enough?” is clear. “Would it


not necessarily be so bad if you were better remunerated than you currently


are?” is not clear.


        Questions must not be tendentiously phrased. “Do you find your work


engaging?” is non-tendentiously and non-judgmentally phrased. “Does your


work, despite its menial and insignificant character, manage to interest you?”


is tendentiously and judgmentally phrased.


        Questions should not be vague or overly theoretical. “Are your clients


happy with your work?” is non-vague. “In the long-term, does the economy


benefit from your work?” is vague and overly theoretical.


        Questions should not be circuitous. The respondent should not feel


that games are being played. “Do you get along with your boss” is direct. “If


your boss became a spokesperson for a fast-food chain, would that make you


want to stop eating there?” is circuitous and manipulative.      Also, the questionnaire should not be too long. Otherwise, response


rates will decline and answer-quality will deteriorate in those who complete


the questionnaire.


      Finally, when information about the respondent’s attitudes is being


sought, it is necessary to ask questions relating to different ways in which


that attitude might actually guide his thought and behavior. Simply asking


“do you like your career?” will not elicit fine-grained information about the


respondent’s attitude towards his career and may even elicit a defensive


response. Fine-grained and sincere responses are more likely to be elicited by


questions such as the following:


      “Do you regard difficult assignments as inconveniences or as


challenges?”


      “Do you find yourself thinking about how to improve your


professional skills even when you are not on the job?”


      “Do you tend to throw yourself into your work when you have


personal problems?”


      “Do you work even when don’t have to?”


              The researcher constructed a test satisfying these desiderata.


Also, the test is sufficiently similar to proven and reputable job-satisfaction


questionnaires as to minimize the risk of its failing of its purpose, while also,


unlike existing questionnaires, eliciting information specific to therespondent’s level of career-satisfaction (as opposed to job-satisfaction).         Validity


      Validity is being ensured in the following ways.


      First, a reputable professional survey-service has already been retained


to administer the survey to the eight demographics in question. This service


provides automated, reliable analytics and always complies with legal and


professional protocols.


      Second, questions are clearly and modeled on those of reputable


questionnaires, within the limits set by the differences in subject-matter.


Also, the survey company has a grading system whereby survey-efficacy is


assessed before the survey is administered; and this surveyed a score of


100%.


      Third, questions will initially administered to small samples, and then


scaled up when results from initial surveys show that error margins were


unlikely to vitiate results. Tight, demographically-driven clusterings of


responses diminish error-margins and warrant upscaling; and the absence of


such clusterings warrant changing the survey, so as to increase confidence-


intervals, before re-administering.


      Finally, we only need error-margins to be as narrow as was consistent


with their establishing unambiguous rankings. The fact that one of the


variables is discontinuous made any other standard of precision irrelevant.


Therefore, once initial surveys established that error-margins are narrowenough to yield an unambiguous ranking, we will be free to administer the


survey to a large population.        Reliability


      The survey consists of 20 questions. Four of the questions are


concerned with the respondent’s perception of his own abilities at his work.


Four are concerned with his feelings as to his level of enthusiasm for his


work. Four concern his beliefs as to how much good for the world he believes


himself to do. Four concern his beliefs as to whether he is adequately


compensated. Four concern his beliefs as to whether his clients, co-workers,


and supervisors adequately appreciate his work. No two questions within any


given one of these five question-groups are identical, but answers to


questions within a given group should elicit similar responses. Consequently,


consistency of responses within groups indicates a high-degree of reliability


and validity, and low consistency indicates low degree of reliability and


validity.


      The survey-company software approved the survey for clarity and ease


of use and probable high (76%) completion of rate. At the researcher’s


request (and expense), a manual review of the questions was conducted, in


light of information concerning the nature of the research being conducted.


No changes were recommended.      Data Collection and Management


      The survey-service will prescreen for the relevant variables (test-score,


college graduation, vocationally trained). Respondents will not be


prescreened for income, since surveys must be distributed randomly within


each population group. Potential respondents will be sent an email with a link


to the survey.


      The email contains a description of the survey, the number of


questions, and the nature of those questions. It is stated that the questions


were multiple choice. It is also stated that no information would ever be


publicized concerning an individual respondent’s answers. It is made clear


that the survey had no relation to their work or any aspect of their life and


that their responses, or decision not to do or to complete the survey, will have


no effect on any aspect of their lives. It is also stated that survey results


would be kept for a minimum of three years. The purpose of the survey is


also stated, along with the disclaimer that this is research being conducted by


a doctoral candidate and is not an official government action of any kind. The


identity of the researcher is not disclosed, nor is any other identifying


information.


      No ‘frill material’ is included. Itis not said that responses would


‘enrich scholarship’ or anything of the sort. It is not suggested or stated that


negative consequences will follow from non-responses or certain kinds ofresponses or that good consequences will follow from completed surveys or


from certain kinds of responses. The tone is neutral and no imagery or


suggestive fonts, italicizations, capitalizations, colorings, or other


iconographies are used.


      If email recipients click on the link, they are taken to page where this


information is repeated and where they are presented with two boxes: I


CONSENT and I DO NOT CONSENT. If they click on the first box, they are


taken to the survey proper.      Data Analysis Procedures


      Our research question is:


      RQ1: To what extent are those who drop out of college being
            E


emotionally rational in doing so? In other words, to what extent does their


doing so lead to increased career-satisfaction?


      In order to answer RQ1, we first had to answer:


      RQ2: Who drops out of college? In other words, what characteristics


are dispositive of a person’s dropping out of college? (Is it poverty, mental


illness, physical illness, unstable home life, low IQ, etc.?)


      We found the answer to be:


      HQ2: The higher a given person’s IQ, the less likely he is to drop out


of college.


      In the course of generating HQ2, we discovered that:


      HQ1: The higher a given person’s IQ, the less financially rational it is
            F


for him to drop out of college.


      This established the following earnings-ranking (from bottom to top):


      (1)         Low IQ, non-vocationally trained non-graduates


      (2)         High IQ non-vocationally trained non-graduates


      (3)         Low IQ, non-vocationally trained graduates


      (4)         Low IQ vocationally trained graduates


      (5)         Low IQ vocationally trained non-graduates      (6)         High IQ vocationally trained non-graduates


      (7)         High IQ vocationally trained graduates


      (8)         High IQ non-vocationally trained graduates


      The need to discover whether career-satisfaction generated a similar


hierarchy governed our data-analysis procedures. Questionnaires pre-screen


for the dependence variables (test-scores, graduation-status, vocational-


status). The survey-software will be set to do the following:


      (i)         Provide data for each respondent


      (ii)   Find average value for each question for each target-population


      (iii)                       Average these averages by population, as to generate an


overall career-satisfaction score for each population.


      We are operating on the assumption that answers are up to 10%


inaccurate, even though that actual error-margin is less than 5%.       Ethical Considerations


      We will administer surveys by way of a reputable company that will


not spam anyone, invade their privacy, offer incentives, or otherwise violate


the rights of respondents or skew responses. The questions are phrased in


such a way that respondents will know that their responses, whatsoever they


might be, are genuinely valued.        Limitations and Delimitations


      The results generated will not have validity across any society at all


times or across all societies at a given time. This study is not intended to


establish universally applicable sociological principles. It would be important


to know how existing economic conditions and government policies affected


the realities discussed in this study.


      Another limitation is that this study does not examine the internal


structure of any of the populations involved. For example, the population of


high IQ non-vocationally trained college graduates is internally stratified,


with some of its member loving their careers and others hating them, and it


would be worth how it was stratified and why. The same is true of each of the


sub-populations.


      Finally, it would be worth seeing if the results we obtain, whatever


they might be, hold up when larger populations are concerned.        Summary


      In the first two chapters, we discovered extremely tight connections


between IQ and both dropout-rate and dropout-rationality. With those in the


upper IQ range, a college degree was more significant than vocational


training. With those in all IQ ranges, dropout-behavior tracked dropout-


rationality. It is unambiguously rational for those in the very low IQ range to


drop out and that is they do. It is unambiguously rational for people in the


upper IQ range to graduate from college, and that what they do. It is


ambiguously rational for those in the lower-medium range to drop out, and


that is what half of them do.


      Given this information, the question to ask is whether the degree to


which is emotionally rational to drop out, in the sense of being conducive to


career-satisfaction, tracks the degree to which it is financially rationally to do


so. We figured out how to answer this question. Having already discovered


that IQ, college-graduation status, and vocational status generated an earnings


hierarchy, we simply had to find out whether they also generated a career-


satisfaction hierarchy. 


      Because there did not exist any statistics that explicitly or implicitly


answered this question, we have to generate those statistics ourselves.


Because there do not exist any questionnaires that we could use, we had to


design our own questionnaire; and we did so, taking care to model it, asclosely as its distinctive subject-matter allowed, on existing questionnaires.


Because we designed our own questionnaire, we had to make sure that it


covered the relevant variables, and we also had to see to it that it generated


credible information. This was labor intensive but well worth it.


 


 

College Papers Plus

                      Representative Work July-August 2019

 

Is the Turing Test a good test of intelligence? (philosophy)

Is the Turing Test a good test of intelligence? Second Version

(philosophy)

Should Caffeine be a Controlled Substance?

Who started the Cold War?

Who was a better President? Eisenhower or JFK?

Who was a better President? Nixon or LBJ?

Technology-caused Job-shortages and the Need for Universal Welfare

My Reaction to Schoenberg’s  A Survivor from Warsaw  

      https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DFXkc9AGoeU

Statistics: Basic Principles and Theorems (Math/Statistics)

Poem and Song Compared: To His Coy Mistress Compared with Don’t

Be Cruel (Literary Analysis)

Random Variables, Discrete Variables, Continuous Variables

(Math/Statistics)

Statistics Exam Prep Sheet

Concert Report (Music/Musicology)

Statistics Final Exam Review Sheet (Math/Statistics)

Music Journal (Music/Musicology)

           Is the Turing Test a good test of intelligence? (philosophy)


 


      The statement ‘the Turing Test is a good test of intelligence’ is


ambiguous. On the one hand, it can be taken to mean that a given entity’s


acting like an intelligent being is evidence of its having intelligence, meaning


that such behavior is good but not definitive reason to ascribe intelligence to


the being in question. On the other hand, it can be taken to mean a given


entity’s acting like an intelligent creature is constitutive of its having


intelligence, meaning that there is no difference between its being intelligent


and its behaving (or able to behave) like an intelligent creature. The first


disambiguation, so I will argue, is correct only if subject to heavy


qualifications, and the second disambiguation, so I will argue, is


unqualifiedly incorrect.


      Turing introduced the concept of the Turing Test through the


following hypothetical. A written but rapid exchange between two parties is


occurring. One of those parties is a machine, and the other is a person. A


second person is monitoring the exchange. This person knows that one of the


parties involved is a person and that the other is a machine, and he also


knows what each party writes and when it writes it, but he has no additional


information as to either one’s identity. According to Turing, if this person is


consistently able to figure out which of the two parties is the machine andwhich one is the person, then the machine does not have intelligence. On the


other hand, if that person cannot consistently determine which of the parties


is the machine, then that machine has intelligence.


      We can use a variant of Turing’s own scenario to demonstrate the


spuriousness of Turing’s own reasoning.  Let X be the person involved in the


exchange just described and let Y be the machine; and suppose that the


exchange they are having concerns arithmetic. X is making arithmetical


statements (e.g. “1+1=2”, “1+2=3”, “1+2≠3”), and Y is evaluating those

                          3
statements. If X says “2=8”, Y responds by saying “that is correct”; and if X

      3
says “2=6”, Y responds by saying “that is incorrect.” As it happens, let us


suppose, X, though an extremely gifted playwright and poet, has a blind spot

                                                                            3
for mathematics. He cannot for the life of him understand why “2=6” is false

          3
or why “2=8” is true. Consequently, when ‘conversing’ with Y, the


statements that he makes are often false. But he never generates those


statements mechanically. In some cases, he draws on poetic inspiration; in


other cases, he considers the aesthetic properties of the inscriptions involved;


sometimes he grasps the mathematical principles but misapplies them; and


occasionally he grasps those principles and correctly applies them. In each


case, a great of intelligence is involved, but it is usually either the wrong kind


of intelligence or the right kind of intelligence but applied in the wrong way.


      Turing would have us believe that, in this exchange, Y is theintelligent one and X is the unintelligent one. But that is the exact opposite of


the truth. The reason X is so often wrong is that he is thinking too much,


albeit the wrong ways; and the reason Y is always right is that its behavior is


completely reflexive, with the qualification that, thanks to the intelligence of


Y’s creator, the reflexes in question track the relevant body of truths. What


makes a creature intelligent is not what it does, contrary to what Turing


assumes, but why it does it. In some contexts, intelligence leads to the wrong


behaviors and its absence leads to the right ones. To be sure, intelligence is


more likely than its absence to generate the right behaviors (including the


right statements). But given a sufficiently constricted context, an unintelligent


or minimally intelligent being can outperform one that is hyper-intelligent:


someone with little mathematical intelligence can be trained to produce sums


and products faster than Gauss could and will therefore do a better job of


passing the corresponding Turing Tests. In certain contexts, certain behaviors


are relatively likely to be engaged in only by intelligent creatures, and certain


behaviors may therefore be relatively good evidence of intelligence; but there


is no single form of conduct engaged in by intelligent beings that cannot be


mimicked by unintelligent ones, and for this reason intelligence is never


identical with a tendency to engage in a certain kind of overt behavior in a


certain kind of context. So yes—Turing Tests are sometimes good tests of


intelligence, but only in the sense that they may provide reasonable strongevidence of intelligence, not in the sense they provide definitive proof of it.


      Like us, John Searle holds that overt behavior is nothing more than


evidence of intelligence, and he therefore rejects Turing’s contention to the


contrary. Unfortunately, Searle’s defense of his own position is a failure and


actually gives undeserved credence to Turing’s position. Searle asks to


suppose that, inside of a giant robot (or robot-like carapace), there lives a


man who speaks no Chinese but who has access to Chinese dictionaries and


pronunciation manuals, and the like. Despite not speaking a word of Chinese


himself, this man has become extremely adept at using these resources to


generate decrypt Chinese statements and respond to them with content-


appropriate Chinese utterances of his own, which are electronically broadcast


in a metallic voice to the external world, making it seem to those in the


external world that there exists a Chinese-speaking robot. According to


Searle, a consequence of Turing’s position is that there really does exist a


Chinese-speaking robot; and Searle takes it for granted that those who hold


this are simply wrong.


      The problem is that the behavior of this ‘robot’ (i.e. the metallic husk


with the man inside it) is intelligent. After all, the sounds that it produces are


guided by an understanding of what linguistic symbols mean and of what


those meanings make it appropriate to say, and those who believe the ‘robot’


to be intelligent are not entirely off the mark. True—those people are verywrong as to the mechanisms involved. They believe electrical circuity, as


opposed to biological wetware, to be doing all the work. But they are right


about intelligence being responsible for the robot’s behavior. What about


their belief that the robot speaks Chinese? Searle takes it for granted that this


belief is false. But is it? There is somebody inside the metallic husk who is


intelligently mapping English statements onto Chinese statements and vice


versa, and this person’s behavior is responsible for the noises leaving the


robot-husk. The essence of a given person’s supposedly mistaken belief that


the ‘the robot’ speaks Chinese is the correct belief the sounds that come out


of the robot are intelligent, as opposed to mechanical, responses to the sounds


that are directed at it.


      In conclusion, although a tendency to engage in certain forms of


behavior in certain contexts can obviously be evidence of intelligence, such a


disposition cannot itself be identical with intelligence, the reason being that


any behavior that an intelligent creature is likely to engage in can be


replicated by an unintelligent creature. Consequently, if Turing’s position is


taken to be that overt behavior can be evidence of intelligence, then it is


correct but trivial, and if it is taken to be that overt behavior can itself be


intelligence, then it is simply false. Though motivated by an awareness of


these truths, John Searle’s miscarried attempt to refute Turing ends up giving


the latter’s an undeserved sheen of legitimacy. Is the Turing Test a good test of intelligence? Second Version (philosophy)


 


      To say that a given entity ‘passes the Turing Test’ is to say that, in


some context or other, its behavior is indistinguishable from that of a being


whose conduct is guided by intelligence. Turing believed, for reasons to be


identified forthwith, that there is no difference between acting like an


intelligent entity and being an intelligent being. Turing’s answer to the


question ‘is the Turing Test a good test of intelligence?’ is therefore ‘yes.’


      In this paper, Turing’s position will be examined and refuted.  I will


start by examining the hypothetical scenario through Turing himself attempts


to motivate what he believes the answer to this question to be, and I will use a


variant of that same scenario to show that Turing’s reasoning is spurious and,


moreover, that his position is false. Then I will examine John Searle’s


attempt to refute Turing’s position. It will be shown that, although Searle is


right to regard Turing’s position as false, Searle’s attempt to refute Turing’s


position has little force.


      Turing introduced the concept of the Turing Test through the


following hypothetical. A written but rapid exchange between two parties is


occurring. One of those parties is a machine, and the other is a person. A


second person is monitoring the exchange. This person knows that one of the


parties involved is a person and that the other is a machine, and he alsoknows what each party writes and when it writes it, but he has no additional


information as to either one’s identity. According to Turing, if this person is


consistently able to figure out which of the two parties is the machine and


which one is the person, then the machine does not have intelligence. On the


other hand, if that person cannot consistently determine which of the parties


is the machine, then that machine has intelligence.


      We can use a variant of Turing’s own scenario to demonstrate the


spuriousness of Turing’s own reasoning.  Let X be the person involved in the


exchange just described and let Y be the machine; and suppose that the


exchange they are having concerns arithmetic. X is making arithmetical


statements (e.g. “1+1=2”, “1+2=3”, “1+2≠3”), and Y is evaluating those

                          3
statements. If X says “2=8”, Y responds by saying “that is correct”; and if X

      3
says “2=6”, Y responds by saying “that is incorrect.” As it happens, let us


suppose, X, though an extremely gifted playwright and poet, tends to


overthink trivial matters and therefore has trouble producing correct


statements of arithmetic. Consequently, when ‘conversing’ with Y, the


statements that he makes are often false. But he never generates those


statements mechanically.


      Turing would have us believe that, in this exchange, Y is the


intelligent one and X is the unintelligent one. But that is the exact opposite of


the truth. The reason X is so often wrong is (so we may suppose) that he isthinking too much, albeit the wrong ways; and the reason Y is always right is


that its behavior is completely reflexive, with the qualification that, thanks to


the intelligence of Y’s creator, the reflexes in question track the relevant body


of truths. What makes a creature intelligent is not what it does, contrary to


what Turing assumes, but why it does it. In some contexts, intelligence leads


to the wrong behaviors and its absence leads to the right ones. Given a


sufficiently constricted context, an unintelligent or minimally intelligent


being can outperform one that is hyper-intelligent: someone with little


mathematical intelligence can be trained to produce sums and products faster


than Gauss could and will therefore do a better job of passing the


corresponding Turing Tests. There is no single form of conduct engaged in


by intelligent beings that cannot be mimicked by unintelligent ones, and for


this reason intelligence is never identical with a tendency to engage in a


certain kind of overt behavior in a certain kind of context. So a given Turing


Test provides, at most, highly defeasible, context-internal evidence of


intelligence, and under no circumstances can a given creature’s passing such


a test be regarded as definitive proof of intelligence; and the Turing Test is


therefore not in any significant sense a good test of intelligence.


      Like us, John Searle holds that overt behavior is nothing more than


evidence of intelligence, and he therefore rejects Turing’s contention to the


contrary. Unfortunately, Searle’s defense of his own position is a failure andactually gives undeserved credence to Turing’s position. Searle asks to


suppose that, inside of a giant robot (or robot-like carapace), there lives a


man who speaks no Chinese but who has access to Chinese dictionaries and


pronunciation manuals, and the like. Despite not speaking a word of Chinese


himself, this man has become extremely adept at using these resources to


generate decrypt Chinese statements and respond to them with content-


appropriate Chinese utterances of his own, which are electronically broadcast


in a metallic voice to the external world, making it seem to those in the


external world that there exists a Chinese-speaking robot. According to


Searle, a consequence of Turing’s position is that there really does exist a


Chinese-speaking robot; and Searle takes it for granted that those who hold


this are simply wrong.


      The problem is that the behavior of this ‘robot’ (i.e. the metallic husk


with the man inside it) is intelligent. After all, the sounds that it produces are


guided by an understanding of what linguistic symbols mean and of what


those meanings make it appropriate to say, and those who believe the ‘robot’


to be intelligent are not entirely off the mark. Although these people are


wrong about the specific mechanisms involved, they are right about


intelligence being responsible for the robot’s behavior. What about their


belief that the robot speaks Chinese? Searle takes it for granted that this belief


is false. But is it? There is somebody inside the metallic husk who isintelligently mapping English statements onto Chinese statements and vice


versa, and this person’s behavior is responsible for the noises leaving the


robot-husk. The essence of a given person’s supposedly mistaken belief that


the ‘the robot’ speaks Chinese is the correct belief the sounds that come out


of the robot are intelligent, as opposed to mechanical, responses to the sounds


that are directed at it.


      In conclusion, although a tendency to engage to engage in certain


forms of behavior in certain contexts can obviously be evidence of


intelligence, such a disposition cannot itself be identical with intelligence, the


reason being that any behavior that an intelligent creature is likely to engage


in can be replicated by an unintelligent creature. Consequently, if Turing’s


position is taken to be that overt behavior can be evidence of intelligence,


then it is correct but trivial, and if it is taken to be that overt behavior can


itself be intelligence, then it is simply false. Though motivated by an


awareness of these truths, John Searle’s miscarried attempt to refute Turing


ends up giving the latter’s an undeserved sheen of legitimacy.


                   Should Caffeine be a Controlled Substance?


 


 


 


                                            Abstract


 


      Average daily caffeine intake among pre-adults in the United States


has increased more than 100% in the last twenty years, from 30 mg/day to 70


mg/day, almost entirely due to the popularity, especially among children, of


candy-flavored, highly caffeinated energy-drinks, such as Rock Star and


Monster. This development is a concern for many reasons. First, caffeine is a


psychoactive substance, like alcohol or marijuana, and for that reason alone,


so it is felt, is not appropriate for children. Second, there is reasonably


compelling that caffeine use among children is linked to temporary episodes


of ADHD-like behavior. Most ominously, there have been recent studies on


rats showing that massive daily doses of caffeine can impair brain-


development. For these reasons, the question arises whether the selling of


energy-drinks or other caffeinated substances should be criminalized or


otherwise heavily regulated. The answer to that question, so it is argued in


this paper, is “no.” There is no demonstrated evidence that, when consumed


in moderate doses, caffeine has any effect on brain development in humans,and there is in fact evidence that, in low doses, it has neuro-regenerative and


neuro-protective qualities. Second, although there is reasonably good


evidence that caffeine-intake in children can temporarily cause ADHD-like


symptoms, such as distractedness and fidgeting, there is no evidence that it


ever leads to antisocial or violent behavior. Third, granting that children


should not in general be allowed to use psychoactive substances to recreate or


self-medicate, there is no evidence that caffeine has become a gateway drug


for children, or that caffeine use among children is dangerously high, or that


such caffeine use as there is has to any degree impaired the psychological or


physical development of children or adolescents. Also, because caffeine is


the active ingredient in a number of over the counter medications, including


all medications for PMS and Migraine headaches, and because caffeine


naturally occurs in high doses in many comestibles, including chocolate,


caffeine-related regulations would be unusually burdensome to businesses


and expensive for the general public. Consequently, the benefits of caffeine-


related regulations, including regulations relating to the sale of energy drinks,


would be far too small to justify the considerable financial and societal costs.


 


                                          Introduction


 


        Caffeine is the most widely used psychoactive substance in existence.For the most part, caffeine is harmless, and there is growing evidence of the


health benefits of moderate caffeine consumption, especially on cognitive


performance (Brice, 2016). At the same time, caffeine is not entirely


innocuous. It is toxic when consumed in large doses. Also, studies have


shown that proper brain development does not occur in rats that are fed


astronomically high quantities of caffeine over a long period, suggesting,


albeit weakly, that moderate consumption of caffeine could inhibit proper


brain development in human children (Doepker et al., 2016). Additionally,


although low quantities of caffeine actually have a calming effect in children,


there is reasonably strong evidence that it can induce temporary ADHD-like


symptoms when consumed in large quantities (França, A. P., 2018). This last


fact is significant, owing to the fact that caffeine consumption among


children and adolescents more than doubled over the last thirty years. The


reason for this spike is the popularity among children and adolescents of


highly caffeinated energy drinks, such as Rock Star and Monster. Loaded


with sugar, these carbonated beverages are as easy to guzzle down as any


soft-drink, making them popular with people of all ages, and they have a


candy-like taste, making them especially popular with children (Chen et al.,


2019).


      What should the government’s response be? Should the government


take a completely hand’s off approach and do nothing to restrict the sale ofcaffeine, even to minors? Or should it intervene and criminalize or at least


penalize the sale of caffeinated products to minors and possibly other


vulnerable groups?


      It is the purpose of this paper to answer this question. After


considering all of the relevant facts, we will come to the conclusion that,


although parents should be mindful of possible caffeine use on the part of


their children, the sale and use of caffeine should not be any more regulated


than they currently are. Although caffeine can be abused, the benefits of


treating caffeine as a controlled substance, even in a highly circumscribed


manner, would not be worth the costs.


      The structure of this paper is as follows. We will start by identifying


the relevant statistical and economic data relating to caffeine-use. Then we


will discuss the effects of caffeine on both children and adults. We will


discuss its various benefits, including its medicinal uses, and we will also


discuss the adverse effects that it can have, especially when consumed in


large doses. We will then discuss the financial and logistical complexities


involved in regulating the sale and use of caffeine, many of which derive


from the fact that caffeine is present not just in coffee, but also in tea, soft-


drinks, and chocolate, as well as in numerous over the counter medications,


including Excedrin and Midol. We will conclude by synthesizing all of this


data, our conclusion being that the sale and use of caffeine should beunregulated or minimally regulated.  


 


                Important Facts and Statistics Relating to Caffeine-use


 


        Caffeine is the most widely used psychoactive substance in existence.


In the United States, for example, approximately 450 million cups of coffee


are consumed every day (Baron, 2019). In other countries, coffee


consumption is much higher. For every three cups of coffee consumed by the


average American, the average German consumes five, the average Slovenian


six, the average Norwegian seven, and the average Finn nine (Baron, 2019.


      Importantly, coffee-drinking, though the primary way of ingesting


caffeine, is not the only way of doing so. High concentrations of caffeine are


present in tea and moderate concentrations are present in soft-drinks and in


chocolate. Caffeine can also be consumed ‘directly’, in the form of caffeine


pills, such as Vivarin and NoDoz. Also, caffeine is the primary active


ingredient in so-called ‘energy drinks’, such as Red Bull and Rock Star,


which, non-coincidentally, are also loaded with sugar, giving them a candy-


like taste, and are increasingly popular with adolescents and, to a lesser


extent, children. Coffee-drinking accounts for 70% of caffeine-consumption;


tea, chocolate, and soft-drinks, including energy drinks, for 28%; and


caffeine pills, for 2% (Brice, 2016).      Unlike opiates, tobacco, alcohol, and almost all other controlled


substances, caffeine naturally occurs in many foods and beverages. Moderate


to high levels of it are present in chocolate, colas, sunflower seeds, and


various other staples; and it is therefore present, sometimes in high quantities,


in foods that contain these ingredients, including ice-cream, trail mixes, and


health bars (Brice, 2016).


      Importantly, caffeine is the active ingredient in many different over


the counter (OTC) medications. It is the active ingredient in Excedrin,


Anacin, and every other OTC remedy for migraines, and it is the active


ingredient in Midol, Pamprin and every other OTC remedy for premenstrual


syndrome. Consequently, restricting the sale of caffeine to minors would


involve restricting the sale of all such items to minors. Though theoretically


possible, this would be expensive, with the costs being passed onto to


consumers, taxpayers, and businesses; and it would also lead to irksome


expansions of regulatory bureaucracies. In order to know whether these costs


would be worth bearing, we must know how caffeine affects people, in both


the short and long terms (França et al., 2018). Let us now turn to this topic.


 


                                  Health-benefits of Caffeine


 


      First of all, caffeine increases cognitive performance. Studies haveshown that people do better on standardized tests when they are under the


influence of caffeine (Grosso et al. 2017). Studies have also shown that


caffeine boosts manual dexterity and, in particular, that physicians


performing surgery, including microsurgery, perform better when they are


under the influence of caffeine (Spiller, 2019). This is obviously linked with


the fact that almost all surgical operations are performed by physicians under


the influence of caffeine. This is true even of physicians belonging to


religious faiths, such as Mormonism, that prohibit the use of caffeine (Kelly


et al., 2016).


      There also appear to be long-term health-benefits to caffeine use.


Several studies have shown that caffeine use correlates with improved long-


term memory. Studies also show an inverse correlation between heavy


caffeine-consumption and likelihood of succumbing to Alzheimer’s and other


forms of dementia. Strikingly, studies show much the same to be true of


Parkinson’s Disease (PD): “26 studies found that the overall risk of


developing PD fell by 24-32% per 300 mg increase in caffeine intake (i.e.


with every 3 cups of coffee, approximately)” (Spiller, 2019). There is also


evidence that coffee-consumption reduces the likelihood of developing


certain kinds of cancer, including oral cancer and colon cancer (Endesfelder


et al., 2017). This is likely a consequence not of caffeine but of the


antioxidants in coffee. 


                            Adverse Health-effects of Caffeine


 


        Caffeine can also have adverse health-effects. Here it is important to


note that the effects of caffeine on adults differ in some respects from its


effects on children and adolescents. In adults, the adverse effects of caffeine


tend to be short-term, the most common ones being insomnia and irritability.


Caffeine-intake also temporarily increases heartrate and blood pressure, but


these effects subside within a few hours. Contrary to what used to be thought,


caffeine does not cause arrhythmia or coronary heart disease; nor does it


otherwise adversely affect cardiovascular health. In adults, the main reason


not to consume caffeine is that it can cause insomnia, which in turn can have


serious effects on quality of life. Also, people with mental illnesses, such as


schizoaffective disorder and generalized anxiety disorder, often have adverse


emotional responses to caffeine (Doepker et al., 2016).


      The effects of caffeine on children and adolescents are not entirely


clear, but there is evidence that it can slow down brain development if


consumed in large quantities on a consistent basis. Significantly, this


conclusion is based on experiments involving rats; it is not based on direct


evidence, such as the performance-metrics of children known to consume


caffeine regularly. Moreover, the rats in question were given astronomicallyhigh quantities of caffeine (the equivalent, after adjusting for their body-


mass, of 100 cups of coffee) every day of their pre-adult lives. Finally,


because those rats experienced acute sleep deprivation, it is possible that their


slow brain development was a consequence of their lack of sleep, not, except


indirectly, of their caffeine intake (Kolahdouzan et al. 2017). Nonetheless, the


study unambiguously showed that caffeine use in some way or other retarded


brain development in rats, and the similarities between rat brains and human


brains make it extremely likely that, if consumed in large enough quantities


over a long enough period of time, caffeine can slow down brain


development in humans (Mohan et al., 2015).


      This last point is subject to some important qualifications. First of all,


when administered to rats in moderate doses, caffeine actually offset the


damage done by brain-injuries and, in cases when the brain-injured rats were


still developing, permitted the resumption of normal brain-development.


Something analogous seems to hold of human beings, in that persons who


take caffeine pills during a stroke minimize the brain-damage subsequently


done by that stroke. Finally, studies have shown that caffeine helps offset the


damage done to neonatal rats by instances of hypoxia (Meeusen et al., 2018).


      Importantly, when taken in low to moderate doses, caffeine actually


has a calming effect on children. This is why it is often prescribed by


physicians to children who have ADHD, the standard daily dose being 200mg to 400 mg. When children do not have ADHD, 300 mg or more of


caffeine may temporarily cause ADHD-like symptoms, mainly fidgeting and


increased anxiety. It is extremely unusual for pre-adolescents to consume this


much caffeine and there are no reported cases of caffeine consumption in


children leading to anti-social or self-destructive behavior or of their having


any adverse health-consequences (Meeusen et al., 2018).


      For ethical reasons, there have been few studies of how caffeine


affects the cognitive abilities of children or adolescents. The only studies that


have been conducted concern children with ADHD who have been prescribed


caffeine by a licensed physician. Those studies show that caffeine improves


test-scores in children with ADHD and also improves manual dexterity. It is


not clear whether the same would be true of children who do not have


ADHD; nor is it otherwise clear whether those results in any way generalize


to other populations. That said, there have been studies of how caffeine


affects cognitive performance in college students and other populations, and


those studies all show that it enhances cognitive performance (Schmidt,


2017).


      As a general rule, caffeine temporarily increases blood-pressure and


heartrate, granting that, when taken in low to moderate doses, it tends to have


the opposite effect on children, especially children with ADHD. For this


reason, people are inclined to suspect that caffeine-use increases thelikelihood of stroke and heart-attack. This has been thoroughly studied and


proven to be totally false. Setting aside people with heart-conditions, even


high doses of caffeine do not increase the likelihood of heart-attack or stroke.


The effects of high doses of caffeine on those with coronary conditions have


not been thoroughly studied. There have been no documented cases of


caffeine consumption causing a cardiac incident, even in people with


coronary conditions; but because caffeine is a stimulant whose effects on


such people have not been studied, physicians recommend that they moderate


or eliminate their use of caffeine (Spiller, 2019).    


 


                          Pros and Cons of Caffeine-regulation


 


        Granting that the long-term effects on children of heavy caffeine use


are still unclear, their short-term effects are moderately well-known and are


sometimes negative. Whereas adults respond to moderate amounts of caffeine


by becoming focused, children sometimes respond by becoming confused


and agitated. Caffeine makes it easy for an adult to get through a boring


meeting, but it can make it hard for a child or even an adolescent to get


through a boring class. (This is subject to the qualification that it helps


children with ADHD to focus and behave properly.)


      This is significant because, over the last twenty years, caffeine useamong pre-adults has risen from an average of 30 mg/day to 70 mg/day.


Almost all of this extra caffeine comes from carbonated, candy-flavored, and


highly caffeinated so-called ‘energy drinks’, such as Red Bull, Monster, and


Rock Star. A single ‘Red Bull’ or ‘Rock Star’ contains around 200 mg of


caffeine—the same as a strong cup of coffee. But these beverages, unlike


coffee, are palatable to children; and unlike coffee, they go down smooth and


can easily be guzzled down. And this is just what is happening, especially


with adolescents and pre-adolescents. Currently, there are no laws preventing


children from purchasing energy drinks, and it must therefore be asked


whether such laws should be introduced (Spiller, 2019).


      In the present author’s judgment, the answer to this question is ‘no.’


First of all, we must distinguish the question ‘should children drink


caffeinated beverages?’ from the question ‘should the sale of caffeinated


beverages to children be criminalized?’ Children shouldn’t spend hours


watching TV; but if they do, neither they nor their guardians should be fined


or jailed for it. When asking whether such and such should be illegal, it is not


enough to know whether X is morally good. It must also be taken into


account whether the cure would be worse than the disease. Laws are


expensive; people have to be paid to enforce them; and before we decide to


criminalize such and such, we must be sure that the financial costs of doing


so do not outweigh the benefits (Friedman, 1962).      We must also know that, in criminalizing such and such, we are not


thereby criminalizing things that shouldn’t be criminalized. It’s well and


good to prohibit minors from purchasing energy drinks and caffeine pills. But


what if the minor is a 17-year-old who is suffering an acute migraine and


needs Excedrin? What if the minor is a 14-year-old female who is suffering


from wrenching pains due to PMS and needs Midol? In terms of its caffeine-


content, a single dose of Midol or Excedrin is comparable to the average


energy drink. (A single Excedrin has 65 mg of caffeine; a single Midol has 60


mg., the recommended dosage of each being two to four pills daily.)


      Of course, one option would be to be to allow minors to purchase


caffeinated medications but prohibit them from purchasing energy drinks or


other caffeinated non-medicinal items. This seems reasonable at first, but it


starts to seem less reasonable when financial realities are considered. This


law cannot be enforced unless police officers and prosecutors are given


special training and then dedicate at least some of their time to investigating


and prosecuting allege offenders. Either the public defrays these costs, in


which case it has that much less money to invest in education and business


and the like, or it doesn’t, in which case police and prosecutors have one


more law to enforce but no extra money with which to enforce it, the


inevitable result being that they cease to enforce some other law. This does


not mean that it would necessarily be wrong to enact the law in question, butit means that before deciding to do so, we must know what we are gaining


and what we are losing (Friedman 1962).


      The gains would be modest. Fatal caffeine overdoses are extremely


rare. In order to die from a caffeine overdose, it is necessary to ingest over 5


grams of caffeine within a few seconds. This can be done, but only by


ingesting caffeine pills or powder; it cannot be done by drinking caffeinated


liquid, since the caffeine being ingested is metabolized before it can reach


fatal levels (Turnbull et al., 2017).


      What about the effects of caffeine on brain development? Do they not


warrant banning the sale of energy drinks to youths? They do not. The rats in


the studies in question were given 300 mg of caffeine every day of their lives


until they reached adulthood. The average rat weighs under 10 oz; the


average person weights around 175 lbs. or 2800 oz. This means that these rats


were given the equivalent of 84000 mg of caffeine every single day of their


pre-adult lives. The average American middle-schooler, by contrast,


consumes 70 mg of caffeine, making it unclear whether that experiment has


any bearing at all on the effects of caffeine on human brain development


(Winerdal et al., 2017).


      What about the ADHD-like symptoms that caffeine elicits from pre-


adolescents? Do they not demand that we criminalize the sale of energy


drinks to minors? No. Children obviously shouldn’t consume energy drinks;but that doesn’t mean that we should criminalize their doing so. Children do


not respond to caffeine by becoming violent or otherwise ‘acting out.’ Their


responses are internal: anxiety, restlessness, irritability, and the like. These


emotional changes may lead to expressions of discomfort, such as fidgeting


and squirming, but there are no documented cases of their leading to violent


or confrontational behavior (Brice, 2016).


      The most serious consequence for children of caffeine-consumption is


difficulty sleeping. Sleep-deprivation, especially in children, is a serious


matter. But, first of all, there are no documented cases of children suffering


from chronic insomnia as a result of caffeine consumption, and even if there


were, the right response would not be to criminalize their behavior. Setting


aside cases of violent or excessively disruptive behavior, substandard


behavior on the part of children can and should be dealt with by parents and


teachers, through instruction and discipline. If we try to solve non-criminal


problems by criminalizing them, we will only create worse problems


(Friedman, 1962).


 


                                            Conclusion


 


      There is no evidence that caffeine consumption among adults does


them harm, and there is considerable evidence that it does good. There arestudies that show that daily mega-doses of caffeine impair brain development


in rats; but the doses given, when adjusted for weight, were over hundreds of


times higher than any dose that any human being could possibly consume.


Also, those studies do not make it clear whether the caffeine directly


impaired brain-development in rats or whether it did so by causing sleep-


deprivation.


      Children with ADHD who are given moderate to high doses of


caffeine respond with improved test-performances and improved conduct.


Children without ADHD who take comparable doses respond by temporarily


having ADHD-like symptoms, such as fidgeting, but they do not act out or


act violently, and the effects last only a few hours.


        Although there has been a large percentage-increase in caffeine


consumption among children, due almost entirely to the popularity with that


demographic of energy drinks, the absolute levels of caffeine consumption


among pre-adults remains low. Moreover, there has been no evidence that


caffeine consumption has adversely affected children’s health or


psychological development, and there is definitive evidence that it is helpful


in these respects to children with ADHD.


      Government regulations are expensive. They are expensive to


implement and expensive to enforce. Oftentimes, these expenses are justified.


For example, the laws that prohibit minors from purchasing alcohol, tobacco,and firearms are justified, given the obvious health-problems that such


regulations prevent. In the case of caffeine-related regulations, such expenses


would not be justified. Currently the sale of caffeine is almost completely


unregulated, and there is no evidence of any kind that children or anyone else


is being harmed as a result. Also, the introduction of such regulations would


be especially thorny, given the fact that it is the active ingredient in many


medications, including every single OTC medicine for migraine headaches


and premenstrual syndrome. It is a distinct possibility that adolescents


wanting a ‘caffeine fix’ might resort to buying Excedrin or Anacin, which,


unlike straight caffeine, are far from harmless. Of course, the government


could counter-respond by prohibiting the sale of Excedrin and other such


medications, but nothing but suffering and inconvenience would come of any


such prohibition, as anyone suffering from a migraine or from premenstrual


syndrome knows all too well.


      Further problems arise from the fact that caffeine is available to


consumers in a wide variety of forms, including snack-bars, teas, and health-


drinks. Restrictions on the sale of caffeine, if enforced, would require a


veritable army of regulators and would also debilitate a wide variety of


businesses. The result of such restrictions would be an unwelcome and


useless encroachment of government on the private sector, with no


foreseeable gain for any demographic. It must therefore be concluded that, atpresent, any dialing up of caffeine-related regulations are contraindicated.


 


                                          Works Cited


 


      Ardais, A. P., Rocha, A. S., Borges, M. F., Fioreze, G. T., Sallaberry,


C., Mioranzza, S., ... & de Oliveira Porciúncula, L. (2016). Caffeine exposure


during rat brain development causes memory impairment in a sex selective


manner that is offset by caffeine consumption throughout life. Behavioural


brain research, 303, 76-84.


      Brice, M. (2016). Seven Surprising Health Benefits of Coffee. Medical


Daily.


      Chen, X., Liu, Y., Jaenicke, E. C., & Rabinowitz, A. N. (2018). The


Added Caffeine, Health Concerns and Potential Regulations: The Case of


Energy Drinks.


      Chen, X., Liu, Y., Jaenicke, E. C., & Rabinowitz, A. N. (2019). New


concerns on caffeine consumption and the impact of potential regulations:


The case of energy drinks. Food Policy, 101746.


      Clark, I., & Landolt, H. P. (2017). Coffee, caffeine, and sleep: A


systematic review of epidemiological studies and randomized controlled


trials. Sleep medicine reviews, 31, 70-78.


      Doepker, C., Lieberman, H. R., Smith, A. P., Peck, J. D., El-Sohemy,A., & Welsh, B. T. (2016). Caffeine: friend or foe?. Annual Review of Food


Science and Technology, 7, 117-137.


        Endesfelder, S., Weichelt, U., Strauß, E., Schlör, A., Sifringer, M.,


Scheuer, T., ... & Schmitz, T. (2017). Neuroprotection by caffeine in


hyperoxia-induced neonatal brain injury. International journal of molecular


sciences, 18(1), 187.


      Friedman, Milton. 1962. Capitalism and Freedom. Cambridge:


Harvard University Press.


      Grosso, G., Godos, J., Galvano, F., & Giovannucci, E. L. (2017).


Coffee, caffeine, and health outcomes: an umbrella review. Annual review of


nutrition, 37, 131-156.


      Kelly, J. P., & Granger, C. B. (2016). More Evidence That Caffeine


Consumption Appears to Be Safe in Patients With Heart Failure. JAMA


internal medicine, 176(12), 1759-1760.


        Kolahdouzan, M., & Hamadeh, M. J. (2017). The neuroprotective


effects of caffeine in neurodegenerative diseases. CNS neuroscience &


therapeutics, 23(4), 272-290.


      Mohan, A., Roberto, A. J., Mohan, A., Liogier-Weyback, L., Guha,


R., Ravishankar, N., ... & Mohan, R. (2015). Caffeine as treatment for


Alzheimer's disease: a review. Journal of Caffeine Research, 5(2), 61-64.


      Meeusen, R., & Decroix, L. (2018). Nutritional supplements and thebrain. International journal of sport nutrition and exercise metabolism, 28(2),


200-211.


      Schmidt, B., Roberts, R. S., Anderson, P. J., Asztalos, E. V.,


Costantini, L., Davis, P. G., ... & Moddemann, D. (2017). Academic


performance, motor function, and behavior 11 years after neonatal caffeine


citrate therapy for apnea of prematurity: an 11-year follow-up of the CAP


randomized clinical trial. JAMA pediatrics, 171(6), 564-572.


      Spiller, G. A. (2019). Caffeine. CRC Press.


        Turnbull, D., Rodricks, J. V., Mariano, G. F., & Chowdhury, F.


(2017). Caffeine and cardiovascular health. Regulatory Toxicology and


Pharmacology, 89, 165-185.


      Winerdal, M., Urmaliya, V., Winerdal, M. E., Fredholm, B. B.,


Winqvist, O., & Ådén, U. (2017). Single dose caffeine protects the neonatal


mouse brain against hypoxia ischemia. PloS one, 12(1), e0170545.


      Verster, J. C., & Koenig, J. (2018). Caffeine intake and its sources: A


review of national representative studies. Critical reviews in food science and


nutrition, 58(8), 1250-1259.


        Yousefi‐Nooraie, R., Akbari‐Kamrani, M., & Mortaz‐Hedjri, S.


(2018). Caffeine for cognition. The Cochrane database of systematic


reviews, 2018(8).


                                     Annotated Bibliography


 


      Brice, M. (2016). Seven Surprising Health Benefits of Coffee. Medical


Daily. Discusses recent research that proves caffeine to have a number of


important health benefits, including longer life, low likelihood of contracting


Alzheimer’s, and improved long-term memory.


      Meeusen, R., & Decroix, L. (2018). Nutritional supplements and the


brain. International journal of sport nutrition and exercise metabolism, 28(2),


200-211. A survey of numerous recent studies concerning the effect of


caffeine on the bloodstream’s ability to transport oxygen and on the


consequent long- and short-term health-effects of caffeine.


      Spiller, G. A. (2019). Caffeine. CRC Press. A comprehensive, non-


partisan analysis of recent scientific work concerning the health-effects of


caffeine, as well as the economics of the coffee- and tea-industries. Special


attention is paid to recent findings concerning the probable link between


increased neural plasticity and elevated levels of caffeine intake.


        Turnbull, D., Rodricks, J. V., Mariano, G. F., & Chowdhury, F.


(2017). Caffeine and cardiovascular health. Regulatory Toxicology and


Pharmacology, 89, 165-185. Describes a series of studies in which the effects


of caffeine on cardiovascular health were shown to be positive and,


consequently, not to be similar to those of other agents, such as sodium andnicotine, that increase heartrate and blood-pressure.


      Winerdal, M., Urmaliya, V., Winerdal, M. E., Fredholm, B. B.,


Winqvist, O., & Ådén, U. (2017). Single dose caffeine protects the neonatal


mouse brain against hypoxia ischemia. PloS one, 12(1), e0170545. A detailed


discussion of striking findings on the part of researchers concerning the use


of caffeine to minimize hypoxia-induced brain-damage in neonatal mice.


        Yousefi‐Nooraie, R., Akbari‐Kamrani, M., & Mortaz‐Hedjri, S.


(2018). Caffeine for cognition. The Cochrane database of systematic


reviews, 2018(8). A discussion of recent studies concerning the alleged


neuro-protective properties of caffeine. Provides clear, quantitative data to


the effect that caffeine improves performance on standardized tests. 


                            Who started the Cold War?


 


              The Soviet Union’s political ideology was inherently aggressive


and expansionistic, and that—and that alone—is why the Cold War


happened. It is obviously more politically correct to take the view that both of


the two major parties involved in the Cold War were equally responsible for


its genesis. But that isn’t at all true, for reasons to be discussed. Nor is it true


that, once the Cold War had begun, the situation was morally symmetrical,


with both parties behaving equally morally and equally immorally. The


situation was fundamentally asymmetrical. This was because communism—


especially, the particularly invidious form of it on which the USSR was based


—was not simply one political system among others. Bolshevik communism


was not intended to bring peace or prosperity either to the Russian people or


to the rest of the world; and the founders of the Soviet Union had every


intention of bringing about a war, or some kind or other, with the ‘decadent


West’, especially the United States.


      “It is better than half the world perish and the other half be


communist”, said Lenin, founder the Soviet Union, “than the entire human


race live and communism perish.” Before World War II, the Soviet


Leadership, headed by Joseph Stalin, had already deliberately starved onethird of the Ukrainian population to death, as a way of breaking Ukrainian


resistance to Soviet rule. In additions, millions of people in all of the Soviet


Republics had been shot, imprisoned in the Gulag, or forced to relocate en


masse. Freedom of speech was non-existent; private property was equally


non-existent; living conditions were wretched; there were virtually no


personal, religious, or commercial freedoms of any kind. Although some


people obviously had more power than others, nobody had any legal rights of


any kind. Stalinist Russia was the purest example in human history of a state


that was inimical to its own people.


      In popular culture, we are often told that Stalin corrupted the


revolution. “The revolution began with noble ideals”, we are told. “Trotsky


and Lenin wanted to create a just and egalitarian social order, but Stalin


seized power and derailed the Revolution.” Lenin and Trotsky had


deliberately created a hyper-authoritarian state, and they used it to break the


Russian the middle class, as well as most of the rest of Russian society.


Lenin’s great ‘theoretical innovation’ as a Marxist was his belief that that, in


order for a Marxist state to be created, it was necessary that a ‘revolutionary


vanguard’, operating without any other party’s consent, autonomously take


power and, once in power, forcibly impose communism on society. As for


Trotsky, his great “innovation” as a Marxist was his belief in “permanent


revolution” in all countries. In Trotsky’s view, the rightful objective of aMarxist “revolutionary vanguard” was to impose Marxist communism on all


nations, not just on this or that specific nation.


      Lenin and Trotsky were in complete agreement on all of these points.


In fact, their only significant points of disagreement concerned matters that


were internal to Marxist theory and proved to be of no significance. For


example, Trotsky, unlike Lenin and Marx, held that labor unions were not


inimical to the long-term interests of the ‘proletariat.’ But since there were no


labor unions in Russia, this disagreement was not important. Also, Lenin and


Trotsky made it their objective to strip all Russians, including peasants, of all


of their assets and to kill those who resisted. They rationalized this by saying


that anyone who had any assets and did not immediately relinquish them was


for that very reason a ‘kulak’ (meaning an exploitative landowner,


comparable to a feudal lord) who, as such, had to be ‘exterminated.’ During


World War 1, when the Red Cross entered Russia to provide food and


medicine to the sick and malnourished Russian peasants, Lenin and Trotsky


organized troops to drive them out of Russia, which they succeeded in doing


and which they rationalized by saying that the Russian peasantry had to


suffer as much as possible so that they would come to hate the Tsarist order


and join them in overthrowing it. 


      Stalin did indeed seize power; but he was only able to do so because


the Communist Party had total power and he belonged to it. The CommunistParty had total power because Lenin and Trotsky fought for decades to give it


total power. Stalin and Trotsky were indeed foes, but not because they had


important ideological disagreements. Quite the contrary, they were in perfect


agreement as to what kind of government Russia was to have, their only


disagreement concerning who was to be in charge of it.


      Stalin exiled Trotsky in 1928; and by the start of WWII, Stalin had


long since had total power. Stalin used World War II to expand his power


base to other countries, his first move in this direction being to absorb all of


Eastern Europe into the Soviet Union. It is generally believed that this was


the beginning of the Cold War. Not so. Before the Soviet Union had even


been established, Lenin and Trotsky had agitated for Communist revolution


in the United States and Britain and had already established a network of


‘fellow travelers.’ After WWII ended, the Soviet Union had real power; and


Stalin, and the many others who wanted to spread the gospel of Marxist


communism, had soviet military power behind them and therefore no longer


had to rely solely on agitation and other such grass-roots measures. But the


so-called ‘Cold War’ was merely a militarized continuation of a campaign to


take control of the West that had been occurring since the first decade of the

th
20 century. This led to the wholesale Marxist takeover of China, North


Korea, Cuba, and Cambodia.


      The United States’ role in the Cold War was entirely defensive, inevery sense. To be sure, it made many terrible mistakes. It fought


communism where it wasn’t a significant threat (e.g. Vietnam, Angola) and


didn’t fight it where it was a significant threat (e.g. Eastern Europe, right after


the end of WWII). But the Soviet Union was the aggressor. Also, the Soviet


Union’s economy was completely broken; so even though its post-Stalinist


leaders lacked the Marxist ardor of their predecessors, they had no choice but


to expand, since their economy wasn’t self-sufficient. (When the Soviet


Union fell in 1989, it was because it simply ran out of money.) The United


States had a booming economy during the Cold War—and before it, except


during the early 1930s—and stood to gain little, from its wars-by-proxy with


the Soviet Union. It did not gain resources or land or trading partners; and it


also lost good will and credibility, with its own citizens and with the rest of


the world. But the Soviet Union had everything to gain from its engagements


abroad; and those engagements where what kept it economically afloat


during its short existence.


      In conclusion, the Cold War was a war of Soviet aggression, fueled by


a commitment to aggressive expansionism that was built into its very system


by its founders and catalyzed by its desperate need for resources. For the


United States, the Cold War was a losing proposition; the United States did


not profit from its engagements in Vietnam or Korea or Cuba or Guyana or


Angola. Moreover, those engagements were public relations disasters. Theonly reason the United States undertook them is that it was trying to keep


Soviet aggression in check. 


                 Who was a better President? Eisenhower or JFK?


 


        Ultimately, Eisenhower was a better president than JFK. This is not


because JFK failed to accomplish anything during his presidency: he


accomplished a great deal; and his list of presidential accomplishments is


longer and more illustrious than Eisenhower’s list. It isn’t because he did too


little that JFK was less of a President than Eisenhower, but rather because he


did too much. The American people take it for granted that their President is


supposed to solve their problems. This is largely JFK’s doing: thanks to him,


government is now expected to be, for lack of a better term, a ‘big brother’—


a righter of wrongs, as opposed to a neutral administrator, with the result that


government is now so large that nobody’s rights are secure. Eisenhower’s


presidency, by contrast, was emotionally neutral and, unlike JFK’s, did not


pave the way for the situation we have now, in which the government is


omnipresent.


      Let us start by listing Eisenhower’s main presidential

                  [120]
accomplishments:


      *He balanced the budget.


      *He created the highway system.


      *He kept America out of war.


      *He ended the Korean war and did so on terms that were at leastreasonably consistent with American interests.


      *He signed the first Civil Rights Acts into law.


 


      Now let us state his main presidential failures (or what are taken to be

    [121]
such):


 


      *He failed to end the Cold War.


      *He failed to help the American farmer.


        *Economic growth, though steady, was slow.


      *He did not combat the hard-right, McCarthyite wing of the


Republican Party.


      *He did not promote Civil Rights sufficiently aggressively.


 


      Notice that Eisenhower’s supposed ‘failures’ as a President were


really about his not taking an interventionist, moralizing role in American


affairs. When we say that Eisenhower ‘should’ have done more to combat


McCarthyism, what is the justification? McCarthy had a position; other


people had different positions. It may have been Eisenhower’s responsibility


to curb criminal misconduct on McCarthy’s part, but it was not his


responsibility to extirpate all support for McCarthy’s political views. So this


‘failure’ of Eisenhower’s was a failure only relative to an activist,Kennedyesque conception of government.


      Now let us look at Kennedy’s presidential achievements and failings,

                                              [122]
starting with his (alleged) achievements:


 


      *He averted nuclear war.


      *He founded the peace corp.


      *He encouraged public service on the part of Americans.


      *He helped usher in affirmative action, equal pay, and civil rights.


      *He started the US space program.


      *He gave a temporary boost to the economy. 


 


      Now let us look at his failures:


 


      *He gave arms to many (then) US allies, many of which are now


dangerous actors.


      *He deepened our involvement in Viet Nam.


      *He failed to remove Castro from power, emboldening the Soviets to


threaten us with Nuclear war.


 


      JFK’s achievements are impressive—but dubious. The theme we see


running through his presidency is that it is the President’s job to be a hero: arighter of wrongs, as opposed to a mere administrator---which sometimes has


positive effects (e.g. civil rights), sometimes has negative ones (e.g. Viet


Nam), and sometimes has ambiguous effects (e.g. expansion of money supply


and credit, leading to temporary economic spike), but has led to over-


expansions of government in both domestic and foreign policy.


      Sadly, unless there is an actual crisis, it is the government’s job to


govern—not to inspire, not to create a utopia, not even to eliminate all


injustices. Eisenhower’s Presidency was a blank compare to Kennedy’s, his


main accomplishment being the construction of the national highway system.


Kennedy’s system was certainly not a blank, and he was obviously in many


respects a singularly good president; but his legacy was that Presidents are


supposed to be heroes, not mere civil servants, which has caused politics to


become much more ideological and divisive than it has to be and which,


consequently, has impaired the effectiveness of government.


                   Who was a better President? Nixon or LBJ?


 


        Richard Nixon is now made out to be a bigoted right-wing extremist,


and LBJ is made out to be the exact opposite, the conventional wisdom that


Richard Nixon was an oppressor and LBJ a champion of the oppressed. But


this position is not consistent with their actual political legacies. Under LBJ,


and to a large extent because of him, the United States government engaged


in aggressive campaigns to improve education and to fight poverty,


unemployment, and racial discrimination. But the aftermath of these


measures is increased unemployment among African Americans, a


dysfunctional educational system for everybody, and a bloated and hyper-


authoritarian Federal government. Richard Nixon, by contrast, did have at


least some unambiguous successes as President and must therefore be


regarded as better President than LBJ.


      Let us start by listing what many would regard as LBJ’s greatest


accomplishments:


 


      *He created the welfare system, with its general financial provisions


for those in dire economic straits.


      *He signed into law measures that aggressively racism towards ethnic


minorities illegal in all but the most completely personal contexts.      *He increased Federal funding, as well as oversight, of education by a


factor of ten.


 


      LBJ’s greatest mistake as President is generally believed to be his


decision to deep American involvement in Viet Nam.


 


      What about Richard Nixon? What were his greatest accomplishments


as President?


 


        *Nixon founded the EPA.


      *Nixon officially recognized Communist China, which, by his


      intention, hastened the demise of the Soviet Union.


        *Nixon ended the Viet Nam war


 


              What were Nixon’s greatest mistakes?


 


      *He used the instruments of government to cover up a crime that he


committed.


      *He deepened American involvement in Viet Nam before ending the


war.


      *He started the War on Drugs.      *He took America off the gold standard.


 


      With regard to the last item, I do not myself know that this was a


mistake; but it is sufficiently often mentioned that I felt obliged to include it.


As for the War on Drugs, for various reasons (the main being that penalizes


lifestyles, as opposed to crimes, and therefore turns the police into thought


police), I believe this to be one of the worst mistakes ever made in the history


of public policy, and it is, in my judgment, the blackest spot on Nixon’s


legacy.


      Given only what we’ve said thus far, LBJ appears to be the obvious


front-runner. But not so fast! LBJ’s ‘War on Poverty’ created more poverty,


especially among the very groups that it was intended to help. Prior to LBJ’s


great reforms,


 


        *Unemployment among African Americans was lower than it is.


      *African Americans were considerably more likely to own their


      businesses than they are now


        *African Americans were more likely to be employed as engineers


and to have trades.


      *Crime among African Americans was lower, as were incarceration


rates.      *Income-gaps between Caucasians and African Americans were


      smaller, as were education-gaps.


      *Public education was better and less expensive.


      *The Federal government was smaller.


      *The cost of living was lower.


      *Rates of depression and mental illness were lower.


      *Rates of homeownership, including among African Americans, were


higher.


        *Levels of well-being, including among African Americans, were


higher.


 


      In a word, each of LBJ’s signature policies, though admirable in


intent, seriously backfired. Also, LBJ’s decisions concerning Viet Nam cost


lives on both sides, while failing to advance American interests.


      By contrast, Nixon’s good deeds as Presidents have stood the test of


time. By recognizing China, Nixon created infighting within the Communist


bloc and thereby paved the way for the demise of Soviet Communism. AS for


the EPA, it does water it is supposed to do: it protects the environment,


including wildlife, and helps keep water clean and water drinkable. As for


Nixon’s behavior vis-à-vis Vietnam, this, like many other aspects of his


presidency, was ambiguous. But he did end the war, despite being underpressure from his own base to continue it; and that is more than can be said


for Johnson.


      In conclusion, LBJ clearly meant well, but his policies to a large


extent did the opposite of what they were supposed to do. According to


economists, this is because those policies replaced the invisible hand of


supply-and-demand with the dead hand of government policy, leading to a


weakened economy and a consequent loss of wealth across the board,


especially for those on the bottom economic rung. I suspect that there is more


to the story. I personally do not believe that welfare is particularly


destructive, economically or otherwise, and I don’t believe LBJ was wrong to


implement generous welfare policies. But his expansion of government was


too fast and too large, its aftermath being a government that is too large and


is too involved in people’s lives.


 


     Technology-caused Job-shortages and the Need for Universal Welfare


 


How, if at all, will artificial jobs affect employment in the future? Are you an


optimist on this score, or a pessimist?


 


 


        Artificial intelligence eliminates several jobs for each job that it


creates. This is what has been happening since AI’s very inception, and this is


what will continue to happen. Some people claim that AI creates as many


jobs as it eliminates. This is false, and it is the purpose of this essay to prove


that it is false. I will start by showing that it is inherent in what technology is


that technological advancement decreases the amount of work that there is for


people to do. I will then explain why this is doubly true of AI. I will end by


discussing how government should deal with the job-shortage that AI  will


inevitably lead to.


      Technology reduces the need to work, and it makes the work that it


doesn’t eliminate less difficult. Thanks to tractors, sewing-machines, and gas-


powered drills, it takes little effort to do in an afternoon what it would take


months of back-breaking labor to do by hand.  What is true of cars, tractors,


and sewing machines is true of AI-based technologies:  thanks to


smartphone-apps and computer-programs, it takes little effort, as well as littletraining, to do in a single afternoon what would otherwise be impossible or


would require months of intense intellectual work on the part of a trained


professional.


      Many people have either lost jobs to technology or fear that they soon


will. Right-wing economists have argued that such people are wrong.


According to such economists, technology creates a job for every job that it


takes away. In their view, technology took jobs away from cobblers, but it


created new jobs for the engineers needed to build and maintain the machines


that made cobblers unnecessary. Similarly, so they argue, AI is taking jobs


away from stockbrokers, but it has created new jobs for the programmers


needed to service the e-platforms that eliminated the need for stockbrokers. In


general, so it is argued, technology needs people to service it and therefore


creates jobs that take the place of those that it eliminates.


      This position is false and always has been. In societies that have little


or no technology, the unemployment rate tends to be zero. There was no


unemployment in Cambodia under Pol Pot; nor was there any in an Eskimo


fishing community in the year 1600. The reason is the same in each case:


where there is no technology, labor is inefficient, and everybody must


therefore work. To be sure, new technology does indeed create new kinds of


work: before there were cars, there were no auto-mechanics; and before there


were smartphones, there were no app-developers. But the purpose oftechnology is to minimize how much work we have to do; it is not to alter the


nature of what we have to do while keeping its quantity the same. If cars,


tractors, and fork-lifts didn’t lighten workloads, we wouldn’t have much use


for them. Consequently, there is no truth whatsoever to the idea that


technological advancement creates as much work as it eliminates.


      Why was such an absurd position ever argued for? The main reason is


that the economists who advocate this position want to minimize the amount


of government-interference in the economy. Their position is that


government regulation restricts commerce and thwarts economic


development: and in most contexts, they are right, since a society cannot


function for long unless its members are allowed to exchange goods and


services. But even if unregulated societies economically outperform regulated


ones, it doesn’t follow that the government should never regulate. Second,


unemployment benefits are not a form of government regulation and don’t


have the same invidious economic effects as regulations. The law that


prevents people from teaching unless they have a master’s degree in


education is a regulation, since it prevents the market from deciding who


works and gives that power to the government. The laws prevent people from


killing and robbing are not regulations, since they don’t do this, and neither,


for the same reason, are the laws that give people welfare benefits. To be


sure, welfare benefits are not economically innocuous, since they have to bepaid for out of people’s taxes; but granting that excessive taxation hurts an


economy, moderate taxation is sometimes a necessity, this being a case in


point.


      Technology has always eliminated jobs; but in times past, the contrary


position, though false, was at least defensible. Pre-AI technology did not run


itself, and its effect was not so much to eliminate employment as it was to


make employment less about physical labor and more about knowing how to


operate labor-saving machines. When the tractor came into existence,


agricultural work became that much less about physical labor and that much


more about knowing how to operate a tractor. But the story is very different


when tractors are replaced by self-operating tractors and when, more


generally, machines are replaced by robots. True—people will still be needed


to maintain those robots, but there will be very few such jobs in relation to


the number of labor jobs lost, and those jobs will also require unusually high


levels of training and intellectual acumen. In general, a slight improvements


in technology creates massive gains in efficiency and a corresponding drop in


the demand for a given person’s labor.


      This is cause for alarm if people are still required to work for food,


lodging, and other necessities, since new technology, especially AI-based


technology, makes most people economically redundant. But it is not a cause


for alarm if people are not forced to work for basic necessities. And thanks tothe surpluses of wealth created by the very technologies that make most


people economically redundant, there is no reason for most people to work.


      The standard response to this is that, unless people are forced to work,


they will become parasites and society will fall apart. But the truth is that


most people right now are parasites: most jobs are not necessary and cost


society more than they are worth. Somebody who receives $20,000 in welfare


is quite harmless. But a redundant police officer or government bureaucrat is


not harmless, since, unlike the welfare recipient, that person has power. This


is not to say that all government employees and police officers are useless.


But there is no way to create jobs for people without giving them at least


some power. Even the lowliest and most unnecessary clerk can jam up


legitimate business—and is likely to do so to make himself feel important.


Creating jobs for unemployable people gives them the ability to prevent


employable people from contributing, and it is therefore best simply to give


them money for basic necessities. Ironically, the belief of right-wing


economists that everyone should have to compete in the arena of commerce,


with its consequent refusal on the part of government to give welfare to


people who simply cannot do so, leads to the creation of vast numbers of jobs


that benefit nobody, including those who have them. I therefore suggest that a


universal welfare policy be instituted. In this I am in agreement with many


distinguished people, including economically informed right-wing figures,such as Richard Nixon, who was one of the first public figures to advocate


such a policy, as well as technology-wise left-wing figures, such as Mark


Zuckerberg.


               Ideas as Networks: Reflecting on Steven Johnson’s


                          “Where Good Ideas Come From”


 


      In his TED Talk “Where Good Ideas Come From”, Steven Johnson

                                                      [123]
outlines a new (or what he believes to be a new) view as to the genesis of


ideas. In his talk, Johnson focused mainly on ideas of significance, such as


Evolutionary Theory (his own example) or psychoanalytic theory; but


assuming that his model is correct, it may well hold of ideas in general. The


traditional view, according to Johnson, is that great ideas represent existential


leaps: the great thinker in question is just ‘sitting there’, as it were, and the


great idea in question ‘happens upon him,’ like a visitation. The stock


example is Newton sitting under a tree, when an apple falls on his head,


whereupon the concept gravity force flashes into his mind.


      Before we even consider what Johnson says, we can already see some


of the holes in this picture. A lot of objects fall on a lot of people’s heads, but


very few of them respond by having scientific insights. This suggests that,


when such an event leads to such a realization, it isn’t so much by creating a


new idea as it is by jolting the thinker in question into finally seeing the


significance of some constellation of ideas that is already at work within him.


When the apple fell on Newton’s head—supposing for argument’s sake that


the story is actually true--it gave him one last tidbit of information, deliveredin the form of a rousing shock, that brought together a previously all-but-


unified network of ideas that he had been working on.


      And this is basically what Johnson says. “We have this very rich


vocabulary for describing moments of inspiration,” writes Johnson (3:17).


“We have the flash of insight, the stroke of insight, we have epiphanies, we


have eureka moments, we have the light-bulb moment.” Embodied in all of


these metaphors, Johnson continues, is the idea that an idea is a self-


contained “single thing,” when in actuality, Johnson says, “an idea is a


network.” 


      Johnson then points out that what we think of as an idea involves


pluralities of neurons firing simultaneously, which, assuming that each neural


firing carries its own quantum of information, suggests that ‘an’ idea is really


a lot of little ideas coming together. (I find this reasoning persuasive, since


the idea that individual neurons bear no information strikes me as a non-


starter.) Having made clear what, speaking anatomically, ideas are, he then


asks: What kinds of environments conduce to idea-creation? When he poses


this question, it is not clear whether Johnson is referring to physical


environments or social environments or both; but his answer suggests that he


is referring to what might be called ‘socio-physical environments’, meaning


environments that are defined both by their physical and their social


properties. Johnson argues that great ideas surface in open spaces wherepeople can move and also talk freely. It is not in cubicles that people come up


with ideas, Johnson says, nor is it in the laboratory. It is in an open space,


such as the cafeteria or the boardroom, where people are not insulated and


where they can be exposed to other people’s thoughts.


      Johnson begins his talk by pointing out that the beginning of the


modern scientific era coincided with the invention of the coffee house; and he


says that this is not a coincidence, partly because, when that happened, coffee


replaced alcohol as the drink of choice, which obviously gave intellectual


activity a boost, but also, so he argues, because the coffee houses of the day


were physically spacious and encouraged free exchanges of ideas. (This idea


of Johnson’s is consistent with the fact that a number of great writers and


composers worked in coffee houses: Bach, Hemingway, Sartre, and countless


others.)


      Later in the talk, Johnson discusses how many a supposed case of a


great scientific ‘Eureka-moment’ was either a myth, sometimes put forth by


the scientist in question himself, or was at most the culmination of a long


period of gestation. Johnson references the case of Darwin specifically, who


claimed to come up with evolutionary theory in just such a flash, but careful


examination of whose scientific records shows that he had been working on


the idea for decades.


      Johnson does not make it explicit how these two ideas—first, thatopen and movement-friendly spaces encourage idea-generation and, second,


that ideas are networks, not self-contained units—are related. But the idea


seems to be that, because an individual idea is really a convergence of a lot of


little ideas, they are most likely to be formed in places where a number of


people, each with his own ‘little idea’, can exchange and amalgamate their


little ideas into one big one. Just as idea-creation in an individual mind


involves internal networks of neural-firings, so idea-creation in pluralities of


individuals involves external networks of verbal exchanges, which


exchanges, Johnson suggests, are most likely to happen where there is


freedom of movement and a corresponding freedom of speech.


      My own experience is consistent with Johnson’s hypothesis. I myself


have had ideas while sitting in a cubicle, but those were usually derivatives of


ideas formed as a result of the kinds of free and open exchanges that Johnson


discusses. Also, when people are physically shut up in cubicles or in other


prison-cell-like spaces, their physical surroundings are, as it were, telling


them not to be free or let their ideas roam. I myself know a number of


talented writers, thinkers, and artists; and when looking for a new apartment


or home, each and every one of them wants space, quiet, and natural light.


None of them, if given an option, chooses to work in a cramped space. And I


have noticed that, although some of them are slovenly, their work-spaces


have an uncluttered and open quality: they may not make their beds and theymay leave a sock or t-shirt on the floor; but they don’t obstruct their own


physical movement with knick-knacks or bulky furniture. In the living spaces


of my less creative friends, so I have also noticed, there is likely to be extra


physical ‘junk’, for lack of a better word (e.g. space-hogging beanbags or


sofas) as well as junk in the aesthetic sense (e.g. crass posters and cheap


artwork)---all of which tends to be absent from the dwelling-places of my


more creative acquaintances, suggesting that Johnson may well be right to


link intellectual innovation to certain kinds of physical spaces. 


                 Are we born good? Response to: “Born Good?”


                  (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FRvVFW85IcU)


 


      Two questions arise in connection with this video. First, are babies


born with a sense of right and wrong? Second, what does this video have to


say on this matter?


      Let us start with the first question. Unless people were predisposed to


be moral, they would never develop morality. People can learn math because


they naturally think in terms of quantities, and learning math is therefore a


matter of correctly deploying aptitudes and tendencies. People can learn


music because they instinctively respond to music (babies are soothed by


classical music and sometimes rock to the beat of a song that they hear) and


even  instinctively produce it (babies rhythmically beats their hands on table


tops and sometimes produce inchoate singing-like sounds).


      Similarly, babies can learn morality because they are already


empathically connected with others and, for this reason, instinctively


distinguish between kind and cruel behavior. To be sure, an infant’s moral


code is not that it would be feasible for an adult, or even a child, to have,


since it doesn’t embody a sufficiently deep understanding of the


accommodations that must be made to others if society and even personal


relationships are to work. But, as anyone who has had a younger siblingknows, babies are quick to bond with others and are also quick to respond to


kindness with kindness and to meanness with coldness or hostility---all of


which bespeaks a certain innate morality. And a child’s moral education is


about shaping its innate moral code, not creating it out of nothing.


      Some children turn into psychopaths or criminals. But when this


happens, it is not, at least not categorically, because they were born without


moral codes, but is rather because their innate senses of morality were


decommissioned by adverse circumstances.


      So the answer to the question ‘are people innately moral?’ is: Yes—


people are born with a certain morality, albeit one that, like the rest of one’s


mind, has to be sculpted and honed before it can be society-ready.


      As for the video, it too answered this question in the affirmative, and it


supported that answer with relevant experimental data (e.g. babies preferred


the friendly looking teddy bears to the unfriendly looking ones). At the same


time, as someone who has nephews and nieces and younger siblings, there


was nothing in the video about infant-behavior or psychology that I did not


already know, and the video also didn’t answer any of the relevant follow-up


questions, including the question ‘why do some people become bad if they


are innately good?’, as well as the question ‘given that people are innately


moral, what is moral instruction about?’, both of which we answered just


now.                         An Exercise in Legal Interpretation


 


 


      It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly acquire, receive, or


otherwise transfer any human organ for valuable consideration for use in


human transplantation if the transfer affects interstate commerce. The


preceding sentence does not apply with respect to human organ paired


donation.


 

                                                                      [124]
      42 U.S. Code § 274e. Prohibition of organ purchases


 


      Both programs violate Section 301 of FOTA (henceforth simply


‘FOTA’, since we are only concerned with Section 301). They


unambiguously violate it relative to intentionalist, purposivist, and pragmatist


conceptions of legal interpretation; and they ambiguously violate it relative to


a textualist conception. It is only relative to a strictly textualist approach that


either one of them could plausibly be construed as not being a violation of


FOTA, but even this is doubtful. 


      The upshot of FOTA is that organs may not be bought and sold for


money or money-equivalents. In this context, the term “tangible


consideration” obviously refers to money or money-equivalents, such asproperty or services. Significantly, FOTA, originally enacted in 1984, was


amended in 2013 to use the term “valuable consideration” instead of

                            [125]
“tangible consideration.” “Tangible consideration” is an offer of a tangible


asset, and in accounting a “tangible asset” is a physical asset, such as a piece


of equipment. Cash is an intangible asset, as are stocks and bonds and all


other securities. Since the purpose of FOTA is clearly to prevent the


exchanging of organs for any relatively liquid asset, “tangible consideration”


was therefore too narrow in scope, since it didn’t exclude any securities,


including cash, and therefore had to replaced be “valuable consideration.” 


      Health World’s Program 1 (henceforth ‘HP1’) is a proposal to the


effect that, if a given person X elects to donate a kidney to Health World,


then Health World will wire $50,000 to a charity of X’s choosing. Health


World’s Program 2 (henceforth ‘HP2’) is to the effect that, if X elects to


donate a kidney, Health World will wire $50,000 to some other person Y of


X’s choosing, with the qualification that Y be classified as ‘poor’ according


to World Bank standards.


      There are two preliminary points. First, the question here is not


whether HP1 and HP2 are morally legitimate. There may well be good moral


reasons for their existence, especially given the fact that there is a shortage of


viable kidney’s despite the abundant potential supply; and they may even be


well intentioned, in the sense that the objective of those behind them mayindeed be to make kidneys available to those who need them. All of that is


simply irrelevant, , however, and the question here is simply whether Health


Programs 1 and 2 violate FOTA. The answer is that they do.


        Program 1, if put into effect, would simply allow for the creation of


organ-money ‘laundromats.’ Poor person X wants to sell his kidney to organ-


trafficker Y. FOTA prohibits Y from directly giving X the money. HP1


creates a backdoor. Y can create a ‘charity’ of his own (or, more likely, he


has already done so), which, though it may discharge some legitimate


charitable services, is basically just a front for Y’s organ-trafficking business.


Alternately, Y can bribe or otherwise corrupt an operative of some existing


charitable agency to collude with Y in his organ-trafficking business.


      This is not an idle hypothetical, but a veritable inevitability. Charities,


especially international ones, are proverbially difficult to oversee; and even


the most reputable ones, such as UNICEF, keep the lion’s share of the money


they receive in charitable donations, supposedly for the purpose of defraying


overhead costs. It is reported that less than 17% of the money donated to


UNICEF actually makes it to UNICEF’S supposed beneficiaries, the rest

                                                [126]
being eaten up by UNICEF-related costs. Given how desperate many


people are for money and given how much money people are willing to pay


for organs, the introduction of a backdoor involving charities would simply


be an invitation to create front-charities or to turn existing charities intoparties to the organ-trade.


      Also, given the costs involved in running a charity, such as World


Health, and given also the dubious nature of World Health’s ambit, it would


likely be forced to resort to de facto organ-trafficking simply to stay afloat


financially. Charities are expensive to run, as the case of UNICEF shows,


even when the services they provide are unambiguously legal and moral, and


World Health would likely be insolvent if forced to rely on legal cashflow.


      Here is an analogy. In most parts of the United States, prostitution is


illegal. Suppose that sex workers came up with an arrangement whereby,


instead of receiving direct payment, they would provide sexual favors in


exchange for large cash donations to charities. First of all, those sex workers


will not even put forth such a proposal unless they already have an agreement


with the charities to cut them in financially. This is not a slur on sex workers;


it is simply to point out that, like all workers, they need to be paid and must


know that they will be paid before entering into an arrangement of this kind.


Further, if such a proposal were enacted, ‘charities’ would instantly spring up


to take advantage of the situation. UNICEF and other conventional charities


don’t create this sort of ‘feeding frenzy’, since they don’t provide a work-


around for people wishing to engage in extremely lucrative black-market


activities. HP1 does create such a workaround.


      The purpose of FOTA is to prevent the exchanging of organs foranything having cash-value. So from a purposivist perspective, HP1 is


unambiguously a violation of FOTA. Given that, supply and demand being


what they are, HP1 would effectively nullify FOTA, or at the very least force


violators of it to assume the appearance of being philanthropists, HP1 is a


violation of FOTA—additionally so since, in addition to providing a


workaround for such violators, it would also tarnish the reputations of


charities in general. Given that the intentions of the framers of HP1 were


clearly to prevent the exchanging of organs for cash or cash-equivalents,


HP1, which simply reroutes cash-for-organs through ‘charities’, is


unambiguously a violation of FOTA.


      It is only from a narrowly textualist perspective that HP1 can be


construed as not being a violation of FOTA. Here is the original (1984)


reading of the relevant part of the statute:


 


      It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly acquire, receive, or


otherwise transfer any human organ for tangible consideration for use in


human transplantation if the transfer affects interstate commerce. The


preceding sentence does not apply with respect to human organ paired

          [127]
donation.


 


      If Y offers to donate money to X in exchange for X’s kidney, Y isoffering ‘valuable’ consideration, but not ‘tangible’ consideration. As


previously stated, tangible consideration is offer of a tangible asset, and a


tangible asset is a physical asset, such as a tractor. Even cash, as also


previously stated, is not a ‘tangible asset.’ Nor are copyrights or even


physical services. So yes---law-makers opened up a serious loophole by using


the term ‘tangible consideration.’ Technically, the 1984 version makes it


legal to sell organs for cash; it prohibits the sale of organs for physical assets


but otherwise doesn’t criminalize it.


      But this only shows how little weight is to be placed on the term


‘tangible.’ The statute is obviously intended to prohibit the cash-sale of


organs, this being why, in FOTA’s aftermath, organ-trafficking remained

                                                      [128]
quite as underground as it had previously been. So again—yes: Thanks to


the term “tangible asset”, FOTA (1984) can, on a textualist reading, be


construed to permit HP1---but only because, on such a reading, it can be


construed to permit organ-sales in general. All of which shows that, in this


context, a strictly textualist approach is not the right one.


      All of this applies with to HP2, which proposes that, if Y wants to pay


for X’s kidney, he can do so, provided that the money goes to some poor


person Z of X’s choosing. HP2 is simply proposing that organ-sales be


middled through intermediaries or agents—who, for legal reasons, will claim


to be ‘friends’, or some such. Such a transaction is not legitimated by the‘paired donation’ provision in FOTA, for the simple reason that paired


donation does not involve anyone’s being paid, directly or indirectly, to give


up their organs. HP2 violates FOTA from a purposivist perspective, given


that the purpose of FOTA is to prevent organ-sales; from an intentionalist


perspective, given that the intention of the law-makers in question is to


prevent organ-sales; and from a pragmatist perspective, given that the


intention of the law-makers in question is to prevent organ-sales along with


the collateral damage that would result, including loss of credibility to


legitimate charitable organizations, done by organ-sales. From a strictly


textualist perspective, HP2 is in the clear, thanks to the term ‘tangible


consideration’, in virtue of which even straight organ-for-cash transactions


are technically legal. But this, echoing what we said earlier, only shows the


irrelevance in this context of a strictly textualist construction.


 


                           Posts for Business Ethics Class


Can you think of an example where someone has been honest but not ethical,


                        as Carter (assigned reading) says?


 


Yes! I have known many people who used honesty about little things to be


dishonest about big things. Somebody would fail to repay a debt to me, and


then, when I called them on it, they would quibble about my wording to cloak


what was really happening. And their quibbles were technically accurate; I


might have said that the money was loaned 28 days ago, and they would


point out that it was 27 or 29, or whatnot, and then make the exchange be


about my supposed looseness with words, or whatnot, when the truth is that


they were failing to honor an agreement that they not only willingly entered


into but positively inveigled me into entering into with them. So yes, honesty,


when misdeployed, can be a way of distracting and deceiving. 


       What was your decision in "Desperate Air?" Sell? Not sell? Why?


 


My decision was not to sell, at least not without first disclosing the problem


to the prospective buyers. Even though I could effectuate the sale  without


being in violation of Florida law, I would still have deceived  the other parties


to the deal, and I would also have put many people's physical health in


jeopardy. Not to mention that, when these problems surfaced, which they


inevitably would, my company and I would look like liars who cared not one


straw for honesty in business or for human welfare. So no---no sale without


first disclosing all material facts, the hazardous waste issues definitely being


of the material variety.


         How far would YOU have gone in the obedience experiment?


 


Speaking personally, whatever I would have done in that context, I would


have done because I personally wanted to do it, not because I was 'under


orders' to do it. In my experience, people who say 'I'm just doing my job' or


'my hands are tied' are either lying or, if they're telling the truth, then they


should quit those jobs. If I had decided to shock the subjects (or do what I


believed to be shocking them), I would have done so out of sadism, or some


other purely personal motive, not out of some ethic of obedience, and I would


have admitted as much to myself. This is not to say that I would have acted


sadistically--I'm inclined to think that I would have been in the 10% who


bailed. But whatever I ended up doing, I wouldn't have used the excuse that I


was 'following orders'-especially since, in this context, there would be no real


reason for me to follows those orders. 


 Reactions to the Jones Day report on the rankings scandal at the Fox School


 


Perhaps I'm a tad jaded, but I think that this case of misconduct--and it was


misconduct--is a bit of a red herring. People lie; it isn't good, but there it is. I


think that Fox's focus should be optimizing its operations---providing the best


possible instruction at the lowest possible price--rather than on rankings and


on acts of contrition relating thereto. It's not good that numbers were fudged;


but it happened, and the focus now should not be to chastise and take pounds


of flesh. It should be to ensure that Temple students, and other Temple-


stakeholders, are given the maximal value for their considerable financial


investment. I am much more interested in being the best possible education


than I am seeing people be taken to the woodshed, and this frenzy of


accusations and apologies seems to be more about public relations than about


quality of instruction. 


 Can you apply ideas from the Bazerman and Tenbrunsel article to McCoy's


                      dilemma in the Parable of the Sadhu?


 


Yes, there is a connection, in that people who behave questionably tend to


rationalize, this being the point, or one of the points, of both the Bazerman


article and the Parable of the Sadhu. 


When people are selling, Bazerman points out, they overvalue assets; when


they are buying, they undervalue them. When they are accused of


misconduct, they deny and double-down; and when no accusations are


pending, their defensive rationalizations miraculously vanish.


As for Parable of the Sadhu, its main point is similar. A given person chooses


not to help someone who needs his help, and he is left with a gnawing feeling


of guilt that, unless he chooses to atone, he must rationalize away.   Almost


anyone in that position who chose not to save the man would rationalize his


decision in some way or other. "I work hard, and I deserve a little me time."


"I can't solve everyone's problems; as long as I'm not actively causing harm, I


deserve no censure." "Why should I help him? Would he help me if the tables


were turned?" 


Similarly, almost anyone whose livelihood depends on compliance with the


corporate line will toe that line and then rationalize it. "I have mouths tofeed." "This company does more good than harm, and it doesn't deserve to go


down over some petty financial impropriety." "If I don't cover up this mess,


someone else will." 


 


 Will it be possible for you to maintain your ethical values yet succeed in the


                                    business world?


 


Yes, 100%. Succeeding in business is about providing agreed upon services


for agreed upon prices. Who succeeds in business? Is it people who make bad


cards and bad shoes? No. It's people who make good cars and good shoes and


charge fair prices for them. People in business who gouge or deceive don't


last long. Business is about providing people with services that they need and


want and ask for and doing so for an agreed upon fee. Business, therefore, is


about helping people and being compensated accordingly. So I think that a


certain integrity is not only compatible with business success but positively


necessary for it. As for the apparent exceptions to this--Bernie Madoff, Ken


Lay, Ivan Boesky--these people are not really in business; they are merely


pretending to be--they are crooks posing as businessmen and therefore are not


counterexamples to my position.


 


                 Have you ever been in the "Endgame" scenario?


 


Yes, I have been in many such situations. I have had friends who broke rules,


sometimes serious ones, and I had to decide what to do. And I chose personal


loyalty over concern for the rules--even though the people I was covering for


had made very real and very unambiguous mistakes. For example, when I


was in the eighth grade, I found out that a friend of mine had deliberately


made a series of unauthorized purchases with other people's credit cards--


which is a deeply wrong thing to do. But I didn't turn him in. He ended up


being caught a week later, saving me the trouble of having to make a tough


decision. But I was very reluctant to 'snitch' on him, even though he was


doing wrong, and I don't know what I would have done had he not been


caught.


Frankly, there is nobody, even when truly good people are taken into account,


who is as good as he holds himself out as being. One way to deal with this is


to admit it and not hold oneself out as a paragon of morality. Another way is


to live with the hypocrisy. I prefer the first path. I try to a good person, but I


know I'm not perfect and I therefore choose not to judge others. For this


reason, if I were to make a mistake, even a serious one, I would be given a


certain leeway not accorded in such circumstances to more judgmental


people.     What is your "home base" ethical theory? (from the Deckop chapter)


 


 


My home base is universalism (or 'deontology' as some seem to call it). And I


think the same is true of all human beings. When deciding how to treat my


mother or best friend, I don't run through a series of cost-benefit calculations


regarding the maximization of utility; I decide on grounds of loyalty and


empathy. In extreme cases, this would not hold: if, for example, my best


friend turned out to be a mass-murderer, then I would choose turning him


over being loyal. But such a decision, it seems to me, would still not


necessarily be made on strictly utilitarian grounds, as it would embody a


certain instinctual regard for other members of society, towards whom I do


feel a certain natural kinship and with regard to whom it would be very


unnatural, almost counter-biological, for me to behave in a complete callous


manner. I don't know that anyone, with the possible exception of a few


policy-makers, ever makes decisions on strictly utilitarian grounds, as there


always seems to be an implicit regard for other people's subjecthood and


dignity.


 Is THE social responsibility of business to increase its profits? -- Who's right:


                                Friedman or Mackey?


 


Mackey is right, and Friedman is wrong.Considered as a member of society,


a hit man has a responsibility to behave decently; but considered as a hit man,


a hit man's only responsibility is to fulfill his contracts. Similarly, considered


as a part of society, a business has a responsibility to be decent; but


considered as a business, a business's only responsibility is to profit. Milton


Friedman and others have held that economic pressures and moral ultimately


coincide--that if business's focus on their bottom line, they will automatically


have to right-size themselves with respect to people's rights. There is a certain


truth in that position, but it is far from being categorically true. There is


money in misconduct. There are sex-traffickers, organ-hustlers, and other


black marketeers who don't exactly do good but make a decent living. So I


would submit that, precisely because businesses do not, in their capacity as


businesses, have any responsibility to do good, they should be given external


incentives in the form of regulations and laws. Consequently, Mackay is


right, not Friedman.


 


 Were WalMart to increase its pay and benefit level to those of Costco (Stone


article) or TJ's (Wilke article), or LaColumbe (Carmichael article) would it be


                        more or less financially successful?


 


It would obviously be less successful, and it would also be able to employ


fewer people. Walmart has very low prices; and its fuel bill per unit of space


is lower than that of its competitors, which means that it takes less of a toll on


the environment, per unit product, than the  much lauded 'mom-and-pop'


store, which, despite its hallowed place in American iconography, is


competing with a 19th century coal factory for the title of most ecocidally


inefficient entity in the world. 


A friend of mine works at Walmart; he is paid reasonably well and finds the


work tolerable--and he's glad to have it, since he doesn't have too many


options. But if Walmart started paying its employees executive salaries, then


half of them would have to go, and its prices would soar. These are facts. 


The Walmart people do what they do not because they're evil, but because


economic forces make it hard to be saints--and, as Milton Friedman and


others have said, may even make it contraindicated. 


 Have you ever had a "Sadhu" dropped at your feet (so to speak). If so, what


                                      did you do?


 


Yes, on several occasions. Just last week, a friend of mine was injured and


bleeding. His injuries were not life-threatening, but he definitely needed


attention. I had a choice: help him and get blood all over my new car or spare


my car and not help him. I helped him. The car looks terrible now, but I did


the right thing. 


When I have chosen not to help a soul in need, it was generally because the


cost to myself was greater than the cost to that other person. If my friend had


had a highly contagious illness that was sure to kill me if I gave him a ride,


then no, I would not have helped him; but short of that, I would have--and


did. 


 Do you think corporations are living up to their original purpose in society?


 


Yes, I do think that corporations are doing what they are supposed to be


doing. They are supposed to be providing consumers with products that the


latter are willing to pay for, and they do just that, since they would go out of


business if they didn't. 


Are they bad actors? Probably, in some respects. But if we dislike them so


much, whey are still around? Because we need them, and we like what they


do. We want cars, shoes, etc., and that's what they give us--at very low prices


to boot. 


If companies treated each and every employee like royalty, the cost of a pair


of sneakers would be astronomical. So before we tell 'the corporations' to take


a hike, we have to confront that very real economic fact.


It is fashionable to bash corporations, and I myself bash them from time to


time. And I know from personal experience that working at one is simply


horrid. That said, when it comes time to buy shoes or Ipods or computers or


cameras or shirts or just about anything else, setting aside a few very


specialized items, where do I turn? The village cobbler? The corner


fruitstand? No! I go to Walmart or Amazon, and I buy items made by Nike or


Apple or Dell. And those items--you must grant--work really well. Companies exist only as long as people buy from them. If Microsoft made a


bad product, it would go out of existence. So granting that corporations often


behave badly, I cannot, without hypocrisy, weigh in against them. And before


others do so, they have to ask themselves: what is the alternative? 


 


 


   Identify an argument in an article, book etc. that does poorly on TWO or


more of the 7 standards Paul & Elder say help assess critical thinking. Briefly


                                        discuss.


 


 


The book I chose is 'Being and Time' by Martin Heidegger. I have been told


that it is a great work; but I found scarcely a single intelligible sentence in it.


Plus, I also found repeated use of the same undefined terms ("existential",


"authenticity", "throwness"), often with confusing variations. So far as I


could understand it, it seemed to be saying that human beings are being true


to themselves when they work with their hands but not when they work for


companies or bureaucracies, the idea being that the latter are soul-robbingly


parasitical organizations. Which--if that is what Heidegger is saying-is fine,


but could have been, and has been said, better and certainly more concisely.


I'd have to give this work an F on clarity, logic, and organization.  


Here is a characteristic quotation: 


"inquiring or in choosing. This holds true-and by no means least-for that


understanding which is rooted in Dasein's ownmost Being, and for the


possibility of developing it-namely, for ontological understanding.


When tradition thus becomes master, it does so in such a way that whatit 'transmits' is made so inaccessible, proximally and for the most part,


that it rather becomes concealed. Tradition takes what has come down to


us and delivers it over to self-evidence; it blocks our access to those


primordial 'sources' from which the categories and concepts handed down


to us have been in part quite genuinely drawn'! Indeed it makes us forget


that they have had such an origin, and makes us suppose that the necessity of


going back to these sources is something which we need not even


understand. Dasein has had its historicality so thoroughly uprooted by


tradition that it confines its interest to the multiformity of possible types,


directions, and standpoints of philosophical activity in the most exotic


and alien of cultures; and by this very interest it seeks to veil the fact that


it has no ground of its Own to stand on. Consequently, despite all its


iological interests and all its zeal for an Interpretation which is


philologically 'objective' ["sachliche"], Dasein no longer understands the


most elcmentary conditions which would alone enable it to go back to


the past in a positive manner and make it productively its own.


We have shown at the outset (Section I) not only that the question of


the meaning of Being is one that has not been attended to and one that


has been inadequately formulated, but that it has become quite forgotten


in spite of all our interest in 'metaphysics'. Greek ontology and its history


-which, in their numerous filiations and distortions, determine the conceptualcharacter of philosophy even today-prove that when Dasein 22


understands either itself or Being in general, it does so in terms of the


'world', and that the ontology which has thus arisen has deteriorated


to a tradition in which it gets reduced to something self-evident


-merely material for reworking, as it was for In the Middle Ages


this uprooted Greek ontology became a fixed body of doctrine. Its


systematics, however, is by no means a mere joining together of traditional


pieces into a single edifice. Though its basic conceptions of Being have


been taken over dogmatically from the Greeks, a great deal of unpretentious


work has been carried on further within these limits. With the


peculiar character which the Scholastics gave it, Greek ontology has, in


its essentials, travelled the path that leads through the Disputationes


metaphysicae of Suarez to the 'metaphysics' and transcendental philosophy of


modern times, determining even the foundations and the aims of Hegel's..."


      http://users.clas.ufl.edu/burt/spliceoflife/BeingandTime.pdf


 


 


 


   Response to Posts about Descartes’ Evil Demon (my material in italics)


 


      Erik Smallwood posted Oct 15, 2019 6:24 AM


 


        Descartes evil genius theory very compelling. I can relate this to a


couple of different things. One way is how do actually know that you are


awake or if you are dreaming. I think of the movie Inception. The only way


they could know if they were out of the dream world was by checking their


personal totems. The phrase Cogito Ergo Sum reminds me of the Matrix or


conspiracy theories that involve our world being run by a computer


simulation program (Sims, SimCity). I think, therefore I am would seem to


be able to stand up to the challenge but when looking at it in the Inception


or Matrix views the computer could be allowing you think. As for the


topics we have discussed in  previous posts, I think the only one that could


come close to passing the challenge presented would be death. We now that


we will all die eventually. I do find a problem with this in the fact that we


have multiple instances of reincarnation through out the history of religion.


You could view death as just the next step in fulfilling the ultimate purpose


of said thing. Use a fish for example. The fish is caught and killed. It turns


into food which gives energy when we eat it. We also use the guts and


remains to help fertilize and grow our plants. If you look at death t 


      Great post! You made a profound point, namely, that the Evil


Genius scenario is concerned not just with epistemology but also with


political and even personal life. Ordinarily, the Evil Genius scenario is


taken as a way of motivating skepticism, its purpose being to show that our


sensory experiences could in principle be hallucinations. But if Descartes’


objective had been to make a strictly epistemological point, he wouldn’t


have used such a pregnant metaphor; he would have attributed the 


hallucinations in question to impersonal forces, such as a chemical


balance, not to a sentient being, let alone a malicious God-like one.


      During this time, science was proving the erroneousness of


Scripture and the Catholic Church was being outed as a malicious


deceiver. And as this was happening, the Church responded maliciously


and defensively, sometimes simply killing the scientists in question. I


believe that the ‘demon’ of which Descartes speaks was a metaphor for the


Catholic Church. I do not believe that this was by Descartes’ conscious


intention, but it was nonetheless intentional, albeit unconsciously so.


 


 


 


         Madisen Domayer posted Oct 14, 2019 4:48 PM


 


      The argument of the evil genius is confusing. Trying to understand


that we “live” in a world where everything is full of deceptions is hard to


grasp. It hard to imagine everything I think or see as being false, or


possibly false. I think this relates to his argument of conscious vs.


consciousness. Conscious refers to what we believe while consciousness is


what is true. According to the evil genius theory, our conscious and


consciousness are not the same, for our conscious is full of deception. One


way to disprove this theory is finding ideas that we can ensure exist


without doubt, such as counting numbers and knowing the alphabet. This


concept relates to the Cogito Ergo Sum argument. Since I think something


is true, it has to exist, despite the evil genius theory. If I can think it, it is


real. I think these two theories can become confusing, but if you think of


them as two separate idea, even two that contract teach other, they seem to


make more since.


 


              I don’t think the Evil Genius scenario is quite as opaque as you


make it out to be. The idea is simply that our sense-perceptions could be


hallucinations. I grant that Descartes muddies the waters a bit by attributing


those hallucinations to an ‘evil demon’, which introduces potentiallyconfusing political and emotional resonances into the scenario. But the point


is clear enough: what we regard as accurate awarenesses could be delusions.


              In response to which, Descartes rightly asks: What is it that I


could not fail to be right about? What is my Archimedean point in my


question for knowledge? Supposing that I am the victim of deliberate and


systematic deception, what is that, for all that, I could not possibly be


deceived about? Descartes’ answer is—I know that I doubt, and therefore


think, and therefore exist. In a word—I think, therefore I am. The mere


existence of doubt proves the existence of thought and, consequently, of one’s


own existence. And Descartes is right about this: one’s own thought, even if


that thought assumes the form of doubt, affirms one’s own existence.


              Descartes also believes that, on this slender basis, he can prove


that we in fact know what we think we know—that, in particular, we can


prove that, as a general rule, our sensory experiences are accurate, the same


being true, with some qualifications, of the inferences we draw from them.


Although I agree with Descartes that we do in fact have much of the


knowledge that we attribute to ourselves, I don’t know that ‘I think, therefore


I am’ is, or even could be, the basis of that knowledge. The actual basis of


our knowledge of the external world is derived from considerations of


continuity and coherence, as in, we must posit an external world answering


to our ‘perceptual narrative’ in order to render the gaps in that narrativenon-anomalous. I listened to an interesting audiobook about this:


  https://www.audible.com/pd/Guide-to-Descartes-Meditations-


      Audiobook/B01J90RXN8?qid=1571172493&sr=1-1&pf_rd_p=e81b7c27-


6880-467a-b5a7-


            13cef5d729fe&pf_rd_r=48N225CQMEAJ59Z4XEK6&ref=a_search_c3_lProduct_1_1


I’d be interested in other people’s thoughts on this work.


 


                             Economics Quiz on Elasticity


 


Elasticity of demand formula


Elasticity = %change in demand/%change in price


 


  1. Elasticity = -1.2 price increase =.02


      Solve for x


      -1.2=x/.02


      X=-.024


 


  2. Elasticity = -1.2


      Wish to increase sales by 10%


      Solve for x


      -1.2=1.10/x


      X==11/12=-.917


 


  3. Income elasticity = 3.6, income increases by 4%, what effect on


      demand?


      Solve for x, 3.6=x/.04


      X=.144


   4. Elasticity of supply=1.5, price increases 2%, what effect on quantity


      supplied?


      Solve for x, 1.5=x/.02


      X=.03


 


  5. Farmer’s yields up 30%


      Farm output elasticity=--.75


      What effect on revenue?


      Solve for x, -.75=.3/x


      X=-.4


      Therefore, yield increases by 30% but demand decreases by 40%. So


      percentage of output not demanded has increased, and net revenue


      (revenue minus expenses) has therefore decreased.


 


  6. Demand curve: p=200-.2q


      MPC=50+.1q


      MEC=.1q


 


      Private equilibrium=intersection of p=200-.2q and 50+.1q->q=500      Social equilibrium= =intersection of p=200-.2q and .1q->q=2000/3










 


 


  7. What level of tax will lead to social equilibrium?


      Tax = MEC at social equilibrium = .1(2000/3)=66.67


 


  8. Does tax create deadweight loss


      Deadweight loss=economic inefficiency


      Question ambiguous


      Taxing negative externality eliminates deadweight loss. So this


      particular tax ($66.67) does not create deadweight loss.


      Taxing non-externality does create deadweight loss, since the amount


      taxed is unpaid work, leading to inefficiency


      Professor seems to have had second disambiguation in mind, but your      answer correct given the context.


 


  9. At private equilibrium, calculate elasticity of demand


      Private equilibrium -> 500->p/q=100/500


        Elasticity=125/-25=-5


      Elasticity of demand at private equilibrium=-5(1/5)=-1


 


10.                  Calculate elasticity of demand between two equilibrium points


      using midpoint method:


 


General formula:


 


(q2-q1)/((q1+q2)/2)


divided by


(p2-p1)/((p1+p2)/2)


 


 


Q1=375


Q2=500


 


P1=125P2=100


 


Q2-q1=125


Q2+q1=875


(q2+q1)/2=437.5


 


(q2-q1)/((q1+q2)/2)=125/437.5=.256


 


P2-p1=-25


p2+p1=225


(p2+p1)/2=112.5


  (p2-p1)/((p1+p2)/2)=-25/112.5=-.222


 


 


 


 


(q2-q1)/((q1+q2)/2)


divided by


(p2-p1)/((p1+p2)/2)


 


= 


.256/-.222


 


=


 


-1.153


 


 


 


 


 


                   Summary of Video about Milgram Experiment


                    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f97VYdkHZK8


 


                                Critical Viewing Form


 


                                        BA 3102


 


Instructions: Please address each item below for each movie.  The total


length of your critical viewing form responses should be approximately one-


half to one page, single spaced.  This form will be graded on a pass/fail


basis.  To pass, you need to provide reasonably detailed and insightful


answers to the items below. 


 


1.   Briefly summarize the basic plot, or issue that the movie addresses.


 


The video concerned the Milgram experiment, along with a recent recreation


thereof. In these experiments, volunteers were ordered to commit acts that, so


they were led to believe, caused intense pain to human beings. (In reality, the


people being tortured were actors and were not experiencing pain, but the


volunteers did not know this and had every reason to believe otherwise.) 90%


of the volunteers followed orders to a tee, their ‘excuse’ (or ‘justification’,depending on how you look it) being ‘I had my orders; the rest is not my


responsibility.’ The point of these videos seems to be that people don’t take


responsibility for their behavior unless they have to.


 


2.  What do you think is the most interesting point in the movie?


 


I found it interesting that there was little or no difference between men and


women in respect of how willing they were to follow orders even when those


orders involved inflicting pain. Unlike the commentators, however, I did not


find the result particularly surprising. Supposing for argument’s sake that


women are more empathic, this empathy can either play out in the form of


empathic connectedness to one’s supervisor or to one’s victim; and, as it


turns out, it is more likely to play out in the former way.


 


3.  What is the most controversial statement you’ve heard?


 


It may be that my own life-experiences have biased me, or it may be that I


have already internalized and accepted the results of the Milgram experiment;


but what I found most controversial was the assumption, made by all parties


involved, that a human being’s go-to is just behavior and that unjust behavior


requires that special rationalizations be operative. In my own experience,people tend to take the path of least resistance; they do what is expedient, not


for the most part what is principled. To be sure, setting aside the odd


psychopath, people choose expediency within the limits set by social


acceptability; but, in my own experience, people who act with integrity


despite strong social incentives to act without it are more the exception than


the rule; and I found the frequently made assertion to the contrary to be


particularly controversial, at least relative to my own starting assumptions.


 


4.  What is the most important ethical issue that the movie is addressing? 


Please explain.


 


Do people do what is right or what is expedient? If the movie is to be trusted,


which it is, the answer is: they do what is expedient. It may not have been the


intention of Stanley Milgram or of the movie-makers to make this point;


perhaps it was their intention to make a case that people’s moral judgment is


easily skewed, with the result that, despite having the best of intentions, they


act wrongly. And maybe that is what it shows: but I think the reality


uncovered here is simply that people are more self-interested than ethical.


 


 


  


 


 Racism and Sexism


                                  BA 3102 Online


                          Reflection Paper #2 Instructions


 


Please take the Implicit Association Test and reflect on your results.  The test


is on the web, located at www.understandingprejudice.org/iat.  Take the race


and gender/career IAT tests. You need not report your scores.  In your paper,


please answer these questions:


 


  1. Do you think that the tests measure unconscious bias with respect to


      race and gender? Please be specific in discussing aspects of the test


      that you think are or are not valid for measuring unconscious bias.


 


 


2.  Either way, do you think unconscious bias exists in society (regarding


race and/or gender)?  If not, why not; if you think it does, how might it show


itself in the organizational context? 


 


 


If you have questions about how the test works, go to


    https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit/demo/background/faqs.html; it may beable to answer them.


 


Please note that research shows that the order in which the faces are


presented to you does have an effect, but the effect is very small and usually


does not have a significant effect on your results.  Also, please note that there


are other tests in addition to the race and gender/career tests.  If you wish to


take one or more of these, go to this site:


      https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit/demo/takeatest.html.  You need not log


in.  Just enter as a guest.


 


Your paper should be one to two double spaced pages, using 1 inch margins


and a normal sized font.  Your reflection paper will be graded on a pass/fail


basis.  To pass, you need to make a reasonable case for your point of view


and meet the page requirement.


 


      There were two tests: one concerning gender, the other concerning


race. The test on gender definitely did a good job of measuring the degree to


which the test-taker associates career with masculinity and family with


femininity. According to the test, I myself do strongly associate masculinity


with work and femininity with family. I do not regard this as a bias. I used to


be an ardent feminist; but, ironically, it was female acquaintances of minewho convinced to soften my pro-feminist attitudes. They told me that


feminism forced them to have to work, which left them little time for family


and children, which, so they told me, they deeply resented.


      When in public, I always defer to politically correct positions; and I


also think that gender-roles are in fact easily overvalued. I know many men


who are dismal professionals and many women who are highly competent


ones; and the issue is not, frankly, one that greatly exercises me. In any case,


the test did accurately gauge my feelings about traditional gender roles, with


the qualification that I would not refer to those feelings as ‘biases’, since,


when confronted with a woman who clearly feels at home in the workplace,


or a man who clearly feels at home at home (pun intended), I strongly feel


that the woman belongs in the workplace and the man belongs at home.


      As for the test on racism, it did a good job of measuring one’s feelings


concerning one’s feelings about blacks (if one is white) or whites (if one is


black). That said, even if one unconsciously regards whites as superior to


blacks or vice versa, that is not, in and of itself, racism, since it is actions that


are racist, not feelings. Somebody who has an anti-black bias but resists it


when making decisions—when deciding who to hire, for example---is not


racist, even though he may have the emotional underpinnings of racism. 


      Humans should not be condemned if, at a given moment, they have a


politically incorrect sentiment, since feelings are fluid and will tend to right-size themselves as the occasion demands. I used to have preconceptions


about Chinese culture; then I got involved with a Chinese woman and, as a


result, developed a pro-Chinese bias, which in its turn led to an anti-Western


bias. I do not think such reversals are unusual; and I also think that, although


people inevitably have preferences, some of them not entirely well-informed,


they tend at the end of the day to be reasonably fair-minded when it comes to


matters of race.


      Are their unconscious racial biases in our society? Of course there are.


There are three hundred million people in this country, and practically any


given American, including those who pose as completely politically correct,


inevitably have ‘in-group’ biases. But, first of all, the people who go out of


their way to show how politically correct they are often, in my experience,


have politically driven and unnatural views about members of other groups.


They treat a given black person as a black person, not as a black person.


Individual blacks, like individual whites, want to move forward


professionally; they fall in love; they fall out of love; and so on. The same


being true of individual members of any other given group. And in my


experience, people who are excessively concerned with political correctness


seem to be focused, ironically, on group-affiliations, as opposed to individual


characteristics.


      More importantly, what is important is not how individual members ofa society feel but how they act. Behaviors can be managed, through laws and


policies and the like, but emotions cannot be directly managed—and should


not be directly managed. And whatever the private sentiments of individual


American may be—and those sentiments vary widely, even within a given


demographic---I don’t see that there is systematic denial of opportunity or of


justice to people based on gender or race. There are laws and institutions that


are intended to protect would-be targets of discriminatory conduct—and, as


far as I can tell, do a creditable job of doing so. Finally, I think that the


personal sentiments of individual Americans tend to follow official policy in


this regard, with the consequence that we are not on the whole a particularly


racist or sexist or otherwise bigoted group.


 


   Answers to (somebody else’s) Questions about Orwell’s “Shooting and


                          Elephant” (My content in italics)


 


1. Who Orwell represents in the story? Does he represent the empire? How


  native people see him?


2. What decision did Orwell make about the elephant? Why? To what


  extent was the correct decision?


3. Why the elephant deserves to die? or live? Why Orwell shoot the


  elephant? What was his motivation?


4. What is the symbol of the elephant? Does the elephant symbolize the


  imperialistic British empire?


5. Did Orwell feel peer pressure? Does Orwell was a powerful man?


Beyond Questions


1. Orwell said, there is a mask, and your face grows to fit it. In our life,


  How many times we decide to wear a mask to fit in? Are we looking to


  be accepted by others?


2. Are we ever becoming ourselves? Are we always fulfilling the role that


  is expected of us?


3. Is social media influencing our role of who we are? Are we in the


  puppet role?


4. Do we have a responsibility in our homes, jobs, and community to do  what is right?


5. What am I going to do to become true to myself? Am I going to keep


  doing what others expected me to do?


 


Hi Sahillys! I am a big Orwell fan, and I have read “Shooting an


Elephant.” So I will try to answer your questions:


1*. First of all, “Shooting an Elephant” (SAE) is not a story; it is non-


fiction. Orwell was a civil servant in Burma, and this is a true story about


one of his experiences there. And yes, Orwell represents the British


Empire. Actually, both he and the elephant represent the British Empire,


each of them being, its own way, wounded and faltering, like (so it is


suggested) the British Empire.


2*. Orwell had a legal and moral duty to kill the elephant, given that it was


on a rampage. So he did in fact behave correctly.


3*. I don’t know that the elephant deserved to die, but it was killing people;


so it had to be dispatched.


4*. Yes, the elephant symbolizes the British Empire---or is meant to.


Orwell was a liberal anti-colonialist; and the point of SAE is to depict the


British Empire as bombastic and oppressive.


5*. I believe that Orwell’s behavior in this context was not so much about


personal pressure as it was about professional obligation. And no, Orwellwas not a particularly powerful person. He never had much money or


status and died in a poor house.


1*. Some people wear masks; others don’t. Those who wear masks tend to


so most of the time, if not all of the time. Those who don’t do so are rarely


phony.


2*. Some people are who they are and live honestly; others aren’t and


don’t. We are not all in the same boat, as far being honest and living


authentically are concerned. Some people embrace who they are and don’t


buckle under peer pressure; others collapse like a house of cards.


Anthropologists say that, given a group of twenty people, 19 do what the


rest do and one decides for himself what to do.


3*. People who are real in real life are real in social media; people who


are fake in real life are fake in social media. The former are less drawn to


social media than the latter and are likely to use it primarily for reasons of


a practical as opposed to emotional nature.


4*. Yes, tautologously so. If it is right, then we have a responsibility to do


it; and if it is wrong, we have a responsibility not to do it. These are


definitional truths.


5*. Nothing is preventing you from being you except you. People are what


they choose to be.


  


 


                 When is it a good for a company to decentralize?


 


      Given only the information provided, Derek should fight the holacracy


initiative. Given additional information, the verdict might be different, but


none of the information provided warrants decentralizing Contect; in fact,


that information suggests that the opposite path is the appropriate one. Also,


the changes involved in the holacracy initiative would be far-reaching and


would have unpredictable consequences; and such an initiative would


therefore be contraindicated in this context, since Contect’s growth has been


steady and might well be jeopardized by such an initiative.


      Contect is a global construction company with many regional offices.


Given that Contect is global, it might seem to be a good idea to decentralize.


After all, each of its branch offices knows better than central management


what it has to do and what constraints it is operating within; and it might


therefore seem reasonable to implement a Holacracy-style decentralization-


initiative. Also, decentralization has been proven to be the way to go in many


contexts. One way for a corporation to decentralize is for it to become a


franchise, and sometimes this is extremely profitable, as the case of


McDonald’s shows.


      This does not appear to be one of those times. “Without centralized


oversight of projects,” it says in the Case Study, “any single subsidiary’smissteps risked taking down the entire company,” the reason being that


Contect is a construction-company. Construction-projects are magnets for


civil and criminal litigation. There is a high probability of deliberately or


accidentally violating local laws. If a Contect regional manager decides to cut


costs by flouting some regulation, the result could be large numbers of deaths


and injuries, a likely result being that Contect as a whole is targeted for


criminal and civil actions and either shut down because of a legal action or


bankrupted out of existence. Also, we know about a case where poor


decisions on the part of a Contect regional office led to losses of


approximately $700,000,000 as well as loss of reputation.


      It’s one thing to make Big Macs. It is quite another to make buildings.


There is a single uniform recipe for all Big Macs. There cannot possibly be


anything similar in the case of buildings. In addition, success in the


construction-business is largely about not making mistakes. Suppose that


Contect builds 100 buildings that don’t fall down and one building that does


fall down. That one building is more than enough to shut off Contect’s lights


and possibly put its leaders in prison. Of course, if there is a case of food-


poisoning at a single McDonald’s, that too could cause major problems for


the McDonald’s corporation. But McDonald’s can hedge against that by


insisting that all franchises strictly follow a script; and this is not possible in


the case of Contect, since no two buildings are the same.      In some contexts, decentralization is appropriate. A personal


acquaintance of mine runs an extremely successful online consulting


business; and although he is the boss, each employee has almost complete


autonomy. This person (let’s call him “Smith”) is himself very talented and


he hired five or six very talented people; he finds them business and in


exchange they ‘kick up’ a percentage, but nobody gives orders to anybody.


His motto is “hire good people and leave them alone.” Smith’s overhead


costs are minimal; there is no bureaucratic redundancy; and everyone who


works for him is happy, since they have complete freedom. At Smith’s firm,


there are no group meetings. When Smith meets with people, it is always


one-on-one. And those occasions are rare. If an employee is


underperforming, he is given a brief warning or just let go; and if he is


performing adequately, he is not likely to hear anything.


      I know another person (let’s call him “Brown”) who started a


consulting business in a similar professional area. Brown’s business-model is


very different from Smith’s. Brown wants rules and predictability; and he


insists on regular group-meetings and group-outings, and the like. The


problem is that Brown’s company is small, and its employees find it hard to


bring clients in, or to service existing clients, without getting blowback of


some kind from Brown. Brown managed to borrow millions of dollars to start


his business, which is why his business is still up and running, but it has beenlosing money since day one, unlike Smith’s business, which began with a


$20,000 loan and is making money since day one.


      The kind of anarchical approach to management that Brian Robertson


is talking about makes a lot of sense when profits depend on creativity, as is


the case with Smith’s firm; and it also makes a lot of sense when well-


defined procedures can take the place of central management, as is the case


with McDonald’s. It makes less sense with a company, such as Contect,


whose product is buildings, as opposed to ideas, and whose production-


process cannot in any way be predetermined by some McFormula.


Implementing Holacracy might benefit Contect, but it would also be


extremely risky; and the risk is not worth taking, since Contect is currently


doing well.


  


                            A Tough Business Decision


 


Instructions:  Please answer the questions below.  The length of your written


case assignment form responses should be approximately one to one and a


half pages, single spaced.  This form will be graded on a pass/fail basis.  To


pass, you need to provide reasonably detailed and insightful answers to the


questions below. 


 


      You have a decision to make as Nash.  To simplify things, assume that


you can either (A.) sell the property to Fledgling (you won’t face legal


repercussions), or (B.) not sell the property (delaying the sale while you


investigate the toxic waste will likely kill the sale). 


 


1. What/who are the main stakeholders to your decision?  List them with a


  brief explanation.


 


The stakeholders are all of the parties who stand to be affected by my


(Nash’s) decision.


Nash. Therefore,


*I myself am a major stakeholder, since I stand to lose my job and even mycareer if I make the wrong decision (and also, indeed, if I make the right one).


*DAC as a whole is another stakeholder---and probably the largest one, since


its solvency is at stake, as well as its reputation.


*All employees of DAC are stakeholders, with higher ranking employees


having commensurately more at stake than lower ranking ones.


*The people who are planning on purchasing the land are stakeholders. And


finally


*Anyone whose health might be adversely affected by the deal is a


stakeholder, since, of course, one’s health is one’s most important asset.


 


 


2. What would you do?  Sell it or not sell it?  Why?


 


      The question is not whether or not to sell, but whether or not to make


all parties involved aware of the relevant facts. And the answer to that


question is: yes. I know that there are threats to people’s health on that land,


and I have a moral, if not a legal, obligation to apprise any people who might


be either selling or buying that land of those facts.


    I have a moral obligation to the people who are buying it, because the


deal will not be in good faith if I don’t do so and also because, if they aren’t


given this information, their own health and those of their tenants will bejeopardized, not to mention that they may well be lost to criminal and civil


liability.


      Also, if I don’t make Williams, my boss, aware of the relevant facts,


then, first of all, he won’t be in a position to make a morally informed


decision and, what’s more, he could blame the entire situation on me if all


goes awry, which is very likely.


 


3. Please indicate whether your decision in 2. is more consistent with


    utilitarianism, profit maximization, or universalism, and explain why.


    I would make Williams aware of the facts. For practical reasons, I


would tell him that I was doing this to protect the airline’s reputation and to


protect him civil and criminal fallout. I would also point out to him that the


airline’s current cashflow problems would be negligible compared to the


problems to which not disclosing the situation might lead. Finally, we have


no idea how the buyers will react: for all we know, they will still want the


land, granting that they will probably be able to bargain down the price.


    We are dealing a potential case of serious criminal negligence. Further,


I don’t even know that I would lose out financially by coming clean with


Williams and also with the buyers. Finally, if Williams is smart, then he


knows that, if he greenlights the deal without disclosing what he knows, I


will be a witness to what he did. This does not mean that Williams let mekeep my job. But if he fires me, I will still have my reputation and my


integrity; and if I don’t tell him, I will very likely lose both. And the situation


being what it is, the probability is that I will eventually lose both. Conclusion:


Tell Williams and give him the chance to come clean with the buyers; and if


he doesn’t, play the hero and go them directly, which, as Williams knows,


would make it hard for him to fire me without turning himself into a villain


and which, in addition, is the right thing to do.


 


                                 An Ethical Quandry


 


        Instructions:  Please answer the questions below.  The length of your


video case assignment form responses should be approximately one page,


single spaced.  This form will be graded on a pass/fail basis.  To pass, you


need to provide reasonably detailed and insightful answers to the questions


below. 


 


      1.            After part one if the video case, Julia is confronted with a


decision: Should she turn left, into town, and report the accident to the


police?  Or should she turn right and go home?  What do you think is the


most ethical decision?


 


              Obviously, the ethical decision is to take responsibility. In a


way, the fact that it was ‘accidental’---in the sense that it was caused by


negligence—makes the situation less morally complicated, not more.


Suppose that, for some reason or other, had targeted this person, perhaps


because of a vendetta or perhaps simply because she was just plain evil. In


that case, of course, her act of killing the other person would have been


unambiguously evil, but her subsequent act of not turning herself in, though


itself evil in its right, would at least have not been hypocritical.              Moreover, she would not under that circumstance have been guilty of


negligence---that is, of simply not taking full responsibility for her own


actions before committing them. It is not too much to demand of a person that


they not drink and drive and also that they not, while driving, rummage


around items that they drop. I myself constantly have occasion to drive while


tired or under the influence of Ambien, and I myself also frequently have


occasion to change the radio while driving or to pick up items that I drop. But


I don’t---not because I morally perfect, but simply because I am not a


complete degenerate.


              But Julia was negligent, and her behavior was hypocritical. She


had spent the entire evening reveling in accolades given to her for her civic


mindedness. But then when the very same social system that conferred those


honors demanded that she take care to drive carefully, she failed to do so; and


when it then required her to take responsibility for this lapse of hers, she


again failed to take responsibility.


              Julia’s failure to turn herself, though understandable, bespoke a


lack of integrity as well as a lack of regard for the very community-norms


that she allowed herself to be so praised for upholding, and she therefore


cannot be said to have behaved rightly in not turning herself in.


              Of course, the de rigueur response is that such considerations


are irrelevant, since we have to consider the hypothetical as it is presented tous, not as it might be were it real. But moral injunctions derive their force


from their ability to hold up when the facts continue to pile on. It is easy to


fabricate some context in which it would benefit one more to skip out on a


debt than to pay it; but the moral injunction derives its practical forces from


the hard-learned lessons about the consequences of not paying one’s debts,


the same being true of the moral injunction to turn oneself in for crimes for


which one simply ‘knows’ one would otherwise not be held responsible.


 


      2.            After watching the second part of the video case (i.e., “part 3),


do you think you made the right choice for Julia?  That is, does part 3 change


anything for you?


 


              It does not. If anything, the fact that the other driver was drunk


means that, from a purely utilitarian perspective, Julia should have turned


herself in. For had she done so, she would have been commended for her


honesty and probably also legally exonerated. But as it stands, she is a liar


and law-breaker, her decision puts on the wrong side not only of universalist


but also quite possible of utilitarian conceptions of morality.


 


 


      3.  Please indicate whether your decision in 1. is more consistent withutilitarianism or universalism, and explain why.


 


              Assuming for argument’s sake that the various beneficiaries of


Julia’s teaching and charitable deeds really did depend on her specifically for


assistance, then her decision to skip out taking responsibility for her crime is


justifiable from a utilitarian perspective, the reason being that the more would


suffer than would benefit from her going to jail or otherwise losing her ability


to continue her charitable work. From a Kantian or Universalist perspective,


according to which moral laws are inviolable and are not mere means to


desired ends, then, of course, her conduct was immoral. That said, if


psychological and sociological realities are taken into account, it is less than


clear that the utilitarian and universalist verdicts would differ. In all


likelihood, the loss of self-respect that Julia would like experience might well


undermine her moral fiber and, for that reason, her ability and willingness to


continue her work. Also, in all likelihood, there would be people who could


step into the breech if she had to stop her work. People have great respect for


people who take responsibility, and had Julia done so, she might well have


been given a pass, and also retained her self-respect, none of which will


happen if she continues the cover-up and is then found out. 


      Legitimate Line Extensions as an Alternative to Front-businesses


                        The Solution to the Pizza Puzzle


 


 


Section I. There are two ways to implement this proposal: relative to one of


them, there may be a moral dilemma; and relative to the other, there is no


moral dilemma. Taken one way, Brittany is proposing that high-quality pizza


be given to the guests at competitive prices through a ‘front’ of sorts, this


front being a hotel-service that is posing as an independent business. Taken


another way, Brittany is proposing that the hotel go into the Pizza business.


In other words, she is proposing a line-extension: instead of simply providing


lodging and other strictly hotel-related services, the hotel will also provide


pizza, doing so not just for hotel-guests but for the general public.


      Regardless of how her proposal is interpreted, the primary


stakeholders are the same, these being: the hotel-owners, including


shareholders and creditors, the hotel-employees, the hotel guests, and the


general pizza-consuming public. If the hotel launches an independent pizza


business, which sells and delivers pizza to the general public, then the general


public is more of a stakeholder than it would be if the pizza-service is


implemented in a purely in-house way; but it is a stakeholder either way,since it is either being given or denied a valuable service. Also, regardless of


how the proposal is carried out, competitor pizza-providers are also


stakeholders, with the qualification that, unlike the other stakeholders, they


are negatively affected if the venture in question is a success.


      Of course, Brittany’s proposal can simply be rejected, which means


that there are three options, each with distinctive effects on the various


stakeholders involved. Importantly, the ethical complexion of the case


depends very much on the quality and prices of the pizza being provided. But


in keeping with the terms of the hypothetical, we will operate on the


assumption that the pizza continues to be reasonably priced and of high


quality.


 


 


StakeholdersDecision A: In-Decision B: Hotel-Decision C:


                                house Pizza Servicebased PizzaReject Brittany’s


                                Posing asService that alsoProposal


                                Independent ServiceServices Generalaltogether and


                                                          Publicmake no changes


Hotel++ Explanation: The++ Explanation:-       Explanation:


  Management/Proprietorshotel gainsThe hotel gainsThe hotel loses


                                      revenue/prestige.revenue/prestige.revenue and has                                                                                    to pay to deal


                                                                                    with pizza


                                                                                    boxes and other


                                                                                      waste-products


                                                                                      generated by


                                                                                    payments made


                                                                                    to rival


                                                                                      businesses.


Hotel Guests+ Explanation: A++ Explanation: A-       Explanation:


                                    high-quality,high-quality,The hotel guests


                                reasonably pricedreasonably pricedare deprived of


                                product is madeproduct is madea potentially


                                available to them,available to them.good source of


                              albeit with anpizza.


                                element of


                                deception (hence


                                only one plus).


General Pizza--       Explanation: They++ Explanation:-       Explanation:


consuming Publicare not providedThey are notThey are not


                                with an extraprovided with anprovided with


                                  source of pizza.extra source ofan extra source                                The pizza-marketpizza. The pizza-of pizza. The


                                is not enriched.market ispizza-market is


                                                          enriched.not enriched.


 


      Section II.  There are three frameworks within which to evaluate the


available options in this context: utilitarian, universalist, and profit-


maximization. It will be argued that, in this particular case, all of these


frameworks yield the same verdict, the reason being that in the long-term it is


hard for a business to be profitable if it isn’t benefiting its consumers.


      Let us consider each of the three possible decisions, beginning with


the decision to reject Brittany’s proposal. In that case, the hotel loses money.


It probably has to raise costs in order to compensate for these losses.


Customers end up being gouged, not to mention that they miss out on a nice


dining experience, and the hotel loses business.


      Now let us suppose that the hotel has an inhouse pizza-service that


poses as an independent business. First of all, a business’s obligation is to


provide agreed upon services for agreed upon prices. If you pay me to build


you a swimming pool, what matters is whether the job gets done at the agreed


upon price. If I pretend to subcontract to my cousin Jerry, while in fact doing


the job myself, that is irrelevant, so long as you are not being deceived as to


the quality of the work being done. The only material considerations in thissort of context are (i) quality of work and (ii) payment-related agreements.


(In some contexts—for example, with lawyers or financial-service providers-


--there can be conflict-of-interest issues; but that is not an operative


consideration in the pool-case or the pizza-case. Also, conflicts of interest are


only material because they impact quality of service: a lawyer can’t


effectively represent opposing parties, after all.)


      Also, in-house businesses of this kind are very common. I personally


have never been to a hotel where there weren’t restaurants and sometimes


other services that had their own names and branding but clearly had no


existence outside of the hotel in question. Plus, if the hotel actually invests in


special uniforms for the delivery-personnel and otherwise enhances branding,


the effect is not so much to deceive customers as to enhance their experience.


People will happily pay $200 for a $10 steak if they are also given nice


service. The mark-up becomes unambiguously ethically problematic only


when it is used to hide low-quality. If I charge you $200 for a steak and a


show (possibly in the form of a well-attired delivery-person) and I only give


you a steak, then I am in breech; but if I give you both, I am not in breech.


      From a utilitarian standpoint, this would be a respectable option; from


a universalist perspective, this would be questionable, given the element of


dishonesty involved; and from a profit-maximization perspective, it would be


questionable, since it is not clear whether the expenses incurred would beoffset by the hotel’s own pizza-consuming base.


        Consequently, the ideal path here would be to create a pizza service


that also services the general public. This would eliminate any hint of


dishonesty and would also broaden the service’s customer-base, which would


help defray the various sunk costs involved in purchasing the uniforms, doing


in-house promotion, and the like. Also, there would be little reason not to go


this route, since most of the work, including the branding as well as product-


creation, would already have been done. This approach, assuming that it was


properly carried out, would therefore be optimal from all three of the


perspectives in question, granting, of course, that no business venture can be


known with certainty to succeed.


      As for the null path, that of simply rejecting Brittany’s offer, that


would be safe in the short-term but would eat into the hotel’s bottom line and


would also cut the hotel out of a potentially lucrative market, while also


depriving the public of a great pizza.


      This case helps us weigh in on the debate between John Mackay and


Milton Friedman, Friedman’s position being that a business’s sole concern is


to profit, since the ‘invisible hand’ of the market will take care of any ethical


problems involved, and Mackay’s position being that a business has to meet


the market half-way when it comes to holding itself to ethical norms.


Ultimately, Mackay’s position is the right one. Businesses do not profit bybeing ethical; they profit by giving their customers what they want. If the


general public wants toxic waste and assassins-for-hire, businesses can profit


by providing these unethical services.


      Friedman seems to hold that transactional ethics are identical with


ethics in general, which they often are but sometimes are not. Economists,


including Kenneth Arrow and Amartya Sen, have focused a great deal in the


last few decades on negative ‘externalities’ which the market’s invisible hand


does not do a very good job of mitigating, an externality being an unintended


by-product of an economic transaction. Heavy industry generates pollution;


for-profit prisons incentivize the manufacturing of crime; and unregulated


agriculture incentivizes the creation of cheap but unhealthy foods. These are


all examples of externalities, and the free market has not been proven to do as


good a job of mitigating them as Friedman and other free-marketeers hold.


This means that it is incumbent either on government regulation or the moral


integrity of business-owners to do damage control.


      Another problem that Friedman overlooks is that, when not restrained


either by ethics or law, businesses tend to collude with government. The


government is staffed by human beings who need to eat and pay rent, the


same being true of businesses; and it is only to be expected that, given the


opportunity, businesses will do their best to use the government to shut out


competitors and also to insulate themselves from the law. Realisticallyspeaking, if someone is running a $20,000,000,000 business, they are likely


to make donations to politicians, who in their turn will be expected to curb


regulatory and law-enforcement agencies. Without either government


regulation or personal integrity on the part of executives, it is likely that such


collusion will rise to unacceptable levels.


      All of this said, Friedman’s position is still more true than false and


isn’t as opposed to Mackay’s position as it initially seems to be. A business


that is focused only on the bottom line is likely in the long run to do shoddy


work and therefore to fail financially. If the public detests you and your


product, which they will if you are ill-serving them and also squeezing out


competitors, it will be hard to stay afloat, even with government cooperation.


The reason is simply that the economy is much too large even for the


government to control, this being why Enron and Bernie Madoff and Lehman


Brothers, came to a screeching and disastrous halt. Each was ‘chummy’ with


regulators, but there is only so much regulators can do to pacify shareholders


who have lost everything. So yes—Friedman is probably right that economic


rationality probably does eliminate many negative externalities, but he also


probably overestimates the extent to which economic actors are long-term


rational.


 


Section III.  I would choose to create the pizza service, complete with newbranding, and would at least offer it to the general public, so as to offset the


possible element of dishonesty and also to test market-demand for what


might prove to be a lucrative product. The hotel has already gone to the


trouble of creating a pizza that is as good as that of its competitors. If it takes


no action, it will continue to lose money, which decision would be a loser


relative to each of the moral frameworks in question. 


      At the same time, if it goes to the trouble of buying special outfits for


delivery personnel, giving them the requisite training, and so on, then it might


as offer the pizza to the general public, since it would at that point have


created the product and branding; and if it wanted to offer the product to the


public, it would be all but ready to do so, give or take some non-trivial but


manageable concerns relating to delivery and production-capacity.


      This would be 100% honest and, if successful, would maximize the


benefit to all of the stakeholders. Further, there is already proof-of-product,


meaning that the hotel’s pizza is already known to be good; and, of course,


all of the investment in machinery and personnel is already at this point sunk,


making a maximum-value approach advisable. Of course, the do-nothing


approach is an option, but businesses that shirk from opportunities to grow


tend to die, and it also isn’t clear that it is an option for the hotel, given how


much it is already losing in pizza-based revenue. In conclusion, the line-


extension option, involving a real pizza business servicing both hotel guestsand non-guests, is from all the relevant perspectives the indicated path.


     Legal vs. Substantive Freedom and the Paradox of the Free Market


        Reflections on works by Hall, Debord, and Morgan & Tierney


 


This paper is a critical response to three articles: “The Commodity as


Spectacle”, by Guy Debord; “The Spectacle of the Other”, by Stuart Hall; and


“An Illustrated Guide to Guy Debord’s ‘The Society of the Spectacle’”, by


Tiernan Morgan and Lauren Purje. Each one of these articles had most, if not


all, of the following five characteristics:


 


(a)                     It correctly points out that a society that is market-based, as


      opposed to culture-based, inevitably turns people into objects;


(b)                     Despite making this important point, not a single one of these


      articles discusses pornography, which is the best conceivable


      illustration of the fact that market-based societies turn people into


      objects or, to use Debord’s term, ‘mere spectacles’;


(c)                     Up to a point, each of these articles is itself an example of the


      very commodity-fetishism that it is its very purpose to expose and heap


      scorn on; 


(d)                     Although each of these papers does expose a deep problem with


    all economy-based societies--namely, that human beings are turned into


      objects it does so much as attempt to identify a constructive way of      responding to this fact; and finally,


(e)                     Although, as just stated, each of these papers identified this


      important problem with market-based societies, there is an important


      corollary that each of them hints at but not a single one of them clearly


      states, namely, that the various freedoms that people necessarily have


    in a given market-economy---in particular, the freedoms to own and


      exchange goods and services---inevitably lead to complete mutual


      enslavement on the part of that society’s members, albeit under the


      pretexts of ‘universal legal protection of individual rights’ and


      ‘economic and individual freedom.’


 


      Let us now clarify and substantiate each of these points, and relate it to


the articles in question.  First of all, what better example of “the Commodity


as Spectacle”, to use Guy Debord’s term, could there be than a stripper or


pornographic actress? Debord himself does not mention these professions,


and yet they are the best conceivable examples of his point that the free-


market turns people into mere ‘spectacles.’ For here we have a human being


who has been turned into a commodity that is in the most literal possible way


a spectacle. This woman is paid to be ‘stripped’ of her clothing—and dignity


—and turned into a pure spectacle—something that exists only to be


consumed and that is consumed by being looked at.      This is not to say that strippers and pornographic actresses are forced


into their professions: in most cases they are not. But in a way, the fact that


they enter these professions ‘freely’ only shows how insidiously and


deceptively destroying of freedom the so-called ‘free market’ really is. First


of all, if a woman is abducted and forced to become a pornographic actress,


that does not redound to the discredit of capitalism. Capitalism is about


people transacting with one another. In other words, it is about people having


and using the legal right to dispose of their own assets in a manner of their


own choosing. Since the woman was forced into prostitution, her being a


prostitute is not the  result of a transaction (being kidnapped and forced into a


certain line of work is not a way of transacting, after all), and it therefore falls


outside the scope of what a capitalist system permits.


      So let us consider the case where the woman ‘freely’ becomes a


stripper or pornographic actress. Why has this woman chosen this path? Very


simple. She needs money; in a market-economy, she has no value over and


above what people are willing to give her in the form of money; and unless


she has the wherewithal to become a high-level professional, such as a


medical doctor or computer-programmer, her options are either (i) earn a


paltry income doing time-consuming, soul-destroying menial work (e.g. work


as a waitress or telemarketer) or (ii) make real money by literally turning


herself into a spectacle.         Pornographers and consumers of pornography will say that this


woman ‘did this to herself’—that she ‘did it freely.’ And after a fashion, they


are right. Like all members of a market-economy, this woman started off with


certain legal ‘freedoms’; and in order to eat and pay rent, she disposed of


those freedoms in a manner that, given the options available to her, was the


most ‘rational’ and that she consequently ‘freely’ chose. And yet all of this


‘freedom’ and ‘rationality’ has been turned against itself and made its


possessor into a slave: this woman may be legally free, but how much more


freedom than an actual slave does she actually have? If a slave tries to escape,


he may be hunted down and beaten, maybe even killed. If this woman refuses


to either work ten hours a day in a cubicle or spend those same ten hours


dancing naked under neon lights, she will be out on the streets and either die


of exposure or be jailed for vagrancy. Incidentally, supposing for argument’s


sake that she does choose to live on the streets, the various petty convictions


that she will wrack up as a result will make it impossible for her to get any


kind of job that pays enough money to live on. So no—her situation is not, at


least not unambiguously, different from that of an actual slave, even though


her every move is carried out ‘freely.’


      Debord writes:


 


      The spectacle subjugates living men to itself to the extent that theeconomy has totally subjugated them. It is no more than the economy


developing for itself. It is the true reflection of the production of things, and


the false objectification of the producers (Debord, 142).


 


 


      How much more impactful this statement would have been had it been


followed by a specific example! And what better illustration of it could there


be than the just-discussed completely literal one!


      Debord’s article is the work of someone with a powerful intellect. It


reads much like Marx’s “Theses on Feuerbach” and seems to have been


modeled on them, both consisting of deep but obscure epigrams that would


be a lot less obscure if concretely illustrated. And not a single one of the forty


epigrams composing this work involves a concrete illustration-even though


illustrations abound, as we have seen.


      Presumably, it was presumably for this very reason that Morgan and


Purje wrote their article “An Illustrated Guide to Guy Debord’s ‘The Society


of the Spectacle’”. Though brilliant, this article suffers from one major flaw:


it doesn’t contain any illustrations. Yes—it contains ‘illustrations’ in the


sense that it there is art-work in it; but it is quite as devoid of specific


examples of the phenomenon in question (that the ‘free market’ turns people


into two-dimensional spectacle-commodities) as Debord’s work itself. Andits attempt to clarify Debord’s meaning do not in my view do Debord’s work


justice:


 


      As spectators, we regularly experience advertisements for rival


products — Pepsi and Coca-Cola, Delta and US Airways, The X-


Factor and The Voice. Often we’re presented with conflicting desires or


messages. For instance, a television drama depicting an AA meeting might


be preceded by a glamorous vodka advertisement. Such logical


inconsistencies are buried by the spectacle’s relentless proffering of goods


and imagery. Gradually, we begin to conflate visibility with value (Morgan


and Purje).


 


      Yes, technically speaking, it is ironic that the same consumers are


being shown ads for booze are also being shown ads for ways to get off of


booze. But this isn’t exactly a ‘logical inconsistency.’ It is, indeed, just a


humorous irony: advertisements are seen by millions of people; some of


them want vodka and others want to drop drinking vodka---just as some of


them want to buy sneakers and others want to buy dress shoes.


      Also, Morgan and Purje are interpreting Debord overly literally. In


their view, Debord is making the pedestrian point that, in a market-society,


people focus almost as much on packaging—on the wrapper and theribbons and the like—as they do on the actual product. But Debord is


trying to make a much deeper point—one to the effect that capitalistic


transactionalism drains turns human beings into soulless widgets who, as


such, have nothing on the ‘inside’ and are therefore pure ‘outside’—pure


appearance in other words.


      As for Stuart Hall’s “The Spectacle of the Other” (Hall, 2001), this


work was a combination of very sharp and accurate and also very


misconceived. Hall points out that, thanks to predatory capitalistic practices,


human beings were enslaved and that this was subsequently rationalized on


free-market grounds. This is true, of course. Hall then insightfully says that


capitalism ‘otherizes’ human beings—which it does, in that, in a ‘free’


market system, people do not interact, so much as they transact, with the


result that kinship and moral ties are dissolved in an acid bath of


acquisitiveness.


      Where, in my view, Hall goes quite astray is his contention capitalism


reinforces distinctions of race and gender. As Marx and Engels themselves


said, capitalism does quite the opposite: capitalism replaces the biological


with the financial: biologically rooted instincts---both wholesome ones, such


as feelings of warmth for friends and family, as well ugly offshoots, such as


chauvinism and racism---are replaced by cold calculations, with friends and


family and even children having only as much worth as an accountingprogram says they have. So yes—historically, just as Hall says, capitalism led


to acts of profiteering that involved exploiting racial differences. What Hall


fails to say is that, when capitalism is allowed to run its course, it


dehumanizes everybody: all people—man, woman, black, white—are equally


required to toil in cubicles for paychecks that barely cover their rent; and if,


in order to tend to a sick child or make a much needed visit to the doctor’s


office, they take so much as a day off without ‘written permission’ from their


supervisor, they are rewarded for it by having their livelihood cut off—none


 


 


 


Debord, G. (2006). The commodity as spectacle. Media and cultural studies:


  Keyworks, 117-21.


 


Hall, S. (2001). The spectacle of the other. Discourse theory and practice: A


  reader, 324-344.


 


Morgan, Tiernan and Purje, Lauren (2016). “An Illustrated Guide to Guy


  Debord’s ‘The Society of the Spectacle’”. Retrieved from:


      https://hyperallergic.com/313435/an-illustrated-guide-to-guy-debords-the-


  society-of-the-spectacle/ 


 


 


 


 QUANTITATIVE Dissertation Research Plan


 


 


 


                                  STATEMENT OF ORIGINAL WORK


 


    I understand that Capella University’s Academic Honesty Policy


      (3.01.01) holds learners accountable for the integrity of work they


      submit, which includes, but is not limited to, discussion postings,


      assignments, comprehensive exams, and the dissertation. Learners are


      expected to understand the Policy and know that it is their


      responsibility to learn about instructor and general academic


      expectations with regard to proper citation of sources in written work


    as specified in the APA Publication Manual, 6th Ed. Serious sanctions


      can result from violations of any type of the Academic Honesty


      Policy including dismissal from the university.


 


    I attest that this document represents my own work. Where I have


      used the ideas of others, I have paraphrased and given credit


      according to the guidelines of the APA Publication Manual, 6th Ed.


      Where I have used the words of others, (i.e. direct quotes), I have      followed the guidelines for using direct quotes prescribed by the APA


      Publication Manual, 6th Ed.


 


    I have read, understood, and abided by Capella University’s


      Academic Honesty Policy (3.01.01). I further understand that Capella


      University takes plagiarism seriously; regardless of intention, the


      result is the same.


 


 


 


 


                                    Signature for Statement of


                                            Original Work


 Vineta Mitchell Dr. Guillory


        LearnerMentor


        NameName


 Vmitchell26@capella.edu patricia.guillory@capella.edu


            Learnervmitch16@gmail.comMentor


          EmailEmail


 21356578 10/07/2019


        LearnerDate          ID 


 


                    Dissertation Research Plan: QUANTITATIVE


                    STUDIES ONLY


 


 


                                      PRELIMINARY INFORMATION


      Learners, please insert your answers directly into the expandable boxes


    that have been provided!


 


                              A. Learner and Specialization


                                          Information (to be


                                        completed by Learner)


                  Learner NameVineta Mitchell


                  Learner EmailVmitchell26@capella.edu


          Learner ID Number21356578


                  Mentor NameDr. Guillory


                  Mentor Email 


                                                patricia.guillory@capella.edu


                    SpecializationNursing Education            Specialization Chair 


                            Name


            Specialization Chair 


                            Email


            Committee Member 


                        #1 Name


            Committee Member 


                        #1 Email


            Committee Member 


                        #2 Name


            Committee Member 


                        #2 Email


                        MethodologyQUANTITATIVE 


 


                              Section 1.  Topic Endorsement


        1.1 Research TopicThe proposed research study topic is implicit


                                    bias on the part of Nursing Faculties against


                                  African Americans who are not first-generation


                                    immigrants. It is therefore important in this


                                      context to distinguish between native born


                                  African Americans and first-generation African


                                  Americans, since the current study is concerned


                                  with implicit institutional biases that are direct


                                  towards native born African Americans but are


                                  not, at least not with equal intensity, directed


                                  towards first-generation immigrants of African


                                  Ancestry. A case will be made that native born


                                                    (Muronda, 2015).


                                      Less than 10% of Nursing Faculty members


                                    are of African (Sub-Saharan) descent, even


                                  though African Americans are over 13% of the


                                    population (US Census Bureau, 2018). At the                                      same time, first-generation immigrants of


                                  African descent disproportionately represented


                                      in Nursing Faculties (South, 2018). The


                                  population of the United States is approximately


                                  330 million, approximately 42 million of whom


                                    are of African ancestry. Of those 42 million,


                                    approximately 3.4 million are first generation


                                  immigrants, approximately 95% of whom come


                                  from one of the following countries: Jamaica,


                                      Haiti, Nigeria, Trinidad & Tobago, the


                                    Dominican Republic, Ghana, Guyana, Kenya,


                                      and Somalia (US Census Bureau, 2018).


                                    Immigrants from these countries are twice as


                                  likely as native born Americans to be employed


                                  as medical professionals, over three times as


                                  likely as native-born African Americans to be


                                    employed as medical professionals, over four


                                        times as likely as native-born African


                                  Americans to be employed as nurses, and over


                                    five times as likely as native-born African


                                      Americans to be employed as members of                                          Nursing Faculties (South, 2019).


 


  


            1.2 ResearchAlthough there is a voluminous scholarly


            Problem (1literature concerning racism towards African-


              Paragraph)Americans, there is a paucity of literature


                                    concerning the effects of such literature in the


                                      context of Nursing Faculties, and there


                                    extremely little literature concerning how the


                                    attitudes of nursing faculty members towards


                                    first-generation immigrants of African descent


                                  differ from their attitudes towards native-born


                                                  African Americans.


                                        There does exist purely statistical data


                                  relating to the rates of employment in Nursing


                                        Faculties of both native-born African


                                        Americans as well as first-generation


                                  immigrants of African descent. But this data has


                                    not been interpreted (Akintoye, 2019). It has


                                        been observed that, in many different


                                    professional context, including nursing and


                                  nursing-instruction, first-generation immigrants                                    of African descent do in fact ‘outperform’


                                    native-born African Americans, both when it


                                  comes to being hired and also when it comes to


                                  being promoted. But this has not been treated as


                                  a sign of bias or prejudice. In fact, it has been


                                  celebrated as evidence of their absence (White-


                                                      means, 2009).


 


                            RESIDENCY LEARNERS ONLY:


                                      Specialization Chair Topic Endorsement


        •         After completing Section 1, “Topic Endorsement,”


              addressing the Research Topic and Research Problem,


              submit the form to your Residency Instructor for approval.


              Follow the instructions carefully.


        •         Collaborate with your Residency Instructor until you have


              approval for the Section 1, “Topic Endorsement.” After you


              have received their approval for Section 1, your Residency


              Instructor will submit this section to your Specialization Chair


              or Designee for Topic Endorsement.


        •         The Specialization Chair or Designee will notify you and


              your Residency Instructor of their decision and a copy of the              decision will be sent to Dissertation@capella.edu.  


          2.1 ResearchAmerican laws and mores have changed


              Problemenormously over the last sixty years. Jim Crow


            Backgroundlaws, which explicitly discriminated against


                                        African Americans, were abolished and


                                  replaced with laws designed to ensure equality


                                  of treatment and opportunity (Akintoye, 2019).


                                  Also, during this period, the United States has


                                  transitioned from being 90% white, has become


                                    highly diverse and multicultural, with whites


                                  being expected to become a minority by 2043


                                                    (Lieberman, 2019).


                                          It is difficult, however, to track the


                                        psychological realities underlying these


                                    massive demographic shifts and, in particular,


                                  to know whether people’s private attitudes have


                                    kept pace with the just-mentioned legal and


                                    institutional changes. Racism and ethnic bias


                                  no longer assume overt forms, but that doesn’t


                                      mean they don’t exist. For example, even                                    though the white population has shrunk by


                                  almost a third over the last sixty years, nursing


                                  faculties are still over 90% white, even in areas,


                                  such as Detroit and Chicago, where they make


                                      up less than one third of the population


                                                    (Phillips, 2014).


                                            Also, the fact that first-generation


                                      immigrants of African descent are so much


                                  more likely than equally qualified native-born


                                  African Americans to be hired and promoted by


                                  such faculties suggests that their members are


                                        still uneasy about native-born African


                                                Americans (Sabin, 2009).


                                        A related fact is that native-born African


                                      Americans are culturally and even to some


                                  extent ethnically distinct from first-generation


                                      immigrants of African descent (Hamilton,


                                    2019). The upbringing and outlook of a given


                                    immigrant from Lagos, Nigeria is likely to be


                                  very different from that of an African American


                                  who was raised in Baltimore or Los Angeles;                                       and in addition to speaking with different


                                    accents, the two are likely to have different


                                      preferences in relation clothing and other


                                  personal matters (Hamilton, 2019). Researches


                                  have established that racial bias is triggered not


                                      by skin color alone but by skin color in


                                    conjunction with distinctive accents, clothing


                                        styles, and personal manner, and first-


                                    generation immigrants of African descent may


                                    therefore fail to trigger the biases that operate


                                    against his native-born counterpart (Smedley,


                                                          2003).


 


  


  

































            2.2 ResearchIs implicit bias on the part of nursing faculty


              Question(s)members towards native-born African


                                        Americans responsible for the fact that,


                                    compared to equally qualified first-generation                                      immigrants of African descent, they are


                                    disproportionately unlikely to be hired and, if


                                      hired, disproportionately unlikely to be


                                                        promoted?


 


                                            If so, is this bias conscious?


 


                                    What non-disruptive and politically feasible


                                  measures can be taken to counteract the effects


                                                    of this bias?    


 


                                    What are the economic consequences of this


                                        bias and what would the economic


                                        consequences of their elimination be? 


        2.3 Purpose of theThe purpose of this study is to identify and


                  Studydelineate the social consequences of the


                                    psychological forces responsible for the fact


                                    that native-born African Americans are less


                                    likely than members of all other ethnicities,


                                      including first-generation immigrants of


                                  African descent, to be recruited/promoted by


                                                    nursing faculties.


        2.4 MethodologyThis study will be divided into two parts,


        and Basic Designand the methodology used in each part will be


                Overviewquantitative.


                                      In the first part, the relevant statistical data


                                    will be analyzed, so as to establish that the


                                      above-stated discrepancies are indeed a


                                      function of implicit bias. Since this will


                                  involve correlating hiring-rates and promotion-


                                        rates with applicant-credentials, the


                                      methodology in question, being causal-


                                    correlational, will be quantitative (Cresswell,                                                          2015).


                                      In the second part, the nature and causes of


                                  the biases in question will be investigated. This


                                    will be done through a carefully constructed


                                  survey, which will be administered online. The


                                    survey will use the standard six-point Likert


                                        scale, making it possible for results to


                                      evaluated automatically and objectively


                                                  (Bachmann, 2015).   


 


 


          2.5 DissertationIdentifying Implicit Racial Barriers and


                  Titletheir Impact on Changing the Face of


 Nursing Faculty


                   


 


                              Section 3.Research Theory


          3.1 TheoreticalUltimately, the foundations for this study


              Foundationslie in Levi-Strauss’s structural approach to


                                          anthropological research and in James


                                    Gibson’s ecological approach to psychological


                                                          research.


                                        According to Levi-Strauss’s structuralism,


                                      human interrelations are governed by rules,


                                      most of them implicit, that are defined in


                                        terms of binaries, such as black/white,


                                      good/bad, boss/underlying, and male/female


                                      (Levi-Strauss, 1963). It is to be stressed that


                                      the rules in question are not laws or even


                                          conventions. Rather, they are largely


                                      unconscious understandings that, although


                                    having some biological roots, are changeable


                                      and only assume rigid forms when given


                                    external reinforcement in the form of statutes                                      and other expressions of institutional force.


                                              According to Gibson’s ecological


                                      methodology, interactions among organisms,


                                        including human beings, are guided by


                                      implicit understandings as to how maintain


                                      viable equilibria in a sustainable manner


                                            (Gibson, 1977). Oftentimes, these


                                          understandings give rise to enlightened


                                      practices, but they may also lead to behavior


                                      that, although productive in times past, has


                                      long since ceased to be so (Gibson, 2002).


                                          Structuralism has been used with great


                                    advantage in the study of racism, including in


                                        the medical profession, by a number of


                                    scholars, including Bonilla-Silva (1996) and


                                    Viruell-Fuentes (2012), who have shown that


                                      otherwise inexplicable and highly invidious


                                        forms of racism, such as Jim Crow and


                                        Apartheid, can be understood, though


                                    obviously not justified, if mapped onto Levi-


                                      Strauss’s structuralism Bonilla-Silva (1996).                                          As for Gibson’s ecological school of


                                        psychological research, Anderson (1999),


                                      Williams (2001), and Krieger (2014) have


                                      done extensive work showing that racial


                                      institutions, as well as their psychological


                                    residues, can be understood along Gibsonian


                                      lines by regarding them as over-deployed


                                        defensive-mechanisms, comparable to those


                                      that mediate asthma, lupus, and other auto-


                                          immune disorders (Krieger, 2014).


  


        3.2 Contributions toIn this work, we will show that the just-


                  Theorymentioned contextualizations of the theories


 of Gibson and Levi-Strauss not only make it


          Describe how yourpossible to interpret irrationally


        study will contributediscriminatory behavior on the part of


      to theory in your fieldotherwise rational professionals but also help


          by meeting one oridentify feasible policy-recommendations that


          more of these fourwould help reconcile the various parties


                criteria.afflicted by the racial biases examined in the


 current study.   


    1.  The study should
 


        generate new theory.
 

 


    2.  The study should


        refine or add to an


        existing theory.


 


    3.  The study should test


        to confirm or refute a        theory.


 


    4.  The study should


        expand theory by


        telling us something


        new about


        application or


        processes


 


      • Use current (within


      5-7 years), scholarly,


        PRIMARY


        resources to support


        statements.


 


      • Use APA style in


        citing all resources.


          3.3 TheoreticalThe primary theoretical implication of the


              Implicationspresent study is that racial attitudes, along


 with the social damage thereby done, can be


              Describe themitigated without overhauling the institutions                theoreticalthat host them or otherwise engaging in


            implications youextreme measures that are likely to lead to


          believe your studyhate, as opposed to reconciliation (LeGrande,


        could have for your2018).


          field AND yourThus far, racism has been combatted either


          specialization area.through heart-wrenching but ultimately empty


            This will be thepleas for ‘compassion’ or through massive


                theoreticalsocial changes requiring prohibitively large


          framework(s) to beamounts of political will and financial capital


                used in(Kumi-Yeboah, 2019). The current study will


          conceptualizing theidentify measures that are both non-


        study and analyzingideological and also enviro-friendly and, for


                the data.those reasons among others, would be loss


 costly and less likely to meet with emotional


 or political resistance (LeGrand, 218).


      • Use current (within 


      5-7 years), scholarly,


        PRIMARY


        resources to support


        statements.


       • Use APA style in


        citing all resources. 


  













            3.4 PracticalDiscriminatory behavior is never innocuous,


              Implicationsbut it is especially harmful in the context of


 decisions relating to the hiring and promoting


          Please describe theof healthcare employees. Researchers have


          specific practicalestablished that discriminatory hiring-practices


        implications that maycorrelate with lower-quality healthcare being


          result from thisgiven to members of the group thereby


        research that can bediscriminated against (Sen, 2018).


        used by any or all ofAlso, economists in the United Kingdom,


            the followingGermany, and the United States have


            stakeholders: theestimated that biases on the part of healthcare


            population beingproviders, including racial biases, increases


        studied, professionalshealth-care costs by as much as 20%. Any        for whom this topicinsight that can be provided as to how to


        pertains, and/or themitigate such bias is therefore likely to


          wider communityimprove quality of healthcare while stabilizing


                  itself.costs (Simon, 2019)


  


  


      • Use current (within


      5-7 years), scholarly,


        PRIMARY


        resources to support


        statements.


 


      • Use APA style in


        citing all resources. 


  


 














 


                                          References


 


    Akintoye, E., Miranda, W. R., Veldtman, G. R., Connolly, H.


        M., & Egbe, A. C. (2019). National trends in Fontan


        operation and in-hospital outcomes in the


        USA. Heart, 105(9), 708-714.


 


    Bachmann, A., Dansuer, B., & Marin, D. (2015). Developing a


        theoretical framework using a nursing perspective to


        investigate perceived health in the “sandwich generation”        group. Nursing Science Quarterly, 28 (4), 308-318.


        Doi:1177/


          0894318415599217


 


    Bonilla-Silva E. Rethinking racism: Toward a structural


              interpretation. American Sociological Review.


            1996;62:465-480.


 


    Clark R, Anderson NB, Clark VR, Williams DR. Racism as


            a stressor for African Americans: A biopsychosocial


            model. American Psychologist. 1999;October


              1999:805-816.


 


    Cohen G, Garcia J, Purdie-Vaughns V, Apfel N, Brzustoski P.


            Recursive processes in self-affirmation: intervening to


            close the minority achievement gap. Science. 2009 Apr


              17;324(5925):400–3.


 


      Creswell, J. (2015). Educational research: Planning,


        conducting, and evaluating quantitative and qualitative


                      th 
        research. (5Ed.). Upper Saddle River, New Jersey:        Pearson Education, Inc. ISBN: 978-0-13-354958-4


 


    Frieden, T. (2014). Six components necessary for effective


        public health program implementation. American


        Journal of Public Health, 104 (1), 17-22.


 


    Flemings, C., Lamont, M., & Welburn, J. (2012). African


        Americans respond to stigmatization: The meanings and


        salience of confronting, deflecting conflict, educating the


        ignorant and “managing self. Ethnic & Racial Studies. 35(3),


        400-417.


 


    Flora, P., De Jong, P. R., Le Grand, J., & Kim, J. Y.


            (2018). The State and Social Welfare, 1997:


            International Studies on Social Insurance and


            Retirement, Employment, Family Policy and Health


            Care. Routledge.


 


    Gee GC, Payne-Sturges DC. Environmental health


            disparities: a framework integrating psychosocial and


              environmental concepts.Environ Health Perspect.              2004;112(17):1645-1653.


 


    Gibson, J. J. (2002). A theory of direct visual


            perception. Vision and Mind: selected readings in the


            philosophy of perception, 77-90.


 


    Gibson, J. J. (1977). The theory of affordances. Hilldale,


            USA, 1(2).


 


    Graham L, Brown-Jeffy S, Aronson R, Stephens C. Critical


            race theory as theoretical framework and analysis


            tool for population health research. Critical Public


            Health. 2011;21(1):81-93.


 


    Hamilton, T. G., & Massey, D. S. (2019). Immigration and the


            Remaking of Black America. Russell Sage Foundation.


 


      Hassouneh, D. (2013). Unconscious racist bias: Barrier to a diverse


        nursing faculty. Journal of Nursing Education, 52(4), 183-184.


    Hassouneh D, Akeroyd J, Lutz K F , Beckett A K , (2012). Exclusion


        and control: Patterns aimed at limiting the influence of faculty of        color. Journal of Nursing Education, 51(6), 314—325.


      Hassounch-Phillips, D., Beckett, A. (2003). An education


        in racism. Journal of Nursing Education, 42(6), 258-


        265.


 


    Krieger N. Got theory? – on the 21st c CE rise of explicit


            use of epidemiologic theories of disease distribution:


            a review and ecosocial analysis. Current Epidemiol


            Reports 2014; 1(1):45-56


 


    Kumi-Yeboah, A., Brobbey, G., & Smith, P. (2019). Exploring


            Factors That Facilitate Acculturation Strategies and


            Academic Success of West African Immigrant Youth in


            Urban Schools. Education and Urban Society,


              0013124519846279.


 


    Le Grand, J., & Robinson, R. (2018). Privatisation and the


            welfare state. Routledge.


 


    Lévi-Strauss, Claude, and Monique Layton. Structural


              anthropology. Vol. 1. New York: Basic Books, 1963. 


    Lieberman, J. S., Austin, G., Austin, G., Bajpai, R., Bajpai, R.,


            Basrur, R. M., ... & Bernstein, J. (2019). The political


            consequences of preferential policies: a comparative


            perspective. In The Socio-political Ideas of BR


            Ambedkar (Vol. 35, No. 21–22, pp. viii-x). New Delhi:


            Columbia University.


 


    McNeil, G. (2008). African-American nurses faculty satisfaction and


        scholarly productivity at predominately white and historically black


        colleges and universities. ANF Journal, 14 (1), 4- 12.


 


      Mertler, C. (2016). Introduction to educational research. Thousand


    Oaks, CA. Sage


 


    Muronda, V. (2015). The culturally diverse nursing


        student: A review of the literature. Journal of


        Transcultural Nursing.


    NLN (2018), Biennial Survey of Schools of Nursing, Academic Year


        2017-2018. Retrieved from: http://www.nln.org/newsroom/nursing-


                education-statistics/biennial-survey-of-schools-of-nursing-          academic-year-2017-2018


 


    Phillips, J. & Malone, B. (2014). Increasing racial/ethnic diversity in


        nursing to reduce health disparities and achieve health equity.


        Public Health Reports, 129 (2).


 


    Sabin J, Nosek BA, Greenwald A, Rivara FP. Physicians' implicit


        and explicit attitudes about race by MD race, ethnicity, and


        gender. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 2009 Aug;20(3):896–


        913.


 


    Sen, A. (2019). The political economy of hunger.


 


    Simon, J. L. (2019). The economics of population growth (Vol.


        5403). Princeton University Press.


 


 


 Smedley BD, Stith AY, Nelson AR, editors. Unequal


            Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in


            Healthcare. Washington, DC: National Academy Press;


            2003. (Eds) 


    U.S. Census Bureau (2018). Projections Show a Slower Growing,


        Older, More Diverse Nation a Half Century from Now. Retrieved


        from http://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/.


      White-Means, S., Zhiyong, D., & Hufstader, M. (2009). Cultural


        competency, race, and skin tone bias among pharmacy, nursing, and


        medical students: Implications for addressing health disparities.


        Sage Journals, Retrieved from:


                https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1077558709333995#


 


    Viruell-Fuentes EA, Miranda PY, Abdulrahim S. More than


            culture: Structural racism, intersectionality theory,


            and immigrant health. Soc Sci Med. 2012.


 


    Williams DR, Collins C. Racial residential segregation: a


            fundamental cause of racial disparities in health.


            Public Health Rep. 2001;116(5):404-416.        ISBN:-13 978-14833-7548-9


 


 


    NLN (2016). Achieving diversity and meaningful inclusion in


        nursing education: A living document from the national league


        of nursing. Retrieved from: http://www.nln.org/about/position-


        statements/nln


 


 


    Schriner, C., Deckelman, S., Kubat, M., Lenkay, J. & Nims, L. (2010).


        Collaboration of nursing faculty and college administration in


        creating organizational change. Nursing Education Perspective, 31


        (6), 381-386.


 


    Sen, A. (2019). The political economy of hunger.


 


    Simon, J. L. (2019). The economics of population growth (Vol. 5403).


        Princeton University Press.


 


    Stewart, D. L. (2008). Being all of me: Black students negotiating        multiple identities. Journal of Higher Education, 79, 185-207.


 


    Sutherland, J., Hamilton, M., & Goodman, N. (2007).


        Affirming at risk minorities for success ARMS


        retention graduation and success on the NCLEX-


        RN. Journal of Nursing Education, 46(8), 347-


        353.


 


    U.S. Census Bureau (2018). Projections Show a Slower Growing,


        Older, More Diverse Nation a Half Century from Now. Retrieved


        from http://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/.


      White-Means, S., Zhiyong, D., & Hufstader, M. (2009). Cultural


        competency, race, and skin tone bias among pharmacy, nursing, and


        medical students: Implications for addressing health disparities.


        Sage Journals, Retrieved from:


                https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1077558709333995# 


 


 


                          DISSERTATION LEARNERS ONLY:


                          Specialization Chair Topic Approval


                          (To be completed by Specialization


                          Chair/Designee after Section 1 and 2


                          are approved by Faculty Mentor)


  


        Chairs: Please insertSignature: Vineta Mitchell


      your electronic signatureDate: 10/07/2019


          to certify that theComments:


          Research Topic is


          appropriate for your


        specialization and return


                    to


        dissertation@capella.edu.


 Discussion Post #8 (worth 30 points; at least 200 words):  Due by Saturday,


Oct 26th, by 11:30 p.m.


 


Read the introduction to the theme of “Culture and Identity” on pp.


428-430.  Then read Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s “The Yellow


Wallpaper” on pp. 442-454 (I've also put an audio reading of the story


above, so you can listen to it as well.)  Then read any ONE other piece


of fiction or poetry or drama or nonfiction from the “Culture and


Identity” theme from pp. 428-575.  Again, though, you may NOT use


the same piece for post #8 as you did for post #7


 


For discussion post #8, there are two parts: 


First for part A (worth 15 points).  SUMMARIZE “The Yellow Wallpaper”


and the other piece you read with one FULL paragraph of 6-8 sentences (at


least 50 words) given to each piece for a total of at least 100 words for


this part (remember, your summaries should be detailed enough to SHOW


you read well . . .). Make sure when you do your post that you give the


title of the piece you are responding to, as well as the pages it is on in


our text. 


 


For part B (worth 15 points).  Then RESPOND to the story and other piece


and/or the ideas in them in some way--either creatively or critically (for


critical, for example, see the handout called "An Inductive/Inquiry


Approach to Studying Texts" in week two’s module or the “Glossary of


Critical Approaches” on pp. 946-954).  You might write several questions


(as outlined in the Inquiry Approach) or you might choose one of the


critical approaches and analyze the story or stories from that perspective. 


Or you could compare/contrast the story and the other piece in terms of


what they say about the theme of “Culture and Identity.”  Or you could


write about how you interpreted these pieces.  These are just some


suggestions for ways you can respond to literature you have read.


 If you want to do a creative response, then write your own "mini-story"or


poem about this theme or in the style/vein/voice of one of the pieces you


read.


 


Or you can answer/address this question:  Charlotte Perkins Gilman said


that she wrote this piece as a feminist protest against the way women were


treated during her time.  Do you see this character as protesting or not?  Is


she trying to create a different kind of identity for herself than the one that


was acceptable for women at that time—or is she just mentally unstable? 


Write about her and this story and compare it to the other piece you read


somehow.


 


For the response part, I am looking for at least 100 words for this part


also.  The more detail the better; the more thoughtful/thought-provoking,


the better!


 


 


 


Jennifer Johnson posted Oct 19, 2019


 


The Yellow Wallpaper by Charlotte Perkins Gilman (page 442-454)From the beginning this story will open the doors to a psychological thriller


that will leave you wanting more all the way to the end.  It begins by


detailing the daily struggles of a Physician named John and his wife who


seem to operate strangely in their personal relationship.   John is his wife’s


physician and that will hinder her ability to cope with her mental illness


throughout the story.  John seems to be in true denial of his wife’s mental


condition. This story will lead you to believe that John’s wife is going


through postpartum depression in many ways.  He has taken her away to a


beautiful yet older rental home to heal, and ultimately this home will begin to


unravel her mental illness.  She becomes obsessed with things she sees and


begins to write about them in her journals.  The story will explain how John’s


wife is hiding a lot of her fears and feelings.  She begins to write a secretive


journal detailing the things she is experiencing and seeing in the rental


house.  The yellow wallpaper in the house will have a major significance to


the story and will add to the wife’s perception of reality.  She begins to see an


imprisoned woman within the yellow wallpaper which will leave the reader


wondering.  At times this story will go from documenting the first person


struggles of anxiety and depression to something that is a bit evil and full of


suspense.   


 


 Hi Jennifer! I very much enjoyed your post. But I feel that you simply stated


the ‘cold facts’ of the case, as it were. Yes, this woman is obviously cycling


into psychosis, possibly caused by post-partum depression, and yes she does


start to project onto the wall-papers. But what, in your opinion, does all of


this mean? In other words, what is it that isn’t said but lies beneath the


surface of these events? For example, is the husband deliberately torturing


her? If so, why? Is there a larger conceit at work concerning gender


relations? If so, what? I would be very interested on your thoughts on these


matters! -Monzer


 


A Poet To His Baby Son by James Weldon Johnson (page 504-505)


 


This poem is about a father who wants his son to grow up to be something


great.  As his son lays in front of him as a baby, he begins to think of the


future and what his son will grow up to be.  His son is described as being


blessed with his mother’s face and cursed with his father’s mind.  He wants


his son to grow up to be a banker, a politician, leader or a type of go getter. 


The father seems to have strong opinions on what he does not want is son to


be.  He states, “Take the advice of a father who knows.”  He clearly does not


want his son to become a poet.  He defines in the poem that it is no time or


place for poets today.  He views the language of poets as an unknown tonguetoday.


 


Great post! What are your thoughts on the father’s values? Is the father


right to have such specific views as to what constitutes success? And why


does he have them? Is it because he is himself unfulfilled? Or is it just that


he is ‘old school’ and has rather retrograde beliefs about how life is to be


lived? Finally, what are your own views on these matters? Are you a poet


who others tried to force into some pre-existing professional template?


Cheers, Monzer


 


Questions about the Yellow Wallpaper


 


What type of physician is John?  Does he have any experience with mental


illness or postpartum depression?  Is a psychiatrist? What type of physician is


her brother? 


 


Probably a general practitioner who, if given the choice, would specialize in


psychiatry. 


 


How did she really feel about the yellow wallpaper?  She used words like


flamboyant, repellent, revolting and unclean.  Did she really hate the yellowwallpaper?


 


She does not like it. It is clinical and fake.


 


 


The story mentioned that Mary is good with the baby.  Is this their first


baby?  Has Mary been there as the caregiver for more than one child for John


and his wife?  Does Mary know she has postpartum and that’s why they are


at the rental house?


 


I don’t know that she thinks in quite such logical, transactional terms.


 


In the story she states she is angry enough to do something desperate.  She


also mentions she has a hidden rope.  Does John take her suicide signs


seriously?  Does John know that his wife could be suicidal? 


 


He is probably deliberately causing her to be suicidal, or so the subtext


suggests.


 


John takes it as far as to take his wife to a rental house to recover from


postpartum depression.  Has John seen signs that would make him think hiswife would harm their child?   


 


Great suggestion, but his objective seems to be to hurt, not to protect.


 


Questions A Poet To His Baby Son


 


Why does the author think becoming a poet is such a bad choice?  Is the


author a poet himself?


 


He thinks it’s a bad choice, because, financially speaking, it is a bad


choice. Pan-handlers make more money than poets.


 


Why does the author think that poets are unfortunate fellows?   Why doesn’t


he want his son to grow up to be like one?  Is that because you cannot earn a


living being a poet?  The poem says that poetry is unknown tongue?  Does he


think that no one reads or respects poetry anymore?


 


He thinks this, because they have no earning power and are therefore


defenseless. Plus, there are great poets who have day-jobs, such as Wallace


Stevens, who was an investment banker. Even Shakespeare made his living


as an actor, not as a poet or playwright. 


It seems the author wants the best for his son.  Why would he be critical of


what he does not want his son to be when he grows up?


 


Asked and answered. See above.


 


Why would the author think that poetry is not a good way of communicating


love for his son if he is writing his own son a poem like this? 


 


Poetry is a great way to communicate love, but it isn’t a good way to pay the


bills. A friend of mine is a poet, and he always had to ask other people for


money, including me. One day I lent him my car, and he just drove away.


With my dog and birth-certificate.


 


How would the author feel if his son grew up to become a poet and read this


poem that was written for him as a baby?  Would be feel regretful that he has


such harsh feeling on poets knowing his own son became one?


less


 


That really depends. It depends on the father and also depends on the son’s


situation. Is he writing the poem from his mansion or from his jail cell?   


 


[1]
 https://www.sapling.com/8370027/calculate-cash-flow-operating-activities
 
[2]
Figures are taken from https://www.stock-analysis-on.net/NYSE/Company/Oracle-
  Corp/Valuation/Enterprise-Value
[3]
 https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/ORCL/oracle/total-assets
[4]
 https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/ORCL/oracle/total-assets
[5]
 https://www.investopedia.com/terms/l/leverageratio.asp
[6]
 https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/ORCL/oracle/total-assets
[7]
 https://www.datanyze.com/market-share/other-communication-and-collaboration-
software/microsoft-word
[8]
 http://fernfortuniversity.com/term-papers/porter5/analysis/3735-microsoft-corporation.php
[9]
 https://tradingeconomics.com/aapl:us:market-capitalization
[10]
 https://bstrategyhub.com/swot-analysis-of-microsoft/
[11]
 https://bstrategyhub.com/swot-analysis-of-microsoft/
[12]
 https://www.datanyze.com/market-share/other-communication-and-collaboration-
software/microsoft-word
[13]
 http://fernfortuniversity.com/term-papers/porter5/analysis/3735-microsoft-corporation.php
[14]
  https://www.cbsnews.com/news/big-brother-microsoft/

[15] http://time.com/4565438/california-marijuana-faq-rules-prop-64/
 

[16] https://www.drugrehab.org/are-anti-drug-laws-encouraging-drug-use/
 

[17] https://sfbay.ca/2018/01/31/sf-to-reverse-war-on-drugs-pot-convictions/
 

[18] http://lacannabisnews.com/la-county-moves-to-clear-pot-related-convictions/
 

      [19]http://www.thecannifornian.com/cannabis-news/northern-california/thousands-marijuana-
  convictions-reduced-tossed-bay-area-das-plan/
 
 

[20] With some exceptions, e.g. George Will: http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
      dyn/content/article/2009/10/28/AR2009102803801.html
 
[21]
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incarceration_in_the_United_States
[22]
 See Ostrowski (1989).
[23]
 See Sowell (2014).
[24]
 See also Thornton (2002).[25]
 See Ostrowski (1989).
[26]
 http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/europpblog/2014/10/21/why-russias-strong-state-

        political-system-still-remains-a-better-option-for-the-country-than-western-

style-democracy/
[27]
 http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/europpblog/2014/10/21/why-russias-strong-state-

        political-system-still-remains-a-better-option-for-the-country-than-western-

style-democracy/
[28]
 Arrow 2014.
[29]
 See A conservative case for climate action. 8 February 2017. Accessed at:

      https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/08/opinion/a-conservative-case-for-

  climate-action.html?_r=0
[30]
 See Republican tax proposal: Novel climate solution or regulatory

giveaway? 9 February 2017. Accessed at:

        https://insideclimatenews.org/news/08022017/carbon-tax-epa-clean-power-

  plan-climate-change-donald-trump
[31]
 See Hazlitt 2017.
[32]
 See Hazlitt 2017.
[33]
 A conservative case for climate action. 8 February 2017. Accessed at:

      https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/08/opinion/a-conservative-case-for-

  climate-action.html?_r=0

 
[34]
 Republican tax proposal: Novel climate solution or regulatory giveaway?

9 February 2017. Accessed at:

        https://insideclimatenews.org/news/08022017/carbon-tax-epa-clean-power-

  plan-climate-change-donald-trump

 [35]
 Light Pollution Hurts Our Economy and Our Resources. 8 August

2018. Accessed at http://cescos.fau.edu/observatory/lightpol-econ.html
[36]
 A conservative case for climate action. 8 February 2017. Accessed at:

      https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/08/opinion/a-conservative-case-for-

  climate-action.html?_r=0
[37]
 See Sowell (2005).

 
[38]
 These four reasons are taken from:

    http://www.stonemarmot.com/rantrave/usenergy.html
[39]
 See Marshall (1890) and Smith (1776), both of whom argue at length that

it is more expensive, both to employers and the economy as a whole, than to

pay them adequately.
[40]
 See Myerson (1997), who argues that for the reason just given minimum

wage increases are necessary to prevent places of business from becoming

soul-destroying ‘sweatshops.’
[41]
 Adam Smith (1776) was one of the first economists to point out that

surpluses are necessary for economic growth and also that there won’t be

adequate surpluses unless workers are adequately compensated.
[42]
 Milton Friedman (2009) makes this point, as does Jevons (1871).
[43]
 Sowell (2017) makes this point, as do Friedman (2009) and Jevons (1871).
[44]
 Sowell (2017), Friedman (2009) and Jevons (1871) makes this point.
[45]
 Henry Hazlitt makes this point, as do Smith (1776), Jevons (1871),

Friedman (2009) and Sowell (2017).
[46]
 http://time.com/4565438/california-marijuana-faq-rules-prop-64/

 
[47]
 https://digit.hbs.org/submission/zara-leverages-data-analytics-to-

  understand-consumer-tastes/
[48]
 https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/bending-the-curve-on-

industrial-energy-efficiency
[49]
 https://www.tradegecko.com/blog/zara-supply-chain-its-secret-to-retail-

success
[50]
 https://www.scmglobe.com/zara-clothing-company-supply-chain/
[51]
 https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/bending-the-curve-on-

industrial-energy-efficiency
[52]
 https://www.supplychaindive.com/news/H-M-fast-fashion-zara-uniqlo-

supply-chain-logistics/439410/
[53]
 https://www.thecut.com/2016/03/please-make-high-fashion-women-will-want-to-wear.html
[54]
 https://www.sapling.com/8370027/calculate-cash-flow-operating-

activities

 
[55]
  Figures are taken from https://www.stock-analysis-

    on.net/NYSE/Company/Oracle-Corp/Valuation/Enterprise-Value
[56]
 https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/ORCL/oracle/total-assets
[57]
 https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/ORCL/oracle/total-assets
[58]
 https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/ORCL/oracle/total-assets
[59]
 https://www.investopedia.com/terms/l/leverageratio.asp
[60]
 https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/ORCL/oracle/total-assets
[61]
 Understanding Money Laundering. Course handout.
[62]
 White, Chris. Utilization of Rules in Anti-Money Laundering Compliance

Monitoring Programs. Metavante White Paper.
[63]
 https://www.justice.gov/usao-sdtx/pr/six-convicted-roles-multi-million-

    dollar-black-market-peso-exchange-money-laundering
[64]
 https://www.hstoday.us/federal-pages/doj/36-members-of-international-

    sex-trafficking-organization-found-guilty/
[65]
 http://tcbmag.com/news/articles/2014/st-paul-lawyer-convicted-of-

laundering-drug-money
[66]
 Understanding Money Laundering. Course handout. Also see

  https://www.investopedia.com/terms/m/moneylaundering.asp and White,

Chris. Utilization of Rules in Anti-Money Laundering Compliance

Monitoring Programs. Metavante White Paper.

 
[67]
 https://www.inman.com/2015/05/21/19-red-flags-to-detect-money-

laundering/
[68]
 See https://legaldictionary.net/money-laundering/ Also see Understanding

Money Laundering,

  https://www.investopedia.com/terms/m/moneylaundering.asp and White,

Chris Utilization of Rules in Anti-Money Laundering Compliance.

Monitoring Programs. Metavante White Paper
[69]
 This paper is based on three sources:

 

    https://www.fraud-magazine.com/cover-article.aspx?

                                            id=4295003585&mkt_tok=eyJpIjoiTlRrMlpURTNPR1UyTWpBNSIsInQiOiI1Rmk1OVdlZDMxYlF2YUl1ZmpFZkdhK0szQUVEaGV6N0dJb2VKK1FvK1FpUmZoeDFaeWh0SXV5MFhGa2VLd2NSdVozWkttcEJ4dHZZVzMwTDVtVXFjcnplZTZqVDFNQm9vajNSSlZ2TnNqNmthallsb1ZYREdGbXdSOVdpRGxSczJxKzJcL0dUWmFNaVdYU0pJbVBYc3B3PT0ifQ%3D%3D

(Assigned Reading) 

      https://www.chicagomag.com/Chicago-Magazine/December-2012/Rita-

    Crundwell-and-the-Dixon-Embezzlement/

 

  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rita_Crundwell
[70]
 This list is taken from https://whitecollarattorney.net/fcpa/accounting-

provisions/
[71]
 http://smallbusiness.chron.com/five-characteristics-good-work-ethic-

10382.html

 
[72]
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nick_Leeson#cite_note-4
[73]
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nick_Leeson#cite_note-4
[74]
    https://books.google.com/books?

                                        id=EuLrXWaOdSIC&pg=PT31&lpg=PT31&dq=Nick+Leeson+denied+a+broker%27s+licence+in+the+United+Kingdom+because+of+fraud+on+his+application&hl=en#v=onepage&q=Nick%20Leeson%20denied%20a%20broker's%20licence%20in%20the%20United%20Kingdom%20because%20of%20fraud%20on%20his%20application&f=false
[75]
      http://tanya-nps.blogspot.com/2014/09/coso-2013.html
[76]
 https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/08/nick-leeson-barings-

bank.asp
[77]
 https://securityintelligence.com/understanding-the-coso-2017-enterprise-

    risk-management-framework-part-1-an-introduction/
[78]
 https://weaver.com/blog/coso-frameworks-17-principles-effective-

internal-control
[79]
 http://tradefutures.co.uk/Nick_Leeson_Barings_Bank.pdf

 
[80]
 http://www.complex.com/pop-culture/2012/11/the-10-most-common-

internet-crimes/

 
[81]
 https://www.fbi.gov/investigate/cyber

[82]
 https://www.fbi.gov/wanted/cyber

[83]
 http://kellywarnerlaw.com/revenge-porn-laws-50-state-guide/

 
[84]
 Goodman (2015).
[85]
 Britz (2013).
[86]
 http://www.africanews.com/2018/06/14/ethiopia-opens-telecoms-to-

    investors-while-nigerian-entrepreneur-invent-smart/

 
[87]
 http://www.africanews.com/2018/06/14/ethiopia-opens-telecoms-to-    investors-while-nigerian-entrepreneur-invent-smart/

 
[88]
 http://www.africanews.com/2018/06/14/ethiopia-s-targets-foreign-

  investment-to-ease-currency-shortage/

 
[89]
 Mooney (2010).
[90]
 Mooney (2010).
[91]
 Fields (2016).
[92]
 Mooney (2010).
[93]
 Mooney (2010).
[94]
 Freud (2016).
[95]
 “If a man has been his mother's undisputed darling,” Freud wrote, “he retains throughout life the
triumphant feeling, the confidence in success, which not seldom brings actual success along with it.” 
    https://www.brainyquote.com/authors/sigmund_freud
In other words, a surplus of maternal love gives the child the self-confidence necessary to succeed, it
being the father’s job to temper that self-love with the necessary degree of self-discipline.
[96]
 Mooney (2010), Holmes (1993).
[97]
 Bowlby (1969).
[98]
 Prior & Glaser (2006), Cassidy & Shaver (2016)
[99]
 Cassidy & Shaver (2016)
[100]
 Cassidy & Shaver (2016)
[101]
 Cassidy & Shaver (2016)
[102]
 Cassidy & Shaver (2016)
[103]
 Kennedy & Kennedy (2004)
[104]
 Kennedy & Kennedy (2004)
[105]
 Kennedy & Kennedy (2004)
[106]
 Kennedy & Kennedy (2004)
[107]
 Kennedy & Kennedy (2004)
[108]
 Kernberg (1984).
[109]
 Firestone (2013).
[110]
 Davila (1997).
[111]
 Mikulincer & Shaver (2012).
[112]
 Cleckley (1950), Kernberg (1984, 1984b, 1985), Hare (1993). Be it noted that there are different
degrees of psychopathy: a given person might have a high degree of professional integrity, and to that
extent by non-psychopathic, but otherwise be highly psychopathic. This was the case with Jeffrey
MacDonald, the Army doctor who slaughtered his whole family and had no remorse at all doing so.
Jeffrey MacDonald's performance as a physician was consistently exemplary, there being no indication
that it was in any way corrupted by psychopathy, even though there is no doubt that Dr. MacDonald
was otherwise a textbook case of a psychopath. Dr. MacDonald's case is in no way a singularity, there
being many cases of psychopaths who, like Dr. MacDonald, are non-psychopathic in specific contexts. 
See McGuiness (1983).[113]
 Schimmenti (2014).
[114]
 Kernberg (1984)
[115]
 Kernberg (1984)
[116]
 Kernberg (1984b)
[117]
 Kernberg (2004, 2004b) makes similar points.
[118]
 Rogers (1961) makes similar points.
[119]
 References are to Edwin Driver’s article “Pioneers in Criminality:

Charles Buckman Goring (1870-1919)”: Journal of Criminal Law,

Criminology, and Police Science, Volume 47, No. 5, 1957.
[120]
 https://www.nps.gov/features/eise/jrranger/5accompx.htm
[121]
 https://www.nps.gov/features/eise/jrranger/5accomp2X.htm
[122]
 https://www.mic.com/articles/74045/jfk-s-top-5-political-accomplishments
[123]
 Explanation of this parenthetical hedge: W.V.O. Quine and Joseph Ullian wrote a book called
‘The Web of Belief’, in which they argue for a form of the ‘network-conception’ of ideas. Also, this
conception is also the basis of connectionist theories of ideas, and there are in all likelihood many other
anticipations of what Johnson is saying here.
[124]
 https://codes.findlaw.com/us/title-42-the-public-health-and-welfare/42-usc-sect-274e.html
[125]
 https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2013/10/02/2013-24094/change-to-the-definition-of-
      human-organ-under-section-301-of-the-national-organ-transplant-act-of
[126]
 https://www.charitynavigator.org/index.cfm?bay=search.summary&orgid=4617
[127]
 https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2013/10/02/2013-24094/change-to-the-definition-of-
      human-organ-under-section-301-of-the-national-organ-transplant-act-of
[128]
 https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/115/hr6413/text