
Propositions as Sets of Properties, Truth as Instantiatedness 


       Consider the proposition 

(*) there is a cactus in front of my window 

A world where (*) is true is different from one where (*) is false. In the one kind of world, there is an instance of the property of being a cactus in a certain place, at a certain time. In the other kind of world, there is no instance of that property. It thus seems that for (*) to be true is for various properties to be instantiated and that for (*) to be false is for those same properties not to be instantiated. 
    As it happens, (*) is false. But I can easily enough imagine what things would be like if it were true. I imagine a world where, at certain places and times, there are instances of certain properties. 
      What is true of (*) is obviously true of other propositions. These reflections suggest a certain view as to what propositions are, and as to what it is for a proposition to be true. A proposition is a collection of properties, and a proposition is true if the relevant properties are instantiated. 
       I thus propose that a proposition is a set of properties, and that for a proposition to be true is for all of those properties to be instantiated. Truth is identical with instantiatedness.   
     In this paper, I will develop the suggestions just put forth. There are atomic propositions and molecular propositions. The position in question can be made to apply to both. 

§  There are two requirements that any adequate theory of propositions must satisfy. First, it must accommodate the fact that a propositions has a certain composition – or, as Katz put it, a certain decomposition. Second – this is related – it must account for the unity of the proposition; it must explain how a proposition’s various constituents can combine into something true or false, instead of remaining a truth-valueless set or heap. 
      The proposition Socrates punched Plato has a unique decomposition into minimal parts; and that proposition is obviously identical with a certain arrangement of those parts. The question is: how exactly are those parts arranged in that proposition? What conceivable arrangement of Plato, Socrates, and the relation of punching constitute a true proposition? The set (Plato, Socrates, the relation of punching) obviously isn’t true or false. It doesn’t matter whether we impose some kind of ordinal structure on that set. The ordered triple <Plato, the relation of punching, Socrates> isn’t true or false. Neither is <the relation of punching <Plato, Socrates>>, or any other ordering of those three constituents. So even though it seems clear that Plato punched Socrates is identical with some arrangement of those three things, it is far from clear what kind of arrangement is the appropriate one. In my view, it becomes quite clear what the right kind of arrangement is, so long as we pursue the suggestions made earlier regarding the nature of propositions. 

(A) “Smith punches Jones”

is a sentence. 

(B) “Smith, the relation of punching, Jones”

 is not. 
    A sentence is not just a heap of referring terms. A corresponding point holds about propositions. 

(Ap) Smith punches Jones 

is a proposition. 

(Bp) Smith, the relation of punching, Jones

is not. A proposition is not a heap of objects and properties. A proposition is a set of objects and properties that are unified in some way. But how must they be unified? In what does the “unity of the proposition” lie? This question has never been adequately answered. I believe that our analysis of propositions gives us an answer to this question. 
 
§    Frege’s answer was to say that, in a proposition, certain items are “unsaturated”: they have holes in them. These holes enable the items in the proposition to link together in the right way. In (A), the expression “punches” corresponds to something with holes in it; these holes enable Smith and Jones to link up with that thing in the appropriate way. By contrast, in (B), the thing corresponding to “the relation of punching” doesn’t have the right number of holes in it; so it doesn’t appropriately link up with Bob and Smith. 
     Frege’s “solution” is really just a way of labeling the problem, as Davidson said. Obviously we aren’t talking about physical holes. We are talking about holes in a metaphorical sense. What we want to know – what Frege doesn’t tell us – is what this metaphor is a metaphor for. 
     The difference between (A) and (B) obviously has something to do with the fact that the first has grammar, whereas the second does not. In the first, there are inflections. (I will argue later some of these are not phonetically apparent.) In the second, nothing is inflected. The difference between a proposition and a non-propositional heap is somehow coded in these grammatical articulations. The question is: what exactly these articulations do? Do they themselves refer to entities of some kind? Does the “-s” on “punches” refer to some  mysterious entity – perhaps to kind of function? Is that why (A) encodes a proposition while (B) does not? Are grammatical articulations referring terms with the special property that the things to which they refer confer unity on what would otherwise an unordered heap? Or do grammatical articulations not refer to anything? Do they exert their unifying influence in some other way?  

§        Let me start out by stating, in extremely rough outline, the position I will defend. Consider the ordered-set <2,3>. The ordinal properties of this set can be coded in, and actually identified with, the properties of some unordered set, namely ((2), (2,3)). I will argue that propositions are unordered sets of properties. Thus Smith punches Jones is a set of properties. For a proposition to be true is specifically for all of its constituents to be instantiated. Truth is instantiation. For a proposition to be true is for all the members of a certain kind of set to be instantiated.
     Here two worries immediately arise. First, it seems obvious that Smith punches Jones and Jones punches Smith have the same constituents, even though they are obviously different propositions. I will argue that those two propositions share constituents – they have in common Jones, Smith, and the relation of punching. But the one proposition has constituents not had by the others; and the ordinal differences between those two propositions are reflected in these differences in their constituents. 
   The other worry is this: Surely Smith is not a property; surely Smith cannot be instantiated. Let me outline what I will say about this. On my analysis, (Ap) is identical with some set S that comprises  only things that can be instantiated, and that therefore comprises only  properties. I will argue that what is a member of S is not Smith per se but is rather the property of being identical with Smith. Obviously that thing can be instantiated. 
    No doubt, this maneuver will raise another concern: a concern I will spend a lot of time trying to allay. It will at once be said that what is a constituent of (Ap) is Smith and not the property of being identical with Smith. (Ap) says that Smith punched Jones, not that the property of being identical with Smith did so.
    I fully agree: what is a constituent of (Ap) is Smith, and Smith – nothing else – is what punched Jones. But we need to be very clear what it means to say that something is a constituent of a proposition. As I will argue, when you say that Smith is a “part” or “constituent” of a proposition P, you are not saying that Smith’s relation to P is anything like a brick’s relation to a house or a wheel’s relation to a car. What you are saying is that the truth of P depends in some way (that we will specify) on Smith: the “constituency” relation in question is a relation of dependence – it is a purely logical relation, and cannot be modeled on a spatial relation of any kind. Now suppose we identify (Ap) with some set S, one of whose members is the property of being identical with Smith. By doing so, I will argue, we can do justice to the relation that holds between (Ap) and Smith – the relation of dependency that holds between them. So far as it is meaningful, let alone true, to say that Smith is a “part”  or “constituent” of a proposition, what is being said is precisely that there exists just the kind of dependency relation we’ve been discussing. Our construal of propositions as sets of properties, along with our construal of truth as the instantiatedness of the members of such sets, captures that dependency relation to a tee. 
    There is more to say on this matter. Consider the following two statements: 

(i) x is a constituent of a proposition P. 
(ii) y is a member of set S. 

 The sense in which x is a part of P is entirely different from the sense in which y is part of S. x is a part of P only in the sense that the truth of depends on some fact about x. y is a part of S in some other sense. It is true that I identify 

(Ap) Smith punches Jones 

with some set S; it is also true that the property identical with Smith is a member of S, and not Smith himself. But the members of S are not the constituents of P. For Smith to be a constituent of (Ap) is specifically for (Ap) to be about Smith  -- it is for there to be a dependence relation between Smith and (Ap). Precisely that dependence-relation holds between Smith and (Ap) if we identify (Ap) with S, and then go on the truth of (Ap) with the being-instantiated of all the members of S. So our analysis is consistent with the truth of statement that Smith is “constituent” or “part” (Ap), at least on any significant disambiguation of that statement. It is irrelevant that Smith himself is not a member of S. When we are talking about the membership of S we are talking about one thing; when are talking about the constituency of P we are talking about another (we are taking about relations of dependency or aboutness). There is a connection between these two sets of facts: facts about the constituency of P – facts about the aboutness relations in question – are realized by or supervene on facts about the membership of S. But, strictly speaking, the two sets of facts are distinct. We will explore this further in due course. 
§        There is yet another worry. Some may object to the idea that there is such a thing as the property of being identical with Smith. It will be said that tallness is a property, and so is wetness – but there is no such thing as the property of being identical with Smith. 
     I think this point of view is wrong for two different reasons. First, statements like “so and so is not identical with Smith” are obviously meaningful – indeed, they are often true -- and it is hard to see how this could be the case unless there were such a thing as being identical with Smith. 
     Second, suppose that Smith exists in some world w. Obviously Smith is not a basic constituent of w; he is not one of its lower level constituents – he is not a quark or a muon or a single displacement of mass-energy. All of Smith’s activities – indeed, his very existence – supervene on lower-level states of affairs. So if Smith occupies some part of space-time, that supervenes on much more basic facts – facts about the displacements of mass-energy (or whatever the basic constituents of the world in question are). Nobody is going to deny the existence, let alone the scientific respectability, of the properties involved in those lower level states of affairs – charge, spin, mass, and so on. Nobody is going to say that there is anything suspect or “viciously circular” about believing in these properties. Every fact about Smith, even his very existence, is fixed by facts about those wholly acceptable, lower-level properties. So the property of comprising a Smith is a perfectly respectable property of a world. It is a necessary consequence of there being certain patterns of mass-energy displacement in that world. Given the respectability of these lower-level states of affairs, and given that Smith’s existence is a necessary consequence of them, it is hard to see the property of being Smith in any way lacks respectability – it is hard to see why we should deny existence to the property of being identical with Smith.
   We might even think of it this way. It is clear that aesthetic and moral properties are realized by lower-level states of affairs: certain patterns of mss-energy displacements realize beautiful works of art, while others don’t. Given that Smith’s existence is realized by lower-level states of affairs  -- by certain patterns of mass-energy – we might even think of Smith as a kind of property. If a pattern of mass-energy displacements has the right properties – if, perhaps, it has the right origins, and it has the right internal properties – then it “Smiths”. 
   Of course, there are profound differences between the property of being beautiful and the property of Smithing. A world can comprise many beautiful things; but – leaving aside things like cloning, meiosis, and so on – a world can comprise only one Smith. The reason for this is not hard to identify. Whether a pattern of mass-energy displacements is beautiful doesn’t have anything to with its having certain origins – the Mona Lisa would be beautiful in any place or time. By contrast, whether a such a pattern Smiths or not is tied very closely to its conditions of origination. A qualitatively identical pattern that had different origins wouldn’t be Smith – it would realize a Smith-duplicate, not Smith himself. But here the important point is that, quite plainly, whatever is the case with Smith – indeed, whether he exists or not – is fixed entirely by scientifically respectable lower-level properties. So it hard to see why we cannot countenance the property of realizing Smith or, therefore, of being identical with Smith. 
      The analysis given here applies to analytic as well as synthetic propositions, and atomic as well as molecular propositions. 

§     I will argue that grammatical articulations are what distinguish word-heaps from sentences. I will also argue that grammatical articulations do not typically refer to anything. (In some cases they may, but not typically.) If grammatical articulations referred, then they would simply create big heaps where, previously, there were only small heaps. Suppose the inflections in (A) refers to entities x, y, and z. In that case, (A) wouldn’t be a proposition; it would be the heap: Smith, Jones, the relation of punching, x, y, and z. Referring to new things doesn’t turn a heap into a proposition; so grammar articulations couldn’t perform their unifying function by being referring terms. What grammatical articulations do is to indicate how to generate new properties on the basis of the properties introduced by the referring terms. (I am treating relations as properties – an n-place relation is a property had by n-tuples.) Consider (A). The referring terms – “Smith”, “punches”, “Jones” – pick out Smith, the relation of punching, and Smith. (For reasons I will give, Smith and Jones are themselves properties.) The purely grammatical properties of that sentence – the inflection on the verb, the relative positions of “Smith” and “Jones” – indicate how new properties are to be generated from those primitive properties. Those new properties – we will see soon enough what they are – suffice to encode the ordinal differences between Smith punches Jones and Jones punches Smith. 

II. There are, ultimately, three conceptions as to what propositions are. 

(i) Functions from worlds (or situations) to truth-values. So that Plato snores is the set of worlds where Plato snores or is a function that assigns truth to worlds where Plato snores, and falsity (or no truth-value) to other worlds. 

(ii) States of affairs. So the proposition that Plato snores is identical with the event of Plato’s snoring (or, perhaps, with a series of such events).

 (iii) Arrangements of objects and properties. So that Smith punches Jones  is some kind of arrangement of Smith, Jones, and the relation of punching, much as <2,6,8> is a structure consisting of three numbers

      I believe that (i) and (ii) are false. I believe that (iii) is closer to the truth. But, first, I don’t think it is quite correct. (As I will argue, that Smith punches Jones is not an arrangement involving Smith and Jones per se, but the properties of being identical with Smith and Jones, respectively.) But leaving aside this last point, (ii) is woefully incomplete. Suppose propositions are arrangements of individuals and properties. We still need to know two things. First, what is the relevant kind of arranging? We aren’t talking about spatial arrangement. So what are we talking about? Second, how can an arrangement of objects and properties be true or false? The set (Smith, the relation of punching, Jones) isn’t true or false? It doesn’t matter how much ordinal structure we introduce: the ordered triple <Smith, the relation of punching, Jones> is no more true or false than its counterpart. We will deal with these problems in due course. 

§ The Tractarian Answer 

      If I am reading him correctly, Wittgenstein gave a clear answer to the two questions we just asked. The sentence “Smith punches Jones” encodes an arrangement of objects and properties: Smith is related to Jones in some way, and the relation in question is of that of puncher to person punched. If reality comprises a state of affairs in which those things are arranged in that way, then the sentence is true. If not, it is false. 
    Suppose this view is right. In that case, the proposition that Smith punches Jones consists of Smith, Jones, and the relation of punching being arranged in a certain way; and they are arranged in the very way in which they would be arranged in the corresponding state of affairs. The sentence is isomorphic with the proposition. The proposition is isomorphic with state of affairs. That is why the sentence represents the state of affairs. 
    There is an obvious problem with this. If this view is right, then the thing meant by “Smith punches Jones” consists of Smith, Jones, and the relation of punching being arranged in the very way they are arranged in the corresponding state of affairs. How are they arranged in that state of affairs? Smith is punching Jones. So if the view in question is right, the proposition that Smith punches Jones  consists of Smith standing in the relation of punching with respect to Jones. 
     But this means that the mere existence of the proposition guarantees its truth. If the proposition that Smith punches Jones consist of Smith’s punching Jones, then the mere existence of that proposition guarantees that Smith is punching Jones. But the proposition Smith punches Jones exists regardless of whether Smith punches Jones. It is obvious that the way in which Smith, Jones, and punching are arranged in the proposition cannot be identical with the way they are arranged in the corresponding state of affairs. 
    At the same time, it does seem fair to say that that Smith punches Jones consists of Smith, Jones, and punching in some kind of arrangement. But, it would appear, the “picture-theory” seems not to give the right arrangement. 

§ Are Propositions States of Affairs?

      This naturally leads us to position (i): a proposition is a state of affairs. This is not a popular position, since there are two obvious problems with it. First, propositions are true or false. But a state of affairs is not true or false, and therefore isn’t a proposition. Second, (i) makes it impossible for there to be false propositions, unless one takes the heroic of measure of saying that there exist non-existent states of affairs. 
    Some (e.g. Barwise and Perry) have identified propositions with possible states of affairs or, at any rate, with sets of such things. This is not so different from position (iii). Before we consider (iii), we  should note one other reason why propositions cannot be states of affairs: this other reason is crucial to having a correct conception of what propositions are; it is also crucial to evaluating the Barwise-Perry position. 
    Consider (Ap). That proposition has a unique decomposition into minimal parts. It neatly decomposes into Smith, the relation of punching, and Jones. (It may have other ingredients, corresponding to tense-markers and the like. Let us ignore these for now.) Notice that, in that proposition, the relation of punching is completely distinct from Jones and from Smith. The proposition connects them, of course. But each of these things occurs in its purity: what occurs is not Jones’ being tall or angry, but simply Jones. The proposition consists of three, neatly separated (though linked) entities.
     In light of this, suppose that (Ap) is true. Consider the state of affairs that makes it true – imagine Smith punching Jones. Let S be that state of affairs. S doesn’t have a structure even remotely like that of (Ap). S’s minimal parts are definitely not the relation of punching, Smith, or Jones. First of all, Smith’s act of punching is “adjectival” on Smith. It isn’t as though Smith is here, and his act of punching is there. Smith’s punching Jones is inseparable from Smith and Jones. Further, that act is by no means a minimal part of the states of affairs involved. It probably involved a number of subsidiary acts. (Even if it didn’t, that doesn’t affect our point. Consider the proposition Beethoven composed the 9th symphony. The “act” of composing involved innumerable deliberate subsidiary acts.) The same is true mutatis mutandis of Smith and Jones. They are not minimal parts of anything. They are constituted by innumerable events. If the state of affairs in question has minimal parts, those would be sub-atomic of some kind. But, I think, such events wouldn’t really be parts of that event in quite the sense in which Jones and Smith are parts of the proposition that Smith punches Jones. It seems more natural to say that the state of affairs, unlike the proposition, doesn’t have any unique, correct decomposition. In any case, it doesn’t have a decomposition even remotely like that of the corresponding proposition. 
   Also, Smith and Jones are not encountered in their purity in the relevant state of affairs. What occurs in the proposition appears to be simply Jones. Of course, the proposition goes on to ascribe a property to Jones. But Jones’ occurrence in that proposition is unpropertied. What occurs is not Jones’ being tall or Jones’ being sweaty - just Jones. But in any state of affairs, even one that involves Jones’ floating in a void, what occurs is not just Jones: it is a state of affairs involving Jones. What occurs in reality is Jones’ being a in a certain place, having a certain height and weight, animated by certain attitudes or beliefs. There is no Jones simpliciter. There are states of affairs involving Jones. Jones is inseparable from them. It is not as though there is first a Jones and then a state of affairs is constructed out of Jones. For Jones to exist is for a state of affairs of some kind to exist. Jones is not accurately thought of as an isolable constituent of states of affairs. Jones simpliciter – the Jones that doesn’t occur in a state of affairs – is a pure abstraction. What occurs in reality is not Jones simpliciter; what occurs are Jonesy states of affairs. There can no more be “free” occurrences of Jones – occurrences of Jones in isolation of a state of affairs -- then there could be free occurrences red. For these reasons, I think that metaphysically Jones is a property of states of affairs. As for what exact kind of property he is, that depends on your other metaphysical views. If you believe the essentiality of origins, then a state of affairs is Jonesy if it has a certain history. If you have a more theologically inclined view, you might say that a state of affairs is Jonesy if it is animated by the right kind of immortal soul. All that is important here is that Jones must be seen as a property of states of affairs, lest we run into insuperable metaphysical problems. 

§      It is clear that the articulations one finds in a proposition are radically different from those found in the corresponding states of affairs. Ian Hacking refers to this as the “articulation problem”. In the proposition Socrates is tall, we have one constituent corresponding to Socrates and a totally different one corresponding to tallness. But Socrates cannot be separated from his tallness. Even if you cut off Socrates’ legs, you are not separating him from his height: you are only giving him a new height,  and he will be as inseparable from his new height as he was from the old one. Propositions separate out what, in reality, are balled together. Propositions and states of affairs have entirely different decompositions. Various thoughts and atoms are constituents of Socrates. But no thoughts or atoms are constituents of the proposition that Socrates is tall. So propositions are not states of affairs, and they are not things that are even remotely like states of affairs. 
      However we analyze propositions, we must make sure that the things with which we identify propositions have the same decomposition as the propositions themselves. It is practically a datum that Socrates is not only a constituent of the proposition that Socrates is tall, but a minimal and discrete part of it. The idea that propositions are states of affairs is inconsistent with that idea. For given any state of affairs in which Socrates is involved, he is absolutely not a minimal part of it, and he is absolutely not neatly separable from it. This fact, I believe, vitiates the idea that a proposition is a set of states of affairs or, what is not so different, a set of worlds. A set of states of affairs has whole states of affairs as ultimate constituents: Socrates himself is no ultimately constituent of such a set. And any given state of affairs cannot possibly have Socrates as an ultimate constituent. 

§     This brings us to approach (iii) Consider the  set of worlds where Socrates is tall. Socrates isn’t a constituent of that set in remotely the sense in which, by all appearances, he is a constituent of that Socrates is tall. Now consider a function that assigns truth to each of the worlds just mentioned. The point we just made still applies. On face of it, Socrates isn’t a constituent of that function in the sense in which he is a constituent of that Socrates is tall. 
   Of course, attempts have been made to reintroduce constituent-structure into that function – to make it more like the corresponding propositions. Whether these attempts succeed is a question for another time. Even if they do, the possible-worlds approach is still a failure. If a possible world is a set of propositions, then (ii) is viciously circular. If a possible world is a concrete alternative world, then (ii) is committed to all manner of dubious metaphysical and epistemological views. (There is no point in going through them here: they are well documented.) Given this, it would probably be better to abandon (ii). 

§    A word of clarification is in order here. I think that it is true to say that propositions are functions from worlds to truth-values. But such a statement is unacceptable if taken as an analysis. There are true, and even informative, statements that cannot serve as analyses. Permit me to explain my meaning. First of all, there is surely nothing wrong with talking about hypothetical worlds – such talk is innocent. Let w be a hypothetical world. Some propositions will be true in w and some won’t. Let P be a proposition that is true in w. Since P is true in w, we can naturally think of P as associating w with the truth-value true (or the property of truth). Let w* be some other hypothetical world, but suppose that P is false in w. P associates falsity with w*. And so on, for any other hypothetical world one might consider. So it is certainly true that propositions associate truth-values with hypothetical worlds, and can thus be regarded as functions from worlds to truth-values. 
    But propositions are functions from worlds to truth-values in the sense of “are” that indicates predication. All and only propositions have the property of assigning truth-values to worlds. But if we analyze propositions as functions from worlds to truth-values , then our statement is either viciously circular (if the worlds in question are treated as propositions) or is wrong for other reasons (if the worlds are treated as concrete objects). 
    A comparison might be in order. It may well be true that x is the same event as y iff x and y stand in the same causal relations, i.e. if everything that causes x also causes y and if anything that x causes is also caused by y. And such a statement is not only (quite possibly) true, but also informative. But taken as an analysis of the concept of an event, that statement is circular: after all, causes and effects ere themselves events. 
    Here is another example. Nothing that is not a proposition entails anything; and anything that is a proposition entails something. So 

(*) all and only propositions stand in entailment relations.

is true.  Further (*) is an informative statements. But it is not acceptable as an analysis of the concept of a proposition. Anything entailed by a proposition is itself a proposition. So (*) amounts to: 

(**) all and only propositions entail other propositions. 

    Taken as an analysis, (**) is viciously circular. I believe the statement propositions are functions from worlds to truth-values is informative and accurate. But it is viciously circular if it is taken as an analysis. I believe that PWS is a giant projection of a failure to distinguish the conditions that must be met to provide an analysis of a concept from those that must be met to make a true statement about a concept. 
     (i) is an out and out failure. (ii) is either viciously circular or is extremely dubious. Further, it is at best an open question whether a set of worlds or a function from worlds to truth-values could have a decomposition at all like that of a proposition. Given this, we should, I believe, try to make some variant of (iii) work. 

III.    Now it is time to give a positive solution. Let us start with some basic points about propositions. To a first approximation, a proposition is a property of a world. Suppose that Plato snores is true in w and false in w*. In that case, w has a property that w* does not. w comprises certain states of affairs that w* does not. The space-time manifold in w has a ripple in it not had by the space-time manifold in w*. Kenneth Taylor (1998) speaks of states of affairs as “ripples in the quantum”. For Socrates to be snoring is for the quantum to be rippled or indented in a certain way (with the possible qualification that those ripples have to have certain origins). 
    Being tall or red is a way that individuals can be. Thus tallness and redness are properties of individuals. A proposition is a way a world can be. It is thus a property of a world. This is why David Lewis (1986) explicitly identifies propositions with properties of worlds. For the proposition Socrates snores to be true in w is for w to be a certain way – it is for w’s quantum to have certain ripples in it. That proposition is thus a property, and that proposition is true in a world exactly if that proposition is instantiated in that world. We can thus identify truth with instantiatedness. A proposition P is a property of a world, and P is true exactly if that property is instantiated. 
    Here we should deal with what would appear to be a major problem with what we’ve said so far (to avoid confusion, I’m going to put the objection in the mouth of an imaginary interlocutor): 

  Let p be the property of being a world where 

(*) Plato punched Socrates

 is true. Let w be a world where the proposition Plato punched Socrates is true, and let w* be a world where that same proposition is false. w has p. w* does not. So it is obvious that, for some property x, Plato punched Socrates is true in a world exactly if that world has x. This point generalizes without limit: given any proposition P, there is some property P* such that P is true in a world exactly if that world has P*.  
   But here is the problem. The proposition seems to be more basic than the corresponding property: the property must be understood in terms of the property; and the property’s being instantiated must be analyzed in terms of the proposition’s being true. This spells the doom of your analysis: for you are trying to analyze the proposition in terms of the property, and the proposition’s being true in terms of the property’s being instantiated. 
    For (*) to be true in w, what property must (*) have? It must have p. But what is p? It is the property of being a world such that, in that world, (*) is true. So (*) is more basic than p. p is defined in terms of (*). This means that we cannot analyze (*) in terms of p; and we cannot analyze what it is for (*) to be true in terms of p’s being instantiated. On the  contrary, we must analyze p in terms of (*), and we must analyze p’s being instantiated in terms of (*)’s being true. 
    This point generalizes without limit: what we just said about (*) is true of any proposition. Consider the  proposition

(**)  penguins don’t fly. 

  Obviously there is some property P such that (**) is true in a world w exactly if w has P. P is the property of being such that (**) is true in it. But we cannot analyze (**) in terms of P, and we cannot analyze (**)’s being true in terms of P’s being instantiated. On the contrary, we must analyze P in terms of (**), and P’s being instantiated in terms of (**)’s being true. So your account seems doomed to vicious circularity. 


    I think that this point is entirely wrongheaded. (To simplify discussion, let us leave momentarily aside analytic propositions.) A proposition is never just true. It is always true in virtue of something about the world: mass-energy is distributed in the right way; sentient beings are having the right thoughts or feelings. A true proposition registers some fact, and the truth of a proposition supervenes on something more basic. 
    Consider (*). It is not as though Plato just punches Socrates. Plato’s punching Socrates supervenes on facts of a much more fundamental kind: Plato punches Socrates in virtue of the fact that atom a moves in this way at this time, atom b moves that way at that time, and so on. Given two worlds where the same elementary particles move in the same way, either (*) is true in both of them or in neither. So the truth of (*) supervenes on the way in which mass-energy is distributed in the world. That distribution could obviously be described without mentioning Plato or Socrates or the relation of punching. Given any one of the electron-jumps involved in Plato’s punching Socrates, that electron-jump could obviously be described without mentioning Plato or Socrates. The same applies to each of the micro-events involved Plato’s punching Socrates. Obviously the totality of those micro-events could (in principle) be described without mentioning Plato, Socrates, or the relation of punching. That totality is plainly more basic than (*). If (*) is true in a world w, that fact supervenes on the way in which space-time is wrinkled in w. Those wrinkles underlie the truth of (*); and they can plainly be described without mentioning (*). Thus the property of having those wrinkles is more basic than (*), and the property of having those wrinkles is more basic than the concept of (*)’s being true. So there is no circularity in analyzing (*) in terms of the property a world has if it is wrinkled a certain way, and there is no circularity in analyzing (*)’s being true in terms of a world’s having the right wrinkles. 
    There is more to say in this connection. As we’ve noted, given any two worlds where mass-energy is distributed in the same way – any two world’s whose quanta are rippled in the same way – (*) is true in both of them or in neither: so the truth of (*) supervenes on other facts. But the converse is not true. There can be two worlds where (*) is true but that otherwise differ enormously. There are many different ways that Plato can punch Socrates, and there are many different ways that the surrounding circumstances can vary. So whether (*) is true is fixed by how the quantum is rippled in w. But how the quantum is rippled in w is by no means fixed by whether (*) is true in that world. This puts it beyond doubt that, if (*) is true in a world w, that is in virtue of w’s having some property that is more basic than (*): it is in virtue of facts about the basic constituents of w – facts about the way the quantum is rippled in w. The property that a world has if (*) is true in it is thus less basic than the property that a world has if the quantum is rippled the right way in it. So, contrary to what the objector says, there is some property P such that P is more basic than (*), P’s being instantiated is more basic than (*)’s being true, and such that (*)’s being true is fixed by P’s being instantiated (but not vice versa). Thus our account is not guilty of vicious circularity, despite what the objector says. 
     These points generalize. Consider any empirical proposition p. p is not just going to be true in w. It is going to be true in virtue of some fact about the basic constituents of w. p will be true in w in virtue of the fact that, as we put it, the quantum in w is rippled a certain way. The property of having that rippling will be more basic than p, and a world’s having the right rippling will be more basic than p’s being true. So I think the objector’s point is misguided.
     Let us sum up. Consider the proposition Jones punches Smith. This is true in w iff the “quantum” in w is “rippled” a certain way – if w comprises displacements of mass-energy of a certain kind. So the proposition that Jones punches Smith can be thought of as a property of worlds, and that proposition/property is true in a world w iff it is instantiated in w.

IV. But the story just told isn’t quite accurate. There are a couple of reasons for this. Let p be the property that a world must have if, in it, Jones punches Smith. p will be instantiated in w exactly if, in w, there is a certain pattern of mass-energy displacements. But exactly these mass-energy displacements will suffice for the truth of infinitely many other propositions. Obviously they will suffice for the truth of every analytic proposition. (Since such propositions are true under any circumstances, it follows vacuously that whatever happens in a world is sufficient for their truth.) But those same displacements will make true somebody punches Smith and Jones punches somebody and somebody punches somebody and somebody does something intentionally.
     We could try to get around this. If a mass-energy displacement is enough to make true Smith punches Jones, it is enough to make true somebody punches Jones, but the converse doesn’t hold. So perhaps we could use this asymmetry to distinguish the kinds of properties associated with the patterns of mass-energy displacements. 
   But this maneuver won’t always work. Consider the proposition x is a circle  and x is a closed two-dimensional figure of uniform curvature. Surely these are different propositions; and surely in any possible world, any mass-energy displacement sufficient for the truth of the one is sufficient for that of the other. Of course, some will deny that these are different propositions. But that denial has little independent motivation – it seems an ad hoc way of ameliorating a commitment to a degenerating research program. 
   Also, the Lewisian picture seems to make analytic propositions disappear. If a proposition is a property of a world, then what a proposition tells you is nothing more and nothing less than how a world with that property is different from a world without it. An analytic proposition is one that all worlds have. So, on Lewis’ model, analytic propositions don’t tell you anything: they might as well not exist.  
      The problem with the view we’ve been considering is one we’ve already encountered. Propositions have decompositional structure. A proposition is not specified merely by its truth-conditions. It is necessary also to give its decomposition The Lewisian analysis just considered doesn’t accommodate the internal or decompositional differences between  

(i) Alpha is a figure whose perimeter coincides with the class of all points equidistant from a given point in a plane  

and 

(ii) Alpha is a closed two-dimensional figure of uniform curvature. 

So it is not enough to say that a proposition is a property of a world. This obviously relates to the fact that analytically equivalent propositions can convey very different information and, what is a consequence, that analytic propositions do typically convey information. At the same time, the view just considered contains some profound truths, and our view will be more a development than a rejection of it. 
      Another illustration may help. Again consider: 

(Ap) Smith punches Jones. 

    In this world, if Jones and Smith are to exist, innumerable sub-atomic, atomic, chemical, molecular, cellular…events must occur. In any world where Jones and Smith exist, their existence supervenes on the existence of lower-level phenomena. The same is true of the relation of punching: if there is a punching, that supervenes on many other events. So no state of affairs that makes (Ap) true has have Smith or Jones or the relation of punching among its ultimate constituents. Given this, suppose we identify (Ap) with some property P such that  (Ap) is true in w exactly if P is instantiated in w. In any world, an instance of P will make true many propositions whose ultimate constituents are not Smith or Jones – whose ultimate constituents are tiny displacements of mass-energy. This makes it hard to believe that P itself has a unique decomposition whose ultimate constituents are specifically Smith, Jones, and the relation of punching. If Jones manages to punch Smith, that is only by the grace of innumerable subvenient states of affairs. So P’s being instantiated demands the occurrence of subvenient states of affairs having certain properties. So it is individuative of P, and thus essential to it, that whenever it is instantiated, things more basic than Smith, Jones, and the relation of punching are instantiated. For this reason, it cannot be said with confidence that P has a unique, ultimate decomposition into Smith, Jones, and the relation of punching. On the contrary, it seems as though those three things are not among its ultimate constituents. This makes P unsuited for identification with (Ap). 
   All of this assumes that properties themselves even have constituents. It is clear that instances of properties have constituents. An instance of the property chair has legs and a back. But it isn’t really clear if that property itself has constituents. Even if properties do have constituents, it isn’t clear if they have them in the sense in which propositions have constituents. Perhaps the property water is composed of the property hydrogen and the property oxygen. But are the last two properties constituents of the first in the very sense in which Smith is a constituent of (Ap)? This is, at best, an open question. I will argue that the answer is “no”. 
    Let us sum up. It is pretty clear that Smith and Jones and the relation of punching are constituents of (Ap). It is also clear that (Ap) has a unique decomposition into minimal parts, and that the three things just mentioned are among those minimal parts. But it is not clear if P has an even remotely comparable decomposition. It isn’t even clear if P has a decomposition in the sense in which (Ap) does. Also, P’s being instantiated, while sufficient for the truth of (i), is also sufficient for the truth of infinitely many distinct propositions. So it does not seem right to identify (i) with P.
§  There is one other desideratum that any theory of propositions must satisfy.  Consider the following propositions: 


(Ap) Smith punches Jones. 
(2) Smith punches somebody. 
(3) Smith punches everybody. 
(4) somebody punches somebody.
(5) Fred punches nobody. 
(6) Fred punches Jones. 
(7) Nobody punches Jones. 

   It is pretty clear that all of (Ap)-(&) have  a constituent in common, namely: __punches__ or x punches y. 
  It is pretty clear that (Ap)-(3) that have a constituent in common, namely: Smith punches__ or Smith punches x.  
  It is pretty clear that (Ap)-(3) that have a constituent in common, namely: Smith punches__ or Smith punches x.  
  It is pretty clear that (6)-(7) that have a constituent in common, namely: __punches Jones or x punches Jones. 


    The naïve thing to say is that (Ap) has three constituents: one corresponding to Jones, one corresponding to Smith, and one corresponding to the relation of punching. 
    But that would overlook the fact that (Ap) has the component x punches Jones and also the component Smith punches x. One of  (Ap)’s components seems to correspond to the property of being a thing x such that Smith punches x. Another seems to correspond to the property of being a thing x such that x punches Jones. So (Ap) has several constituents. It has one corresponding to Jones; one corresponding to Smith; one corresponding to the relation of punching; one corresponding to the property of being a thing x such that Smith punches x; one corresponding to the property of being a thing x such that x punches Jones; and, finally, one corresponding to the result of putting all of these things together. 
     Frege argued that the proposition Smith punches Jones is built out the relation x punches y, and the functions x punches Jones and Smith punches x. The point we just made obviously has a certain similarity to Frege’s. (In fact, I will argue, they are the same point.) 
    

§      Here is how I would propose to accommodate all of these facts. (Ap) is a set S of properties, one of whose members is P. But P is not the only member of S. What are its other members? My answer to this question will initially be alarming.
      Let us start with terminology:

Ps:  the property of being identical with Smith. 
Pj:  the property of being identical with Jones. 
Psx: the property of being a thing x such that Smith punches x. 
Pxj: property of being a thing x such that x punches Jones.
Pp: the relation of punching.  
P: as previously defined. 


   I propose that (Ap) is a set S whose members are exactly the properties just listed. And I propose that for (Ap) to be true is simply for all of its members to be instantiated. 
     For reasons already given, our including P on the list of relevant properties does not constitute a case of vicious circularity. 
     Let me now give the motivation for this analysis. First of all, what circumstances is (Ap) true? The following properties must be instantiated: the relation of punching (i.e. the relation x punched y); the property of being a thing x such that Smith punched x; the property of being a thing x such that x punches Jones; the property of being identical with Smith; the property of being identical with Jones; and finally P. 
       If any one of these properties is not instantiated, then (Ap) is not true. For example, if the property identical with Smith is not instantiated, then there is no Smith; and there is therefore no Smith to punch Jones. So for (Ap) it is necessary that each of those six properties be instantiated. 
    It is also sufficient. Suppose that each of those properties is instantiated. In that case, there is a Smith, a Jones, a case of somebody’s punching somebody, a case of Jones’ being punched, a case of Smith’s punching somebody, and a case of Smith’s punching Jones. (The instantiating of P guarantees the occurrence of the last of these.) 
     There is more to say. The proposition (Ap) has a discrete parts corresponding  to Smith, Jones, the relation of punching, the property of being a thing x such that x punches Jones, and the property of being a thing x such that Smith punches x.; and (Ap) also has a (maximal) discrete part corresponding to the result of putting these together. 
    The same thing is true of S. S has one member corresponding to Smith, one corresponding to Jones, one to the relation of punching, and so on. So S has a breakdown parallel to that of (Ap). 
    So here is what we have thus far. The instantiating of those six properties is both necessary and sufficient for the truth of (Ap). Further, for each discrete constituent of (Ap), there is one property on that list; and for each property on that list, there is one constituent of (Ap). 
    Here we should address a worry one might have about our analysis? The instantiating of P by itself is necessary and sufficient for the truth of (Ap). So why not just say that (Ap) is identical with P and that (Ap)’s being true is identical with P’s being instantiated? 
     The reason is that P does not decompose in the same way as (Ap). If we are claiming that some thing x is identical with (Ap), we must at all costs make sure that x has Smith, Jones, and the relation of punching, and so on, as discrete constituents. If we identify (Ap) with P alone, it is by no means clear if that burden is met.  But if we identify S with the set containing exactly the six properties listed above,  then, first, (Ap) is true exactly if every member of S is instantiated and, second, the set just described has the same decomposition as (Ap): like (Ap) that set consists of Smith, Jones, the relation of punching, and so on. 
        As we said earlier, any analysis of propositions must accommodate the fact that different propositions can have common constituents. Our proposition has that virtue. Consider the proposition: 

(PJ) Plato punches Jones. 

  Here is what we pre-theoretically believe about the relation between (Ap)  and (PJ). They have certain constituents in common: one of these constituents corresponds to  the relation of punching; another to the property x punched Jones; and another to Jones. For various reasons, I think we should hold onto this pretheoretic intuition. The facts relating to the “systematicity” and “compositionality” of thought accord very well with this intuition; they would not accord so well with its negation. 
     Now remember what we said about  (Ap). Suppose that we apply exactly the same analysis (mutatis mutandis) to (PJ). What we end up with this is this. (PJ) is a set S* whose members are exactly the following properties: 

Pp:  the property of being identical with Plato 
Pj:  the property of being identical with Jones. 
Ppx: the property of being a thing x such that Plato punches x. 
Pxj: property of being a thing x such that x punches Jones.
Pp: the relation of punching.  
P*: just like P (mutatis mutandis). 

 And (PJ) is true exactly if every member of S* is instantiated. 
 S and S* have certain members in common: Pj; Pxj; and Pp. These members corresponding to the constituents that we pre-theoretically believe (Ap) and (PJ) to have in common, namely: Jones; the property of punching Jones; and the relation of punching. So our analysis accommodates the fact that (Ap) and (PJ) have exactly those constituents in common. For exactly similar reasons, it accommodate the fact that both those propositions have one constituent in common with Fred punches Barney; and that one, but not the other, has a constituent in common with Fred punches Jones. For the same reason (mutatis mutandis), given any two propositions that pre-theoretically believe to share some constituent c, our analysis is consistent with the fact that they share that constituent. 

§ I wish to stress one point. We identified (Ap) with a set S containing all and only the six properties listed above. But it might seem that our inclusion of P on that list dooms our analysis to vicious circularity. P is the property of being a world where Smith punches Jones. So P is defined in terms of the proposition Smith punches Jones. But we are analyzing that very proposition in terms of P. So our analysis is circular. 
      But there is no circularity. We need some way to identify that property. And the easiest way to do so is in terms of a proposition – in terms of (Ap). When we describe an event, we typically use a sentence and, therefore, a proposition. (I say “typically” and not “always” because an event can also be described through some analogue medium, like a motion picture.) We say “Smith punched Jones” or whatnot. But consider the mass-energy displacements which realize that event; consider the over-all mass-energy storm constituted by those various displacements. That storm doesn’t have remotely the kind of structure had by any of the propositions which describe it. 
   It isn’t as though Jones can just exist. Jones’ existence supervenes on that of innumerable other states of affairs. In fact, the entity Jones is really a kind of abstraction from these various states of affairs. In the proposition, Jones is separate from his various attributes. Jones isn’t separate from his tallness, even though the proposition Jones is tall has one constituent corresponding to Jones and a discrete one corresponding to his tallness. The same is true (mutatis mutandis) of Jones’ being punched Smith. the proposition Smith punches Jones has (at least) three discrete constituents. But the event  thereby described – the storm of mass-energy displacements -- is a seamless whole; in any case, so far as it does have articulations, they are not remotely like those of that proposition. 
     There are, in principle, different ways to identify that storm. It can be indicated by ostension. In fact, that is how it was identified by those who witnessed it. (“Harry, did you see that? Wasn’t that astonishing? I never though Smith was such a cad.?”) Of course, that event can also be indicated by description. When we describe an event, we typically use a sentence and, therefore, a proposition. (We don’t have to use propositions: we could also use analogue media like motion-pictures or painting.) Under the circumstances, it was necessary for us to identify that event by way of a sentence and, therefore, a proposition. But we didn’t have to so identify it. In principle, it could have been identified through an ostension or a drawing or a motion-picture. 
    Now consider the kind of mass-energy storm we’ve just been discussing. In any world where (Ap) is true, there is an instance of that kind. To identify that kind, we use a sentence and, therefore, a proposition: we say, for example, “it is the way of being wrinkled that is common to all and only those worlds where Smith punched Jones is true.” But we are using that proposition “referentially”, not “attributively”; we are using it a means of identification only. We are analyzing (Ap) in terms of the corresponding kind – not in terms of the proposition used to pick out that kind. We use the propositioin only as a means of identification. It is the thing identified, not the means of identifying it, that enters into our analysis. So our analysis is not circular. 
    But there is a possible objection to this: 

    You say:  “consider the kind instantiated by all and only the mass-energy storms realizing the event of Smith’s punching Jones.” But that storm instantiates all manner of different kinds. Qualitatively different sorts of storms can realize a case of Smith’s punching Jones. Smith and Jones can be located in any number of places and any number of times. The punch can be thrown in all kinds of different ways. And so on. So when you talk about the kind of mass-energy storm A given storm instantiates all manner of different kinds. So which kind are you talking about? You are talking about the kind instantiated by all and only those storms sufficient for the truth of Smith punched Jones. So that proposition is not merely a way of picking out a property; it enters into the very definition of the right kind of property; so your analysis is circular. 
    
  
      
   (Ap) is a contingent proposition. In this context, let us focus on such propositions.  A proposition doesn’t just hold. It holds in virtue of some fact – some state of affairs, some mass-energy displacement (or, more likely, consisting of such displacements). If a proposition is true in a world, there is something that makes it true – something that anchors it. Propositions aren’t free-wheeling. A true proposition is anchored to the world by a non-propositional entity.
   There are a couple of corollaries. First, if a proposition is true in a world, that imposes constraints on the facts constituting that world. Given that Smith punched Jones is true in w, there are some limits on how the underlying facts can be. There are some limits on what the underlying mass-energy displacements can do.
   A consequence is that if a given proposition is true in two worlds, then those worlds have something in common in virtue of which that proposition is true in both of them. It is not a brute fact that they are both true; the commonality is anchored in some extra-propositional commonality. If we say that there is no such commonality, we are saying that the underlying facts can be vary without limit; we are saying that the truth of that proposition imposes no limits on the underlying facts. The mass-energy displacmenets can occur in any way at all. But if a proposition is true, that plainly does impose limits on these underlying facts. 
  So if Smith punched Jones is true in two different worlds, that is in virtue of some extra-propositional commonality. It cannot be a brute fact. The proposition Smith punched Jones is obviously a useful way of identifying that commonality. But that commonality underlies the fact that Smith punched Jones is true in both worlds. That fact cannot constitute the commonality. Otherwise, we strip the proposition of any anchoring in extra-propositional reality; and we deprive true propositions of the power to impose limits on the how the underlying facts may be. So if Smith punched Jones is true in two different worlds, that indicates some more fundamental commonality. There is some more property P such that both worlds have P and such that it is a consequence of their having P that Smith punched Jones is true in each. The description “property had in common by all and only those worlds where Smith punched Jones is true” is a useful way of identifying that property. But the property is more fundamental than the corresponding proposition. And what enters into our analysis is the property itself, not the description of it. That is why our analysis is not circular. 
      

§    One worry about our proposal is this. S doesn’t have Smith has a member: instead, it has the property of being identical with Smith. By contrast, (Ap) has Smith, not the property of identical with Smith, as a constituent. Therefore, S cannot be identical with (Ap). 
    There are (at least) two different ways we can respond to this. I don’t think that either is more correct than the other.
    For a long time, semanticists have insisted that Smith himself is a constituent of the proposition Smith punches Jones. But when we say such a thing, we are making an enormously theoretical claim. We don’t have any direct understanding of what propositions are. When we say that make some claim about what the “constituents” of propositions are, it is to accommodate various data (about modality, analyticity, cognitive content, and the like). For example, we know that that Smith punches Jones couldn’t possibly be true if there were no such thing as Smith.  So this leads us to say that Smith himself must be a “constituent” of that proposition. 
   But if there should turn out to be some other way to accommodate this modal datum, then there would be no need to insist that Smith himself is a constituent of that proposition. We have identified (Ap) with S. S’s being instantiated occurs exactly if (Ap) is true. So S’s modal properties are in lock-step with (Ap)’s. Thus if we were to analyze (Ap) as being identical with S, that would be consistent with the relevant modal data. Since that analysis accommodates the relevant intuitions about modality, we (to that extent) have grounds for thinking it is the property of being identical with Smith, and not Smith per se, that is a constituent of (Ap). Our analysis does not accommodate the view that Smith himself is a constituent of (Ap). But that view is an entirely theoretical one; it is not a datum. It is surely not a datum that Smith is a constituent of that proposition. So our analysis cannot be thrown out on the grounds that it doesn’t accommodate that view. 
    An analysis is meant to accommodate all the relevant data – not al the relevant theoretical superstructures that have grown up over that data. We can’t say that Einstein’s theory is wrong simply because it conflicts with the “datum” that Newton’s theory is right. The latter is not a datum. We cannot say that our analysis of propositions is wrong simply because it makes the property of being identical with Smith, and not Smith himself, be a constituent of certain propositions. The idea that Smith himself is such a property is a bit of theoretical superstructure; it doesn’t have the same standing as any datum. And our theory is consistent with the relevant data. 

§     There is another way to respond to the problem in question. We could say that our analysis is consistent with the idea that Smith is a “constituent” of (Ap). The idea would be this. 
    When we say that Smith is “constituent” of (Ap), that is really a metaphorical way of saying that the truth of (Ap) depends on some fact about Smith: some kind of relation of logical dependence holds between (Ap) and Smith. The sense in which Smith is a “constituent” of a proposition is entirely distinct from the sense in which something is a member of a set. The membership of S is not identical with the constituency of (Ap); and in order to do justice to the constituency of (Ap), we must assign members to S that are not constituents of (Ap). It is precisely in order to accommodate the fact that Smith is a constituent of (Ap) that we must make the property of being identical with Smith a constituent of S. 
       Let me clarify these obscure remarks. Suppose we take it as a given that Smith himself must be a constituent of (Ap). (I myself don’t think that is a “given” at all. But let us leave that aside.) By itself that doesn’t mean that our analysis is wrong. True – our analysis identifies (Ap) with some set S. True – S has as a member not Smith himself, but rather the property of being identical with Smith. 
   But it still doesn’t follow that our analysis is inconsistent with the idea that Smith is a “constituent” of S. After all, we haven’t yet analyzed the “constituency” relation yet. When we say that object O is a “constituent” of proposition P*, we are making a theoretical claim. We certainly cannot see that Smith is a constituent of some proposition the way we can see that a certain brick is a constituent of a certain house. When we talk about propositions, the term “constituent” is obviously being used in a metaphorical sense. Smith isn’t a constituent of a proposition in the sense in which a leg is a constituent of table. Propositions are abstract objects. They don’t have “constituents” in any straightforward sense. So even if we take it as a datum that Smith is a constituent of (Ap), we cannot say that our analysis is wrong until it is has been said what it is for something to be a constituent of a proposition. Once that has been said, then it can be determined whether our analysis is wrong. 
   But I believe that the concept of “constituency” can be delineated in a way that reconciles our analysis with the aforementioned “datum.” Suppose that (Ap) is true in some world w. According  to our analysis, that means that the members of S are all instantiated in w. (Ap) is true exactly if all the properties in S are instantiated. One of those is the property of being identical with Smith.  So, if our analysis is right, then (Ap)’s being true consists in various properties being instantiated, and Smith will be identical with one of the resulting instances. 
   So Smith is a “constituent” of (Ap) in the following sense. (Ap) is a set S of properties. For (Ap) to be true in w is for those properties to be instantiated in w. The property of being identical with Smith is one of those properties. So Smith is identical with one of those instances. Smith is a “constituent” of (Ap)  in the sense that he is an instance of one of the properties that is a member of S. 
    In general, the constituency relation would amount to this. Let P* be an arbitrary proposition. P* is identical with some set S* of properties. O is a “constituent” of P* exactly if O is an instance of one of the properties that is a member of S*. 
 
     
§ Let us take stock. Let (Ap) be the proposition that Smith punches Jones. According to our analysis, (Ap) is identical with a set of properties S. S has for its members various properties. One of the members is the property of being identical with Smith. Smith himself is not one of those members. 
     Given this, there are two ways we can deal with the widely held view that Smith is a “constituent” of (Ap). We can say: 

(*) That view is wrong. It turns out that what is a member of S is not Smith himself, but the property of being identical with Smith. 
    The idea that Smith is a “constituent” of (Ap) is not a datum; it is a hypothesis – a piece of theoretical superstructure. One cannot deny that this table-leg is a constituent of this table: it is a datum; we see that it is true. But one cannot just see that Smith is a “constituent”  of (Ap). The position that he is such a constituent is not a datum, but is rather a theoretical way of dealing with various data. Among these data are modal data, e.g. the datum that (Ap) couldn’t possibly be true in a circumstance where there were no Smith. Our analysis of propositions accommodates that datum. And our analysis accommodates it by denying the theoretical  (and obscure) view that Smith is a constituent of (Ap). So, methodologically speaking, we have good reasons for denying the presumption that Smith is himself a constituent of (Ap).

The other position we can adopt is this:

(**) Smith is indeed a “constituent” of (Ap). Our analysis is consistent with that. Indeed, our  analysis makes it clear what it is for Smith to be a constituent of (Ap). (Ap) is identical with a set of properties S. For (Ap) to be true is for all the members of S to be instantiated. One of those properties is that of being identical with Smith. In any world where (Ap) is true, Smith is an instance of one of the properties that is a member of S. Smith’s being a “constituent” of P consists in its being the case that, in any world where (Ap) is true, Smith’s is an instance of one of the properties that is a member of (Ap). In general, for O to be a constituent of a proposition P* is for it to be the case that, in any world where P* is true, O is an instance of one of the properties that is a member of P*. 

    I think that (*) and (**) are really the same view, the only differences being verbal. 


§   Let us sum up. (Ap) is true exactly if all the members of S are instantiated. Further, (Ap) and S have the same decomposition. Therefore we might as well identify (Ap) with S and (Ap)’s being true with S’s being such that its members are all instantiated. 
    At this point, there might seem to be a problem for our analysis. We just said that (Ap) and S have exactly the same decomposition: and surely they must, if S is to be (Ap). But S appears to have a constituent that Ap does not have. S comprises P; but (Ap) comprises only Smith, Jones, and the relation of punching – there is no P. So S and (Ap) have different constituents and are not identical.
    I think this is false. I think that (Ap) does have  a constituent corresponding to  P. Smith, Jones, and the relation of punching are not the only constituents of (Ap). That proposition also has a complex constituent. Consider the verbal representation of that proposition: “that Smith punches Jones”. The words “Smith punches Jones” seem to correspond to a single entity, albeit one that is, in some sense, composed of Smith, punching, and Jones. It is this complex entity gives (Ap) its truth-conditions. Smith, Jones, and the relation of punching contribute to (Ap)’s truth-conditions only by way of their involvement in this complex. So while it is true that one of S’s constituents is something other than Smith, Jones, and punching, the same is true of (Ap). 

§    One more application of our analysis might of use. Consider the proposition 

(#) Plato snores. 

     Let w be a world where (#) is true, and  let w* be one where (#) is false. w is different from w*. The quantum in w is rippled differently: in w, there are events having a certain character and having certain origins; in w*, there are no such events. Let P be the property a world has iff its quantum is rippled in that way. (#) is true in a world exactly if P is instantiated in that world. This might induce one to say that (#) is identical with P and that for (#) to be true is identical with P’s being instantiated. 
     But as it stands, this position is not quite acceptable.  (#) has a unique, ultimate decomposition; and Plato and the property of snoring are uncontroversially among those ultimate constituents. (Whether they are all of them is another matter: I think not, for reasons I’ll soon give.)  Given this, suppose we identified (#) with P. In that case, if our identification is to be correct, then P must have the same decomposition as (#). But it is by no means clear whether this condition is met. If P is instantiated, let us say that there is a P-state of affairs. A P-state of affairs necessarily supervenes on other, lower-level states of affairs: states of affairs involving tissues in somebody’s nasal passages, various interactions among air-molecules, respiratory and neurological processes, not to mention innumerable sub-atomic processes. Of course, the exact realization of any P-state of affairs may vary from world to world (or even within a world). But what is not thus invariant is that  if there is a P-state of affairs, that is wholly in virtue of the existence of innumerable lower-level states of affairs meeting certain broad requirements. (It may not matter exactly how the air-molecules are distributed. But it matters that they go through some kind of passage in a body meeting certain requirements, with the result that noise of a certain kind is produced: within these limits, there is enormous latitude . But there are limits.) So a necessary condition for P’s being instantiated is that various lower-level phenomena are instantiated. The necessary conditions for a property’s being instantiated presumably reflect facts about the structure of the property. Given this, it becomes  at best an open question whether P decomposes neatly into Plato and the property of snoring. There is the distinct possibility that, if it decomposes at all, it decomposes into things much more basic than those two. Also, as we said before, there is no clear sense in which a property decomposes into others. By contrast, there is one  clear sense in which Plato snores decomposes into Plato and the property of snoring. For these reasons, it would not be advisable to identify (#) with P. 
    Given this, here is what I would propose. (#) is identical with a set S one of whose members is P. The other members of S are Plato and the property of snoring. Remember, Plato is a property. Let Pp be this property, and let Ps be the property of snoring. If P is instantiated, then obviously Ps and Pp are also instantiated – any state of affairs sufficient for Plato’s snoring is sufficient for the occurrence of Plato and for an occurrence of snoring. So P is instantiated entails Pp and Ps are instantiated. Thus, since the instancing of P is necessary and sufficient for the truth of (#), it follows that the instancing of P and Ps and Pp are also thus necessary and sufficient. 
    P is true exactly if all of S’s members are instantiated. So P is identical with a set S whose members are Pp, Ps, and P; and P is true in w exactly if all of these properties are instantiated. 
     S has exactly the right decomposition. Among its ultimate constituents are Plato and the property of snoring. Further, if all the members of S are instantiated, that is necessary and sufficient for the truth of (#). So there is, so far as I can tell, no barrier to identifying S with (#) and to identity (#)’s being true with S’s being such that its members are all instantiated. 

§     Now we can say why, on our analysis, it is possible to distinguish between analytically equivalent propositions. As we noted, this is a distinction that many theories of the proposition have a hard time accommodating. 
   There is obviously a difference between the proposition 

(#) that Plato snores 

and the proposition 

(##) that Plato snores and triangles have three sides. 

     One of these propositions is about triangles; the other is not. Our analysis easily accounts for the distinction. (#) is a set S of the kind just described. (##) is a set S* that has some members in common with S, but that also has other members. Among S*’s members are the property of being a triangle, the property of being a side, the property of being a trio (or of being thrice-instantiated). None of these things is a member of S. So and S and S* have different memberships, explaining why (#) and (##) have different decompositions. 
     There is more to say about the relation between (#) and (##). But it will have to wait until after we’ve dealt with molecular propositions. But given only what we just said, it should be clear why our analysis does, whereas the Lewisian analysis does not, account for the decompositional differences between (#) and (##). On Lewis’ analysis, (#) is identical with some one property P such that P’s being instantiated in w is necessary and sufficient for (#)’s being true in w. The trouble, of course, is that P’s  being instantiated in w is necessary and sufficient not only for (#) but also for (##) and for infinitely many other propositions. The difference between (#) and these other propositions is to be found, at least in part, in their decompositions; and our analysis has a place for those facts. 
     In light of these points, it should also be clear, at least to a point, why our analysis is able to distinguish between:

(i) Alpha is a figure whose perimeter coincides with the class of all points equidistant from a given point in a plane  

and 

(ii) Alpha is a closed two-dimensional figure of uniform curvature. 

There is some property P such that if P’s being instantiated in w is necessary and sufficient for (i) and (ii)  both to be true in w. In fact, there is no conceivable ripple of w’s quantum that could make the one true without also making the other true. So we cannot identify either of those propositions with the property of having a certain kind of quantum-ripple. But since the instancing of P is necessary and sufficient for the truth of each, it is not unreasonable to give it some place in our analysis of those propositions. 
  Given this, here is what I propose. (i) is identical with a set Si; (ii) is identical with a set Sii. Both sets contain P. But the two sets don’t have exactly the same constituency. Among the members of Si is the property of being a point; but this property is not a member of Sii. Among the members of Si is the property of having uniform curvature; this is not one of the members of Si. Each of (i) and (ii) is true exactly if  all its members are simultaneously instantiated. (i) and (ii) are different propositions because, as just indicated, they have different constituencies. The truth of the one is necessary and sufficient for the truth of the other because the instancing of P is necessary and sufficient for the truth of both. The main point is that our set-theoretic analysis distinguishes between analytically equivalent but distinct propositions. 
    Another example might be in order. The proposition 

(*) a triangle is a triangle

 is not informative. But the following proposition is informative: 

(**) a triangle is a closed figure such that any two of its sides intersect, and such that not all three of them intersect. 

   
    Here it might be appropriate to make a few general remarks. Again consider:

(#) that Plato snores 

      There is reasonable agreement that Plato and the property of snoring are constituents of (#). Our analysis is consistent with that. But our analysis might seem inconsistent with another obvious fact about (#). The two constituents just mentioned combine to form some larger constituent – one corresponding to the words “Plato snores” in the verbal expression of (#). Here is the trouble. We identified (#) with a set S whose members are Ps, Pp, and P. On our  analysis, P is an ultimate constituent of S – it is no less a basic constituent of S than are Ps and Pp. When we look at (#) (or, rather, at its verbal representation), it looks as though the only basic constituents of that proposition are Plato and the property of snoring. To be sure, (#) does have a third constituent – one that corresponds to some kind of putting together of the words “Plato” and “snores”. But, by all appearances, that third constituent is built out of the other two: it mustn’t be basic. But our analysis makes it basic: P is as ultimate and indivisible a constituent of S as either of Ps or Pp. Therefore, one might conclude, our analysis is wrong. 
       I think that this objection to our analysis involves a failure to distinguish propositions from their verbal representations. It also involves a failure to appreciate how much we rely on sheer metaphor when we discuss propositions. Finally, that objection involves a failure to distinguish the psychological facts relating to the grasping of a proposition from the facts relating to the structure of the proposition itself. 
     There is no doubt that (#) is in some sense “put together out of” Plato and the property of snoring. But there is also no doubt that this putting together has not the slightest resemblance to the putting together of a car or a building. The property of snoring is an abstract object; it cannot be put next to, or on top, or underneath anything. And given any two spatiotemporal entities, no matter how you “put them together” – no matter what kind of glue you use, no matter what kind of forklift you operate – you will not make a proposition out of them.  So as for the idea that  the third constituent of (#) – the “complex one” – has to result from some kind of juxtaposition of the other two – that idea is a complete non-starter. That third component will not divide into Plato and the property of snoring in anything like the way that table divides into legs and a plank. 
     I believe that our analysis actually makes it clear what the actual sense is in which Plato and the property of snoring combine to form a third constituent. If P is instantiated, that is ipso facto sufficient for the instantiating of Pp (i.e. Plato) and of Ps (i.e. the property of snoring). There is obviously a dependency relation among these various properties. These dependencies are given by entailments. Now properties cannot literally be parts of other properties. A property is an abstract object, and cannot be a part of anything in the sense in which a leg is a part of a body. When we talk about properties being “parts” of other properties, we must surely be talking about relations of dependence. These relations are often, though not always, embodied in our verbal definitions: a “triangle” is a “three-sided closed, straight-edged, planar figure”. We might say that the property of being a side is a “part of” the property of being a triangle. But we are using the word “part of” metaphorically here, since abstract objects, like properties, don’t have parts in any ordinary sense of the word. The non-metaphorical meaning here must be this: if x has the property of being a triangle, then x has the property of having straight-sides. So when we talk about properties being parts of other properties, we must, I think, be talking about relations of dependence or entailment holding among instances of those properties. 
        That relation does seem to hold among P, Ps, and Pp. If P is instantiated, so ipso facto are the other two properties – just as when the property triangle is instantiated, so are side, three, straight and so on. 
        Of course, in the verbal representation of (#), the part corresponding to P is literally composed out of the parts corresponding to Ps and Pp. But that obviously doesn’t mean that P itself is literally composed out of those properties. Further, that fact about language actually supports our analysis, if only weakly. The kind of dependence-relation just discussed is often verbally expressed through the sort of verbal juxtaposition in question: the expression “three-sided closed, planar, straight-edged figure” picks out the property of triangularity. This might make it seem as though the property picked out by that long expression literally composed of the properties straight-edged, planar, and so on: they are literally parts of the property of triangularity.   But the only sense in which the properties planar, straight-edged, and so on, are parts of the property of triangularity is that some  dependence relation holds among these properties: if a thing is a triangle, that entails that it is also planar and straight-edged, and so on.  So the verbal decomposition of “Plato snores” into “Plato” and “snores” corresponds not to a relation of part-hood, in any literally sense, but to a relation of dependence. And that is precisely the relation that holds between P and Ps and Pp. 
     We are inclined to say that Ps and Pp are the only basic components of (#), and that any other components are “built out of” those two. The only sense that can be attached to this is: if (#) comprises any third component, then there some kind of asymmetrical relation of dependence—necessitation or entailment -- between that third component and the other two. On some interpretation of the expressions “less basic than” and “composed out of”, the property picked out by “three-sided closed, planar, straight-edged figure” is  less basic than, and is composed out of, the properties picked out by “three-sided”, “closed”, and so on. But all this means is that x is triangle entails x is straight-edged (closed) but not vice versa. If we insist on understanding the relation of “composition” in more literal terms, we will inevitably fail. Obviously the aforementioned relation of dependence does hold between P, on the one hand, and Ps and Pp on the other. If P is instantiated, that requires that Ps (Pp) be instantiated, but not vice versa. Our analysis of (#) is consistent with that: on our analysis, the component whose verbal expression consists of both “Plato” and “snores” stands in exactly that relation of dependence with respect t the component whose verbal expression is “Plato” and also with respect to the component whose verbal form is “snores”. So our analysis does capture the only meaningful sense in which certain components of that proposition are more “complex”, or our “built out of”, others. It is true that, on our analysis, P is an ultimate constituent of (#). But that is in no way inconsistent with standing in the dependence relations just described with respect to Pp and Ps; and, as we’ve seen, to the extent that it has meaning to say that P is a “derived” constituent of (#), and not a basic one, what is meant can only be that P stands in the afore mentioned dependency relations with respect to these other constituents. Since our analysis captures that fact, our analysis captures the only meaningful sense in which certain constituents of that proposition are “built out of”, and are thus “less basic than”, others.  

§      We must take care to distinguish facts relating to the epistemology of propositions from facts relating to the structure of propositions themselves. A failure to make this distinction is, I believe, abetted by a tendency to put too much stock in the verbal representations of propositions. When you read the sentence:

(#s) “Plato snores”, 

   you “piece together” the meaning of the whole sentence on the basis of the meanings of its parts. This, of course, might leads one to think that the meaning of the whole is put together out of the meanings of the parts in something like the way that a table is put together out of legs and a slap of wood. 
     When we say that you “piece together” the meaning of the whole on the basis of the meanings of the parts, the only thing this could mean is that you figure out the meaning of the whole sentence on the basis of the meanings of the parts. When we say that you figure this out, we can only be saying that you have hit on some dependency relation holding between the meanings of the parts and that of the whole. Once again consider the expression: “three-sided closed, planar, straight-edged figure”. That expression, as a whole, picks out the property of triangularity. On the basis of the meanings of the parts of that expression, plus a small amount of mathematical acumen, you can figure out what the expression as a whole picks out. But this obviously doesn’t that the referent of the whole expression is, in any literally sense, put together out of the meanings of the parts. You can derive the meaning of the whole on the basis of the meanings of the parts; and the fact that this can be done embodies the fact that there is a dependency relation between the thing picked out the by whole and the things picked out by the parts. But that is the only sense in which the thing picked out by the whole is “composed of” the things picked out by the parts. The only sense in which it is meaningful to say that one property is “composed out” of another is to say that there is some kind of dependency relation of the kind described. 
    Let us sum up. The fact that we figure out the meaning of a whole expression on the basis of the meanings of the parts means only that some (asymmetrical) dependency relation holds between the meaning of the whole and the meanings of the parts. It does not mean that the whole is, in any other sense, less basic than the parts. Indeed, in this context, the only meaningful sense that can be attached to phrases like “less basic than” and “is a complex consisting of” concerns relations of dependency. In the only sense of “more basic than” that has any significance in this context, our analysis is consistent with the fact that some constituents of propositions are “more basic than” others. In the only relevant sense of “more basic than”, our analysis captures the fact that Plato (Pp) and the property of snoring (Ps) are more basic than P. Our analysis captures the fact that P’s being instantiated requires Pp’s (Ps’s) being instantiated, but not vice versa. It is true that, on our analysis, P and Ps and Pp are all equally members of S: from that viewpoint, none is more basic than any of the others; from the viewpoint, there is no stratification. S is a kind of democracy, and P is as lowly as Ps and Pp. But that doesn’t matter. The only relevant sense in which P is to be put on a higher level than Ps or Pp is that that instantiating of P instantiated necessitates  that of Ps (Pp) but not vice versa. Our analysis captures that fact in spades. Every other kind of  stratification or sub-ordination is irrelevant metaphor. So whatever our feelings out it might be, there is nothing logically wrong with identifying (#) with a set in which P, Pp, and Ps are all on an equal footing: their inequality – the asymmetry of the entailment relations holding among them --  is inseparable from them, and needn’t be buttressed by encasing them in some stratified structure. 

§    These points help us deal with another important fact. Propositions are structures; they are orderings, not heaps, of constituents. But if we focus too much on language , we are likely to misunderstand the nature of this ordering. 
   Consider the sentence “Smith punches Jones”. The order of the words has nothing to do with the order of the corresponding entities in the proposition. In some languages, the order the nouns is reversed; in others, there are (virtually) no constraints on word-order. The sense in which Smith, Jones, and the relation of punching are “ordered” in 

(Ap) Smith punches Jones 

has nothing to do with order in the spatio-temporal sense. 
    Once again, the kind of order in question has to do with relations of dependence – relations of entailment. It is true that, in (Ap), Smith has one “position” and Jones has a different one.  In 

(A*p) Jones punches Smith 

  Smith and Jones have switched positions. What, in non-metaphorical terms, what does this all amount to? We saw earlier that, when we are discussing propositions, facts about “composition” and “stratification” are really facts about dependence. The same thing is true here  facts about the “ordinal” properties of propositions are really facts about entailment relations. (Ap) entails that Smith punches something; (A*p) does not entail this. (Ap) entails that Jones is punched by something; (A*p) does not entail this. And so on. When we say that, in (Ap), Smith is in one “position” and Jones is another, what we are saying is that, if (Ap) is to be true, then Jones must be doing the punching and Smith must be receiving it. We are talking about what is entailed by the truth of the proposition. So we are talking, not about position in any literal sense, but about relations of dependence and entailment. The ordinal properties of propositions are fixed by their inferential properties. 
      Consider (Ap).  We pretheoretically know that Smith is in the “subject” position and Jones is in the “object” position. If we identify (Ap) with something x, then we must be able to retrieve the ordinal information that we pretheoretically have about (Ap) from x. The ordinal properties of (Ap) must be fully “coded” in x. In general, an analysis of what propositions are must fully account for their ordinal properties. 
      I believe our analysis satisfies this requirement. According to us, (Ap) is identical with a set S whose members are the following properties (remember that individuals are in fact properties)

Ps: Smith 
Pj: Jones
Pp: the relation of punching
P: the property that a world has if, in it, Smith is punching Jones. 

      And for S to be true is for all of those properties to be instantiated. Of course, if all of those properties are instantiated, then P is instantiated. If P is instantiated, there are various consequences:  Smith is punching something, Jones is being  punched by something, and both punchings are one and the same. We saw a moment ago that the ordinal properties of (Ap) lie in these consequences. So by virtue of identifying (Ap) with S, and by identifying the truth of (Ap) with the instantiating of all of S’s members, we have ensured that S codes all the ordinal information characteristic of (Ap). 

§     Here it might be appropriate to point out what are, I believe, some virtues of our analysis. Remember that theory (i), and also Wittgenstein’s “picture theory, couldn’t account for the existence of false propositions, since they identify propositions with their truth-makers. On our account, the truth of a proposition requires the existence of some spatio-temporal state of affairs. But the proposition itself requires only the existence of properties: it requires only the existence of ways that mass-energy might be displaced. 

Molecular Propositions 

     Let us discuss molecular propositions: these are propositions that are formed out of other propositions, e.g. Bob is tall and Sam is short. In keeping with tradition, I will describe quantified propositions (e.g. something is short ) as “molecular”. 
     A point about methodology is in order. When dealing with atomic propositions, we defined truth in terms of instantiatedness: a proposition is a set of properties, and that proposition is true iff all its members are instantiated. We must treat molecular propositions in the same way. We cannot define proposition and truth one way for atomic propositions and another way for molecular propositions. That would be absurd. Propositions are propositions. Truth is truth. But this need for uniformity requires that, initially, we say a few counterintuitive things.  
     Consider the proposition: 

(jsw)  That John believes that snow is white. 

    This is a proposition about a proposition; it attributes a property – being believed by John – to that snow is white. Obviously that property and that proposition are constituents of jsw. So jsw is identical with a set S among whose members are that property and that proposition. 
     Here a refinement is in order. We have identified propositions with sets of properties: it is crucial to our analysis that every component of a proposition be something that can be instantiated. But, as we’ve analyzed it, the proposition that snow is white is not exactly a property; it is a set. (I don’t think that properties are sets.) In order to provide a uniform analysis, I propose this. What is a constituent of jsw is the property of being identical with that snow is white. That property is instantiated exactly if that proposition exists. We must be careful here: the property of being identical with that snow is white can be instantiated without that proposition’s being true. For the instancing of that property, it is necessary and sufficient only that that snow is white exist. To sum up, jsw is a set S; and among the members S are the property of being believed by John and also the property of being identical with that snow is white. 
     But those cannot be the only members of S. Both of those properties can be instantiated without John’s believing that snow is white. The property of being identical with that snow is white is automatically instantiated. If John believes that grass is green (or even that snow isn’t white), then the property of John’s believing something is instantiated. So the properties in question can be instantiated with jsw being true. S must comprise some other constituent. This other constituent is not hard to identify. 
     In worlds where John believes that snow is white, the quantum is rippled one way; in other worlds, the quantum is rippled differently. Let P be the property that a world has if, in it, the quantum is rippled in the way just mentioned. So P is instantiated in w exactly if, in w, John believes that snow is white. Among the members of S are P. Of course, if P is instantiated, then so are the properties that are members of S. Obviously if P is instantiated, then John believes something or other (so the property of being believed by John is instantiated). And the property of being identical with the proposition that snow is white is instantiated under any circumstances. Thus if P is instantiated, so are the other members of S. And jsw is true exactly if P is instantiated. So jsw is true exactly if all three members of S are instantiated. Thus we identify jsw with S, and we identify S’s being true with all its members being instantiated.
     The question arises: Why not just say that P is the sole member of S, since P’s being instantiated is necessary and sufficient for the truth of S? We’ve already seen the answer to this. It is pretty clear that jsw comprises a distinct constituent corresponding to the property of being believed by John, and it also comprises a distinct constituent corresponding to the proposition that snow is white (and, thus, to the property of being identical with that proposition).If we identify jsw with a set, then we need the membership of that set to clearly reflect these facts about jsw’s constituency. If that set’s sole member is P, then those facts are eclipsed; the set doesn’t have the right decomposition. 
     A given propositions is “composed” of various things. We saw earlier that this composition-relation is best understood in terms of relations of dependency or entailment holding among those constituents. It is pretty clear that jsw comprises one constituent corresponding to the words “john believes”, another constituent corresponding to the words “that snow is white”. It is also clear that jsw comprises some more “complex” constituent corresponding to the juxtaposition of “John believes” and “that snow is white”. If that more complex constituent exists, then so does each of the simpler ones; but both of the simpler ones can exist without the complex one existing. The thing corresponding to “John believes” can exist simultaneously with the thing corresponding to “that snow is white”. But that doesn’t guarantee the existence of the thing corresponding to the juxtaposition of those expressions. So an asymmetrical relation of dependency holds between that more complex constituent and those less complex ones.                                                                                     
     Exactly these points apply to the members of S. If P is instantiated, then so is each of the two properties just mentioned. But both of those other properties can be instantiated with P being instantiated. So there is a dependency relation between P and each of the other two properties just mentioned; and that relation perfectly parallels the one discussed a moment ago – both relations are  asymmetrical in precisely the same way.  
     Given this, it becomes clear why we must identify jsw with S. S comprises three constituents: one corresponding to the proposition that snow is white; another to the property of being believed by John; and a third corresponding to something that, in the relevant sense, combines the two. (Remember that the kind of combining in question consists in the holding of dependency relations: and the right kinds of dependency relation holds among the three things just discussed.) So S has the same constituency as jsw. Further, jsw is true exactly if all three members of S are instantiated. So we can identify jsw’s being true with its being the case that all the members of S are instantiated – roughly, we identify truth with instantiatedness. And we identify jsw with S. In this way, we do justice to the decompositional fine-grain of jsw, and also to its truth-conditions.
     At this point, I must address what many will find to be a worrisome feature of our analysis. We have identified propositions with sets. Thus the proposition: 

(jsw)  John believes that snow is white. 

  is a set. We decided that what is a member of that set is not, strictly speaking, the proposition that snow is white, but rather the property of being identical with that proposition. Obviously this proposal is counter-intuitive. One would think that the proposition iself ought to be a member of that set.
    There are a couple of things to say here. First, on one delineation of the expression “constituent”, we are making the proposition that snow is white  be a constituent of (jsw). But, even if we leave that aside,  I think that the just mentioned counter-intuitiveness of our analysis is simply another embodiment of some very crude and false theories that we tend to have about the sense in which things are “constituents” of propositions. That Plato snores is not built out of Plato the way a building is made out of bricks. (jsw) is not built out of that snow is white the way my car is built out of metal parts. As we saw earlier, whenever we relate the notions of “constituency”, “composition”, and “part” to propositions, we are really talking about relations of logical dependence and entailment. On our analysis, the truth of (jsw) absolutely depends on some fact about the proposition that snow is white. On our analysis, (jsw) is true exactly if that snow is white has the property of being believed by John. In so far as our analysis of (jsw) is consistent with that fact, it fully accommodates the fact that that snow is white is  “constituent” of (jsw) – for that “constituency” relation just is the dependency relation discussed a moment ago. (In any case, that is one way to delineate the concept of “constituency”, as it relates to propositions.) Now in order to accommodate that fact, we had to identify jsw with a set S that comprises, not that snow is white, but instead the property of being identical with that proposition. But this is in no way inconsistent with the truth expressed by statements like “the proposition that snow is white is a constituent of jsw”: for on any interpretation in which such a statement is meaningful, let alone true, that statement amounts to an affirmation of the dependence relation described a moment ago; and, as we just saw, our analysis fully accommodates the existence of that dependence relation. So by identifying jsw with a set S one of whose constituents is the property of being identical with that now is white, our analysis actually captures the truth of the statement that that snow is white is a constituent of jsw, in so far as that statement is meaningful and true. 
    What we said about jsw applies, with only a few obvious changes, to all molecular propositions. Consider: 

     (sn) Sam is not short. 

  This attributes falsity to the proposition that Sam is short. So among sn’s constituents are that property and that proposition. For reasons discussed earlier, in connection with jsw, it would be preferable to say that the property of being identical with that Sam is short is a constituent of that proposition. So sn is a set S that has as members (inter alia) the property of being false and the property of being identical with the proposition that snow is white.  (The property of falsity is instantiated in a world w iff some proposition is false in w. Presumably that property is instantiated in every world. But that needn’t concern us here.)                   Like any other proposition, sn is true iff all the members of S are instantiated.  But obviously sn could be false even if both the property of being false and the property of being identical with that Sam is short were instantiated. (After all, those properties are instantiated in w if it is false in w that Smith is bald and true that Sam is short.) So S must comprise some third constituent. 
     In light of our earlier points, this third constituent is not hard to identify. Consider the way the quantum is rippled in a world in which Sam is not short, i.e. in which Sam is of average or above average height. Let P be the property that all and only such worlds have. P’s being instantiated in w is necessary and sufficient for sn’s being true in w. So P must be a member of S. But we don’t want to make P be the only member of S. For now familiar reasons, making P be the sole member of S  wouldn’t do justice to the decomposition of sn. But we are being true to that decomposition if we make P and the other two properties (that of being false and  that of being identical with that Sam is short) be the membership of S. So has the same decomposition as sn. Further, sn is true exactly if all of those three properties are instantiated. So we identify S with sn, and identity sn’s being true with S’s being such that all its members are instantiated. 

§    Before dealing with quantified propositions, let us deal with conjunctions. Consider: 

(sb) That Sam is tall and Bob is short. 

  First of all, this proposition is true exactly if the two constituent propositions are true. So the constituent whose verbal representation is “and” can be treated as a property that ascribes truth to a pair of propositions exactly if both members of that pair are true. This analysis is, I will argue later, equivalent to the familiar idea that “and” denotes a function that assigns truth to a pair of propositions exactly if both members of that pair are true.) Let AND be that property.  The property AND is instantiated in a world w exactly if some pair of proposition is true in w. (Presumably AND is instantiated in every world. But this needn’t concern us.)
  Obviously (sb) has AND as a constituent. For now familiar reasons, (sb) also comprises the property of being identical with that Sam is tall and also the property of being identical with that Bob is short. Let Pst and Pbs be these two properties. So, for now familiar reasons, sb is identical with a set S whose membership includes AND and Pst and Pbs. But – once again for familiar reasons – those cannot be the only members of S. After all, all of those properties could be instantiated with sb’s being true. So S must contain a fourth constituent. Consider the way that quantum is rippled in a world where it is the case both that Sam is tall and Bob is short. Let P be the property had by all and only such worlds. sb is true in  a world w exactly if P is instantiated in w. (Of course, is P is instantiated in w, then so are AND and Pst and Pbs.) If we suppose that S comprises P, then sb is true exactly if every member of S is instantiated. Further, S has the same decomposition as sb – both comprise distinct and separable parts corresponding to the property picked out (in English) by “and”, and also to the proposition that Sam is tall and the proposition that Bob is short. So we might as well identify sb with S, and identify the truth of sb with its being the case that every member of S is instantiated. 
     Similar discussions provide the analysis of propositions like Bob is short or Sam is tall, Bob is short because Sam is tall, Bob is short if Sam is tall, and so on.  There are no conceptual obstacles here, though some care must be taken in choosing the constituents corresponding to the connectives. 

§    Quantified Propositions 

      In keeping with tradition, I regard quantified propositions as being molecular. The proposition nothing snores is in the same category as Bob snored and Fred snores, and not in the same category as Bob snores. I adopt this view partly because, as we will see, it allows for a smooth and uniform semantics. (So the reasons are somewhat like the reasons for seeing n0 as being equal to 1, for any natural numbers n). But I also think that, at bottom, quantified propositions really are in the same category as conjunctions, disjunctions, and so forth. They are meta-propositions: propositions about classes or sequences of propositions. (I hope that reasons for this become clear.)
    Let us begin our treatment of quantified proposition with: 

(ns) that nothing snores. 

   I think it is important to begin with negative existentials, since they make obvious certain features of quantified propositions hidden by existentials and universals. Following Frege, I see (ns) as saying that every proposition having the form x snores is false. For now, I would like permission to treat the form x snores (sometimes referred to as a “propositional function” or “open proposition”) as an entity in its own right. In a moment, we will discuss what kind of entity it is.  
    On the face of  it, (ns) has (inter alia) two constituents: the propositional form just mentioned, and the property of being universally false, i.e. the property had by a thing x if every instance of x is false. So the form x is a square circle has that property, since every instance of that form is false. Let us refer to that property as UF. UF is instantiated in a world w iff there is some propositional form such that, in w, every instance of that form is false. (Presumably UF is instantiated in every possible world. But, once again, this needn’t concern us.) For now familiar reasons, we must identify ns with a set S whose membership includes (inter alia) UF and the form x snores.
   There is a  caveat. We have said that a proposition is a set of propositions, and is true exactly if all those properties are instantiated. Here is the problem. Let NS be the set with which (ns) is identical. We don’t want to say that the property of snoring is a member of that set. Why not? Because if that property is instantiated, then (ns) is automatically false. So we don’t want to say (ns) has that property as a member. 
     It is not hard to deal with this. What is a member of S is not exactly the form x snores, but rather the property of being identical with that form. 
    This procedure is exactly analogous to one we used earlier. We decided that 
(stbs) that Sam is tall and Bob is short
is identical with some set S; and decided that what is a member of S is not exactly the that Sam is tall, but rather the property of being identical with that Sam is short. (Let Pss be that property.) 
     We saw that, contrary to first appearances, this procedure actually accommodates the fact that that Sam is tall is a “constituent” of (stbs), at least on one viable delineation of the term “constituent”. For that procedure accommodate the dependence relation that holds between (stbs) and that Sam is tall; and, as we saw, that dependence-relation is really identical with the constituency-relation in  question. Further our decision to make Pss be a constituent of S enabled us to extend our analysis of truth as instantiatedness to molecular propositions. That decision enables us to capture both the decomposition and the truth-conditions of (stbs): and those are the two important desiderata. 
    Let us return to 
(ns) nothing snores. 

    We want our analysis of (ns) to do justice both to its decomposition and to its truth-conditions. This can be done, provided we apply the procedure (mutatis mutandis)  just described. We identify ns with a set S that comprises (inter alia) UF and also the property of being identical with the form x snores. 
     Before we continue, a somewhat delicate point is in order. As we will see, propositional forms probably are properties. I believe that  x snores is the property had in common by all and only that John snores, that Mary snores, that Frank snores, and so on. I believe that an instance of that form is some specific proposition of that form. So an instance of x snores is a constituent of that John snores.
    But that John snores is not an instance of the property of being identical with x snores. An instance of the latter property is the form x snores itself. 
   An example may clarify my meaning. An instance of the property even number is the number four. But the number four is not an instance of the property identical with the property of being an even number. After all, the number four is not identical with the property of being an even number. Similarly, that John snores is not an instance of the property identical with the propositional form: x snores, even though it is identical with an instance of the form x snores. 
x snores.       To sum what we’ve said thus far: ns is identical with a set whose membership includes the property of being identical with the form x snores (let Pxs be that property) and also includes UF. I propose that, by doing this, we can account for the truth-conditions and the decomposition of ns.
   But, again for familiar reasons, S cannot comprise only UF and Pxs. After all, those two properties could be instantiated in a world w where ns was false. Suppose that, in w, the proposition nothing plays tennis  is true. In that case, UF is instantiated in w. Further, suppose that Mary snores in w. In that case, Pxs is instantiated in w. (Of course, Pxs can be instantiated in a world even if nothing in that world snores. For, it seems to me, even in a world where nothing snores, the property of being identical with the form x snores exists. But, once again, we needn’t dwell on this.) So both UF and Pxs can be instantiated in a world without ns being true. So ns cannot be identical with a set that contains only UF and Pxs.  
   So given that we are identifying ns with a set, that set must contain some third constituent. Again, this is not hard to identify. Consider the way the quantum is rippled in a world where something snores. Let P* be the property that all and only such worlds have. Now let P be the property that all and only worlds lacking P* have. So a world has P iff its quantum is appropriately unrippled. ns is thus identical with a set S that comprises UF and Pxs and P. ns is true exactly if P is instantiated. Of course, if P is instantiated, so a fortiori are UF and Pxs. It follows that ns is true exactly if P and Pxs and UF are instantiated. But, for now familiar reasons, we don’t want to say that S’s sole member is P: that wouldn’t do justice to the compositional structure of S. So we identify ns with a set S containing all three of the properties just mentioned; and we identify ns’s being true with S’s being such that all its members are instantiated. 

§ Our analysis made heavy use of the idea that there is such a thing as the propositional form x snores? Now we must answer the question: what is that thing? 
    Consider the class of propositions containing all and only that John snores, that Mary snores, and so on. The form x snores is the property had in common by all and only those propositions. In light of what we said earlier, we can give a precise statement of what this property is. Remember that the proposition John snores is identical with a set S whose members are: the property of being identical with John; the property of snoring; and the property P had by world w exactly if, in that world, John snores. An exactly similar analysis applies to that Mary snores and that Ethel snores and so on. So the property of being identical with the form x snores is one and the same with the property of being a set S such that, for some individual x, S contains (i) the property of being identical with x; (ii) the property of snoring; and (iii) the property P had a by world w exactly if, in that world, x snores.    

§ The proposition: 

(es) Everything snores

is dealt with in a way exactly analogous to the way we dealt with (ns). First of all, (es) is true if the propositional form x snores is “universally true”, i.e. is such that each instance of that form is true. Let UT be the property of universal truth. We identify (es) with a set S that contains UT and, for reasons already seen, that also contains Pxs (the property of being identical with the property x snores).  For now familiar reasons, S must contain a third constituent. Consider the way the quantum is rippled in a world w in which everything snores. Let P be that property. S contains P and UT and Pxs. (es) is true exactly if P is instantiated. If P is instantiated, then so are Pxs and UT. So (es) is true exactly if all of P and Pxs and UT are instantiated. Thus (es) is true exactly if all the members of S are true. Thus we identify (es) with S, and identify the truth of (es) with its being the case that all the members of S are instantiated. 
§ Let us now consider the proposition: 

(ss) something snores. 

     Here it is tempting to say this: 

     It is obvious what that proposition is. It is identical with the property of snoring. And that proposition is true exactly if that property is instantiated. So (ss) fits perfectly into our view that propositions as sets of properties and that for a proposition to be true is for the corresponding properties to be instantiated. 

     But such a view is not correct. Presumably something snores has the same basic structure as nothing snores and everything snores. For reasons we have seen, the latter have as members, not the property of snoring, but rather the property of being identical with that property. We want (ss) to have a structure analogous that of those other two propositions. 
   Also, (ss) has a certain amount of decompositional structure. The property of snoring doesn’t have any decompositional structure, at least not in the sense in which (ss) does.            
    Given these points, this is what we say. (ss) is identical with a set (SS). (SS) has the property of being identical with the property of snoring as a member. (SS) also has the property of being instantiated as a member. Let (PT) be this property. 
     (ss) also has a third member. Consider the way the quantum is rippled in a world where something snores. Now consider the property common to all and only worlds having that property. Let (s*) be that property. For exactly analogues of reasons considered earlier, in connection with (ns) and (es), (SS) has (s*) as a member. 
     So the proposition something snores is identical with a set that has the following three things as members: the property of being identical with the property of snoring; (s*); and (PT). That proposition is true in a world exactly if each of those properties is instantiated in that world. 
     This analysis is, admittedly, counter-intuitive. But it is demonstrably consistent with both the truth-conditions had by something snores and also with facts about its decomposition. 
        Here one consequence of our analysis should be made explicit. According to our analysis, the proposition that John snores is identical with a set that has the property of snoring as a member. (And our analysis also requires that that property be instantiated if that proposition is correct.) But on our analysis, (ss) is identical with a set that does not have that property as a member. And this will strike many as odd, and even unacceptable.
        Let us recall a point made earlier. The John snores and Fred snores is obviously built out of other propositions. It is obviously “molecular”. Traditionally, semanticists have regarded quantified propositions (like something snores) as also being molecular, even though they are not, strictly speaking, built out of other propositions. I think that this tradition embodies a real insight into the nature of quantified generalization. When you say “something snores”, you are, arguably, making a statement about a class of propositions: the class of propositions of the form x snores. You are saying that at least one such proposition is true. So quantifications are meta-propositions. For reasons given earlier, the same is true of conjunctions, conditionals, negations, and the like. The proposition if grass contains chlorophyll, then grass is green affirms  the existence of a relation between propositions. It is thus a meta-propositional proposition. The right definition of “molecular proposition”, then, is probably not “proposition built out of other propositions”, but rather “proposition that concerns propositions”. As we just saw, quantified generalizations fall into this category, as do our paradigms of molecular propositions (conjunctions, conditionals, disjunctions, and so on). So the tradition of assimilating those two classes into a single proves correct or at least theoretically very convenient. 
      
  

§   Now we can give fairly precise answers to two questions. First, what is it for E to “denote” O? Second, what is the semantic function of grammar? 
     There are two delineations of the term “denote”. One of these, E denotes O exactly if, in virtue of having the form “…E…”, a sentence-token encodes a proposition P such that P’s being true involves the existence of a state of affairs such that O is a constituent of that state of affairs. This is the sense in which 
    “Smith” denotes Smith. Consider the sentence “Smith punches Jones.” Suppose that (Ap) – the proposition encoded in a token of that sentence – is true. P is true in virtue of the fact that there is a state of affairs that (inter alia) has Smith as a component. 
     Let us refer to this as “denoting1”. What does the expression “red” denote1? The obvious, but wrong, answer is: “the property of redness”. The right answer is this. A token of “red” denotes1 an instance of that property. Consider a token of the sentence “that car is red”. If true, that token encodes a proposition P such that P holds in virtue of the existence of a state of affairs of which some constituent is an instance of redness. 
     To understand  the other delineation of “denote”,  we must remember that each proposition is identical with some set. On this delineation, E denotes O exactly if, in virtue of having the form “…E…”, a sentence-token encodes a proposition P such that the set with which P is identical has O as a member. Let us refer to this relation as “denoting2”. Consider a toke of “Smith is tall”. The occurrence of “tall” denotes2 the property of tallness, not some instance thereof. And the occurrence of “Smith” denotes2 the property of being identical with Smith, not Smith himself (i.e. not some instance thereof). 
Here is the general rule. 
     E denotes1 O exactly if, in virtue of having the form “…E…”, a sentence-token encodes a proposition P such that, if P is true, it is true in virtue of the existence of a state of affairs one of whose constituents is O.
    E denotes2  O exactly if, in virtue of having the form “…E…”, a sentence-token encodes a proposition P such that O is one of the members of the set with which P is identical.
      
§ What do grammatical inflections do? “Smith punches Jones” encodes a proposition; “Smith, the relation of punching, Jones” does not. The first has the right grammatical inflections; the second does not. The difference between a sentence-token and an unmeaning heap apparently lies in facts about grammar. Grammatical facts code the relevant ordinal information. 
     We’ve seen what that information is. 

(Ap) The  proposition Smith punches Jones. 

Ps:  the property of being identical with Smith. 
Pj:  the property of being identical with Jones. 
Psx: the property of being a thing x such that Smith punches x. 
Pxj: property of being a thing x such that x punches Jones.
Pp: the relation of punching.  
P: as previously defined. 


   (Ap) is a set S whose members are exactly the properties just listed, and for (Ap) to be true is simply for all of its members to be instantiated.     
      Let t* be a tokne of “Jones punches Smith”, and let (Bp)  be the propositoni encoded therein. (Bp) and (Ap) will have different constituents. t and t* differ in the order in the component expressions are arranged. This is a grammatical difference; it is the way in which, in English, facts about  case are expressed. In other languages – Latin, Russian, Greek – those facts are coded primarily in  word-endings, not (so much) in facts about word-order. In English, word-order does exactly what is done, in languages ike Russian and Latin, by patently grammatical inflections. So word-order is a grammatical device par excellence. 
    What does word-order (in English) do? The set with (Bp) is identical will have different members from the set with which (Ap) is identical. For example, (Ap) has as a member: 

Psx: the property of being a thing x such that Smith punches x. property of being a thing x such that Smith punches x. 

(Bp) does not have Psx as a member. (Bp) has as a member: 

Pjx: the property of being at thing x such that Jones punches x. 

(Ap) does not have Pjx as a member:  
     
    Grammatical inflections, then, do have an extremely significant semantic role: they determine what will be the constituents (on any delineation of that term) of the propositonis meant by sentence-tokens. In t, the facts about word-order tell you (inter alia) that Psx is a member of the corresponding proposition. In t*, facts about about word-order tell you (inter alia) that Pjx is a member of the corresponding proposition. 
       Are grammatical inflections referring terms? There are two ways we can go about answering this question.
     Grammatical inflections do not by themselves refer to anything; but they assign referents to sequences of expressions on the basis of the referents of those expressions. Consdier t again. As a whole, t denotes the proposition (Ap). The grammar of t – the word-order, the inflection on the verb –  do not themselves denote anything. But, on the basis of the referents of “Smith”, “love”, and so on, they assign referents to various complex expressions. For example, the proposition (Ap) is assigned to the whole sequence. The property Psx is assigned to the complex expression “Smith punches”, on the basis of the referents of “Smith” and the root-verb “punch”. The property Pxj is assigned to “punches Jones” on the basis of the referents of “Jones” and the root-verb “punch”. 
    Very roughtly, the general idea would be this. Grammatical inflections do not themselves refer. But when a grammatical inflection occurs in a sequence of referring terms, that occurrence assigns a referent to that sequence as a whole on the basis of the referents of the expressions composing that sequence. 
      There is another way to look at facts about grammar. The idea would be the grammatical inflections do refer; but what they refer to is a function of the verbal environment. Consider the inflection on the verb in t. We have seen that, because that inflection occurs in that place, the corresponding proposition has Psx and Pxj as members. So we could conceivably see that inflection  as denoting (or, strictly, as denoting2) those properties. When that same inflection occurs in a different environtment, e.g. a token of “Plato snores”, it denotes a different thing. 
      I that the first analysis is the preferable one: it is, I think, more natural to see grammatical inflections, and the like, not as themselves referring to anyting, but as assigning referents to sequences of expressions on the basis of the referents of the components of those sequences. 
      In effect, we’ve already seen why this path is preferable to the other. If we taken other other path, then we must say that an occurrence of a grammatical inflection denotes a number of different things – e.g. the ending on the verb in t denotes both Psx and Pxj. That inflection is surely not ambiguous between those two properties. At the same time, we probably don’t want to say that it denotes some complex entity consisting of both those properties. What would that entity be? Would it be some set consisting of exactly of those properties? If we  agreed to such a proposal, that would unnecessarily complicate our analysis of propositions. So it seems better to say that, strictly speaking, grammatical inflections do not themselves refer, but that they assign referents to sequences of expressions on the basis of the referents of the components of those sequences. At the same time, the facts do not compel us to say this: such inflections can be treated as contextual referring terms – terms whose referents are a function of the verbal environment in which they occur. The obstacles to taking this path are considerations of simplicity and the like – so far as I can tell, it would not be wrong to do so. But for the reasons given a moment ago, my official position is that it is best, from the viewpoint of theory-construction, not to regard grammatical inflections as referring terms. 

Some Metaphysical Consequences 

       Thought separates things that, in reality, are not separable. We think that Smith is a discrete, isolable constituent of the universe. But he is not. Wherever Smith exists, so does a state of affairs. This is the case for a number of reasons. First, nothing is propertyless. If Smith exists, he must have a certain height, weight, and so on. So what we find in reality is never just Smith, but Smith’s having such and such properties. This is equivalent to saying: what we find is not Smith, but always some state of affairs involving Smith. Also, Smith’s existence supervenes on the occurrence of innumerable states of affairs: sub-atomic, atomic, molecular, cellular, metabolic, psychological. For modal reasons, Smith cannot be identified with the sequence of events on whose existence his own supervenes. But he is plainly inseparable from them: there but for the grace of those lower level existents goes he. 
    The truth is that Smith is more in the nature of an abstract. He is no separable from the existence of concrete states of affairs than are instances of whiteness or roundness. People can no more exist outside of states of affairs than smiles can exist outside of people (or Cheshire cats). 
    This suggests that Smith is really a property of states of affairs. What is it for Smith to exist in a world. The old picture is that Smith is at the bottom, and properties are heaped on top of him. This picture is reinforced by language, which gives Smith his own, semantically simple expression; and which represents the attribution of properties to Smith as the adding of gratuities to an already self-supporting entity. Presumably this fact about language has its basis in deep cognitive facts. Be all of this as it may, it is the wrong metaphysical model. We find states of affairs first. The basic constituents of a world are displacements of mass-energy, wrinkles in space-time. If those wrinkles are of such and such a type – if those wrinkles have the right properties – then Smith exists in that world; if not, not. So Smith, I would suggest, is a property of states of affairs. 
       On similar grounds, I would argue that the things we call “properties” – redness, roundness, and the like – are really properties of properties. Actually, they are, I belive, properties of properties of properties -- 3rd order properties! 
    First of all, you never find instances of redness in isolation of states of affairs. The same is true of instances of roundness, sweetness, and anything else that we refer to as a “property”. What you find is a red (or sweet or round) state of affairs. 
    What is a state of affairs? Pick some state of affairs. (To facilitate things, choose one that you can see or feel.) Consider the fact that there is a tree in such and such place at such and such time. Let S be that state of affairs. What is it for a world to comprise S? S’s existence in a world supervenes on the existence of innumerable displacements of mass-energy – ultimately, on the presence of certain “wrinkles in the quantum” of that world. So that state of affairs exists in a world w if some of the wrinkles in that world’s quantum are of the right type, i.e. if those wrinkles have the right properties. So a state of affairs is a property of a property. Instances of redness, tallness, and the like – the things we are used to describing as “properties” – are properties of states of affairs. So they are properties of of properties of properties. 
    

   


      
