1. Empiricism cannot explain observable events because it forbids embedding them in unobservable continuities.

2. The mind would consist only of disconnected spontaneities if completely described by conscious experience alone.

3. Conscious events must be embedded within otherwise unconscious psychological continuities to be explained.

4. The statement that X's parts are governed by laws L is not equivalent to the statement that X itself is governed by those laws.

5. The statement that X complies with the same laws as Y is not equivalent to the statement that X-internal events are to be explained by the same principles as Y-internal events.

6. Constitutive dependence is distinct from causal dependence.

7. Propositions are not identical with sentences.

8. Facts are distributions or redistributions of mass-energy.

9. A truth is distinct from the fact in virtue of which it holds.

10. Events are redistributions of mass-energy.

11. Properties are non-spatiotemporal entities.

12. Concepts are non-spatiotemporal.

13. The physical world is causally closed.

14. The mental affects the physical, therefore the mental must be physical (ontological materialism).

15. Explanatory dualism is true even if ontological dualism is false.

16. There is no way to understand why physicalistic statements being true should entail mentalistic statements being true.

17. Propositions consist of concepts.

18. The explanatory generalizations of different disciplines consist of distinct concepts.

19. Psychology and physiology are more remote from each other than physiology and microphysics.

20. Psychological propositions do not present the facts in virtue of which they hold as being in physical space.

21. Perceptions are not given to us as occurring in the same spatial manifold as physical events.

22. Scientific thought is not the same as empirical thought.

23. The term "empirical thought" is an oxymoron.

24. To the extent that thought mediates between observations and beliefs, beliefs are not directly supported by observation.

25. Most philosophers make heavy concessions to empiricism without empiricism-independent justification.

26. We do not sense-perceive forces or causal powers.

27. If empiricism is correct, we cannot know to what degree our sensory experiences are veridical.

28. If empiricism is correct, the future cannot be known on the basis of the present.

29. Hume accepted skepticism about perception and induction because they were corollaries of empiricism, instead of rejecting empiricism.

30. Logical relations hold among propositions, not sentences.

31. Propositions are non-spatiotemporal.

32. The spatiotemporal world comprises no instances of logical relations.

33. Entailment holds if, given P, it is not even a theoretical possibility that Q should fail to be true.

34. Confirmation holds if, given P, it is ceteris paribus more likely than not that Q is true.

35. Some philosophers hold that sentences are the relata of logical relations, but this is false.

36. Some philosophers hold that propositions are spatiotemporal, but this is false.

37. Properties are constituents of propositions.

38. Propositions consist of properties.

39. Formal entailment holds among propositions, not expressions.

40. Statements that a sentence is "formally true" are abbreviated ways of making statements about propositions.

41. The view that properties are identical with scattered objects composed of their instances is false.

42. Two uninstantiated properties would be identical if properties were identical with their instances (reductio).

43. One can change a scattered object without affecting the corresponding property.

44. Expression-tokens entail one another only in a derivative sense, via their meanings.

45. Logical relations hold among meanings, not among expressions per se.

46. The relata of logical relations must be things that are true or false.

47. Empiricists treat truth as a one-place relation (property) rather than a multi-place relation.

48. Empiricist subjectivism about arithmetic reflects inability to countenance non-spatiotemporal entities.

49. Conventionalization is culture-level subjectivization.

50. Empiricism mistakenly treats relations as properties.

51. Empiricism often treats 3-place relations as 2-place relations.

52. Colors are not purely subjective in the empiricist sense.

53. Colors are properties of three-place relations.

54. Color-experiences are informative, not categorically hallucinatory.

55. Colors are mind-dependent but not mental.

56. The empiricist puts headaches in the same category as concern for one's child's welfare, but this is false.

57. Emotions are not merely "sentiments" equivalent to bodily sensations.

58. Meanings are identical with sets of properties.

59. Wittgenstein's view that "meaning is use" is false.

60. If expression-tokens were nothing but bursts of noise, there could be linguistic activity on planets without sentient life (reductio).

61. Attempts to scientize psychology have typically been attempts to empiricize it.

62. Freud and Chomsky succeeded in scientizing certain sub-domains of psychology.

63. There is unconscious ideation.

64. There is ideation that is not only unconscious but subpersonal.

65. People can rationalize and deceive themselves.

66. People can repress knowledge they wish they didn't have.

67. People can be internally conflicted, and internal conflict is a battle between conscious and unconscious conceits.

68. Repressed emotions may be expressed as symptoms.

69. The concept of repression is coherent despite seemingly cogent arguments against it.

70. A psychopath is someone who doesn't have a conscience and never had one.

71. A sociopath is someone who had a conscience but ceased to have one.

72. Sociopathogenesis involves implementing a certain sort of rationalization.

73. Sociopaths are people who "sell out" and "die inside."

74. The pre-sociopath has values, internal conflict, capacity to love, and grasps non-instrumental goodness.

75. The sociopath lacks values, internal conflict, capacity to love, and grasp of non-instrumental goodness.

76. Psychopathy is a kind of perpetual infantilism.

77. Linguistic competence enhances cognitive competence.

78. There is nothing to thinking other than manipulating symbols (rejected position).

79. Anything thinkable with symbols is thinkable without them (alternative position, also problematic).

80. One must figure out what is meant by complex expressions; meaning cannot be directly determined by convention for complex expressions.

81. Without linguistic competence, a creature could not think discursively at the level of Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations.

82. Linguistic competence is constitutively, not merely causally, related to cognitive competence.

83. It is a conceptual necessity, not an idiosyncrasy of human psychology, that certain cogitations need linguistic vehicles.

84. There is subpersonal thought underlying conscious, pre-conscious, and repressed ideation.

85. Subpersonal cognitive operations mediate vision, language-comprehension, and musical ability.

86. Your mind figures out how to convert sensory disturbances into visual images, but not you (your self).

87. It would be viciously regressive to say the self carried out cognitive operations underlying sense-perception.

88. Perception is not mere sensation; perceptions are articulated sensations.

89. Articulations of perception correspond to conceptual knowledge.

90. Subpersonal, non-iconic ideation becomes hewed to sequences of expression-images.

91. Pleasant affects alert us to certain structural features in works of art.

92. Congenial phenomenology alerts us to positive properties like truthfulness and validity in expression-image series.

93. The nucleus of one's self is consciousness.

94. We don't grasp universals except by way of linguistic symbols (at the personal level).

95. Our minds can grasp universals non-linguistically at the subpersonal level.

96. Berkeley conflated images with concepts using the word "idea" for both.

97. Images are not concepts; universals are grasped through conception.

98. Empiricism cannot countenance non-image-mediated thought.

99. Concepts are not constituents of consciousness but are access-conscious.

100. Empiricism is inimical to the idea of invisible structure.
1. A sentence is meaningful if it attributes some property to some object.

2. Expressions like "the absolute is one" contain undefined terms and therefore say nothing until those terms are defined.

3. Russell, Tarski, and other logicians were wrong that there are meaningless bona fide sentences.

4. Alleged antinomies are either false or are sentence-schemata, not actual sentences.

5. Russell's Paradox does not demonstrate a counterexample to the Axiom of Comprehension.

6. The expression "the property of not being a member of itself" does not have a referent; it only appears to have a sense.

7. K₁ ("K is a member of itself") fails to encode a proposition because "itself" doesn't refer to anything.

8. The occurrence of "itself" in Russell's paradox lacks a sense.

9. The rules of English semantics are not at fault for apparent paradoxes.

10. When "self" functions anaphorically, it is eliminable.

11. Type Theory (TT) is self-defeating because it is given by a sentence that violates its own stricture.

12. There are two classes of antinomies: meaningless ones and false ones.

13. "This sentence is false" tokens are neither true nor false, not both true and false.

14. The semantic rules of English do not permit the construction of sentences that violate the Law of Non-Contradiction.

15. Natural languages are not defective in the way logicians have alleged.

16. What a sentence-token affirms depends on what its parts refer to (principle of compositionality).

17. Sentence-types are not individuated by the physical properties of their tokens.

18. Meaning cannot be use.

19. There are meaningful expressions that are never used literally and infinitely many that aren't used at all.

20. Once you know what an expression means, you won't acquire new knowledge about that meaning by acquiring additional knowledge of how that word is used.

21. To say anything, one must produce words intentionally; involuntary utterances are not speech.

22. In order for anything to mean anything, there must be semantic rules.

23. Duly rule-governed usage of an expression is governed by, and therefore doesn't constitute, its meaning.

24. Concepts are the meanings of predicates, not psychological entities.

25. To know that "number" is the word whose usage one is to study, one must already grasp the concept of number.

26. Semantic analysis (what linguists do) must not be confused with conceptual analysis (what philosophers do).

27. Words are not individuated strictly by the acoustical properties of their tokens.

28. Two sounds being tokens of the same word requires same meaning, sufficient acoustic similarity, and bona fide speech.

29. Wittgenstein's view that meanings don't exist has been refuted.

30. Platonic objects, if they exist, are not useless for explaining understanding.

31. Knowing a rule and knowing how to apply it are not separate achievements requiring infinite regress.

32. Rule-following is not a strictly psychological phenomenon.

33. The difference between someone who understands why F(13) = 169 and someone who believes it spuriously is not psychological.

34. Thinking is not a psychological process in the sense Wittgenstein supposed.

35. Knowledge of how to apply a rule is built into knowledge of that rule.

36. Chomsky's distinction between competence and performance resolves apparent problems about rule application.

37. Competence is ability; performance is the ability to deploy ability.

38. There is no gulf between knowing a principle and knowing how to apply it under given circumstances.

39. Given only a person's psychological condition, it is completely indeterminate what that person is thinking (Wittgenstein's false conclusion).

40. Working with different functions is not psychologically identical.

41. No accompaniments of rule-following are necessary or sufficient for that act of compliance.

42. When Wittgenstein refers to "accompaniments" of thought, he refers only to phenomenology, ignoring propositional attitudes.

43. Propositional attitudes are not constituents of consciousness.

44. The deployment of a propositional attitude is not constitutive of consciousness.

45. Consciousness is to thinking what a driver is to events under his car's hood.

46. Mental imagery sometimes is thought-constitutive, contrary to Wittgenstein.

47. Thought-constitutive mental images are segments of ratiocinations that mostly do not consist of imagery.

48. Phenomenologically consecutive images are likely to be ratiocinatively disjoint.

49. Wittgenstein failed to distinguish access-consciousness from phenomenal consciousness.

50. Private language is not impossible; Wittgenstein's argument fails.

51. It isn't always other people who penalize those who misuse words.

52. Wittgenstein confuses language-misuse with language-shift.

53. Any given language is only as useful to its speakers as their memories of its semantic rules are good.

54. A manuscript of which there are many copies is not more of a manuscript than one of which there is only one (analogy for private language).

55. Wittgenstein is a hard-core empiricist.

56. Creatures in whom there are no occult processes are zombies, and zombies cannot be acculturated.

57. Groups of appropriately interrelated zombies do not collectively think (contra Brandom).

58. Empiricists cannot grant the existence of propositions.

59. If propositions don't exist, translation becomes inexplicable.

60. Quine's view that no sentence is a translation of any sentence is desperate and false.

61. One cannot learn a language by regarding speakers as thought-free bodies.

62. The Argument from Analogy for other minds is valid.

63. Wittgenstein's rejection of the Argument from Analogy is spurious.

64. We sometimes only need experience of one instance to make reliable generalizations.

65. Wittgenstein's contention that philosophical argumentation is misconceived was a post hoc attempt to legitimate his wanting arguments.

66. Quine and Wittgenstein, operating independently, reached the same radically counterintuitive conclusion about interpreting others.

67. The view that one must focus only on body movements when interpreting others is not empirically motivated but a consequence of strict empiricism.

68. Knowledge of one's propositional attitudes is access-conscious, not consciousness-constitutive.

69. Definitions are not analytic; they describe empirical facts about linguistic usage.

70. There are deep analytic truths that are primitive and cannot fail to be primitive.

71. Some analytic truths are absolutely primitive; others are absolutely non-primitive.

72. 7 + 5 = 12 is not analytic in the sense that one knows it by analyzing constituent concepts.

73. Arithmetical truths are known through pure reason, not sense-perception.

74. Kant's view that mathematical truths are synthetic a priori is flawed.

75. Kant erroneously made mathematics a branch of psychology.

76. Kant's use of "transcendental" obfuscates his actual psychologistic view.

77. Geometrical propositions are non-empirical but not known through introspection.

78. Mental images are vehicles for geometrical thought but one doesn't know geometry by studying images.

79. Knowledge that one can or cannot imagine something is empirical and a posteriori.

80. Hume conflated knowledge of abstracta with introspective knowledge.

81. One cannot know the self through sense-perception or any inwardly-directed analogue thereof.

82. Hume's argument that there is no self fails because it assumes introspective knowledge is the only non-empirical knowledge.

83. Introspection is conceptual, not sensory or para-sensory, in nature.

84. Knowledge of one's conscious condition is empirical as a conceptualization of experience, like a scientific theory.

85. Having a mental image is not introspecting; introspecting involves noting that one is having such an image.

86. Animals must have concepts given they have sense-perceptions.

87. Animals' minds grasp abstracta even though the animals themselves do not.

88. Dogs and snakes are capable of conceptual ideation at the subpersonal level.

89. The Chomskyan unconscious is impersonal; the Freudian unconscious is personal.

90. There is no intrinsic difference between a propositional attitude that is repressed and one that isn't.

91. There are intrinsic differences between personal and subpersonal strata of mentation.

92. One must distinguish self from mind, and the part of mind with which one identifies from another unconscious part.

93. There are two very different kinds of unconsciousness: personal (Freudian) and impersonal (Chomskyan).

94. Chomsky's position that there is subpersonal mentation is de rigueur given obvious facts.

95. Husserl failed to see the bearing of his non-empiricism on his attempts to scientize psychology.

96. One cannot drain introspections of all conceptual articulations; phenomenological bracketing is impossible.

97. Perception cannot be described except on the assumption that it is veridical.

98. Qua student of the mind, one cannot be a strict empiricist.

99. Science is not about sticking to the facts but about organizing facts by positing hidden structures.

100. Dennett and Churchland's eliminativism about the mental, if cogent, would establish the non-existence of the non-mental as well.

1. Paraperception is sub-personal truth-awareness embodied in personal object-awareness.

2. The delight one takes in listening to a Bach fugue embodies subpersonal awareness of truths about structural properties of sounds.

3. Subpersonal awarenesses are expressed at the personal level in the form of phenomenological episodes.

4. There is such a thing as subpersonal mentation.

5. Subpersonal knowledge is never transferred from one mental stratum to another.

6. Conscious knowledge of subpersonal processes is merely an analogue of those processes, not a duplicate.

7. The conscious conceit implanted by the psychoanalyst is a bona fide duplicate of its repressed counterpart.

8. Subpersonal knowledge described by Chomsky et al. is qualitatively very different from its conscious analogues.

9. Sub-personal processes are not strictly physiological; they embody intelligence and are not purely reflexive (contra Searle).

10. The English language is a collection of rules.

11. Semantic rules of the form "x refers to y" are highly complex.

12. People absorb and apply linguistic rules without the slightest difficulty.

13. Linguistic competence is naturally characterized as mastery of semantic rules.

14. The rules of linguistic competence are not access-conscious.

15. Linguistic rules are either access-unconscious in some deeper sense or they don't exist; the latter view is not viable.

16. There is no viable purely physiological characterization of linguistic competence.

17. If you have conscious, discursive knowledge of word meanings, that knowledge wouldn't operate quickly enough for real-time language comprehension.

18. Mentality and consciousness are not identical.

19. Propositional attitudes cannot be constituents of consciousness.

20. When propositional attitudes are "conscious," it is in the sense that they are access-conscious.

21. There is no a priori reason why anything access-conscious must be so.

22. Any given consciousness must be distinct from its object.

23. Distinct objects are such that the existence of one is not logically dependent on the existence of the other.

24. There is no a priori reason why propositional attitudes must be access-conscious.

25. It is coherent to suppose that consciousness might have trouble accessing a given propositional attitude.

26. It often takes considerable intellectual resources to be consciously aware of what one believes.

27. Even if beliefs aren't repressed, one may lack the wherewithal to conceptualize them properly.

28. It's one thing to have cognitive wherewithal for first-order representations; quite another to correctly conceive of that wherewithal.

29. Without meta-cognitive wherewithal, one can't know what one's propositional attitudes are.

30. Searle's view (SV) that mentality is identical with consciousness is logically false.

31. Searle is a dispositionalist about non-consciousness-constitutive mental entities.

32. Dispositionalism doesn't model the data.

33. If beliefs were merely dispositions, knowledge-constitutive beliefs would be nothing more than arbitrary opinions.

34. Non-occurrent mental structures are functioning as mental entities between bouts of generating conscious states and behaviors.

35. Searle's view commits the quantifier-shift fallacy.

36. There are infinitely many sentences one understands and infinitely many derived semantic rules.

37. The a priori likelihood of two speakers' psychologies being perfectly aligned to their respective physiologies is small.

38. Medical science individuates brain-centers on the basis of their presumptive cognitive functions.

39. Brain-physiology is done in light of knowledge of psychophysical concomitances.

40. Mozart's and Beethoven's musical competencies differ physiologically much more than they do cognitively.

41. Cognitive processes are realized by physiological processes, but psychological relations between physiological events cannot be understood in physiological terms.

42. Hume grants that causal statements are sometimes true but holds they only describe regularity-instantiation.

43. Hume's analysis (HC) doesn't distinguish actual from epiphenomenal causality.

44. Day doesn't cause night, even though night regularly follows day.

45. We know intuitively what causes what before looking for regularities.

46. Constant conjunctions tip us off to continuities, to causal mechanisms.

47. It's the mechanism, the continuity, that is the sine qua non of causality.

48. To the extent an investigator's methodology is empiricist, he is blind to the invisible.

49. Empiricist philosophers of science deny that anything makes anything happen.

50. Hume's analysis assumes changes consist of events, but they don't.

51. The spatiotemporal world doesn't consist of discrete events.

52. The world has an analogue, not a digital structure.

53. The redistributions of mass-energy that constitute change do not have a digital structure.

54. Observation represents change as seamless, not as consisting of discrete parts.

55. One who witnesses continuity knows he is witnessing causation.

56. The world doesn't consist of truths; it consists of facts.

57. Truths hold in virtue of facts but aren't identical with facts.

58. Events are nominalizations of truths, not constituents of the external world.

59. Spatiotemporally coincident events with different modal properties would entail some region of space-time isn't self-identical.

60. Hume's analysis of causation involves a failure to distinguish facts from truths.

61. There can be no spatiotemporal changes without causal changes because spatiotemporal changes are causal changes.

62. Notions such as displacement and occupancy are to be understood in causal terms.

63. Hume assumes the concepts of precedence in time and adjacency in space can be understood in non-causal terms, but they cannot.

64. A "Hume world" without causation is impossible because any instance of persistence or occupancy is an instance of causation.

65. If a ball's state at t isn't responsible for its state at t*, there are no grounds for saying they constitute one ball.

66. There is a transcendental argument for the existence of instances of causation.

67. Genidentical thought-episodes are the relata of bona fide instances of causation.

68. There is no such thing as a conceptually innocent observation-report.

69. If purged of theoretical commitments, observation-reports would be stilted and useless.

70. Goodman's puzzle shows that explanation isn't about finding regularities and subsuming events under them.

71. Certain regularities are broken and explanatorily useless; they are discontinuity-generators.

72. Good regularities destroy more discontinuities than they create.

73. Hyper-continuities make a regularity good, not vice versa.

74. We are interested in regularities only insofar as they are hyper-continuity-conducive.

75. There is change; change in the manner of change; change in the manner of the manner of change; and so on.

76. What we typically refer to as changelessness are conditions of high-order changelessness teeming with lower-order changes.

77. Data supports regularity-generating mechanisms; it doesn't directly support regularities.

78. Probability is not a statistical but an explanatory notion.

79. Wittgenstein's argument against other minds assumes probability is statistical, which is false.

80. The "axiom of diversity" is easily explained and shouldn't be an axiom.

81. Explanatory probability is a causal notion.

82. Empiricists deny anything makes anything happen, so they cannot distinguish statistical from explanatory probability.

83. The "problem of the priors" cannot be solved on statistical grounds; it has to be solved on grounds of causality and continuity.

84. Selves are not identical with the mental activity they mediate.

85. It isn't because two segments of a thought process belong to the same mind that they constitute one unbroken thought process; causation creates unity.

86. It is because thought-segments cohere that they belong to some one mind.

87. The self consists of awareness-mediating enduring structures underlying mental activity.

88. What unites a cryogenically frozen brain with its reactivated state is the persistence of a single structure that mediates ideation.

89. It is possible for all constituents of a given system to fall within its scope.

90. There are two ways a system can be organized: horizontally and vertically.

91. Nothing makes anything happen (NC) is Hume's legacy to the philosophy of science, but it is false.

92. The Deductive-Nomological (DN) analysis of explanation follows from the empiricist analysis of causation.

93. DN fails because there are infinitely many antecedents of any event that instantiate infinitely many universal generalizations.

94. Natural laws support counterfactuals, but advocates of DN cannot coherently say this.

95. To show that x is an instance of a regularity is to show it is one member of a whole class of events we can't explain.

96. Regularities are but shadows cast by underlying causal mechanisms.

97. Psychology explains by rationalizing; physicists do not, but both seek causal mechanisms.

98. Physical and psychological explanations share the property of seeking causal mechanisms.

99. Most psychological "explanations" fail DN's criteria, but this discredits DN, not those explanations.

100. A given event E₁ can cause E₂ even if, given E₁'s occurrence, there was less than 100% chance of E₂'s occurrence.

