 



                   Freedom



 



1.0 Determinism in relation to the debate between

materialism and dualism


A set of events is deterministic if it obeys laws that, given the system’s state

at any given point in time, fix the system’s state at all later points in time. The

physical world is a deterministic system. (In any case, it’s very nearly so.

And in this context, we’ll assume that it is. Later, we’ll drop the assumption.)

This means that the world itself is a deterministic system to the extent that it’s

physical.



    There  are  both  physical  and  mental  entities.  Anything  that  involves

thought or feeling is mental; anything that does not (but is spatiotemporal;

i.e., is in space or time) is physical. So beliefs, intentions, and regrets are

mental; and rocks, trees, and explosions are physical.


  It  is  an  open  and  delicate  question  how  the  mental  and  physical  are

related. Some hold that mental entities are identical with certain physical

entities (presumably neural events or structures). This position is known as

materialism. Others deny this, saying that the mental is non-physical. This

position is known as dualism.



  If materialism is right, then the mental world is just part of the physical

world. So if E is some experience that you either have had, are having, or willhave, then given the way the world was 10 million years ago, the state of the

universe 10 million years ago made E’s occurrence inevitable. Whatever you

decide to do today is an inevitable consequence of the way the world was a

million years ago.



    Supposing that the physical world is deterministic, and supposing also

that materialism is right, it’s hard to see how there could be free will. If the

state of the universe a million years ago completely settled what choices I

would make today, then presumably I couldn’t make any choices other than

those that I do make. And it would seem that, under those circumstances, I

don’t have anything resembling “freedom of choice.” In a moment, we will

find that some case can be made that one may have a kind of freedom in a

deterministic world. But let’s hold off on that for a moment and talk right

now about the relationship between indeterminism and freedom.



2.0 Free will in an indeterministic world?


Because of the apparent irreconcilability of materialism with the presumption

that we are free, some believers in free will—for example, Jean Paul Sartre

(1905–1980)  and  Maurice  Merleau-Ponty  (1908–1961)—accept  dualism,

while others, e.g. Peter van Inwagen (1942–), accept materialism but reject

determinism. Let’s consider both options, starting with the first.


  First of all, supposing that there is indeterminism in the world, it doesn’t

necessarily mean that our mental processes aren’t determined. If the atomic

processes making up some rock happen to be indeterministic, that doesn’t

mean that your brain or mind aren’t deterministic. So the indeterminism must

be in the right place.  What is that place? Where must the indeterminism be if our choices are

to be made freely? The indeterminism must relate to the processes involved

in making choices. For, if the mechanisms of which our choices are results

are deterministic, then our decisions are as determined as anything else. Thus,

a free person’s choices are undetermined.



  But a choice that isn’t predetermined by anything isn’t predetermined by

any facts about one’s personality, and a choice of the latter kind is not one

that we would have any inclination to regard as “free.” A short story may

illustrate my meaning. Smith is walking along. All of a sudden, he decides to

become a pilot. This decision has no basis in his personality. He never liked

flying. He already has a career that he enjoys and he depends on. So it would be

inconvenient for him to become a pilot, and he would derive no pleasure from it.

He knows all of this. Nonetheless, he makes this choice. It just comes out of the

blue.


  Was this choice made freely? It doesn’t seem like it. It actually seems rather

compulsive—like something that just overcame Smith. Suppose that “choices”

similar  to  the  one  just  described  were  a  frequent  occurrence  in  Smith’s

psychological life. Would we say that Smith was “free”? No. We’d describe him

as having a kind of disorder. We’d describe the fact that he was visited by these

strange compulsions as indicative of a lack of psychological integrity on his

part; and see his submission to these forces as showing a lack of freedom on his

part. Smith is a puppet dancing at the end of strings pulled by psychopathology.



  This suggests that, in order to be made “freely,” a choice has to be rooted in

facts about one’s personality, and must express one’s values, desires, beliefs, and

previous  intentions.  A  choice  that  lacks  these  roots  seems  to  involve  a

disintegration of the person’s psyche and, paradoxical though this may seem, aconsequent  diminution  of  the  subject’s  freedom.  So  even  if  there  is

indeterminism, it doesn’t help people be free; indeterminism actually seems to

hurt our chances of being free.



  But  to  the  extent  that  a  choice i s appropriately  rooted  in  a  person’s

personality, that choice is not the result of indeterminism but, on the contrary, of

a deterministic structure. And it’s hard to see how, under those circumstances,

we could be free. So we’re damned if we do and damned if we don’t!



3.0 Free will in a dualistic world?


Now let’s consider the view that, although the physical world is deterministic,

the mental is not physical. First of all, even if the mental is not physical, there is

considerable evidence that the mental sphere is deterministic. The decisions that

one makes are clearly a product of one’s pre-existing mental condition.[1]


  We must also take into account that, at least according to some viewpoints,

the choices we make have extremely deep roots in our unconscious mental lives.

Analysis tends to suggest that decisions that seem, at the level of consciousness,

to be “random” are, in fact, strictly determined by unconscious forces. In any

case,  this  is  one  point  of  view,  and  it  is  one  for  which  there  is  some

corroboration.



  But suppose, if only for argument’s sake, that your choices were not fixed

by the state of the universe prior to their occurrence. For the reasons given

earlier, that wouldn’t make those choices be free. On the contrary, it would

make  them  more  like  fits  or  seizures  than  like  considered,  freely  made

judgments.  A story similar to the one just told may help make this clear. You are a

student at State University. You have an A-average. All of a sudden, you choose

to drop out of college and become a drug dealer. Your choice was not caused to

occur by anything; the state of your personality prior to the choice had nothing

to do with your making it; neither did the state of the universe. It just happened.

So, in the middle of a test, you throw down your pen, bolt out of the room, and

get to work as a drug dealer.



  Does  this  sound  like  a  freely  made  choice?  No.  It  sounds  more  like  a

compulsion. It’s as though you were “taken over” by another person and lost

control of your body. Again, we see that indeterminism doesn’t help freedom

and actually undermines it.



4.0 The Compatibilist Conception of Freedom


The problem is that, as we saw, determinism also seems to threaten freedom.

Obviously you have no control over the past. If determinism is right, then what

happened in the past completely determines exactly what’s happening in the

present and, in particular, completely fixes what choices you’re making now. So

something over which you have no control is completely responsible for the

choices that you’re making. It’s hard to see how, under these circumstances, you

could be said to have free will.


    Nonetheless, some hold that there can be free will in a deterministic world.

Such  people  are  known  as compatibilists. Those  who  deny  it  are

incompatibilists.



4.1 The crude form of compatibilismThere are ultimately two different forms of compatibilism. One of these is

very straightforward; the other is quite sophisticated.



    According  to  the  straightforward  version,  which  we’ll  discuss  in  this

section, you are free to the extent that you can do what you want, and you are

unfree to the extent that you cannot. If you want to leave your room and you

can, you are free. (In any case, you’re free in that respect. You may be unfree

in other respects; e.g., once you leave the room, you may want to leave the

house  you’re  in  but  not  be  able  to.)  According  to  the  other  version  of

compatibilism, which we’ll discuss in Section 4.2, being able to do what you

want, though necessary for freedom, isn’t sufficient for it. It is necessary also

that your choices be adequately rooted in who you are as a person.[2]



4.1.1 G.E. Moore’s compatibilism


 
According to G.E. Moore (1873–1958),[3]an act is performed freely if the

agent would have done something else if he had chosen to do so. An act is

free if the agent “could have done otherwise.”


  The  idea  is  pretty  straightforward.  Although  I’m  considering  striking

Harry,  I  choose  not  to.  But,  immediately  upon  making  that  choice,  an

extremely strong person grabs my arm and forces me to hit Harry. My act

was clearly unfree. But why? Because, says Moore, even though I chose to

do otherwise, I ended up striking Harry. Now suppose that I voluntarily strike

Harry. I do it, not because somebody forces me to, but I don’t like Harry and

want him to suffer. In this case, my act is free. But why? Because, says

Moore, if I hadn’t chosen to strike Harry, I wouldn’t have done so. Thus, my

striking Harry is voluntary, Moore says, iff I wouldn’t have done so had I

chosen not to do so.    Moore’s position is a form of compatibilism. Free acts aren’t those that

are uncaused; they’re those that are caused in a certain way—they’re those

that  are  caused  by  decisions  on  the  part  of  the  people  (or  animals)  who

commit them.



4.1.2 Chisholm’s objection to Moore’s analysis


In Human Freedom and the Self, Roderick Chisholm (1916–1999) makes a

compelling objection to this analysis. Let’s suppose that, if I had chosen not

to strike Harry, I would indeed have refrained from doing so. Unless I was at

 
liberty to not make[4]that choice, it’s hard to see how my doing so was free.

If every choice I make is inevitable, then it’s irrelevant that, had I made

different choices, I would have acted differently. For I couldn’t have made

those choices under those circumstances, and I therefore couldn’t have acted

in those ways. And if I couldn’t have acted in those ways, then I couldn’t

have done anything other than what I did, making it hard to see how, in

acting as I did, I was acting freely.



4.1.3 A Lockean counter-objection


Chisholm’s point is a good one, but it isn’t decisive. John Locke (1632–

1704), who held a view similar to Moore’s, makes it clear that points like

 
Chisholm’s don’t necessarily carry the day.[5]In Locke’s view, freedom is a

property of actions. It makes no sense to speak of anything other than actions

as being free. Only things that one can intend to do are done freely. I can

intend to do 20 push-ups, and that’s why I can do it freely. But I can’t intend

to make a certain choice. What would it be to intend to make a certain choice

(e.g., to intend to do 20 push-ups)? If I really intend to choose to do 20 push-ups, then, for that very reason, I have chosen to do 20 push-ups. Second-order

intentions (intentions to intend) collapse into first-order intentions. Thus, so

far as it isn’t a pleonasm, the expression “intentional choice” is meaningless.



  Locke’s argument is a good one. But in a while, we’ll see that, according

to one, quite defensible form of compatibilism, choices can be made freely—

that, in fact, freedom is primarily a property of choices and only secondarily

of acts.



4.1.4 Frankfurt’s refutation of Moore: why “x acted

freely” ≠ “x could have done otherwise”


Harry  Frankfurt  (1929–)  decisively  demonstrated  the  falsity  of  Moore’s

position  by  identifying  scenarios  in  which  somebody  performs  some  act

freely even though that person could not have abstained from performing that

 
act.[6]Here is such a scenario:


 



  (SM[7]) Mr. Smith intends to kill Mr. Jones. Like Mr. Smith, Mrs.

  Green also wants Mr. Jones dead. But Smith doesn’t want to go to jail

  for murder. Without Smith’s knowing it, she installs a microchip in his

  cranium. (We needn’t worry about how exactly she does this or how

  exactly the microchip works.) By means of this microchip, she can

  control Smith’s actions—she can make him do whatever she wants.

  She knows that Smith is intent on killing Jones. But if Smith should get

  cold  feet,  Mrs.  Green  will  use  the  microchip  to  force  Smith  to  go

  through with it. Smith doesn’t know about the microchip; nor does he

  even  know  of  Green’s  existence.  Smith  kills  Jones—he  doesn’t  chicken out at the last minute. And he does so freely (at least insofar as

  anyone does anything freely—he is not in the grips of any delusions or

    compulsions, etc.).



 


  Thus, Smith freely kills Jones, even though Smith could not have done

otherwise. For had he decided at the last minute not to kill Jones, Green

would have forced him to.



    Hence, contrary to what Moore alleges, “x performs act A freely” is not

equivalent with “x does A and, had x chosen not to do A, x would not have

done A.”



4.1.5 The irrelevance of Frankfurt’s analysis


But even though, interpreted narrowly, Moore’s analysis is false, it’s really

just a misguided way of stating the principle, which Frankfurt’s argument

does nothing to undermine, that a free act is one that is choice-driven. Moore

was led to equate “x acted freely” with “x could have done otherwise” not by

a misconception concerning the nature of freedom, but by his acceptance of a

certain  analysis  of  causality—the  so-called  “counterfactual  analysis  of

causality” (CFA). According to CFA, x caused y to occur just in case if x

hadn’t happened, y wouldn’t have happened. “Smith’s pushing the button

caused  the  elevator  to  come”  means  the  same  thing  as  “if  Smith  hadn’t

pushed the button, the elevator wouldn’t have come.”


  CFA is wrong. This is because there is causal redundancy in the world. I

push the elevator button, causing the elevator to come; but if I hadn’t pushedit, one of the other 20 people waiting for it would have done so, and the

elevator would have come.



  But a close cousin of CFA is correct, namely:


 



(CFA*) x caused y to occur just in case, if x hadn’t happened, then ceteris

paribus y wouldn’t have happened.


 



  Similarly, even though, for the reasons just given,


 



(PAP[8]) “x did A freely if and only if x did A and, further, had x chosen not

to do A, x wouldn’t have done y”


is false, nonetheless



(PAP*) “x did A freely if and only if x did A and, further, had x chosen not to

do A, then ceteris paribus x wouldn’t have done A”


is correct.



  It’s  well  known  that,  if  they  are  to  come  out  correct,  counterfactuals

typically have to be hedged with ceteris paribus clauses. Even though:


(JFK) “if JFK hadn’t been assassinated, he would have been re-elected”is a plausible counterfactual, it isn’t necessarily true. What if, sometime after

Nov. 22, 1963, but before the ‘64 elections, JFK died of natural causes or was

disgraced by some scandal? In that case, he would not have been re-elected.

So the right counterfactual is:



(JFK*) “if JFK hadn’t been assassinated, then ceteris paribus he would have

been re-elected.”


  In other words, if JFK hadn’t been assassinated, but otherwise e things

were the same, so that JFK was healthy and popular, etc., then he would have

been re-elected.



  Notice that JFK* is really a causal claim, since it’s just another way of

  saying:


(JFK#) “JFK’s being assassinated caused an otherwise re-election-bound JFK

to not be re-elected.”


 
  As a rule, counterfactuals are causal claims.[9]Thus, “Smith killed Jones

freely” is true just in case (i) Smith killed Jones and (ii) if Smith had chosen

not to kill Jones, then ceteris paribus Smith would have not killed Jones.


    Basically, Smith killed Jones freely if his doing so expressed his decision

to do so, as opposed to some other force. In general:



(FA[10]) an act is free if it expresses one’s decision to act that way.


  This is clearly the right analysis of a kind of freedom.4.1.6 Freedom not a property of choices


If FA is right, it is acts, not choices, that are free. This is what Locke held.

Locke was the first advocate of FA, and he was an exceptionally effective

one. One chooses to act, Locke said; one doesn’t choose to choose. It makes

no sense to suppose that one chooses to choose. For if one always chose what

to choose, Locke points out, one would have to make infinitely many choices

in order to make a single one, and one therefore couldn’t make any choices at

all. In order to choose to open the door, one would have to choose to choose

to open the door; and in order to choose to choose to open the door, one

would have to choose to choose to choose to open the door; and so on.


  So freedom is freedom to act, not freedom to choose. As Locke puts it,

freedom is a relationship between choice and act, and not between subject

and choice.



  It  follows  that,  so  far  as  one’s  freedom  is  concerned,  it  is  irrelevant

whether  one’s  choices  are  caused  or  not.  Since  freedom  is  a  relationship

between choices and acts, not between choices and their own antecedents, it

doesn’t matter whether choices are caused. Nor, therefore, does it matter how

they’re caused.


  In fact, if FA is right, determinism is not only compatible with freedom,

but is a prerequisite for it. Wanting to make the elevator come to your floor,

you intend to push the button. If a degenerative neurological condition has

undermined the integrity of the mechanisms linking your brain to your hand,

thereby making them indeterministic, your intention to move your hand may

be more likely to fail than to succeed. And, supposing that you do manage to

push  the  button,  if  the  mechanisms  linking  the  button  to  the  elevator  areindeterministic, your pushing the button may be more likely than not to fail to

get the elevator to come. To the extent that the mechanisms involved in the

implementation of our choices are indeterministic, we are in the grim position

of somebody who has Parkinson’s. The spirit is willing, but the flesh can’t be

counted on to obey, and neither can the relevant mechanisms in the external

world.



4.2 Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom[11]



According to Locke, you are free to the extent that you can do what you want

to do, and you’re unfree to the extent that you can’t. This is obviously a kind

of freedom—a very important kind.



  But it isn’t the only kind. And, contrary to what Locke says, there is a

sense in which choices can be free or unfree. Harry Frankfurt made this clear.

 
[12]A story will help us begin to understand Frankfurt’s insightful analysis

of freedom.


  Jones is a great writer who is addicted to heroin. Because his addiction is

only moderate, he is able to function perfectly well even when he is heroin-

deprived. (When heroin-deprived, he doesn’t feel good, but he is in no way

incapacitated.)  He  knows  that,  if  he  were  to  shoot  up  right  now,  the

subsequent lethargy would make it impossible for him to write a single word

for the rest of the day. He also knows that, if he doesn’t write 10 pages today,

he will lose his book contract. Jones does not want to lose the contract. Plus,

he wants to grow as a writer, which he won’t do, at least not today, if he

shoots  up.  He  thus  has  a  desire  to not take  the  heroin—even  though  he

simultaneously has a desire to take the heroin.  Jones’ desire to take heroin is a first-order desire. Jones’ desire not to act

on this desire is a second-order desire. This is because Jones’ desire not to

take heroin is a desire as to what to do with another desire; it is a desire not to

cave in to a desire to take heroin.



    Suppose that Jones caves in and he takes the heroin. In that case, Jones is

a slave to his desires. His will has been compromised. He is not acting freely.


  But now suppose that Jones does not cave in. He does the right thing:

instead of taking the heroin, he endures the discomfort of a heroin-free day

and manages to get his work done. In this context, Jones is not a slave to his

desires. His will has not been bent. His conduct expresses a “free will.”



  In light of considerations such as these, Frankfurt says that somebody has

a free will to the extent that his conduct aligns with his second-order desires.


  But here a question arises. Why are second-order desires so special? Why

is it that freedom consists in doing the bidding of one’s second-order desires

—as  opposed  to  that  of  one’s  third-order,  or  fourth-order,  or  first-order

desires? What, in this context, is so special about the number two?



    When  the  heroin-addicted  writer  decides not to  take  heroin,  what  is

driving  him  is  a  rational  appraisal  of  his  situation.  But  when  the  heroin-

addicted  writer  gives  in  to  his  addiction,  it  is not his  rationality  (or  his

morality) that is driving him.


    Before  we  can  close  this  argument,  we  must  address  Frankfurt’s

discussion of the concept of a “person.” By a “person,” Frankfurt does not

mean a member of the species homo sapiens. He means anything that has thesame basic psychological architecture that we have. What is so special about

that structure? First of all, we are self-conscious. Second, we are rational.

Third, we are rational not only about how to attain our objectives, but also

about what those objectives should be. What distinguishes persons from non-

persons is that the former, but not the latter, subject their own desires (and,

more generally, their own mental states) to critical scrutiny.



    Non-persons are often very clever when it comes to figuring out how to

attain their objectives; for example, beavers show a lot of intelligence when it

comes to building dams. But they are not smart about whether they should be

building dams in the first place. The question doesn’t arise. They have the

desire, and they act on it (or they die trying). In general, persons do, whereas

non-persons  do  not,  subject  their  own  desires  to  rational  scrutiny.  Non-

persons do not ask themselves: “What would the consequences of acting on

this desire be? And should I act on this desire?”


  We  persons,  on  the  other  hand, do subject  our  objectives  to  rational

assessment. And this is obviously made possible by the fact that we are self-

conscious. If I am overtaken by a desire to build a dam, I will ask myself:

“how would my acting on this desire help my overall interests?”



  We  can  now  close  the  argument.  Whenever  someone  is  driven  by  a

rational assessment of their own desires, they are driven by a desire about a

desire. Thus, one is rational only to the extent that it is one’s second-order

desires  that  drive  one’s  conduct.  There  is  a  clear  sense  in  which  rational

conduct is free and in which irrational conduct is not.


    There’s more to being free than being able to do what you what. Your

desires must reflect who you are. If they don’t, those desires belong to youbut aren’t of you. And in that case, you are alienated from your own mental

states, in much the way that a person with Parkinson’s is alienated from his

body.



  But,  in  a  way,  the  alienation  is  even  worse.  Involuntary  behavior  is

unintentional behavior. Intentional behavior is voluntary behavior. Voluntary

behavior is desire-driven behavior. (If you don’t want to raise your arm, but it

goes up anyway, you didn’t intend for it to happen.) Epileptic fits are not

actions. Unintended  behaviors  are  not action. Unlike  actions,  they’re

undergone, not done. So estrangement from one’s own actions amounts to

estrangement from all of one’s actions; and it’s hard to imagine a condition

less free than that.



4.2.1 Frankfurt’s emendation of this analysis


Another story will help expose a problem with the analysis of freedom just

described, and it will also clarify the raison d’être for Frankfurt’s soon to be

discussed emendations of it.


  Smith’s first-order desires are seriously out of alignment with his second.

He values writing poetry; he’s good at it; and he enjoys it about as much as

it’s humanly possibly to enjoy it. But he has a voracious craving for drugs.

His craving for drugs, especially cocaine, is unusually strong; and his desire

to write poetry, though intense, is not as intense as his desire to do cocaine.



  Smith’s desire to do cocaine is out of alignment with many of his values

(second-order desires). Were he to give into this desire, he couldn’t write

poetry; nor could he maintain friendships or play sports or, with only a few

exceptions, do any of the other things he values. For this reason, he doesn’tgive in. But given how intense his craving is, every day is a struggle for

Smith. If, as Frankfurt suggests, one is free to the extent that one acts on

one’s second-order desires, Smith is as free as a person can be. But given

how  hard  life  is  for  Smith,  it’s  counterintuitive  to  suppose  that  he’s

maximally  free.  To  be  sure  he  has a  kind  of freedom,  and  he  has  it  in

abundance. But there’s some other sort of freedom that he doesn’t have.



    Frankfurt is aware of this problem, and he revises his view to deal with it.

According to his revised view, if an act is to be free, it is necessary that it be

driven by a second-order desire, but it isn’t sufficient. Another condition must

be met: one’s first-order desires must be consistent with the second-order

desires that are driving that act.


    Here’s the idea. Person X has no self-control. He binges on drugs and

food, and he hates himself for doing this; but he can’t stop—he’s too weak

and his urges are too strong. His life has no meaning and he knows it; but he

will not, or cannot, do anything about it. Unlike X, Person Y has a huge

amount of self-control and never caves into temptation. But everything is a

struggle, since he’s always fighting temptation, like a drowning man trying to

stay afloat. (Y is like Smith.) Person Z cannot be categorized with X or with

Y. Z always does what he values, which is composing music. And what he

values is what he wants. He wants what he wants to want. Because he’s doing

what he wants, he has the freedom that X has that Y lacks. Because he’s

doing what he wants to want, he has the kind of freedom that Y has that X

lacks.  And  since,  of  the  three,  he’s  the  only  one  who  has  both  kinds  of

freedom, he’s obviously the most free of them all.



  Thus, one is free insofar as two conditions are met: (i) one acts on one’s

second-order desires, as opposed to one’s first-order desires; and (ii) one’ssecond-order desires are in alignment with one’s first-order desires.



  To see the merits, and also the shortcomings, of Frankfurt’s brilliant (and,

I think, largely correct) analysis, we must take a moment to say how that

analysis relates to compatibilism.



4.2.2 “x is free”= “x does what x wants to provided

that what she wants to do is adequately rooted in

her personality structure”


We’ve considered two analyses of freedom: (i) “x performed act A freely” = “it

is because x chose to A that he did it,” and (ii) “performed A freely’’ = “A

reflects who x really is.” These two views can be combined into the view that

(iii) “x performed act A freely” = “it is because x chose to A that he did it,

provided that this choice of x’s reflects who x really is.”


  This analysis, which is basically Frankfurt’s, embodies a profound insight

into the nature of human freedom. But, despite everything said thus far, a case

can be made that at the end of the day all freedom is freedom to do what one

wants. For reasons that we’ll soon discuss, I myself don’t accept this idea. But it

isn’t by any means absurd. Here’s why:



  (FD[13]) Smith has given himself over to drug addiction. He spends days

  doing drugs. (He has unlimited supplies of money and never has trouble

  getting them.) Smith has many talents—he’s a great water-skier, a great

  short-story writer, etc., but, because of his addition, these gifts of his lie

  fallow.


        Green, on the other hand, hasn’t given himself over to addiction. He  spends his days doing things that augment who he is. Green can’t indulge

  every craving that he has. Unlike Smith, he doesn’t have the money to do

  so.



        You (JMK/Frankfort) would say that Green is freer than Smith, and

  your reason would be that, even though he can’t gratify as many desires

  as Smith can, the desires that Green does gratify have the right roots,

  whereas those that Smith gratifies do not.


      I grant that Smith’s condition is worse than Green’s, and also that

  Smith  is  less  free  than  Green.  But,  contrary  to  what  you  say,  that is

  because, when it comes to desire gratification, Green’s batting average is

  better than Smith’s. There are a lot of aspirations that Smith has that will

  be thwarted as long as he’s imprisoned by addiction. Smith wants to do

  cocaine more than he wants to be a writer, but it doesn’t follow that he no

 
  longer wants to be a writer. He could very well want both.[14]Let’s

  suppose  he  does.  In  that  case,  a  very  strong  desire  of  his  is  being

  frustrated. It’s true that he’s the one who’s frustrating it, but that doesn’t

  mean it isn’t frustrated.



        Smith  will  inevitably  have  many  other  desires  that  his  cocaine

    addiction  dooms  to  frustration.  In  his  pre-addiction  days,  we  may

    suppose, Smith enjoyed many things that he no longer enjoys. We can

  assume that he desired to do each of these things, and we can also assume

  that he still desires them, even though he obviously doesn’t desire them

  as strongly as he desires cocaine. Many desires are rooted in personality

  structures. A  desire  to  play  the  piano  or  read  Nietzsche  doesn’t  just

  overtake  one;  it’s  rooted  in  enduring  structural  facts  about  one’s

  personality. And as long as the personality structure is there, one’s ability  to express it in the form of action is, practically by definition, a form of

    frustration. Smith’s personality structure may still support those desires.

  (And almost certainly will. Addiction doesn’t turn people into complete

  vegetables, at least not right away, and usually not ever.) It could be that

  Smith thinks it would be greater. But it’s not so clear that it would in fact

  be greater. The phenomenological expression of that frustration would be

  more intense. that doesn’t necessarily mean that the desire in question is

  itself more intense. But that doesn’t necessarily mean that the desire in

  question  is  itself  more  intense.  Desires,  even  short-lived  ones,  are

  structures; they aren’t feelings. And the feelings to which a desire gives

  rise don’t necessarily make it clear how intense that desire really is.



 


  FD is close to the truth, but it falls just short. Another story shows why.

Aaronson is a coward who has no self-confidence. So even though he wants to

write  novels  and  is  extremely  talented  at  it,  he  doesn’t  do  so.  It  isn’t  safe

enough. It’s too bohemian for his stodgy, blinkered parents and for his equally

stodgy friends (who he doesn’t even like—he just pretends to like them, since

he’s supposed to). To make a living, Aaronson sells insurance, which he hates.

His life is a waking death.



  In living as others want him to, Smith is surrendering his freedom, and he is

also dooming many desires of his to frustration. But the two, though related,

aren’t  identical. Aaronson  is  suppressing  an  important  side of himself. The

personality structures that he is suppressing give rise to many ardent desires,

but they aren’t identical with such desires. His losing his freedom consists in

his  suppressing  these  structures.  The  desire  frustration  that  follows  is  an

effect of this loss of freedom and isn’t identical with it.  So Aaronson’s loss of freedom isn’t identical with his being unable to do

what he wants; his being unable to do what he wants is a by-product of his

loss of freedom. To be sure, his inability to do what he wants is itself a loss of

freedom. But, important though this second kind of freedom is, it’s distinct

from the first kind and a derivative of it. So being free consists primarily in

being oneself, and secondarily in being able to do what one wants. And this is

obviously close to what Frankfurt is saying, if it doesn’t coincide with it.



4.3 Sartre and Merleau-Ponty on freedom


Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980) and Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908–1961) both

give what appears to be the same argument, to wit:



  (SMP[15]) Smith is in a locked room, and Jones is in an unlocked
          1

  room. It is only to the extent that Smith wants to leave the room that

  his being unable to do so is an abridgment on his freedom. So, to the

  extent that Smith’s being locked inside the room limits his freedom,

  it’s because, to that extent, the world isn’t complying with his will.



      The same points mutatis mutandis hold of Jones. It’s only to the

  extent that Jones does want to leave the room he’s in that his being

  able to do so constitutes a freedom. If he doesn’t want to leave, his

  being able to do so isn’t a freedom, or is only a hollow one. To the

  extent Jones does want to leave the room, his being able to do so does

  entail that he’s free (in that respect). But it isn’t because his will is free

  that Jones is (in this respect) free. It’s because the world meets his will

    halfway.      The difference between Jones and Smith isn’t that the one has a

  freer will than the other. It’s that the world meets the one person’s will

  halfway but concedes nothing to the other person’s will. They both

  have free wills. To have a free will is to be free to decide what you

  want. It is not to be free to have what you want.[16]



 


    Supposing for argument’s sake that SMP is correct, what follows isn’t
                                                      1

that Smith’s will is free, but only that his will is not made unfree by the fact

that he cannot leave the room. Locke would say that neither Smith nor Jones

has a will that is at all free, the reason being, Locke would say that freedom is

a property, not of the will per se, but of the relationship between will and act.



  But even if, contrary to what Locke says, freedom is a property of the

will, there is another reason to reject SMP. An extension of the story
                                                    1

just  told  will  help  us  identify  this  reason.  Brown  (some  third

person)  has  surgically  implanted  a  microchip  in  Smith’s  brain.  Brown

controls  Smith’s  desires  and  subsequent  decisions  by  means  of  that

microchip. So if Brown wants Smith to want to play tennis, then Brown can

make Smith have that desire by means of the microchip. The locked room

that Smith is now occupying is packed with beautiful artwork. Because he is

an  artist,  Smith  would  ordinarily  want  to  spend  hours  studying  these

masterpieces, and he thus wouldn’t want to leave the room any time soon.

But,  using  the  microchip,  Brown  makes  Smith  desire  to  leave  the  room

immediately—that  is,  Brown  makes  Smith’s  will  be  to  leave  the  room

immediately. But, at this instant, Brown unlocks the room, giving Smith the

ability to leave.  Here we surely have a case of an unfree will if ever there was one. So

while it is true that, when he didn’t want to leave the room, Smith’s will was

not made unfree by the fact that the door is locked, it doesn’t follow that

Smith’s will was free.



    Although neither Sartre nor Merleau-Ponty consider this exact point, they

both put forth an argument that constitutes a kind of response to this, viz.:


 



  (SMP) Once again, suppose that Smith is in a locked room and wants
        2

  leave it. There is obviously a sense in which Smith is unfree. If Smith

  had  no  desire  to  leave  the  room,  he  would  not  be  unfree  (in  this

  particular  respect). You  are  not  able  to  turn  into  a  tadpole.  But  this

  doesn’t constitute an encroachment on your freedom, since you have no

  desire to be a tadpole. (If you did, it would.) The same is true of Smith. It

  is only relative to certain choices that he has made that Smith’s freedom

  is limited. If he had no desire to leave the room, then his freedom would

  not be limited by his inability to leave the room.


      In general, it is only relative to the choices that we make that our

  freedom is limited. So there can be a lack of freedom only where choices

  have already been  made.  Since,  consequently,  the  making  of  choices

  must occur before there can be any lack of freedom, it follows that our

  choices themselves are made freely. (Cf. Merleau-Ponty, p. 469: “[W]hat

  are  called  obstacles  to  freedom  are  in  reality  deployed  by  it.  An

  unclimbable rock face, a large or small slanting rock, are things which

  have no meaning for anyone who is not intending to surmount them...”  See also Sartre, p. 463.)



    Given a Lockean conception of freedom (“to be free is to be able to do what

you want to do—nothing more”) SMP goes through. So SMPT is conditionally
                                          2

correct. But on the basis of it, Sartre and Merleau-Ponty hold a view that is

unconditionally incorrect. They hold that, given the truth of (SMP), it follows
                                                                            2

that choices are entirely uncaused.[17]


  This is a major non-sequitur. It may be true that one cannot meaningfully

speak of an absence of freedom except where choices have already been made.

But it doesn’t follow that those choices were uncaused or, consequently, that

those choices were not predetermined. We’ve already seen why.



4.4 Ego-dystonic vs. ego-syntonic causes


To be free, we have argued, one must identify with one’s desires—gratifying

them isn’t enough. Psychologists refer to mental contents that one identifies

with as ego-syntonic and to those that one doesn’t identify with as ego-dystonic.

An understanding of this distinction may clarify why determinism is necessary

for freedom and why indeterminism threatens it.



    Some people who suffer from psychological disturbances identify with their

symptoms. They don’t see their symptoms as symptoms. For example, the acute

schizophrenic who sees goblins dancing on his bed thinks that he’s seeing things

as they are. To his mind, it’s other people who are wrong: they can’t see what’s

there;  he  can.  The  same  holds  of  the  paranoiac  who  thinks  her  phone

conversations are being monitored by the President.    These are ego-syntonic disorders. The viewpoint embodied in the patient’s

symptoms coincides with the viewpoint of the patient himself. The latter doesn’t

regard the former as an “alien intruder.”



  But not all psychological disturbances are like this. The classic example is

 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).[18]Those afflicted with this disorder

obsess  over  matters  hardly  worthy  of  their  attention;  they’re  compelled  to

perform absurd acts (e.g., they’re compelled to snap their fingers if they have a

thought about the number seven); they’re also compelled to perform normal acts

an abnormal number of times or for an abnormally long period (e.g., they’re

compelled to brush their teeth 20 times a day or to shower for hours on end).

But sufferers of OCD know that their obsessions and compulsions are irrational.

They succumb to the compulsions not because they actually believe they believe

there to be any objective reason to do so, but because, for reasons unknown to

them, they suffer intolerable anxiety if they don’t. And they know that their

obsessions  are  not  legitimate;  they  know  that  those  obsessions  aren’t

comparable  to  Einstein’s  obsession  with  identifying  framework-invariant

physical  laws  or  Beethoven’s  obsessive  dedication  to  perfecting  the

Hammerklavier Sonata. They obsess despite themselves. They don’t think their

obsessions have any legitimate basis. They just can’t stop them.


  Thus, those afflicted with OCD don’t identify with their symptoms. Unlike

schizophrenics, they see their symptoms as symptoms. Their symptoms belong

to their minds but not to them; they are like alien-invaders that have taken root

in their psyches.



    Bearing these points in mind, consider the following scenario. You hate

numbers. You are not detail-oriented. You want to spend all day writing novels.

(You’re a very talented novelist.) You know all of this. But one day you areovercome with an intense desire to become an accountant. This desire came out

of nowhere. It has no roots in your personality. You obviously don’t identify

with this desire. This is because it has no roots in who you are. And the

reason it has no such roots is that your existing values, desires, aspirations,

and so on, had no hand in giving rise to it.



  Were you to act on this desire, there is a sense in which you’d be acting

freely, but there’s a deeper sense in which you’d be acting unfreely. You’d be

acting (un)freely in a sense similar to (though not quite coincident with, as

we’ll see) the sense in which somebody who hands his money over to a

gunman is acting (un)freely.


    Suppose that, while pointing a gun at Smith, Green says “your money or

your life.” In handing over his money, Smith is acting freely in the sense that

he’s doing what it is that, the circumstances being what they are, he wants to

do; and he’s acting unfreely in the sense that, the circumstances being what

they are, what he wants to do is not what he wants to want to do.



    Much like Smith, you’re damned if you do and damned if you don’t.

Supposing that you knuckle under to your ego-dystonic desire to become an

accountant, you are acting freely in the sense that you are doing what you

want to do, and you are acting unfreely in the sense that you are not doing

what you want to want to do.


  That said, there is a sense in which you are less free than Smith. The

circumstances being what they are, Smith must exercise his agency in ways

that he’d rather not to have to exercise it. But this agency is quite intact.



  But your agency is not intact. Your ego-dystonic desire to become anaccountant is competing for control over the very mechanisms that convert

ego-syntonic intentions of yours into action; and were you to give into this

desire, you would to that extent be forfeiting control over those mechanisms.

By virtue of having that desire, you’re in a position similar to that of the

President of a country much of whose is controlled by war-lords who don’t

recognize his authority—warlords who, though they operate in his country,

are not of it, and whose sphere of authority is only as big as the President’s

sphere of influence is small.



  Smith’s  situation  is  like  that  of  a  President  whose  country  is  being

attacked  by  a  foreign  nation  but  who  has  complete  control  over  his  own

country. Even though Smith is in a situation in which he is forced to act in

ways in which he wouldn’t otherwise act, his autonomy is not on that account

compromised; and there is thus an important sense in which Smith is freer

than you are.



4.4.1 A point concerning mental illness


Earlier,  I  referenced  Beethoven  and  Einstein.  Interestingly,  both  suffered

 
from OCD.[19]So do many other high achievers. What this shows is not that

OCD per se conduces to high performance, but that the personality traits that,

when  pathologized,  are  expressed  as  OCD  lend  themselves  to  high

achievement. Beethoven, Einstein, and other OCD-afflicted high achievers

were capable of intense concentration, were highly self-critical and, in order

to  satisfy  the  draconian  standards  of  perfection  they  imposed  upon

themselves,  were  punctilious  in  their  prosecution  of  the  projects  they

undertook.  Someone  with  these  performance-enhancing  character  traits  is

more likely than others to respond to anxiety and disturbances generally bybecoming  obsessive  and  compulsive.  But mere obsessiveness  and

compulsiveness are not pathological.



  Also,  there  isn’t  a  well-defined  line  between  pathological  and  non-

pathological  obsessive  compulsiveness;  and  one’s  pathologies  may  be

implicated in, and in some cases even enhance, one’s efforts. So given that

Beethoven had OCD, it’s unlikely that it was to no degree involved in his

composing the Hammerklavier Sonata, even though his composing that work

was, on balance, non-pathological.


  This exposes one of the main differences between physical and mental

illness. Physical illnesses are to no degree adaptive (except in some purely

accidental manner—one’s having asthma might prevent one from joining the

army  and  then  being  injured  on  the  battlefield[20]).  But  mental  illnesses,

specifically ego-dystonic ones, are sometimes adaptive. This is because ego-

dystonic illnesses are what result when defensive mechanisms become too

strong. Excessive insecurity, fearfulness, and anxiety are defense mechanisms

that have gone too far and that, consequently, inhibit the patient in some

respects. But those same overdeveloped mechanisms may enhance the patient

in other respects. An OCD mathematician’s ability to focus on a minute task

for hours on end is conducive to real achievement. In that respect, it’s non-

pathological. Andthere’s  no  real  chance  that  the  psychological  mechanisms  that  make  it

possible for the mathematician to sustain such a high level of concentration

for  such  a  long  time  have  a purely pathological  basis.  But  it’s  a  distinct

possibility that, depending on the mathematician, the mechanisms that make

that possible are considerably reinforced by mechanisms the very purpose of

which,  at  least  when  they  were  first  developed,  was  to  narrow  the

individual’s psyche, so as to cast intolerable conceits into the abyss of the

unconscious.



  It  should  be  pointed  out  that  mechanisms  whose original  purpose is

neurotic can end up becoming non-neurotic virtues of character. For example,

to  deal  with  some  specific  problem  (e.g.,  a  sense  of  helplessness  that  is

induced by an unstable home-life), a given person might over-develop some

existing character trait (e.g., tendency to focus on details becomes a maniacal

obsessions with them), which, after the initial disturbance, has been dealt

with,  assumes  some  non-pathological,  adaptive  form  (e.g.,  a  talent  for

neurosurgery).


    Basically, there isn’t always a clear distinction between mental illness

and mental hyper-wellness. And the fact that the border is blurry isn’t to be

understood in terms of the trivial, ubiquitous fact that most borders are blurry

(that, for example, there is no sharp line between short and tall, poor and rich,

etc.). The blurring of the line, where mental illness is concerned, has to do

with the fact such illness is, in some ways, at certain junctures, constitutive of

certain kinds of mental health (or, what may be different, mental flourishing).



  This, I think, is why “genius” and “madness” are proverbially thought to

go together. I don’t think that the two, in fact, go together. Madness is alwaysperformance-inhibiting,  for  reasons  that  we’ll  soon  discuss.  But  the

eccentricities associated with ego-dystonic ailments are often conflated with

madness, leading to the false view that insanity is associated in some way

with genius. I must emphasize that ego-dystonic ailments are not a form of

madness. (Not all psychological disturbances are forms of madness.) So far

as the word “madness” has a clear meaning, it refers to a condition in which

one identifies with one’s pathologies—it refers to ego-syn-tonic ailments. A

precondition for such conditions is a lowering of inhibitions that, in sane

people, remain operative and that, when hyper-operative, constitute OCD and

other  ego-dystonic  ailments.  Goblins  and  ghouls  are  no  part  of  a  sane

person’s life except when, during sleep, there is a lowering of the inhibitions

that,  during  wakefulness,  rightly  keep  these  creatures  of  childhood  in  the

cellar of the unconscious. A person with OCD (who isn’t also a person with

an  ego-syntonic  disorder)  is  like  the  sane  person,  except  that  the  OCD

person’s defenses are in overdrive. So, in such a person, it isn’t just ghouls

and goblins that get the ax: healthy beliefs and sentiments do as well. One’s

antipathy towards one’s father, and one’s suspicions concerning one’s best

friend  become  off-limits  in  the  way  that,  in  a  less  neurotic  person,  only

goblins and dragons are.



  In  terms  of  its  outward  effects,  this  hyper-inhibitedness  can  mimic

“madness”  (which,  so  far  as  it  means  anything,  refers  to  psychosis).  The

psychotic person refuses to touch the doorknob because he thinks it’s Satan’s

horn. The obsessive-compulsive person refuses to touch it because, in his

mind, it’s connected, by way of emotionally charged associations that  he

knows to have no objective basis, with emotions that he doesn’t countenance

(e.g., aggressive urges towards a loved one), sexual urges that are “wrong”

(e.g., homosexual, incestuous, or sadistic urges). But the outward observeronly  sees  some  eccentric  who  refuses  to  touch  a  doorknob.  Hence  the

conflation  of  psychosis  with  ego-dystonic  illness;  and—since  the  latter  is

associated  with  (though  it’s  not  the  most  productive  manifestation  of)

character traits that are associated with high achievement—hence the bogus

stereotype of the “mad genius.”



  So,  ego-syntonic  illnesses,  unlike  ego-dystonic  ones,  are  not  at  all

adaptive,  the  reason  being  that  they  result  from  a weakening of  one’s

defenses to a profound, highly incapacitating disorganization of one’s psyche.

So, in a way, those suffering from ego-dystonic illnesses are even further

removed from those suffering from ego-syntonic illnesses than those who

suffer from neither. In this connection, it is worth pointing out ego-dystonic

maladies seem to coincide with what are sometimes called “neuroses” and

that ego-dystonic ones coincide with “psychoses.” 


 


 


 



[1]. See Freud (1949).

[2]. The straightforward version (“you are free if you can do what you want

to do, and unfree so far as you cannot”) was advocated by John Locke

  (1632–1704) and G.E. Moore (1873–1958). The more sophisticated version

is advocated by Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) (in the Critique of Practical

Reason), Sigmund Freud (1856–1941) (in An Outline of Psychoanalysis

and the Question of Lay Analysis) and Harry Frankfurt (1929–) (in The

  Importance of what we care about).

  [3]. Moore (1911).

[4].  In  philosophy,  split  infinitives  are  hard  to  avoid,  since  the

  consequences  of  avoiding  splitting  them  are  often  sentences  that  don’t

mean what one wants to say. There’s a difference between saying “Smith

chose to not strike Harry” and “Smith did not choose to strike Harry.” The

latter says that Smith failed to make a choice; the former says that he did

make a choice. Of course, “Smith chose not to strike Harry” does avoid the

split infinitive. But having the “to” adds oft-needed emphasis.

[5]. See his Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Chapter XXI.

[6]. See Frankfurt (1988).

[7]. “SM” stands for “Smith microchip.”

[8]. “PAP” stands for “principle of alternate possibilities.” Frankfurt coined

this term.

  [9].  There  are  exceptions  to  this.  For  example,  counterlogicals aren’t

  causal claims. An example of a counter-logical would be:

  (*) “if that thing were a pentagon, it would have five sides instead.”

  (*) obviously isn’t a causal claim. (*)’s meaning parallels (JFK)’s. Neither

  says anything about other worlds.  Each merely registers some dependency that holds in this world.

[10]. “FA” is short for “free act.”

[11]. See Frankfurt (1988, Chapter 2).

  [12].  Frankfurt’s  analysis  of  freedom  corresponds  very  closely  to  the

  conception of freedom underlying the work of Freud and other thinkers in

  the psychoanalytic tradition. But Frankfurt was, to my knowledge, the first

  person to articulate this conception of freedom, and he was the first to

  defend it in a systematic and rigorous manner.

[13]. “FD” can be thought of as short for “freedom to do what one wants.”

  [14].  Addiction  doesn’t  obliterate  a  person’s  personality;  it  only

  temporarily  obscures  it.  The  addiction  may  lead  to  some  character

  remodeling. But, in most cases, the person is still there, even at the height

  of the addiction, granting that it may be well-hidden at that point.

[15]. “SMP” is short for “Sartre, Merleau-Ponty.”

[16]. See Solomon (460–173).

  [17].  Cf.  Merleau-Ponty  (Solomon  467):  “It  is  inconceivable  that  we

  should be free in certain actions and determined in others... [In connection

  with the will] we ought, therefore, to reject not only the idea of causality,

  but also that of motivation.”

[18].  Freud,  Stekel,  and  other  early  psychoanalysts  referred  to  OCD  as

“obsessional neurosis.”

[19]. See Davies (2001, 2001b).

  [20]. A colleague of mine (who wishes to remain anonymous) told me that

  sickle cell anemia is adaptive in some respects. My claim that physical

  ailments  aren’t  adaptive  must  obviously  be  qualified.  Many  ailments

  involve  over-active  immune  systems  and  can  be  beneficial  (in  certain

  respects, at certain junctures).