 KUCZYNSKI NEUROSIS VS PSYCHOSIS POSITION STATEMENT PLUS QUOTES 

1. VIEW: Psychosis is a mental impairment precipitated and sustained by a break with external reality
   EVIDENCE: "Psychosis is a mental impairment that is precipitated and sustained by a break with external reality."

2. VIEW: Neurosis is a mental impairment precipitated and sustained by a break with one's emotional condition
   EVIDENCE: "Neurosis is a mental impairment that is precipitated and sustained by a break with one's emotional condition."

3. VIEW: The neurotic flees from his emotions
   EVIDENCE: "The neurotic flees from his emotions; the psychotic flees from reality."

4. VIEW: The psychotic flees from reality
   EVIDENCE: "The neurotic flees from his emotions; the psychotic flees from reality."

5. VIEW: Neurosis may lead to a blunting of one's awareness of certain aspects of external reality
   EVIDENCE: "Neurosis may lead to a blunting of one's awareness of certain aspects of external reality, but any such loss of awareness is subordinate to loss of awareness of one's emotional condition."

6. VIEW: Any loss of awareness in neurosis is subordinate to loss of awareness of one's emotional condition
   EVIDENCE: "Neurosis may lead to a blunting of one's awareness of certain aspects of external reality, but any such loss of awareness is subordinate to loss of awareness of one's emotional condition."

7. VIEW: Psychosis may lead to a disruption of one's understanding of one's emotional condition
   EVIDENCE: "Similarly, psychosis may lead to a disruption of one's understanding of one's emotional condition, but any such disturbance is subordinate to the psychotic's loss of awareness of external reality."

8. VIEW: Any disturbance in psychosis is subordinate to the psychotic's loss of awareness of external reality
   EVIDENCE: "Similarly, psychosis may lead to a disruption of one's understanding of one's emotional condition, but any such disturbance is subordinate to the psychotic's loss of awareness of external reality."

9. VIEW: Neurosis and psychosis are not mirror images of each other
   EVIDENCE: "Though symmetrical in the just-described respects, neurosis and psychosis are ultimately not mirror images of each other."

10. VIEW: Psychosis involves a partial regression to a condition of psychological infancy
   EVIDENCE: "This is a consequence of the fact that psychosis involves a partial regression to a condition of psychological infancy, the operative term being 'partial.'"

11. VIEW: An infant is not psychotic
   EVIDENCE: "An infant is not psychotic."

12. VIEW: The infant's psychological condition is integrated and healthy
   EVIDENCE: "The infant's psychological condition is integrated and healthy, even though the infant's understanding of reality is even more subjective, and therefore more projective, than that of the adult psychotic."

13. VIEW: The adult psychotic has the psychological architecture of both an adult and an infant
   EVIDENCE: "The adult psychotic, on the other hand, has the psychological architecture of an adult as well as that of an infant."

14. VIEW: The psychotic has two entirely distinct and incompatible ways of processing information
   EVIDENCE: "Therefore, the psychotic has two entirely distinct and incompatible ways of processing information."

15. VIEW: The psychotic does not have a unified value system
   EVIDENCE: "He does not have a unified value system; he does not have a unified understanding of how to implement such values as he has; and his psychological condition is therefore therefore one of utter disarray."

16. VIEW: The psychotic does not have a unified understanding of how to implement values
   EVIDENCE: "He does not have a unified value system; he does not have a unified understanding of how to implement such values as he has; and his psychological condition is therefore therefore one of utter disarray."

17. VIEW: The psychological condition of the psychotic is one of utter disarray
   EVIDENCE: "He does not have a unified value system; he does not have a unified understanding of how to implement such values as he has; and his psychological condition is therefore therefore one of utter disarray."

18. VIEW: Nothing comparable to the psychotic's condition holds of the neurotic
   EVIDENCE: "And therein lies the peculiarly damaging nature of psychosis. Nothing comparable holds of the neurotic."

19. VIEW: Neurosis is about containing threats to one's integration by repressing them
   EVIDENCE: "Neurosis is about containing threats to one's integration by repressing them."

20. VIEW: To repress a conceit is to bury one's knowledge of its emotional valence in the unconscious
   EVIDENCE: "To repress a conceit is not to bury one's knowledge of it in the unconscious; it is rather to bury one's knowledge of its emotional valence in the unconscious."

21. VIEW: The neurotic's condition is one of relatively unimpaired intellectual awareness
   EVIDENCE: "As a result, the neurotic's condition is one of relatively unimpaired intellectual awareness."

22. VIEW: The neurotic may have heightened intellectual awareness
   EVIDENCE: "In fact, in some circumscribed ways, it may be even be a condition heightened intellectual awareness, owing to the fact that the neurotic is likely to compensate for his impoverished emotional state by hypercathecting his intellect."

23. VIEW: The neurotic compensates for his impoverished emotional state by hypercathecting his intellect
   EVIDENCE: "In fact, in some circumscribed ways, it may be even be a condition heightened intellectual awareness, owing to the fact that the neurotic is likely to compensate for his impoverished emotional state by hypercathecting his intellect."

24. VIEW: The neurotic has a hyper-stable, though also an ossified psyche
   EVIDENCE: "Moreover, by stripping the contents of consciousness of their emotional valences, the neurotic guarantees that he has a hyper-stable, though also an ossified psyche."

25. VIEW: The essence of psychosis is an inability to organize consciously experienced emotion
   EVIDENCE: "The essence of psychosis is an inability to organize consciously experienced emotion; the essence of neurosis is an inability to have consciously experienced emotion."

26. VIEW: The essence of neurosis is an inability to have consciously experienced emotion
   EVIDENCE: "The essence of psychosis is an inability to organize consciously experienced emotion; the essence of neurosis is an inability to have consciously experienced emotion."

27. VIEW: The psychotic is paralyzed by a superabundance of emotion
   EVIDENCE: "The former is paralyzed by a superabundance of emotion, the latter by lack of it."

28. VIEW: The neurotic is paralyzed by a lack of emotion
   EVIDENCE: "The former is paralyzed by a superabundance of emotion, the latter by lack of it."

29. VIEW: For men, happiness is about forging one's own identity
   EVIDENCE: "For men, happiness is about forging one's own identity."

30. VIEW: For women, happiness is about being loved
   EVIDENCE: "For women, happiness is about being loved."

31. VIEW: Men are happy if they triumphed over their own fathers
   EVIDENCE: "Men are happy if they triumphed over their own fathers, and women are happy if their fathers loved them."

32. VIEW: Women are happy if their fathers loved them
   EVIDENCE: "Men are happy if they triumphed over their own fathers, and women are happy if their fathers loved them."

33. VIEW: For a man to triumph over his father is for him not to submit to his father
   EVIDENCE: "For a man to triumph over his father is for him not to submit to his father."

34. VIEW: For a man to triumph over his father is for him to establish his own identity
   EVIDENCE: "It is for him to establish his own identity."

35. VIEW: A man can establish his own identity by doing the opposite of what his father does
   EVIDENCE: "He can establish his own identity by doing the opposite of what his father does."

36. VIEW: Schopenhauer established his identity by doing the opposite of what his father did
   EVIDENCE: "Schopenhauer's father was a wealthy merchant. Schopenhauer was a great philosopher who spoke with contempt of merchants."

37. VIEW: A man can establish his identity by doing what his father does but doing it better
   EVIDENCE: "He can establish his identity by doing what his father does but doing it better."

38. VIEW: Mozart established his identity by doing what his father did but doing it better
   EVIDENCE: "Mozart's father was a good composer; Mozart was a great composer."

39. VIEW: Donald Trump established his identity by doing what his father did but doing it better
   EVIDENCE: "Trump's father was a moderately successful business man; Trump is an extremely successful businessman."

40. VIEW: A man can fail in three ways
   EVIDENCE: "There are three ways a man can fail."

41. VIEW: A man can fail by trying to fill his father's shoes but failing
   EVIDENCE: "He can try to fill his father's shoes but fail."

42. VIEW: A man can fail by submitting to his father without trying to fill his shoes
   EVIDENCE: "He can submit to his father without even going so far as to try to fill his shoes."

43. VIEW: A man can fail by having no father at all
   EVIDENCE: "He can have no father at all and thus have no father to triumph over or to fail to triumph over."

44. VIEW: Compulsive Work is about avoidance
   EVIDENCE: "Compulsive Work is about avoidance."

45. VIEW: There are two kinds of workaholics
   EVIDENCE: "Here one must distinguish between two kinds of workaholics."

46. VIEW: The workaholic who loves what he is doing works because he wants to work
   EVIDENCE: "There is the workaholic who loves what he is doing: this person works because he wants to work."

47. VIEW: The workaholic who hates what he is doing works because he doesn't want to work
   EVIDENCE: "Then there is the workaholic who hates what he is doing: this person works because he doesn't want to work."

48. VIEW: The workaholic who loves his work is not working compulsively
   EVIDENCE: "The workaholic who loves his work is not working compulsively, and this form of workaholism is not about avoidance."

49. VIEW: The workaholic who hates his work is working compulsively
   EVIDENCE: "But the workaholic who hates his work is working compulsively, and this form of workaholism is about avoidance."

50. VIEW: The workaholic who hates his work is avoiding doing what he wants to do
   EVIDENCE: "This type of workaholic is avoiding doing what he wants to do, and because he hates what he is doing, he has to do it compulsively."

51. VIEW: Stuttering is about not speaking with a single voice
   EVIDENCE: "Stuttering is about not speaking with a single voice."

52. VIEW: Two distinct currents of thought attempt to control one's speech in stuttering
   EVIDENCE: "Two distinct currents of thought are attempting to control one's speech."

53. VIEW: To the extent that these two thought-currents are evenly matched, one stutters
   EVIDENCE: "To the extent that these two thought-currents are evenly matched, one stutters."

54. VIEW: To the extent that one of these thought currents dominates the other, speech is normal
   EVIDENCE: "To the extent that one of these thought currents dominates the other, speech is normal."

55. VIEW: Men are self-contained and women are not
   EVIDENCE: "Men are self-contained and woman are not. That is the difference between men and women."

56. VIEW: Men who are not self-contained are not really men
   EVIDENCE: "Obviously there are men who are not self-contained and there are women who are self-contained. But such men are not really men, and such women are not really women."

57. VIEW: Women who are self-contained are not really women
   EVIDENCE: "Obviously there are men who are not self-contained and there are women who are self-contained. But such men are not really men, and such women are not really women."

58. VIEW: One learns from adversity, not from failure
   EVIDENCE: "One learns from adversity, not from failure."

59. VIEW: One learns more from failure than from success
   EVIDENCE: "that one learns more from failure than from success."

60. VIEW: One does not learn more from failure than from success
   EVIDENCE: "This is not true."

61. VIEW: Success opens up new and unforeseen vistas
   EVIDENCE: "Each success opened up new and completely unforeseen vistas."

62. VIEW: Failure is a dead end from which one learns nothing
   EVIDENCE: "Each failure was nothing but a dead end, from which I learned nothing, except that what I was doing led to a dead end."

63. VIEW: One learns nothing from failure
   EVIDENCE: "One learns nothing from failure."

64. VIEW: One learns from adversity
   EVIDENCE: "One learns from adversity."

65. VIEW: Failure is not adversity
   EVIDENCE: "Failure is not adversity."

66. VIEW: Failure is the end-result of adversity not triumphed over
   EVIDENCE: "Failure is the end-result of adversity that was not triumphed over."

67. VIEW: Everybody wants money
   EVIDENCE: "Does everybody want money? Yes. Everybody."

68. VIEW: Monks, scholars, writers, and 'starving artists' who seem to spurn money still want money
   EVIDENCE: "That is itself a way of wanting money."

69. VIEW: The attitude of a scholar living in squalid conditions towards money is like a jilted lover
   EVIDENCE: "His attitude towards money is that of a jilted and petulant lover."

70. VIEW: Overblown feelings are the opposite of what they are supposed to be
   EVIDENCE: "Overblown feelings are the opposite of what they are supposed to be."

71. VIEW: Emotions that are what they seem to be are not intensely scrutinized by those who have them
   EVIDENCE: "Emotions that are what they seem to be are not the objects of intense scrutiny on the part of those who have them."

72. VIEW: Attitudes pressed into tendentious narratives about oneself are the opposite of what they seem
   EVIDENCE: "Attitudes that are pressed into the service of tendentious narratives about oneself are the opposite of what they seem to be."

73. VIEW: The #1 Rule of Writing is to immediately write down every thought
   EVIDENCE: "The Number #1 Rule of Writing is that one must immediately write down every thought that occurs to one."

74. VIEW: If one waits to write down a thought, the moment will pass
   EVIDENCE: "If one waits, the moment will pass, never to be recovered."

75. VIEW: Memorizing a thought is irrelevant because the original idea is a foil for unconscious ideas
   EVIDENCE: "It is irrelevant that one should 'memorize' what it is that one wanted to say, since the idea that originally came to mind was merely a foil for a constellation of unconscious ideas."

76. VIEW: The Number #1 rule of writing is complete honesty
   EVIDENCE: "Elsewhere I have said that the Number #1 rule of writing is complete honest."

77. VIEW: Following the rule of immediately writing down thoughts makes one an honest writer
   EVIDENCE: "if one follows the above-stated injunction, one is ipso facto an honest writer."

78. VIEW: Lack of coordination is due to a failure to be centered
   EVIDENCE: "Lack of coordination has to do with a failure to be centered, which in turn has to do with a failure to have an objective that one truly believes in."

79. VIEW: Lack of physical coordination is a manifestation of lack of psychological coordination
   EVIDENCE: "Lack of physical coordination is accompanied by, since it is a manifestation of, a lack of psychological coordination."

80. VIEW: A psychological condition is pathological if it restricts freedom
   EVIDENCE: "A given psychological condition is pathological if it restricts freedom and non-pathological if it does not."

81. VIEW: A condition is counter-pathological if it augments freedom
   EVIDENCE: "A given condition is positively counter-pathological if it augments freedom, even if it is unusual or even unique."

82. VIEW: The #1 Rule of Business is to do what comes naturally
   EVIDENCE: "The #1 Rule rule of business is that you must do what comes naturally to you."

83. VIEW: One must not go against their own nature in business
   EVIDENCE: "You must not go against your own grain."

84. VIEW: Working hard against one's nature leads to failure in business
   EVIDENCE: "You must work hard, but you must not work hard fighting your own nature."

85. VIEW: Writer's block only afflicts those not writing from the heart
   EVIDENCE: "Just as writer's block only afflicts those who are not writing from the heart, so 'entrepreneur's block' only afflicts those who are not working from the heart."

86. VIEW: Entrepreneur's block only afflicts those not working from the heart
   EVIDENCE: "so 'entrepreneur's block' only afflicts those who are not working from the heart."

87. VIEW: Choosing a path because it aligns with who you are leads to success
   EVIDENCE: "When people choose a given path because it is who they are, they succeed."

88. VIEW: Choosing a path because of an agenda leads to failure
   EVIDENCE: "When they do so because they have an agenda, they do not."
