A Priori Knowledge and Other Philosophical Works 


What is an intention?
Kant’s Ethics
Philosophical Knowledge 
A Priori Knowledge 
Analytic Truth vs. Formal Truth 






What is an intention?
J.-M. Kuczynski, PhD
jmkuczynski@yahoo.com
 
Introduction: Intentions as system-level judgements, values as system-level beliefs
1.0 Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom
1.1 Rational ≠ intelligent, irrational ≠ unintelligent
1.2 Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom (continued)
1.3 “x is free”= “x does what x wants to provided that what he wants to do is adequately rooted in his personality structure”
1.4 Problems with this analysis
1.4.1 Frankfurt’s analysis systemically flawed
2.0 An as of yet unidentified problem with Frankfurt's analysis
2.1 Second order desires sometimes are the puppets of first order desires
2.2 Fake freedom: The warping of one’s higher-order desires to make them validate one’s lower-order desires
3.0 Values ≠ desires
3.1 Free acts = value-driven acts
3.2 Some general facts relating to the nature of values.
3.3 What are values?
3.3.1 An objection to what we just said
3.3.2 What are values? (revisited)
3.3.4 What are values? (continued)
3.4.0 The question “what are values?” considered in light of Mill’s analysis of moral value
3.4.1 The question “what are values?” considered in light of Mill’s analysis of moral value (continued)
3.5. An objection to our position concerning the nature of values
4.1 Minds ≠ Selves (continued)
4.2 Minds ≠ Selves (continued)
4.3 Minds ≠ Selves (continued)
5.0 Co-corporeal, informationally integrated mental states enough for a mind, but not for a self
5.1 Co-corporeal, informationally integrated mental states enough for a mind, but not for a self (continued)
5.2 Minds that are selves and minds that are not
6.0 When minds become selves
6.1 Summary
7.0 The concept of intrinsic value in relation to the concept of selfhood
7.1 Some preliminaries
7.2 Two Illustrations of Our Thesis that what is Valuable is what consolidates one's Agency
7.3 Selfhood a matter of degree
 
Introduction: Intentions as system-level judgements, values as system-level beliefs
 
In this monograph, it will be made clear what intentions are. Specifically, it will be proved that intentions are judgments as to how to consolidate one’s psychological architecture. It follows, so it will also be established, that values are beliefs as to what, in general, is conducive to the integrity of one’s psychological architecture.
The meanings of these claims, as well as the justifications for them, are to be understood in terms of Harry Frankfurt’s incisive analysis of the concept of freedom, to which we now turn.
 
1.0 Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom
 
According to John Locke, you are free to the extent that you can do what you want to do, and you are unfree to the extent that you cannot.
According to Locke, this entails that freedom is a property of actions, not of desires, i.e. whereas actions can be meaningfully describe as free or as unfree, desires cannot be meaningfully be so described. Locke’s reasoning:
 
One does not desire to desire to go jogging. Were it one’s desire to desire to go jogging, one would ipso facto already desire to go jogging. In general, second-order desires (desires to desire) collapse into first-order choices (desires to act). Therefore, given that one is free to the extent that one can do as one desires, it follows that freedom is a property of actions, not of desires per se.
 
Freedom to do as one pleases is obviously a kind of freedom—a very important kind.
But it isn’t the only kind. And contrary to what Locke says, there is a sense in which choices can be free or unfree. Harry Frankfurt made this clear. A story will help us begin to understand Frankfurt’s insightful analysis of freedom.
Jones is a great writer who is addicted to heroin. Because his addiction is only moderate, he is able to function perfectly well even when he is heroin-deprived. (When heroin-deprived, he doesn’t feel good, but he is in no way incapacitated.) He knows that, if he were to shoot up right now, the subsequent lethargy would make it impossible for him to write a single word for the rest of the day. He also knows that, if he doesn’t write 10 pages today, he will lose his book contract. Jones does not want to lose the contract. Plus, he wants to grow as a writer, which he won’t do, at least not today, if he shoots up. He thus has a desire to not take the heroin—even though he simultaneously has a desire to take the heroin.
Jones’ desire to take heroin is a first-order desire. Jones’ desire not to act on this desire is a second-order desire. This is because Jones’ desire not to take heroin is a desire as to what to do with another desire; it is a desire not to cave in to a desire to take heroin.
Suppose that Jones caves in and he takes the heroin. In that case, Jones is a slave to his desires. His will has been compromised. He is not acting freely.
But now suppose that Jones does not cave in. He does the right thing: instead of taking the heroin, he endures the discomfort of a heroin-free day and manages to get his work done. In this context, Jones is not a slave to his desires. His will has not been bent. His conduct expresses a “free will.”
In light of considerations such as these, Frankfurt says that somebody has a free will to the extent that his conduct aligns with his second-order desires.
But here a question arises. Why are second-order desires so special? Why is it that freedom consists in one's doing the bidding of one’s second-order desires—as opposed to one’s third-order, or fourth-order, or first-order desires? What, in this context, is so special about the number two?
When the heroin-addicted writer decides not to take heroin, what is driving him is a rational appraisal of his situation. But when the heroin-addicted writer gives in to his addiction, it is not his rationality (or his morality) that is driving him.
Before we can close this argument, we must address Frankfurt’s discussion of the concept of a “person.” By a “person,” Frankfurt does not mean a member of the species homo sapiens. He means anything that has the same basic psychological architecture that we have. What is so special about that structure? First of all, we are self-conscious. Second, we are rational. Third, we are rational not only about how to attain our objectives, but also about what those objectives should be. What distinguishes persons from non-persons is that the former, but not the latter, subject their own desires (and, more generally, their own mental states) to critical scrutiny.
Non-persons are often very clever when it comes to figuring out how to attain their objectives; for example, beavers show a lot of intelligence when it comes to building dams. But they are not smart about whether they should be building dams in the first place. The question doesn’t arise. They have the desire, and they act on it (or they die trying). In general, persons do, whereas non-persons do not, subject their own desires to rational scrutiny. Non-persons do not ask themselves: “What would the consequences of acting on this desire be? And should I act on this desire?”
We persons, on the other hand, do subject our objectives to rational assessment. And this is obviously made possible by the fact that we are self-conscious. If I am overtaken by a desire to build a dam, I will ask myself: “how would my acting on this desire help my overall interests?”
We can now close the argument. Whenever someone is driven by a rational assessment of their own desires, they are driven by a desire about a desire. Thus, one is rational only to the extent that it is one’s second-order desires that drive one’s conduct. There is a sense in which rational conduct is free and in which irrational conduct is not.
To make it clear what this sense is, we must first distinguish between intelligent conduct and rational conduct.
 
1.1 Rational ≠ intelligent, irrational ≠ unintelligent
 
An irrational act can involve an enormous amount of intelligence. Smith is a brilliant inventor. He tries to impress his wife by building a giant robot that sings romantic songs in a metallic voice. This alienates her and she divorces him. Moreover, the financial and personal resources he sunk into this project have left him destitute. Smith's act might have been about as intelligent as an act can be. But it was not a rational act. For intelligently carried out though the act was, the immediate object of that act (namely, the construction of a robot that would sing love songs to his wife so that he’d be spared the trouble of doing so) was not intelligently arrived and failed to embody consideration of relevant facts that it was well within Smith’s ability to consider.
A rational act is one that embodies due regard for one's various interests. An irrational act is one that does not. An intelligent but impulsive act (e.g., Smith's speedily building this robot to allay his rapidly growing anxieties about his marital situation, all of which are projective but which become legitimate as a result of this endeavor on his part) fails to embody due regard for one's own interests. (Smith isn't taking into account the consequences of his actions; he is misdeploying his vast stores of intelligence. And, granting that there are different kinds of intelligence, he obviously has whatever kind of intelligence one needs to have to know that (supposing for argument's sake that there's no chance that this project would bring him to the attention of any potential benefactors) this project is bound to land him on Skid Row.) So far as one is driven by first order desires, one is neglecting to gratify one's second order desires. So, given that second order desires are clearly more closely hewed to one's middle- and long-term welfare---or, if it isn't one's own welfare that one cares about, one's middle- and long-term situations---it is clearly more rational to act on one's second than on one's first order desires. Also, to make a point that we will soon develop, it is often rational to perform actions in which, were one's first-order desires allowed to discharge themselves, those desires would be expressed. Too much self-restraint is dysfunctional and, in addition to being unpleasurable, seals off possible well springs of insight and creativity. But, setting aside cases of psychopathology, when a person performs one of these enjoyment-oriented actions, he isn't acting on an impulse; he's acting on his approval of an impulse. In other words, he's considered the impulse, determined that it lines up with second order desires (or, what I believe to be different, his values), and, on that basis, lifted the initial inhibition on his impulse. So, while the resulting action may be indistinguishable from what he would have done had the impulse itself been the proximal cause of his deeds, his psychological condition, given that his action was not directly prompted by that impulse, is radically different from what it would have been had that action been thus prompted.
Having distinguished between rational conduct and intelligent, we may proceed with our discussion of Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom.
 
1.2 Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom (continued)
 
There’s more to being free than being able to do what you want to do. Your desires must reflect who you are. If they don’t, those desires belong to you but aren’t of you. And in that case, you are alienated from your own mental states, in much the way that a person with Parkinson’s is alienated from his body.
But, in a way, the alienation is even worse. Involuntary behavior is unintentional behavior. Intentional behavior is voluntary behavior. Voluntary behavior is desire-driven behavior. (If you don’t want to raise your arm, but it goes up anyway, you didn’t intend for it to happen.) Epileptic fits are not actions. Unintended behaviors are not actions. Unlike actions, they’re undergone, not done. So estrangement from one’s own actions amounts to estrangement from all of one’s own desires; and it’s hard to imagine a condition less free than that.
Another story will help expose a problem with the analysis of freedom just described, and it will also clarify the raison d’être for Frankfurt’s soon to be discussed emendations of it.
Smith’s first-order desires are seriously out of alignment with his second. He values writing poetry; he’s good at it; and he enjoys it about as much as it’s humanly possible to enjoy it. But he has a voracious craving for drugs. His craving for drugs, especially cocaine, is unusually strong; and his desire to write poetry, though intense, is not as intense as his desire to do cocaine.
Smith’s desire to do cocaine is out of alignment with many of his values (second-order desires). Were he to give into this desire, he couldn’t write poetry; nor could he maintain friendships or play sports or, with only a few exceptions, do any of the other things he values. For this reason, he doesn’t give in. But given how intense his craving is, every day is a struggle for Smith. If, as Frankfurt suggests, one is free to the extent that one acts on one’s second-order desires, Smith is as free as a person can be. But given how hard life is for Smith, it’s counterintuitive to suppose that he’s maximally free. To be sure he has a kind of freedom, and he has it in abundance. But there’s some other sort of freedom that he doesn’t have.
Frankfurt is aware of this problem, and he revises his view to deal with it. According to his revised view, if an act is to be free, it is necessary that it be driven by a second-order desire, but it isn’t sufficient. Another condition must be met: one’s first-order desires must be consistent with the second-order desires that are driving that act.
Here’s the idea. Person X has no self-control. He binges on drugs and food, and he hates himself for doing this; but he can’t stop—he’s too weak and his urges are too strong. His life has no meaning and he knows it; but he will not, or cannot, do anything about it. Unlike X, Person Y has a huge amount of self-control and never caves into temptation. But everything is a struggle, since he’s always fighting temptation, like a drowning man trying to stay afloat. (Y is like Smith.) Person Z cannot be categorized with X or with Y. Z always does what he values, which is composing music. And what he values is what he wants. He wants what he wants to want. Because he’s doing what he wants, he has the freedom that X has that Y lacks. Because he’s doing what he wants to want, he has the kind of freedom that Y has that X lacks. And since, of the three, he’s the only one who has both kinds of freedom, he’s obviously the most free of them all.
Thus, one is free insofar as two conditions are met: (i) one acts on one’s second-order desires, as opposed to one’s first-order desires; and (ii) one’s second-order desires are in alignment with one’s first-order desires.
To see the merits, and also the shortcomings, of Frankfurt’s brilliant analysis, we must take a moment to say how that analysis relates to compatibilism.
 
1.3 “x is free”= “x does what x wants to provided that what he wants to do is adequately rooted in his personality structure”
 
We’ve considered two analyses of freedom:
 
(i) “x performed act A freely” = “it is because x chose to do A that he did it,”
 
and
 
(ii) “performed A freely’’ = “A reflects who x really is.”
 
These two views can be combined into the view that:
 
(iii) “x performed act A freely” = “it is because x chose to A that he did it, provided that this choice of x’s reflects who x really is.”
 
This analysis, which is basically Frankfurt’s, embodies a profound insight into the nature of human freedom. We will presently see that, although it’s a step in the right direction, it isn’t correct: for it is possible to warp one’s higher-order desires to suit one’s first-order desires and, thus, to make one’s higher-order desires be mere vehicles for first-order desires.
But right now, I’d like to concentrate on an apparent problem with Frankfurt’s analysis that, although, I suspect, some would be inclined to think otherwise, isn’t an actual problem with it:
 
(FD)  Smith has given himself over to drug addiction. He spends days doing drugs. (He has unlimited supplies of money and never has trouble getting them.) Smith has many talents—he’s a great water-skier, a great short-story writer, etc., but, because of his addiction, these gifts of his lie fallow.
Green, on the other hand, hasn’t given himself over to addiction. He spends his days doing things that augment who he is. Green can’t indulge every craving that he has. Unlike Smith, he doesn’t have the money to do so.
You (JMK/Frankfurt) would say that Green is freer than Smith, and your reason would be that, even though he can’t gratify as many desires as Smith can, the desires that Green does gratify have the right roots, whereas those that Smith gratifies do not.
I grant that Smith’s condition is worse than Green’s, and also that Smith is less free than Green. But, contrary to what you say, that is because, when it comes to desire gratification, Green’s batting average is better than Smith’s. There are a lot of aspirations that Smith has that will be thwarted as long as he’s imprisoned by addiction. Smith wants to do cocaine more than he wants to be a writer, but it doesn’t follow that he no longer wants to be a writer. He could very well want both.[454] Let’s suppose he does. In that case, a very strong desire of his is being frustrated. It’s true that he’s the one who’s frustrating it, but that doesn’t mean it isn’t frustrated.
Smith will inevitably have many other desires that his cocaine addiction dooms to frustration. In his pre-addiction days, we may suppose, Smith enjoyed many things that he no longer enjoys. We can assume that he desired to do each of these things, and we can also assume that he still desires them, even though he obviously doesn’t desire them as strongly as he desires cocaine. Many desires are rooted in personality structures. A desire to play the piano or read Nietzsche doesn’t just overtake one; it’s rooted in enduring structural facts about one’s personality. And as long as the personality structure is there, one’s inability to express it in the form of action is, practically by definition, a form of frustration. Smith’s personality structure may still support those desires. (And almost certainly will. Addiction doesn’t turn people into complete vegetables, at least not right away, and usually not ever.) It could be that Smith thinks it would be greater. But it’s not so clear that it would in fact be greater. The phenomenological expression of that frustration would be more intense. But that doesn’t necessarily mean that the desire in question is itself more intense. Desires, even short-lived ones, are structures; they aren’t feelings. And the feelings to which a desire gives rise don’t necessarily make it clear how intense that desire really is.
 
 
1.4 Problems with this analysis
 
FD is close to the truth, but it falls just short. Another story shows why. Aaronson is a coward who has no self-confidence. So even though he wants to write novels and is extremely talented at it, he doesn’t do so. It isn’t safe enough. It’s too bohemian for his stodgy, blinkered parents and for his equally stodgy friends (who he doesn’t even like—he just pretends to like them, since he’s supposed to). To make a living, Aaronson sells insurance, which he hates. His life is a waking death.
In living as others want him to, Smith is surrendering his freedom and he is also dooming many desires of his to frustration. But those two failings, though related, are not identical. Aaronson is suppressing an important side of himself. The personality structures that he is suppressing give rise to many ardent desires, but they aren’t identical with such desires. His losing his freedom consists in his suppressing these structures. The desire frustration that follows is an effect of this loss of freedom and isn’t identical with it.
So Aaronson’s loss of freedom isn’t identical with his being unable to do what he wants; his being unable to do what he wants is a by-product of his loss of freedom. To be sure, his inability to do what he wants is itself a loss of freedom. But, important though this second kind of freedom is, it’s distinct from the first kind and a derivative of it. So being free consists primarily in being oneself, and secondarily in being able to do what one wants. And this is obviously close to what Frankfurt is saying, if it doesn’t coincide with it.
 
1.4.1 Frankfurt’s analysis systemically flawed
 
Many analyses that philosophers put forth seem not to embody genuine attempts to find the truth. Frankfurt's analysis of freedom does embody such an attempt. And that attempt is almost successful.
But it falls short. In the next section, we will see why. Here's an outline of what we'll find. Acts that are driven by one's Higher-order desires need not be free; for people can, and often do, warp their higher-order desires, so as to make them fit their first-order desires. Higher-order desires, in other words, can become vehicles for first-order desires. A lazy, weak person can warp his higher-order desires so that they merely rubber-stamp the craven first-order desires of which his actions are compulsive expressions.
We will find that truly free acts are those that are driven, not by higher-order desires, but by values. We will find that there is no agency of any kind where there are no selves, and we will find that, where there are no values, there are no selves, though there may be minds. I will leave it at that for now, since the entirety of the last part of the present will work will clarify and justify those statements.
 
2.0 An as of yet unidentified problem with Frankfurt's analysis
 
According to Frankfurt, a free act is one that is driven by higher-order desires. This is false. A free act is one that is driven by one’s values. Values are not desires. (Values may lead to desires, and desires may lead to values. But values aren’t desires.) A story will help us begin to establish these claims.
You hate opera, and you hate the kind of people who hate opera. But those people are chic; they’re the “right” sort of people. You want to be one of them; you want to be chic. But it isn’t because you see their lives as being valuable that you want to be one of them. In fact, you see them as empty, bad people who act in empty, bad ways. But you’re a follower, not a leader. Your desire to enjoy listening to opera has nothing to do with your valuing opera or, indeed, with your valuing anything. That second-order desire of yours is simply a means to end, the end being the fulfillment of some first-order desire, the nature of which we will discuss in a moment. You know that, if you don’t come to have a genuine love of opera, you’ll inadvertently disclose to the people whose ranks you are trying to join that you don’t much care for them. While in your box-seat at the opera-house, you’ll look bored and sullen; you’ll sound fake when you tell these big people how much you like opera. And you believe that, as a result, they won’t let you join them, in consequence of which you’ll wither away.
That first-order desire is not a desire to survive: you know that your survival doesn't depend on your being in the good graces of these people. Rather, it is a cowardly desire to fit in. And that first-order desire is, we may plausibly suppose, the off-spring of another, equally despicable first-order desire, namely, your desire to avoid the hard, anxiety-ridden work of forging your own identity. So it is laziness and cowardice that underlie your first-order desire to fit in. It is not, I repeat, a desire to survive.
In this context, your behavior is a compulsive response to fear and laziness. It is not a free act. It is a compulsive, pseudo-free act.
In this context, it is important to distinguish between fear-driven behavior and cowardly behavior. People are vulnerable. They must take their vulnerabilities into account when deciding what to do. The coward has no compunctions about parting with who he is in his efforts to survive. The fearful, non-coward will avoid parting with his identity until, having considered all of the possibilities, even those that would involve the hard work and alienation from ways of living to which he is accustomed, he judges that he has no alternative but to forfeit at least part of his identity in order to survive. It should be said that many a fearful, non-coward will risk death before forfeiting his identity or even a part thereof.
 
2.1 Second order desires sometimes are the puppets of first order desires
 
So, in this context, your higher-order-driven desire is purely instrumental: It is just a means by which you try to gratify your desire to survive. And, though you want to survive, you don’t value it; or, what is probably more accurate, your desire to survive is more basic than your judgment that it would be good to survive, and the latter is an intellectualization, a derivative, of the former. Your desire to survive is a force unto itself. It doesn’t await your approval. It directly motivates action. And, should you come to approve of it, this judgment of yours has little role, if any, in the instigation of actions on your part that, so you hope, conduce to your survival. Your desire to survive is much more primitive than any judgment of yours as to the extent to which some norm is being complied with. All animals want to survive; but not all animals make judgments. Even though there may well be cases where your desire for such and such is a consequence of your judgment that such and such has value, your desire to survive isn’t one of these cases. Thus, second-order desires can be value-free; for they can be nothing more than the techniques for gratifying (valuatively empty) first-order desires.
 
2.2 Fake freedom: The warping of one’s higher-order desires to make them validate one’s lower-order desires
 
What if one warps one’s higher order desires to validate one’s lower order desires? What if one rationalizes?
These questions show that, as it stands, Frankfurt’s analysis won't do. Knowing that doing right by one’s existing second-order desires would be difficult, and knowing that doing right by one’s first-order desires would be easy and pleasurable, one can convince oneself that one’s current second-order desires are the wrong ones and that they ought to be replaced with ones that, as it happens, validate one’s current first-order desires. If one is too lazy and weak to do what one believes to be the right thing, one has a choice: (i) one can choose to do the right thing, which, as one knows, involves making much needed, but labor-intensive, changes to one’s own character; or, (ii) one can choose to replace one’s existing second order desires with ones that---what a surprise!---just happen to validate one’s existing first-order desires.
Doing this involves convincing oneself that one’s character-defects are actually virtues. So, supposing that Green is somebody who is doing just this, here is what he might tell himself (“GR” is short for “Green’s rationalization”):
 
(GR) I’m not “lazy.” Unlike the blinkered maniac who works all the time and never takes the time to smell a rose or go to the beach, I see the larger picture. Nor am I “weak.” Unlike the so-called “hero” who moronically tries to buck the system, I see the larger picture; I see that despite that system’s imperfections, it is one that I am duty-bound to comply with; and, unlike the so-called hero, I am enough of a realist to know that complying with the system involves getting one’s hands dirty. The “hero” isn’t a hero at all.
To be sure, the (so-called) hero’s efforts have a sheen of valor. And, in sticking up for the little guy---the one whose work is being plagiarized by the well-entrenched senior professor, the one who is being framed by the oft-decorated police-officer---the hero’s conduct might initially appear to be more in keeping with the rules that are constitutive of the system. But that initial appearance is an illusion.
We need the system. If we don’t follow the rules, the system will collapse. But there are two kinds of system-constitutive rules: those that are spoken and those that are not. The hero’s behavior is heroic only relative to the first set of rules. But, in this context—the one in which it would be said by a short-sighted person that I am being “weak,” the one in which I’m supporting the senior professor’s portrayal of events---it is the second set of rules that count. The hero (the odd graduate student or pre-tenure professor who is “telling it like it is” and isn’t abetting the efforts of the senior professor) is violating those rules. And he’s doing so knowing that, because the rules he is violating must never be spoken, people will be forced to characterize his anti-social, system-undermining behavior as system-compliant. So the hero’s behavior is particularly insidious. Therefore, to the extent that his behavior is antithetical to mine, I will take it as a complement when somebody reacts my system-friendly conduct by calling me “a weak, faceless bureaucrat” or “an empty, servile, cringing shell.”
To be sure, the system isn’t perfect. It often rewards the wicked and punishes the virtuous. It often requires that one speak ill of somebody who one knows is decent---who, though nobody says it, everybody (except for a few imbeciles) knows is decent and who, though nobody says it, everyone (same qualification) knows to be a person of merit---and to laud somebody who one knows (and who everyone knows, etc.) to have no merit.
But, on balance, the system is good, and to keep it going, one must follow the rules---all of them, not just the spoken ones. And if that means taking the “coward’s path," so be it.
 
Deep down, Green doesn’t really believe GR. Deep down, he knows that he’s a servile, weak person who is doing the pragmatic thing, as opposed to the right thing. But, at least to the extent that he’s convinced by GR, Green has replaced one set of higher-order desires (e.g., a desire to act virtuously, even when, because of circumstances, one wishes to act in a craven and iniquitous manner) with a different second-order desire (a desire to resist the odd temptation one occasionally feels to do the “right” thing, even when it is not to one’s practical advantage to do so).
It’s pretty clear that this world is replete with people like Green.  This is a problem for Frankfurt’s analysis. So far as Green is acting on his new higher-order desires---the ones that, in telling himself GR, he is installing---Green is letting his own cowardice make his decisions for him and he is thus not acting freely. A junky who lets his low cravings make his choices for him; he is acting freely only when he takes the reins and acts in accordance with what he wants to do, as opposed to what his addiction wants him to do. Green is similarly unfree, since, instead of doing what he wants to do, he does what his cowardice wants him to do.
So, contrary to what Frankfurt says, an act can be unfree even if it expresses a higher-order desire. This happens when the higher-order desire is the puppet of a lower-order desire.
 
3.0 Values ≠ desires
 
Given the points just made, Frankfurt’s analysis of freedom must be modified or augmented in some way. More specifically, Frankfurt must take one the following four positions (and make any such adjustments to his system as the position chosen requires). The result will, I believe, be a decent analysis of at least one, very important kind of freedom. Here are those positions:
 
(i) Contrary to what was just said, people don’t rationalize; they don’t deceive themselves.
 
(ii) Although people do rationalize and deceive themselves, their doing so doesn’t involve their actually replacing any higher-order values of theirs with other higher-order values. It involves only their falsely believing that they have done so. The original values stay on, this being why rationalizers are tormented by gnawing feelings of guilt (from which they typically attempt to insulate themselves by adding more rationalizations to their existing rationalizations). In other words, rationalization isn’t about actually replacing one’s values/higher-order desires with new ones. It is about making oneself believe that one has effected such a replacement.
So, in deferring to the senior professor, Green isn’t acting according to his second order desires. Rather, he’s acting according to what he’s deluded himself into believing are his second order desires. (Consequently, the fact that Green’s actions are not free, except in the sense that they’re voluntary, is consistent with Frankfurt’s analysis.)
 
(iii) Situations such as those described by GR neither constitute cases where one set of higher-order values is replaced with another nor constitute cases where some new set of higher-order values has altogether failed to have been installed. Rather, such situations involve a bifurcation or fracturing of the psyche---a kind of splitting of oneself into two selves, one of which still has the old set of values and the other of which has the new set of values.
So, according to this hypothesis, rationalizations do install new higher-order desires. Contrary to (iii), however, they do so, not by ousting old higher-order desires, but by adding new ones to them.
Given that the new ones are inconsistent with the old ones, rationalization necessarily involves a degradation of one’s psychological integrity. One’s thinking must become more illogical than it used to be or one’s agency---by which I mean the totality of faculties involved in one’s being able to decide what to do---must undergo a sort of splitting.
                                                                    
(iv) Although second-order values can be uninstalled and replaced with others, a distinction must be made between higher-order values, on the one hand, and core values, on the other. All core values are higher-order values, but not all higher-order values are core values. Green’s actions are unfree because, although they’re consistent with (some of) his higher-order values, they aren’t consistent with his core values.
 
3.1 Free acts = value-driven acts
 
(i) is out of the question. To say that people don’t rationalize is itself to rationalize, given what an obvious empirical fact it is that people rationalize.
Also, the essence of Frankfurt’s position is that, if one is to be free, one must not be at war with oneself: intrapsychic conflict is the enemy of freedom. Frankfurt is aware that there are different ways of eliminating intrapsychic conflict and that some of them not only fail to bring one freedom but strip one of it. For example, given somebody who is torn between shooting heroin and kicking his addiction, that person can cease to be at war with himself by relinquishing his desire to kick his addiction and, thus, to surrender to it. But, as Frankfurt himself clearly states, by resolving his internal conflict in that way, the junky is forfeiting his freedom. Nonetheless, Frankfurt holds that, in cases where internal conflict is so intense that no one party has uncontested control over the reigns of agency, one cannot possibly become free without ceasing to be internally conflicted. Knowing that some ways of resolving internal conflicts fail to make one free, Frankfurt holds that the way in which a person resolves a case of internal conflict will bring that person freedom if and only if two conditions are met, to wit:
 
(a) The resolution of the conflict involves his higher-order desires prevailing over one’s lower desires;
  
(b) The way in which that person’s higher-order desires prevail over his lower-order desires doesn’t involve the latter being unduly frustrated and, consequently, requires that the victorious higher-order desires so align with the lower-order desires over which they’ve triumphed that the latter can discharge themselves in a way that doesn’t threaten the hegemony of their higher-order masters.
 
This position is a near duplicate of a position that Freud explicitly advocated, in various forms, throughout his career.[459] It may be possible in some attenuated, strictly logical sense for there to be Intrapsychic conflict without self-deception or rationalization. But, human psychology being what it is, it seems that self-deception is essential to the perpetuation, if not the initiation, of such conflict. In any case, (i) is prima facie discrepant with empirical facts; and, although many philosophers and psychologists virulently deny (i), they do so on a priori grounds that, as we’ll see, are made of straw or, what is much more common, they don’t bother to defend their position.
(ii) is inconsistent with empirical facts. People’s values do change. As a 20 year old, Jim wants to save the world. He works for the Peace Corps. He spends his weekends working at soup kitchens. As a 40 year old, Jim is an investment banker who lives to accumulate wealth and wouldn’t dream of not having a live-in maid, butler, etc. One could say that, even as a 20 year old, Jim’s values were really those of a greedy banker or that, as a 40 year old, his values are really those of a hippie do-gooder. But such a position would be ad hoc and counter-empirical.
To be sure, there are many cases where somebody who is in fact a greedy sociopath works at a soup-kitchen (etc.), so as to bolster his resume in the hopes of making a lot of money on Wall St. And there are people who make a lot of money on Wall St. who wish that they were doing good for the world and whose consequent grief all the gin in the world cannot drown out. But there are also people whose values truly change.
(iii) describes something that, I suspect, really does happen. But, so I also suspect, it does not describe what is typically happening in cases of rationalization. In my personal experience, and in the clinical experience of many an authority, what typically happens is that some one set of higher-order desires becomes corrupt: there is a mixing of the old (pure) higher-order desires with new (corrupt, rationalization-driven) higher-order desires. There is still just one agent. There aren’t two agents—a Dr. Jekyll and a Mr. Hyde—inhabiting one body. There is but one agent. Some of his higher-order desires are wholesome and some of them are unwholesome; and in some cases a single higher-order desire may be wholesome in some respects and unwholesome in others.
(iv) is the only remaining option. In the pages to come, we'll find much reason to accept (iv) and no reason to reject it. Incidentally, this analysis, though clearly similar to Frankfurt’s analysis, does differ from it in a non-trivial way. Frankfurt seems to hold that one’s higher-order desires ipso facto are one’s core desires. But that is precisely what the present hypothesis denies.
 
 
3.2 Some general facts relating to the nature of values.
 
In the next section, we’ll answer the question: “what are values?” Having answered this question, we’ll be able to answer the question: “what is it for an act to be free?” We’ll answer the latter question in the next section.
 
 
(1) Values must be distinguished from things that have value. A great novel has value, but it is not itself a value.
 
(2) "Value" is a relational term. What has value for Smith may not have value for Jones.
 
(3) (2) doesn’t entail that no value is better than any other value; nor does it entail that values are in any way ‘subjective’ or ‘unreal.’ The term ‘three miles from’ is relational; but whether Smith is three miles away from Jones has nothing to do with anyone’s feelings or opinions about anything. The same thing is true of values, as we’ll see. Given that values are judgments, values can be correct or incorrect.
Given that values are relational judgments, two people who have different values needn’t disagree about anything. I value playing the piano and I don’t value playing scrabble. That means that, in my judgment, I bear a certain relation to the first activity that I don’t bear to the second. Smith, let us suppose, values playing scrabble more than he values playing the piano; this means that, in his judgment, he bears a certain relation to the one activity that he does not bear to the other. Those two judgments are perfectly compatible. So even though my values are antithetical to Smith’s, there is nothing that we disagree about.
 
(4) Liking something is not the same thing as valuing it. People value activities (e.g., helping somebody in need) that they don’t enjoy and enjoy activities (e.g., doing cocaine) that they don’t value.
One tends to enjoy the activities that one values. I value playing the piano, and I also enjoy it; and these facts are obviously closely linked. But the relation I bear to that activity by virtue of enjoying it is distinct from the relation that I bear to it by virtue of valuing it. By virtue of the fact that I value playing the piano, I bear a cognitive relation to that activity; in other words, my valuing it consists in my having made a judgment about it (viz., I see it as having value and therefore---for reasons that we’ll soon identify---as being agential). By virtue of the fact that I enjoy playing the piano, I bear a purely affective relation to it (viz., it makes me feel good).
 
3.3 What are values?
 
A value is a judgment on the part of some person (or sentient creature) to the effect that a certain course of action, or a certain outlook, will increase the scope of its agency. A moment ago I was reading a book (The Scientific Image, by Bas Van Fraassen). I then had a sudden urge to read a different book (The Will to Power, by Nietzsche). I was driven by a whim. Van Fraassen’s book was illuminating; I was not wasting my time by reading it. And, although, for personal and professional reasons, I do at some point have to read Nietzsche’s book (which, judging from the fragments I’ve read, is extremely good), I would, in giving in to my whim to ditch Van Fraassen, be undermining a resolution of mine, and doing so for no good reason.
The result of my ditching Van Fraassen under these circumstances would have been a degradation of psychological integrity. I would have been allowing my decision-making process to give undue weight to sudden fancies. I would have been sending a message to myself that it’s ok not to carry out an intention that I had formed in a rational and informed manner and that I knew that, if successfully carried out, would make me a better and more powerful person. This illustrates, and also supports, though only to a small degree, our contention that value is a judgment to the effect that a certain course of action or way of living increases the scope and power of one’s agency.
I value carrying out rationally formed intentions. But why? Because I would be diminishing myself if I indulged every passing whim. So far as the fickle winds of fancy determined by life-path, I would not be calling the shots; I would not be the captain of the U.S.S. Mordecai Einstein. So far as impulses, rather than rationally formed intentions, determined my conduct, I would not be an agent.
Even though I may have desired to read The Will to Power more than I desired to read The Scientific Image, I valued reading the latter at that particular juncture more than I valued reading the former. My reason: under the circumstances, my reading The Will to Power would have constituted a surrender of agency to sub-agential whims.
 
3.3.1 An objection to what we just said
 
There seem to be counterexamples to this contention. For there seem to be cases where, driven by his values, somebody martyrs himself or otherwise diminishes himself. There are cases where a person correctly characterizes an act as “valuable” even though that same act, if carried out, would diminish his agency and possibly destroy it. But that isn’t because our thesis is false. It’s because the word “value” is ambiguous. Sometimes it means “belief that a given way of acting (or being) enhances one’s own agency.” Sometimes it means “belief that a given way of acting (or being) enhances agency in general---not necessarily one’s own, but net amount of agency had by people overall.” This second usage of the term “value” is derivative of the first, even though one’s initial impression would probably be that it’s the other way around.
Most ethical systems use the word “value” (or its analogues) in the just-mentioned derivative manner. The one exception to this is ethical egoism, which was advocated by Nietzsche (and not---at least not to my limited knowledge----by very many other thinkers of substance). We’ll find at the end of this book that ethical egoism, though not ultimately a viable moral system, has some hidden virtues.
 
3.3.2 What are values? (revisited)
 
There are times when I desire to watch TV more than I desire to read Non-Standard Analysis by Abraham Robinson. But, in general, I value doing the latter more than I value doing the former. (Why “in general” as opposed to “always”? There are times when my reading Non-Standard Analysis would represent a compulsive, pseudo-agential act; and on many of those occasions, my watching TV would be a more “integrated” and rational course of action than would my reading some onerous treatise. In general, many is the time when what would ordinarily be characterized as the “lazy” course of action is the rational, non-lazy one, the reason being that what is in fact an agency-diminishing impulse cloaks itself as an intention to perform some action that would ordinarily be seen as agency-promoting, as when one’s intention to cut one’s break short so as to go for a five mile run (even though one’s bursitis makes it a bad idea to do so) or to continue reading some treatise (even though, owing to one’s fatigue and consequent vulnerability to performance diminishing influences, one would ultimately be a better treatise-reader (and treatise–writer) were one, at this particular juncture, to take a break from treatise reading---we’ll revisit this obscure parenthetical point). I value reading Non-Standard Analysis even though, at that particular juncture, I do not desire to do so, at least as much as I desire to watch TV, because I judge that reading that book would consolidate my agency and expand its jurisdiction, whereas watching TV would fail to have such consequences and would indeed lead to a withering of agency.
To be sure, once I turn off the TV and start reading Non-Standard Analysis, I not only experience gratification, but do so on a number of levels. First of all, I am proud of myself for doing the right thing. Second, and much more importantly, in reading Non-Standard Analysis, I experience what I will refer to as agential enjoyment, whereas in lazily watching TV I am experience non-agential enjoyment. (We tend to use the word “pleasure” to refer to non-agential enjoyment: one experiences “pleasure” when one enters a warm bath. But, although one enjoys reading difficult treatises or working on one’s backhand, and although one does experience a kind of pleasure in doing so, that pleasure is derivative of a certain kind of enjoyment (for lack of a better word) that comes from exercising one’s agency.)
 
3.3.4 What are values? (continued)
 
I have impulses. Impulses are in me. But they are not of me. I am not my impulses. There is a sense in which, so far as my behaviors are impulse driven, I am not acting. To put it another way, so far as I am acting in such circumstances, my actions are but vehicles for sub-agential impulses. Consequently, my behavior in such circumstances is ultimately only pseudo-agential. In such cases, that is to say, my agency is involved, but only as a way of discharging impulses that are sub-agential and, in being acted on, diminish my agency.
Here it is important that we make a distinction between two kinds of impulses: those that one has by virtue of being an agent and those that one has before one’s mind becomes agential. My impulse to read The Will to Power is obviously not in the same category as my impulse to eat tubs of ice-cream or to engage in certain carnal acts. The former impulse---though one that, in the previously described circumstances, ought to be suppressed---is obviously derivative of the development in me of values and aptitudes that jointly constitute agency. For that reason, were I, on a whim, to stop reading Van Fraassen’s book and start reading The Will to Power, I would rightly not judge myself as harshly as I would if I stopped reading Van Fraassen’s book and punched my annoying next door neighbor or ate a tub of ice-cream. Giving into impulses---be those impulses agency-derivative or agency-independent---is a bad thing. But giving into agency-independent impulses is worse.
“But by never giving into one’s impulses,” it must be asked, “doesn’t one become a robot? Doesn’t one become a brittle, neurotic square who can’t live, love, or laugh?”
How that question is to be answered depends on what, in this context, it means to “give in” to an impulse. A healthy person ought indeed to discharge his base impulses and---what sometimes coincides with so acting---one ought to act spontaneously. But when one scrutinizes a non-maladaptive case of “giving into one’s impulses” or of “acting on the fly," one finds that the decision to do so was a considered one; one finds that the thought-process behind the decision was to the effect that, since one damages oneself and deprives oneself of strength by alienating oneself from one’s base impulses---of which one’s higher values are rarified derivatives---one weakens oneself: one turns oneself into an emotional cripple, a neurotic nerd, who, having drained his agency of a source of power, is less agential than one would otherwise be. So what appear to be cases of acting “on a whim” are cases in which one non-whimsically (though perhaps almost instantaneously) realizes that it is to the advantage of one’s agency to act in a way that seems to be whimsical. Genuine cases of whimsical behavior are the prerogative of schizophrenics, whose minds are so disorganized that impulses don’t have to go through the usual vetting process to be converted into action, and of psychopaths, whose vetting process operates much more intermittently than that of a normal person and is governed by different operating principles. (Though it may not be apparent, these points about psychopathy are in the process of being substantiated.)
 
3.4.0 The question “what are values?” considered in light of Mill’s analysis of moral value
 
According to John Stuart Mill, happiness is the one thing that truly has value.[460] So far as anything other than happiness has value, Mill says, it's only to the extent that it leads to happiness. Right now we'll examine this thesis of his, along with his argument for it. In so doing, we’ll find support for our contention that to value x is to judge x to increase the scope or the strength of one’s agency.
There’s no denying that writing novels of the same level of merit as War and Peace is more valuable than doing cocaine. Mill admitted this. Mill also admitted that, not having been duly educated or endowed with the requisite cognitive faculties, one might fail to know the delights of reading Hamlet and would prefer drinking vodka to reading Shakespeare. But, Mill insisted, so far as reading Hamlet is more valuable than drinking vodka, it is only to the extent that the former brings more happiness than the latter.
One problem with what Mill says is that happiness presupposes a value-system. Happiness involves believing oneself to have measured up to certain benchmarks and thus to embody certain values. (Mice can probably feel good. But they can't be happy, they can't make judgments of the relevant kind.) A consequence is that happiness presupposes that there are things other than happiness that are of value.
Thus, Mill's contention that happiness is the one and only non-instrumental good is false. In fact, it's tautologously false, given that happiness consists in judging oneself to be good in some way or other. What is good for one person may not be good for another.
 
3.4.1 The question “what are values?” considered in light of Mill’s analysis of moral value (continued)
 
Also, Mill claims that, if a person fails to prefer Tolstoy to grain alcohol, it's because he's defective in some way. But in making that claim, Mill is saying that Tolstoy is valuable in a way that grain alcohol is not and that one must be deficient not to see that and, therefore, not to derive more pleasure from reading good literature than from drinking cheap liquor. So Mill is saying that there are values other than happiness and that our happiness is a consequence, and thus not the essence, of our receptiveness to these values.
Of course, Mill could claim that one can fail to derive any pleasure at all from Mozart's music, etc. and yet not suffer from any defect. But in addition to being totally ad hoc---not to mention hypocritical, at least when put forth by the likes of a cultured person such as Mill, who spent his days reading “good” literature and listening to “good” music---such a position is brazenly false. A tone-deaf person who can't distinguish Mozart's music from the noise made by a dump-truck clearly is deficient in some way: there is something to which he is blind (or deaf, rather). Setting aside people who are rightly held in contempt for their musical deficiencies, nobody really believes that any given person is as good a composer as Mozart or, equivalently, that Mozart is as bad a composer as any given person. At least some of Mozart’s works are better than at least some of those of at least some other people. This is a conservative claim. It’s hard to see how one could sincerely deny it.
This is not to say that, given any two musical works, one is better than other. Two musical works may not be comparable. Each may be good in its own right and it would be artificial to say that one was better than the other. But there are aesthetic truths. I wrote a fugue once. It wasn’t as good as any of the fugues that Bach wrote. The statement “it’s not all a matter of how we feel about a given work of music: some musical works really have merits that others lack” doesn’t entail “there is some one relation R such that musical work x bears R to y iff y is better than x and such that, given any two musical works, one bears R to the other." (Aesthetic properties are not unusual in this respect. Outside of the narrow horizons within which we operate, the question ‹is x hotter than y?› ceases to have a determinate meaning or therefore a single answer. But surely an object’s thermal properties are not “subjective” or “unreal.”)
Of course, these days, many claim to reject this sort of non-relativism, and to hold its advocates in contempt. But that can very easily be explained without supposing either that it's true or that anyone believes it. If it's all just a matter of taste, then—good news!---your sonatas (which even your mother describes as "execrable”) are just as good as Mozart's. We’re all geniuses! Break out the party hats!
If there is no aesthetic right or wrong---if a person's view as to the level of value of a given musical work is a projection of his emotional (and, so it is assumed to follow, unfounded) response to it, instead of his emotional response to it being a consequence of his belief as to its degree of merit then, at least in the arena of musical composition, nobody need fear censure. And given how obviously false that view---or, at least, how thoroughly at variance it is with people's behavior and sentiments---and given, therefore, how much self-deception is involved in making oneself believe it, that view makes it possible to accept other positions that absolve one of one's deficits. No longer is one stupid; one just has a different "but equally valid" opinion.
Mill could rid his position of its vicious circularity by replacing the term "happiness" with the term "pleasure," in which case his thesis becomes "a thing is valuable to the extent, and only to the extent, that it promotes pleasure." An immediate consequence of this view is that the life of a tapeworm that experiences a large amount of pleasure is more valuable than that of an Einstein who does not experience quite as much pleasure. Mill is aware of this problem with his view. He deals with it by saying that listening to Mozart, reading Shakespeare, etc. brings one more pleasure than does shooting heroin. But while it can be said that reading Timon of Athens brings one more happiness than does shooting heroin, it cannot plausibly be said that it brings one more pleasure.
 
3.5. An objection to our position concerning the nature of values
 
People sometimes see things that diminish them---that abridge the scope of their agency and possibly even kill them---as being "valuable." In some cases, this is simply the result of error. (I value doing push-ups all day because I foolishly think that, as long as I do so, I'm in control of my life.[461]) But in many cases no error is involved. Smith rightly sees his self-diminishing activities as a UNICEF-volunteer as having "value." In fact, practically every system of ethics demands a reduction of oneself. [462]
This objection is not hard to neutralize. Let VS be a value-system according to which one's primary ethical obligation is to augment the scope of other people's agency. One has no moral obligation to promote what has no moral value. So, one has no moral obligation to promote welfare (agency) unless agency has moral value. A fortiori one's primary moral obligation cannot be to promote other people's welfare unless agency is the most valuable thing. But agency is, of its very nature, something that has only a relative value: relative to me, my agency may well be the most valuable thing. (In fact, I have no doubt that it is.) But relative to you, my agency has no value at all--except in an irrelevant, purely instrumental sense. (All references to "value" in this context are to intrinsic, not instrumental, value.) So VS is saying that, ethically, what is worthless to a given individual is the very thing that has the most worth. And I do not see how such a value system could be a coherent one.
This suggests that one of the following propositions holds:
 
(i) What is of moral value may not be of the slightest value to any given individual, in which case anyone who acts morally is ipso facto acting irrationally. (In fact, even in cases where what is moral happens to coincide with what is valuable to a given agent, it is not as somebody who is acting morally that he is acting rationally. His behavior, if rational, merely coincides with that of somebody who is genuinely moral. It does not itself embody any morality, being nothing more than a mere simulation of it.)
 
(ii) What is of moral value is what it is in one's own interest to do.
 
So a certain incoherence is internal to public value systems. But such systems must be incoherent in the just-described ways if they are to do their job. Public value systems exist to ensure that, on balance, people's rights aren't horribly violated. The only value systems that can accomplish this are ones that, from a logical viewpoint, are incoherent. (There is nothing incoherent in the supposition that a value system must be incoherent if it is to have the causal properties that a public value system ought to have. This is because how much merit a value-system has is to be judged by the effects on people’s lives through implementing it, not by its coherence. Value systems are not scientific doctrines. Thus, a welfare-maximizing viewpoint may be incoherent.) Setting aside people who are simply deluded (e.g., people who believe that joining cult X, a precondition for which is wire-transferring their life-savings to the Master’s Swiss Bank account, is the royal road to self-actualization), when people say that performing self-diminishing acts (e.g., working at a soup-kitchen) has "value," they may be speaking the truth; for what they are saying is that performing such acts, though not intrinsically valuable, is valuable in that it consolidates value-systems that are instrumental in preserving and augmenting agency in general.
 
4.0 Minds ≠ Selves
 
In this section I will make some points about the difference between minds and selves. What I say in this section will be obscure, and I will provide little or no argumentation for it. The contents of this section will be both clarified and justified in the sections following it.
All selves are minds, but not all minds are selves. A self is a mind that is an agent. An agent is a mind that acts, and doesn’t just react. In order for a mind to be capable of acting, instead of just reacting, that mind must do more than simply facilitate the gratification of primal urges; it must do more than provide the organism with information concerning the external world that makes it clear how, without being killed or injured, that organism can eat, sleep, etc. A mind whose only objectives are to gratify such urges, and in which the sole purpose of knowledge is to enable such urges to be gratified, merely reacts, in light of the knowledge that it has, to the directives of instinct. Such a mind does not act. It does not itself do anything. It merely reacts to instinctual pressures.
These reactions are not blind. The exact nature of these reactions is conditioned by the knowledge stored in that mind. But non-blind reactions are not actions; and given an organism of the just-mentioned kind, that organism’s self does nothing. It has no self, as we’ll see; and its instincts, not its non-existent self, are the real agents. The behaviors in which the organism engages are compulsive responses to instinct. They are therefore not acts. Put another way, so far as those behaviors are acts, they are not acts on the organism’s part, but rather on the part of its instincts.
The organism’s mind doesn’t act. Its only function is to determine, in light of its knowledge of the external world, what exact form the organism’s instinct-directed behaviors must take if those behaviors are not to lead to the organism’s being injured or killed. Such a mind’s function is not to act, but only to ensure that the organism’s reactions to its instincts don’t run afoul of the forces at work in the external world.
 
4.1 Minds ≠ Selves (continued)
 
A self is a mind that has values; it is a self whose behaviors are driven beliefs as to what is of value. Value-driven acts often involve the gratification of instinctual urges; indeed, if value-driven acts systematically make it impossible for such urges to be gratified, the value-system underlying those acts is not a viable one. Nonetheless, a self is a mind that permits the organism housing it to behave in a given way only if, in its judgment, that behavior is in compliance with some value. Of course, its judgments as to what is of value are, and should be, heavily influenced by its knowledge of what will permit the gratification of primal urges. But what is relevant is that, in an organism that has a self, as opposed to a mere mind, it is judgments as to what is of value that lead to behavior; and it is not, except in the indirect sense just described, urges per se that do so.
It follows that selves act. Of course, creatures that are selves sometimes merely react. But it isn’t as a self a creature reacts. (I am a tennis player. But it isn’t as a tennis player that I am writing this book.)
 
4.2 Minds ≠ Selves (continued)
 
A story will help us move forward. Smith is a sapient being. (It doesn’t matter whether Smith is human or not.) Smith can make judgments as to how it must act in order to discharge its instinctual energies. Like all judgments, these judgments involve knowledge of principles. So there must be principles that Smith is aware of and that guide Smith’s thinking. But given an arbitrary one of these principles, Smith doesn’t know that he has knowledge of that principle.
One day, however, Smith becomes aware of at least some of the principles that guide his thought. (How Smith could come to have this second-order knowledge is discussed in Sections 5.0-6.2. Let “P” stand for an arbitrary one of the principles that Smith thereby comes to know himself to know. Let us assume that Smith has these realizations at time t. (Though they’re experienced as mere feelings, embodied in these responses are rational judgments as to what to do, given what Smith’s objectives are (instinct-gratification) and given what he knows about the circumstances. We must distinguish the instinctual response per se from the conscious experiences that merely represent it, much as the icons on your desktop must be distinguished from the patterns of electrical activity to which they correspond.) Before he knew that he had knowledge of P, Smith obviously couldn’t make judgments of the form: my judgment that such and such is consistent with my knowledge of P. Prior to time t, Smith’s judgments were indeed guided by a knowledge of P; but he obviously could not, as of yet, make judgments as to whether his thinking was being properly guided by his knowledge of P. (One’s thinking can be misdirected by one’s knowledge of a legitimate principle. This may happen either because one’s auxiliary assumptions are wrong (e.g., knowing that gross disparities in wealth lead to injustice and are themselves unjust, but not knowing that certain ways of eliminating such disparities may lead to even greater injustices, President Jones destroys the economy in his attempt to redistribute wealth) or because one’s ability to deploy one’s knowledge of the principle in question has been blunted by garden-variety performance-inhibiting factors, such as fatigue and lack of memories.) But, as of time t, Smith can form judgments as to whether the manner in which he arrives at judgments is consistent with P. He is thus aware of a norm from which his thinking mustn’t deviate; and, when such deviations occur, he can make judgments as to their nature and extent. He can thus evaluate his own judgments. And his evaluation of them is positive (negative) to the extent that, to his knowledge, they (fail to) comply with P.
Integral to the argument just put forth is a delicate but important distinction. There is a big difference between being aware of a principle and being aware that one is aware of it. A talented athlete’s behavior embodies awareness of principles that the athlete doesn’t know himself to be aware of. The point being made here is not that his behavior accords with some principle of which, at every cognitive level, he is ignorant. It is that, although a knowledge of a given principle may be what is guiding that behavior, the athlete in question may not be aware of that fact and, indeed, is exceedingly unlikely to be.
Philosophers and psychologists often regard an act as being entirely “mechanical” if it isn’t guided by knowledge that the agent can articulate. But it is only when one has second-order knowledge----knowledge as to what it is that one knows---that one can articulate what one knows; and philosophers are therefore likely to regard behaviors that fail to embody second-order knowledge as failing to embody any knowledge and, therefore, as being entirely unprincipled. In fact, one needs a certain amount of verbal dexterity in addition to such second-order knowledge if one is to be able to articulate the grounds on which they make practically any one of the decisions that they make.
Of course, in saying “snow is white," I am not affirming my knowledge that I know that snow is white; I am talking about snow, not about my own mind. But, in producing that utterance, I am expressing the fact that I know that snow is white. And one could very easily know that snow is white without knowing that one knows it. One can know that snow is white without having the concept of knowledge. But one must have that concept to know that one knows that snow is white. So knowledge of P is different from, and needn’t involve, knowledge that one has knowledge of P. Also, by virtue of having a concept of knowledge, one has various concepts---e.g., belief, truth, mental activity---not had by an otherwise comparable creature that doesn’t have the concept of knowledge.
 
4.3 Minds ≠ Selves (continued)
 
Now endowed with knowledge, not just of P, but of the fact that he has knowledge of P, Smith doesn’t react to situations; he reacts to his reactions to situations. Given a situation, he instinctively makes a judgment. Aware that his judgment must comply with P, he makes a second judgment. This second judgment doesn’t concern the situation in question, at least not directly; it concerns his initial judgment concerning that situation. It concerns the extent to which his initial judgment is consistent with the principles his knowledge of which eventuated in it.
Assuming there to be any cognitive dimension to it at all, one’s response to any given situation is ipso facto principle-driven. But that, by itself, isn’t enough for that response to be an action, as opposed to a reaction. Actions are behaviors that result from judgments about judgments. Confronted with a situation, one makes an initial judgment. One may then make a judgment as to whether that initial judgment was consistent with the principles guiding it. In other words, having made an initial judgment, one may evaluate that initial judgment. One is acting, as opposed to reacting, if one’s behavior expresses such an evaluation. One is reacting, as opposed to acting, if one’s behavior expresses one’s initial judgment.
There is no self where there is no ability to act---where there is no agency. There is no agency, where there is no self. There is no self where there is no self-evaluation.
To put this last point in a way that, in addition to being more precise, doesn’t make it seem viciously circular: there is no self where there are no judgments as to the integrity of other, co-corporeal judgments.
Where there are such judgments, there are values. To approve of (criticize) a judgment (or anything else) is to judge it to have (lack) some value that it ought to have.
What directly leads to a bona fideaction is never a desire and is always an attitude of approval towards a desire. Where there are no values, there is no approval or disapproval. So where there are no values, there is no agency.
 
5.0 Co-corporeal, informationally integrated mental states enough for a mind, but not for a self
 
Anything that has the cognitive wherewithal to have a series of mental states ipso facto has a mind. But there is more to having a self than there is to being capable of having a series of mental states. Consider Smith as he is before time t. Each of his mental states could be understood on its own terms: as a reaction to immediate stimuli. Each of those reactions may have been intelligent. (In other words, each resulted from cogent reasoning as to how to discharge the relevant instincts, given the available information about the environment.) And, supposing that they were intelligent, each was more likely than not to incorporate the information encoded in previously occurring, co-corporeal mental states. So, if we think of Smith’s pre-t mind as a series of links in a chain of events (or conditions), the links in that chain are bound together not merely by virtue of being co-corporeal and not merely, therefore, by virtue of the earlier being partly causally responsible for the existence of the later ones, but by virtue of the fact that (in at least some cases) the former ones bequeathed the information encoded to them to the later ones and, therefore, that it was as mental entities that the earlier ones (in some cases) had a hand in determining the contents of the later ones.
 
5.1 Co-corporeal, informationally integrated mental states enough for a mind, but not for a self (continued)
 
Still, co-corporeality, even when coupled with content-transmission, isn’t enough for self-hood: supposing that M1…Mn is a series of co-corporeal mental states such that, for each i and j, (1 ≤i < j ≤ n), for M1…Mn to form a self, as opposed to a mere mind, it is not enough that Mi be corporeal with Mj; nor it is enough that Mi help bring about the occurrence of Mj; nor, most importantly, is it enough that Mi do this in the distinctively psychological manner just described.
A story will help make this clear. There is a group of around 20,000 people, all of whom live on the same land-mass, which we’ll call “LM.” (LM is big enough that nobody feels crowded but small enough that nobody feels lonely and, more importantly, interactions among its occupants are frequent.) LM-occupants all speak the same language, and they often exchange information with one another. They also often exchange goods with, and provide services for, their fellow LM-occupants.
Being reasonably intelligent and well-informed people, these people tend to have accurate beliefs; and being reasonably honest people, they tend to provide one another with accurate information. Also, most of the time, they’re reasonably honest not just in their communications with their fellows, but in their transactions with them. They tend not to defraud one another.
In at least some cases, the ties that LM occupants have to one another are deep ones. (For the moment, we’ll set aside cases where LM-occupants have no significant ties to their brethren.) Those ties are not purely geographical: it isn’t just that the parties involved live in the same place. Nor are those ties purely causal. (It isn’t just that LM-occupants accidentally bump into other LM-occupants, thereby inadvertently changing the latter’s lives.) The ties in question involve:
 
(i) the fact that one person intentionally transmits information that is arrived in a principled manner to some other person who makes principled inferences from that information,
 
and:
 
(ii) the fact that two people may (for prudential, moral, or even libidinal reasons) benefit each other by honoring an agreement to exchange goods or services.
 
 
One fact about LM’s occupants must be made explicit. There is nothing regulating their exchanges with one another. Should one LM-occupant defraud another, there would be no penalties. Given that there are no laws in LM, the victim would have no legal recourse and he’d have to take it upon himself to see that justice be done. An LM-occupant who’d been misinformed by another would be in the same situation mutatis mutandis. It may be that, because LM’s occupants are so honest with one another, they’re better off for the fact that their lives aren’t weighed down by the presence of the regulatory entities that would be needed for there to be any formal penalties for fraud.
But what is relevant here is that, precisely because their lives are not thus “weighed down," the occupants of LM do not jointly constitute a nation, at least not in the sense in which France constitutes a nation. There is nothing under whose jurisdiction the occupants of LM fall.[463]
 
5.2 Minds that are selves and minds that are not
 
Bearing these points in mind, let us turn our attention back to M1…Mn, and let us make some further assumptions about that series. The information encoded in Mi (1 ≤ i ≤ n) is likely to be accurate. That information, if transmitted to Mj, (1 ≤ i < j ≤ n), is likely to be transmitted in an accurate form. Moreover, the synthesizing of that information with other bodies of information (e.g., information currently being uploaded through the senses as to the nature of environment in Smith’s vicinity) is likely to consist of inferences in which correctly understood correct rules of inferences are correctly applied.
But----and this is the final, and most important, assumption that we’ll make about M1…Mn-----none of the members of that series constitute judgments concerning the merits of either the information-exchanges occurring among other such members or of the manner in which the beliefs encoded therein are generated. Those exchanges and syntheses of information are not policed. It may be that each of the exchanges and inferences in question is done impeccably. But, if so, that isn’t because there is anything overseeing those operations; it is simply because, despite the absence of any supervisory agency, the mental states involved in those operations happen to satisfy the relevant desiderata. By the same token, if the ratiocinative activity that generates M1…Mn is inconsistent, even systematically so, with the very principles embodied in that activity, no internal mechanisms exist to ensure that the needed course-corrections occur. The spuriousness of the reasoning involved in M1…Mn may well ensure that Smith fails in his attempts to gratify his desires.
But there isn't any internal agency that prevents Smith from making such mistakes or, therefore, that protects him from the damage to his person that such mistakes are likely to entail. There is, in other words, nothing under whose jurisdiction the various members of M1…Mn fall. Nothing polices either the manner in which members of that series exchange or produce information or the manner in which that series generates new members. Thus, M1…Mn, though constitutive of a mind and perhaps of something that has an enduring identity in the sense in which a rock does, doesn’t represent anything that has an enduring identity in the distinctive sense in which a human being does.
 
6.0 When minds become selves
 
Let’s revisit, and duly extend, what we said earlier about Smith/M1…Mn. At time t, it will be recalled, that series generates a mental state that embodies a judgment as to the fitness of (some of) the activities by which that series has thus far arrived at judgments. An internal regulatory agency is thereby born.
That agency will inhibit the conversion of impulses into actions. This does not mean that it will simply thwart those impulses. It means that if, once that agency scrutinizes a given impulse, that agency judges it to be one worth acting upon, then it will lift the inhibition. But, for the reasons given in Section 3.3., the aforementioned impulse isn’t the proximal cause of the body-movements that result from the lifting of such an inhibition.
Even before M1…Mn became to any degree self-policing, the activity constituting M1…Mn embodied knowledge, not of some one principle, but of many. So for that activity to become systematically self-policing, it must be guided by a knowledge of many different second-order principles of the sort previously described. But it’s a distinct possibility that not all of those second-order principles will be consistent with one another. As a result, an analogue of the process that led to Smith’s acquiring knowledge of those second-order principles will lead him to acquire knowledge of third order principles, the purpose of which knowledge being to ensure that the totality of second–order principles guiding Smith’s mentation be a coherent one---that those principles not be such that, when complied with, the result is that it is judged de rigueur to lift the inhibition on some impulse and also de rigueur not to lift that inhibition. Second-order principles that don’t fit in with the rest are weeded out; they are no longer countenanced. For the same reason, second-order principles are countenanced that were not previously so. So far as this enterprise is successful, the result is an integrated body of principles, any two of which are consistent with each other, under whose jurisdiction falls all of the activity constitutive of Smith’s decisions as to how to act. So, given the reasonable presumption that, at this stage, none of Smith’s mental activity is purely theoretical, all of it being oriented towards instinct-gratification, this means that this enterprise, so far as it’s successful, yields a single, cohesive regulatory agency under whose jurisdiction all of Smith’s mental activity falls.
 
6.1 Summary
 
Just as group of people who live in the same place don’t become a state until their activities come to fall under the jurisdiction of some regulatory agency, so a group of co-corporeal, informationally integrated thoughts don’t necessarily constitute a self until they all fall under the jurisdiction of a regulatory agency. Before that happens, there are no actions, only reactions; after it happens, there are actions. We finally have an agent and, therefore, a self.
 
7.0 The concept of intrinsic value in relation to the concept of selfhood
 
With the inception of selfhood, values replace desires. Under the growing power of a supervisory structure of the just-discussed kind, the various constituents of that mind become increasingly unified: the structure they form becomes more and more of a self. (Incidentally, a consequence of this last statement, and therefore of our analysis, is that there are degrees of self-hood. This redounds to the credit of our analysis, since selfhood does come in degrees. Though clearly on independent grounds, a justification for it is given later.) Certainly, the initial purpose of this supervisory superstructure was to maximize the amount of instinctual gratification enjoyed by the mind falling within its power. And, surely, that always remains one of its purposes. Indeed, it arguably always remains its primary purpose (though, for reasons I’m about to state, I personally don’t think this).
But that superstructure has needs of its own; and, as that superstructure develops, it becomes increasingly difficult to find an instinctual basis for those needs and increasingly necessary to understand them on their own terms.
 
7.1 Some preliminaries
 
Before we can see what exactly this claim amounts to, or, therefore, why it’s true, we must make preliminary points of a general nature as to the nature of the supervisory agency in which we have claimed the essence of selfhood to lie. There are some impulses that, if acted on, would weaken the integrity of this supervisory agency. Tautologously, this agency, so far as it’s in good working order, will inhibit such impulses. But little harm will come to that agency if it’s too good at its job---if it inhibits impulses that it could, without in any way jeopardizing its own authority, allow to be expressed in action. If that agency is too good at its job---that is, if it’s too conservative, if it inhibits impulses that, erring on the side of caution, it needn’t inhibit—the result will be merely a forfeiture of pleasure; it will not, at least not in the short term (or even the medium term), do any damage to itself or to the structures responsible for the mentation falling in its jurisdiction.
As a result, this supervisory agency comes to be overly restrictive: it disapproves of the disinhibition of impulses that ought to be disinhibited. So far as those inhibited impulses are permitted gratification, it is only on the condition that they assume such forms that, if acted on, consolidate this agency’s power over the course of mental activity falling into its jurisdiction. In some cases, it is possible for those impulses to assume such forms. (This is what Freud referred to as “sublimation.” My aggressive instincts are discharged by my writing treatises that aggressively critique the views of my colleagues.) In other cases, this is not possible. This leads to what Freud calls “neurosis”: an inhibition of impulses that cannot be discharged in ways that are in keeping with one’s values but that, because they are so strong, must come out in some way or other and are forced to be expressed as symptoms. Since symptoms are unintentional, neurosis involves an abridgment of agency. One would have been better off yielding to the impulse and discharging it agentially, instead of forcing to find non-agential ways of discharging itself. (Freud makes this point in his (1926) book Symptoms, Inhibitions, and Anxiety. As he puts it: somebody riding a horse must sometimes let the horse go where it wants to go, lest the horse cease to let the rider have any control over it.)
 
7.2 Two Illustrations of Our Thesis that what is Valuable is what consolidates one's Agency
 
Illustration #1: We see Bach’s music as being more valuable than Eminem’s. (Eminem is a pop-star.) Why? First of all, the enjoyment of Eminem’s music is easily traced back, by way of multiple pathways, to enjoyment of the sexual act, it being largely for that reason that we enjoy Eminem’s music. By contrast, it is not because of any obvious connection that Bach’s music has to the sexual act that we enjoy it. The pleasure Bach’s music gives us is more akin to the pleasure given us by a philosophical or mathematical insight than it is to the (sub-agential) pleasures given to us by the sexual act. Implicated in the experience of listening to Bach’s music, and largely constitutive of the pleasure it brings us, are ratiocinative abilities that have no obvious connection to sexual gratification, or to any other form of instinctual gratification, and that do have obvious connections to the rational operations on which the supervisory agency in question depends to consolidate and extend the hegemony it has over the course of mental activity. Bach’s music is studied in conservatories; it is performed in places (e.g., concert-halls) where the operative norms of conduct require tremendous self-restraint---where one has to sit still for hours on end, where one must speak to others in a very controlled manner, and where one must display all of the asceticism involved in the transformation of instinct-driven proto-humans into instinct-suppressing actual humans.
When people say that Eminem’s music is as highly “valued” as Bach’s, so far as what they are saying is true, they are saying in a distorted way that Eminem’s music is liked as much as Bach’s. And there’s no doubt that (at this juncture in history) there are more Eminem fans than there are Bach fans (that said, pop-stars are seldom liked solely for the merits of their music); and it may be that, during its brief recess from oblivion, Eminem’s music is a source of more pleasure (not pleasure per capita, but aggregate pleasure) than Bach’s music. But, in saying that Eminem’s music is more highly valued than Bach’s, one is confusing the concept of pleasure, and the related concept of desire, with the very different concept of value.
Illustration #2: People enjoy reading (and writing) philosophical treatises. To become capable of this sort of enjoyment, one must alter one’s psychological structure in non-trivial ways. In order to pull off the remodeling of one’s intellect needed to become at all adept at this discipline, or therefore to derive any enjoyment from it, one must suspend gratification of urges that one would otherwise gratify, and one must do so without having any firm assurance that, in due course, one will be able to enjoy gratifications as intense as those that one has foregone. Because it takes a long time to acquire the philosophical acumen needed to make the reading, let alone the writing, of philosophical works more pleasurable than painful, and because during that long period otherwise fecund sources of instinctual gratification are off-limits, one must, if one has chosen to acquire that degree of acumen, develop a certain asceticism. One must come to devalue (some forms of) instinctual gratification and to hyper-value the self-control that comes with becoming capable of suspending instinctual gratification.
This is not to say that the enjoyment of philosophical discourse has no instinctual foundation. Like Nietzsche, I believe that the enjoyment one derives from the exercise of one’s intellect is a form, or at least a derivative, of the instinctual pleasure one receives from having power over others and acting aggressively towards them. But, supposing this correct, the way in which, by virtue of engaging in philosophical discourse, one discharges these primitive impulses is contingent on one’s exercising faculties that, being purely ratiocinative, are much less directly connected with instinct-gratification than they are with the inhibitions of instinct so essential to the existence, and to the consolidation, of the supervisory agency in which the essence of selfhood lies.
The same point mutatis mutandis holds of the pleasure one derives from very sophisticated forms of music. Bach’s music is passionate, and the passion embodied in it arguably has a sexual basis. But Bach’s music expresses that passion in an extremely controlled and ratiocination-heavy manner; and the faculty underlying the ratiocinative component of Bach’s music is one and the same with the faculty underlying the instinct-inhibitory ratiocinations constitutive of the regulatory agency that is one’s self.
 
7.3 Selfhood a matter of degree
 
Some minds are more intact than others. In this respect, minds are like nations. The official government of Pakistan has uncontested control over some areas and only little or no control over others. Thus, the landmass coincident with the nation of Pakistan is less unified than it would be if the loyalties of its occupants weren’t fragmented by the para-governmental agencies that occupy it. By contrast, the landmass coincident with the continental United States can be said to fall under the more or less uncontested jurisdiction of some one government, the same being true of the discontinuous landmass that is formed when Hawaii and Alaska are added. Therefore, the landmass coincident with the U.S. is more of a nation than the landmass coincident with Pakistan. Thus, nationhood comes in degrees. x is more of a nation than y if x’s government does a better job than y’s government of unifying the occupants of the landmass falling in its jurisdiction.
It is for similar reasons that one mind can be more of a self than another. If the regulatory agency governing mind x has more scope and power than its counterpart in mind y, then x is more of a self than y.
That our analysis has the consequences that self-hood isn’t equally distributed among minds is to its credit. People’s selves disintegrate. And there are degrees of integratedness (i.e., of non-disintegratedness), as everyday experience makes obvious and as clinical observation of the mentally ill makes even more obvious.
 
Kant’s Ethics 


 
Kant’s Ethics
J.-M. Kuczynski, PhD
 
 
1.1      Kant’s two categorical imperatives
1.2      The fallacy embodied in Kant’s search for a categorical imperative
1.3      Another Kantian blunder: his failure to distinguish the good from the praiseworthy
1.3.1      Another Kantian blunder: his failure to distinguish the good from the praiseworthy (continued)
1.4      Kant’s argument as to why morality and self-interest coalesce (KA)
1.5      Why Kant’s attempt to connect morality and self-interest is not a complete failure
1.6      Rationality vs. autonomy, practical vs. theoretical reason
 
Immanuel Kant was a great epistemologist and also a great ethicist. Unfortunately, his insights are often embedded in confusion, and it isn’t always easy to separate what is of value in his work from what isn’t. This is especially so where his views on ethics are concerned, as we’re about to see.
Kant held that it is categorically in one’s interest to act ethically and, therefore, that morality and self-interest coincide. To understand Kant’s theory as to why this is so, we must know what Kant believes morality to be. Kant puts forth two theories of morality. According to the first, an act is moral just in case, were everyone else to act similarly, that act would not be self-defeating. According to the second, an act is moral to the extent that it embodies a respect for people’s autonomy. Autonomy is self-determination, and for a person to be autonomous is for him, not someone else, to decide how he’ll live. The opposite of autonomy is “heteronomy.” Somebody is heteronomous to the extent that others decide how he lives. Thus, according to Kant’s second ethical theory, autonomy-conducive acts are good and heteronomy-conducive acts are bad.
Kant believes these two positions to be equivalent. He’s wrong. One can respect other people’s autonomy without acting in such a way that, were everyone else to act similarly, one’s act would be self-defeating. Because it wrongly assumes otherwise, Kant’s attempt to link morality with self-interest fails.
 
1.1 Kant’s two categorical imperatives
 
A categorical imperative is a rule that one should follow no matter what. (“Imperative” means “command” or “rule,” and “categorical” means “unconditional.”) Kant asked:
 
(ACI[1]) Are there any categorical imperatives?
 
He said “yes.” Before we can say whether he was right, we must point out that there are three distinct questions that ACI can reasonably be seen as asking:
 
(1) Are there any moral rules that one simply should follow?
(2) Are there any rules of any kind at all that one simply should follow?
3) Are there any moral rules that hold without exception? In other words, supposing that one’s intention is to be moral, are there any moral rules that one must follow under any circumstances?
 
The answer to (1) seems to be “no.” The statement:
 
(a) “One should refrain from committing immoral acts”
 
is ambiguous between:
 
(b) “One should act morally if one’s objective is to act morally,”
 
and
 
(c) “One should act morally, even if it it’s in one’s interest not to do so.”
 
(a) expresses a hypothetical imperative. (It’s also utterly vacant.) And (b) is clearly false.
In general, what one should do depends on what one’s intentions are. Therefore (1) is false. Similar reasoning shows that (2) is false.
Is (3) correct? Yes. One has a categorical moral obligation, I should think, to refrain from obliterating all life. And, of course, one has a categorical moral obligation to act morally.
But are there any categorical moral imperatives that, unlike the two just mentioned, aren’t utterly trivial? Kant said “yes.” And he identified what he believed to be two non-trivial categorical imperatives:
 
(CI1) An act is moral if it wouldn’t be self-defeating were everyone else to act similarly
 
and
 
(CI2) An act is wrong if it’s a case of treating a person as an object, not a subject, and an act is right if it’s a case of treating a person as a subject not an object.
 
CI2 doesn’t need much of an explanation. It’s obviously wrong to undermine another person’s autonomy. And, although it may well be right to undermine one person’s autonomy to preserve the autonomy of a million others, that doesn’t really redound to the discredit of CI2.
The idea behind CI1 is that, given any bad act x, if everybody did x, nobody could successfully pull x off. It be pointless to lie in a world where everybody lied, since nobody would believe anybody. It would be pointless to try to steal in a world where everyone was a thief, since everyone would go out of their way to make their possessions utterly theft-proof.
Kant thinks that CI1 and CI2 are equivalent. An act is one of using somebody else, Kant believes, if it would be self-defeating in a world where everybody acted that way, and an act is one of not using somebody else if it wouldn’t be self-defeating in such a world.
One can see why one would think this. In a world where everyone was constantly trying to con (or otherwise use) everyone, everyone would be on their guard, making it impossible, so one might infer, for anyone to con (or otherwise use) anyone.
But CI1 and CI2 are not equivalent. First of all, people could use people in a world where everybody was a user. In a world of con-men, the smart con-men could con the not so smart con-men.
In addition to showing that CI1 and CI2 are not equivalent, this shows that CI1 is wrong. Though obviously morally bad, acts of con-artistry wouldn’t necessarily be self-defeating in a world of con-artists. By the same token, there are morally good forms of conduct that, if engaged in universally, couldn’t be successfully carried out. Physicians heal people; healing people is good. But nobody could successfully practice medicine in a world of physicians. Who would grow crops, build roads, enforce the law, and so on?
 
1.2 The fallacy embodied in Kant’s search for a categorical imperative
 
A story will expose a confusion that vitiates Kant’s ethical system. You are friends with Smith. Smith has money. You don’t.
Your children need medication. If they don’t get it right away, they’ll die. Smith is a genuinely well meaning person who doesn’t want your children to die. But (for some reason or other) it’s impossible for him to lend you the money.  The only way for you to get it is to steal it from him.  There truly are no other alternatives. You have exactly two choices: (1) Steal from Smith. (2) Let your children die. You choose to steal from Smith. The result: your children live, and Smith is bankrupt. You obviously did the right thing. Lost money can be regained. Lost life cannot. You don’t regret making this choice. But you do regret having to make it. Smith is a good guy, and you really wish you hadn’t had to steal from him.
Does this scenario show that there are exceptions to the principles that stealing is wrong? No.[2] Stealing from Smith is the lesser of two evils. It’s obvious that, under the circumstances, the right thing to do was to steal the money. But in some cases the “right” thing to do is merely the least wrong thing to do; and this is one of those cases.
Thus, the principle that stealing is wrong does hold categorically. But this doesn’t mean that you should never steal. What it means is that, although you have an obligation—a categorical obligation—not to steal, you have an even stronger obligation not to let your children die. A moral principle outweighed is not a moral principle extinguished. There are many categorical moral obligations. Lying, cheating, stealing, manipulating, wounding—these are all bad things. They are things that are categorically bad. But oftentimes these bad things are the lesser of two evils. Torture is wrong. But it’s more wrong to allow a nuclear device to be detonated in the middle of a city. The circumstances being what they are, torturing one person may be far less wrong than the alternative (namely, letting many innocents die).
Suppose that, by virtue of the fact that you had to steal from Smith to save your children, you ceased to have any obligation not to steal from Smith. In that case, any remorse you felt as a result of stealing from him would have no objective basis. It would be the emotional counterpart of a hallucination. But, under the circumstances, it would be monstrous of you to feel no remorse at stealing from Smith. Of course, your choosing not to steal from him would have been far more monstrous, that being why, under the circumstances, the right thing to do was to steal. That said, it’s appropriate that you feel some remorse at having depleted Smith’s lifesavings. The reason for this is that, even though your obligation to save your children was far stronger than your obligation not to steal from Smith, the latter obligation did not cease to exist. It was merely outweighed. This suggests that the obligation not to steal does hold categorically. In contexts where it appears not to hold, it does hold, but is outweighed by some other, stronger obligation. Presumably, the obligation not to kill innocent people is one that holds categorically, even though there are circumstances (e.g., ones where, in order to save a hundred innocent people, one must kill two innocent people) where it can be overridden.
Bearing these points in mind, let’s reconsider Kant’s two categorical imperatives:
 
(CI1) Never commit an act that would be self-defeating if performed generally.
(CI2) Always treat people as subjects, never as objects; in other words, respect other people’s autonomy, without fail.
 
CI1 entails that one should never lie—even if one must do so to save a hundred people.
CI2 entails that one must never manipulate anyone—even if one must do so to prevent a nuclear bomb from going off in a crowded city.
The fact that Kant’s ethical system has these consequences definitively shows that it is false. The nearest thing to Kant’s ethical system that isn’t obviously false is this:
 
(CI2*) Although it’s categorically wrong to treat people as objects, there are circumstances where one’s obligation not to treat one person as an object is outweighed by some other obligation (e.g., by one’s obligation not to allow ten million people to die).
 
1.3    Another Kantian blunder: his failure to distinguish the good from the praiseworthy
 
Kant held that nothing other than a “good will” has any moral value. By a “good will” he meant an intention to follow “the moral law.” By “the moral law” Kant meant CI2. Here is Kant’s reasoning:
 
(KR) An intention to do good cannot possibly be bad. Of course, an intention to do good can have bad effects. Sincerely intending to save the children, you feed them X, which is lethal, genuinely believing that it’s Y, which is nutritious. But in and of itself your intention to do good is utterly beyond reproach.
But anything other than an intention to do good can be bad. A cool-headed, intelligent villain is that much more diabolical than a hysterical, unintelligent one. A wealthy, healthy villain is that much worse than a poor, sickly one. It is only if good people have them that intelligence, self-control, wealth, and health are good things. This means that those things are not inherently good.
There is ultimately but one moral law, namely: respect other people’s autonomy. It follows that anything other than an intention to treat people as subjects, as opposed to objects, lacks any inherent moral worth.
 
It might be that, unless lobotomized, a certain villain will use his formidable cognitive powers to do harm. But surely lobotomizing someone is, at best, the lesser of two evils. This shows that, although a villain’s intelligence is inherently good, the existence of that inherent good may be incompatible with the some other, far greater inherent good. If, supposing that he isn’t lobotomized, that criminal will kill millions of people, many of them intelligent, then one inherent good (saving the lives, and a fortiori the intellects, of millions of people) outweighs some other inherent good (preserving the intellect of some one person).
Imagine the following. Brown is a happy two year old infant. Brown didn’t have to work for his happiness. He just happens to be happy. Question: Does Brown’s happiness have moral value? Yes. Obviously. That’s why it would be wrong to make Brown unhappy. Second question: Does Brown deserve praise for being happy? No. His happiness, though morally good, isn’t commendable. Many things that are morally good are not commendable. This point is clarified and defended in my book Sections 3.0–4.0 of my book Ethics.
In addition to being false, Kant’s position is self-undermining. It would make no sense at all to say (a) that autonomy isn’t inherently good, while also saying (b) that an intention to respect autonomy is inherently good. So if Kant is right to think it inherently good to intend to respect autonomy, then autonomy must itself be inherently good. But in that case, Kant is ipso facto wrong to think that there is nothing inherently good other than an intention to respect autonomy. Which is not to mention that the intelligence of a villain is indistinguishable from his autonomy: take his intellect away, and you take away a good part of his autonomy, if not the entirety of it.
 
1.3.1   Another Kantian blunder: his failure to distinguish the good from the praiseworthy (continued)
 
A brief detour through the philosophy of law will help us identify the blunders in Kant’s reasoning that underlie his ghastly view that nothing other than a good will has any inherent worth.
In his (1977) article “Is law a system of rules?” Ronald Dworkin (1931–) made the profound point that moral principles1 have a “dimension of weight,” whereas legal statutes do not. There aren’t degrees of legality. An act is either legal or it isn’t. Laws either hold or they don’t. Of course, some laws are hedged with exception clauses. (“Killing is illegal—unless done in self-defense.”) But given a duly hedged law, one is either in violation of it or one is not in violation of it. Legality is binary.
By contrast, morality is not binary. I have a professional and ethical responsibility to teach class on Tuesday. But I also promised a friend that I’d meet him for lunch. (When making that promise, I forgot that I had to teach.) I can’t cancel the lunch-date. (I have no way of reaching my friend.) Presumably, my obligation to teach outweighs my obligation to keep my lunch-date with my friend. Each obligation has some weight; but one of them has more weight than the other. I still have an obligation to meet my friend. But I can’t fulfill that obligation without shirking some greater obligation. But I still have that obligation. That’s why, in standing my friend up, I’m behaving in a decidedly substandard way.
Kant evidently thought that, just like legal statutes, moral laws are binary: a given law either holds or it doesn’t. Kant was wrong. Moral laws, unlike legal statutes, can have varying degrees of relevance.
 
1.4 Kant’s argument as to why morality and self-interest coalesce (KA)
 
(KA)We have value to the extent that we are rational. We’re better than chipmunks and jellyfish to the extent that we are rational and they are not. (If chipmunks were to become rational and we were to become irrational, they’d have more value than we would.) Thus, so far as we subvert our own rationality, we undermine ourselves. Given an immoral act, the very idea of a world in which everyone committed that act is an incoherent one. It follows that immoral acts themselves are incoherent and, therefore, irrational. Since irrationality is self-undermining, and so is immorality; and it’s thus inherently in one’s interest to be moral.
 
This argument involves a massive non-sequitur. Kant says that the very idea of a world in which everybody lies and in which people still benefit from lying is an incoherent one. He concludes from this that in our world one is acting incoherently in lying. But this doesn’t follow. Whether an act is rational in a given situation depends on how that situation is. Other situations are irrelevant. Whether an act is rational in our world depends on how our world is. In our world, a person’s lying doesn’t entail that everyone else lies; nor is a person’s lying necessarily self-defeating for some other reason.
Kant was an exceptionally brilliant man. So why did he commit this ghastly logical faux pas? A story will help us answer this question. Smith is an auto mechanic who, being self-taught, relies entirely on rules of thumb. He doesn’t know general principles of engineering and must deal with each car on a case by case basis. Given a car problem, Smith can’t bring general principles to bear on it, and it is only by becoming intimately familiar with the idiosyncrasies of the car in question that he can figure out what is wrong with it.
Let’s contrast Smith with that paragon of rationality, Isaac Newton. Newton could understand a certain phenomenon (e.g., a certain planet’s orbiting in a certain manner around a certain star) in terms of general principles. This was why Newton, unlike his predecessors, was able to see that the tides were to be explained in terms of the same physical principles as the trajectory of a cannonball and that both were to be explained in terms of the same principles as the orbiting of the Earth around the Sun. So far as he was able to see such inner similarities between apparently different situations, Newton was able to discern the real structure of the world and was, to that extent, genuinely rational. By the same token, in failing to understand particulars in terms of universals, Smith is failing to see the real structure of the world and is thus failing to be rational. This suggests that thought is rational to the extent that it is driven by a knowledge of principles that can be universalized—that is, that hold generally and aren’t context-specific.
Given these very reasonable points, all of which the present author accepts, Kant infers that an act is rational to the extent that it is driven by principles that can be universalized. The principle that underlies a lie—viz. I can tell a lie and benefit from it—isn’t one that can be universalized and for that  reason, Kant believes, isn’t rational. So by lying, thinks Kant, one is making oneself less like Newton and more like Smith, and one is therefore diminishing oneself.
So far as this argument appears probative, it is because the term “universalizable” is being used in an equivocal manner. Let us suppose that, from every standpoint other than a purely ethical one, my lying to Larry is the right move. I’ve figured out the relative weights of the various pros and cons, and factored them into an accurate and honest appraisal of my own objectives. Let’s go even further and suppose that the reasoning that goes into my decision to tell this lie is driven by a thorough understanding of general principles. In this context, we are in effect supposing, I am a Newton, not a Smith.
Under these circumstances, the principle governing my act is universalizable in one sense and non-universalizable in another. It’s non-universalizable in the sense that it shouldn’t be universalized. But it is universalizable in the sense that, like Newton’s reasoning and unlike Smith’s, it’s guided by an understanding of principles that hold generally. Given only what we’ve said, we have no choice but to see Kant as having utterly failed in his attempt to link morality and self-interest.
 
1.5 Why Kant’s attempt to connect morality and self-interest is not a complete failure
 
But that attempt was by no means a failure. The principles driving that attempt are accurate and profound ones. He just wasn’t putting those worthy principles to good use in this particular context. But Kant has real insight into the nature of rationality and autonomy and into their relationship to morality; and so far as there is a connection between rationality and autonomy, on the one hand, and morality, on the other, it is, I believe, to be understood in Kantian terms.
The essence of Kant’s ethics is generally seen as lying in his contention that:
 
(CI1) An act is moral if it wouldn’t be self-defeating were everyone else to act similarly.
 
CI1 is false, and Kant’s ethics is a failure if CI1 is the core of it. But the real essence of Kant’s ethics lies, not in CI1, but in his contention that:
 
(CI2*[3]) An act is good to the extent that it’s autonomy-conducive and bad to the extent that it’s heteronomy-conducive.
 
If it isn’t outright correct, CI2 is a very good approximation to the truth. It is morally acceptable to undermine a given person’s autonomy only to the extent that doing so is necessary to prevent some greater violation of autonomy. Thus, we consider it morally appropriate to attack or kill somebody only to the extent that, by doing so, we’re protecting somebody else’s autonomy—for example, our own or that of our loved ones. And although we consider it morally acceptable to micromanage the lives of children and thus to encroach on their autonomy, we hold this only because we feel that, were we not to do this, our children would fail to develop their autonomy. They’d become undisciplined slobs who, having no self-control, lacked autonomy.
By the same token, protecting a given person’s autonomy is wrong only to the extent that doing so leads to some greater violation of autonomy. We put people in jail and thus violate their autonomy. But so far as this is justified, it’s because, were we not to do so, those criminals, and those who followed in their footsteps, would be responsible for even greater violations of autonomy.
Thus, just as CI2* says, an act is moral to the extent that it is autonomy-conductive and immoral to the extent that it is heteronomy-conducive. Given how intuitive CI2* is, it’s easy to see how an acceptance of it could be an ethicist’s starting point; and given how well it fits the data, it’s easy to see how it could be an ethicist’s finishing point. But given how contrived CI1 is, there’s no real chance that it could be an ethicist’s starting point; and given how wrong it is, it’s unlikely to be an ethicist’s finishing point.
Taken collectively, these points suggests that CI2* was Kant’s starting point and that, so far as he accepted CI1, it wasn’t really because he believed it, but because, for some reason internal to the mechanics of his theory, he felt he had to accept it. This analysis is substantiated by the fact that, despite his gargantuan intellect, saw CI1 and CI2* as being equivalent, even though they very clearly are not.
All of these facts fall into place when we remember that, in Kant’s view, what gives us value is our rationality. Our rationality is what makes us better than animals. It is what makes us human. It is what makes us what we are. This suggests that, in Kant’s view, rationality is the greatest good. How is this to be reconciled with Kant’s belief that goodness is identical with autonomy-conduciveness and badness is identical with heteronomy-conduciveness?
 
1.6 Rationality vs. autonomy, practical vs. theoretical reason
 
The answer lies in the fact that Kant believes that rationality is autonomy. There is much to be said for this position, as we’ll now see.
First of all, what do the terms “rationality” and “autonomy” mean? To be autonomous is to decide for oneself what to do and how to live. A creature that can’t make decisions can’t be autonomous. To be rational is to regulate one’s own thought processes in accordance with logical norms. Thus, to be autonomous is to decide for oneself how to live, and to be rational is to decide for oneself how to think.
“But couldn’t one be irrational,” one might ask, “and still decide for oneself how to think? Couldn’t one learn all the relevant logical norms, and make a decision not to comply with them in one’s thinking? To be sure, it isn’t likely that one would do this. But isn’t it at least a theoretical possibility? And given that it is, doesn’t it follow that your definition of “rationality” is wrong?”
In order to carry out such a program, one’s thinking would have to be rational. In any given situation, one would, by the objector’s own terms, (a) have to figure out what the rational thing to think was, and (b) decide not to think it. And the first part, at least, would involve being rational. The second part, admittedly, wouldn’t be rational—if one knows that the right conclusion to draw is Q, but one infers not-Q instead, one isn’t being rational. But in the case of the person just described, that irrationality would be parasitic on an existing rationality.
Also, if somebody knowingly draws the wrong inference, one is “irrational” in a different way from somebody who fails to see what the right inference is to begin with. The second sort of irrationality is purely cognitive. The first has to do with the relationship between cognition and action. The one has to do with what philosophers sometimes refer to as theoretical reason; the other has to do with what philosophers call practical reason. Theoretical reason has to do only with the drawing of inferences; it has nothing to do with the choices that one makes on the basis of one’s inferences. The degree to which one is “theoretically reasonable” is a function only of the degree to which one draws the right inferences, it being irrelevant what one decides to do on the basis of those inferences. Practical reason has to do with the relationship between the inferences one draws, on the one hand, and the intentions in which they eventuate, on the other.[4]
Given this, suppose that Smith decides to live the sort of life described by the objector. In other words, Smith has resolved that he’ll always conclude the opposite of what the norms of good reasoning require him to conclude. This means that, in any given context, he’ll (a) figure out what, given the relevant data, the right conclusion to draw is, and (b) having figured that out, he’ll take it upon himself to draw the opposite inference.
Smith is a paragon of a theoretically reasonable person: by hypothesis, Smith’s reasoning is impeccable, at least to the extent that he’s successful in his efforts to carry out his agenda. So far as Smith is irrational, it’s because of what he decides to do with the correct inferences that he’s irrational. To be sure, what he decides to do with those inferences is have a belief—it isn’t to do anything overt, like go for a bike ride or have a beer. But it’s still, in the relevant sense, an action. So Smith is rational, at least insofar as rationality has to do with reasoning. So far as he’s irrational, it is in the practical, not the theoretical, sense. Thus, we don’t have in Smith a counterexample to the principle that to be rational is to decide for oneself how to think.
“Very well,” one might retort. “Contrast Smith’s case with Brown’s. Brown skips the first part of Smith’s two-step approach. Brown resolves one day that, in any given context, he won’t figure out what the right inference to draw is. Smith first figures out what he, given the available data along with the relevant logical norms, ought to believe. Having done that, he resolves to believe the opposite. But Brown skips the first part. He has resolved just to let his beliefs arise spontaneously and, therefore, not to be responsive, even in a negative way, to the demands of canons of logic. It’s a datum that, so far as he carries out this plan, Brown’s thoughts aren’t rational. (They may be correct. But, being entirely reflexive, they aren’t rational.) But it’s also a datum that Brown has decided for himself how to think. This straightforwardly shows that you are wrong to say that to be rational is to decide for oneself how to think.
But Brown has decided for himself what to think in the sense that he’s decided not to decide for himself what to think. He has decided that, henceforth, he won’t decide for himself what to think. Once he gives himself over to that life-course, he is ex hypothesi no longer rational. Therefore, we don’t have in Brown a real counterexample to our analysis.
Basically, deciding for oneself how to think always involves regulating one’s thoughts in accordance with norms. Even if one picks the wrong norms—even if one decides not to go with modus ponens, modus tollens, etc. and to go with other, spurious forms of inference—one’s correctly applying these spurious forms of inference itself involves one’s having non-spurious beliefs as to how they apply to the data at one’s disposal. So given somebody who decides to think in accordance with the wrong principles, he can carry out his agenda only to the extent that he correctly sees how those principles bear on the data and, therefore, only to the extent that he is rational.
No matter how you slice it, rationality is intellectual autonomy. In other words, to be rational is to decide for oneself how to think.
Let’s compare rationality with autonomy. To be autonomous, I have said, is to live as one chooses. One’s being autonomous, I propose, is the same thing as one’s deciding what to do on the basis of norms that one has adopted. A good way to see why this is (I believe) the right approach is to consider an obvious objection to it:
 
(NSG[5]) Your analysis is definitely wrong. Consider the case of Williams. Williams has decided that he’ll do whatever he wants to do. He won’t examine his actions, or the intentions behind them, in light of norms. He’ll just act. But he’s autonomous. That’s a datum. After all, he’s deciding for himself how to live.
 
Here’s why this is off the mark. To the extent that Smith carries out his agenda, he isn’t deciding anything at all. True—it is indeed a decision on his part that initiates his entry into a life of the sort described (viz. one in which he just does what he wants, never bothering to assess the consistency of his desires with norms of any sort). But once he’s in that life, he isn’t choosing anything at all. A creature that doesn’t deliberate doesn’t decide anything. It just acts. And a creature that deliberates is ipso facto one that is trying to act on intentions that are in compliance with some set of norms.
Do dogs make choices?[6] Obviously dogs have intentions. (The dog intends to get to the ball before the other dog. That’s why it’s running so frantically.) But it seems wrong to say that dogs “choose” (or “decide”). Dogs don’t deliberate. They just react. The dog sees red meat: he pounces on it. He sees his brutal master: he cringes. The dog’s life is a series of programmed and therefore compulsive reactions to immediate stimuli. The dog doesn’t call the shots; these hardwired reaction protocols call the shots for him, and it therefore doesn’t make choices. Only creatures that deliberate make choices. Sub-rational[7] creatures don’t make choices. Non-rational creatures don’t act; they react.
Rational creatures don’t just react. Their responses to situations are considered. That doesn’t mean that they deliberate before every act. (Nor should they, since a life spent deliberating would be one of “analysis paralysis”—of over-thinking what one should do and therefore never doing anything. It’s therefore irrational to deliberate too much. It’s irrational to be too rational![8]) But their responses to situations are guided by choices that they’ve made, and those choices result from prior deliberations on their part. I see an ice-cold beer in the fridge. Were I to react instinctively, I’d drink it. But long ago I made a choice to live a certain way (to be an author and, therefore, to avoid things, such as getting drunk in the morning, that would make it hard for me to ply my trade), and my instantaneous decision not to drink it reflects that choice. So even though I don’t deliberate, my act (of refraining from drinking the beer) is the embodiment of prior deliberation on its part. The dog’s reactions, by contrast, do not reflect previously made life choices.
One last point before we close the argument: given a set of norms that one has decided to comply with, it’s not always obvious how to comply with them. In such cases, thought is needed to know how it is that, given those norms, one ought to act in a given situation if one is to comply with those norms. And even in cases where it is obvious how to comply with those norms, it’s obviously only to the extent that the right judgments come naturally to one. Thus, a prerequisite for practical rationality—that is, for autonomy—is theoretical rationality.
We can now say how rationality and autonomy are related. To be rational is to regulate one’s thinking in accordance with norms. To be autonomous is to regulate one’s actions in accordance with norms. The latter is a special case of the former, since, as we just saw, one’s thinking must be appropriately norm-driven if one is to know how which actions on one’s part will be incompliance with the norms of conduct one has adopted. Thus, rationality and autonomy are the same thing—or, rather, autonomy is a special case of rationality. Rationality is intellectual autonomy, and autonomy is practical rationality. So rationality is autonomy. A creature can make decisions only to the extent that it is autonomous and, therefore, rational. (Non-rational/nonautonomous creatures have intentions. But they don’t make choices. They don’t deliberate. They just react.)
A creature that doesn’t make decisions isn’t an agent, at least not in the sense in which you and I are. It doesn’t form its own intentions. Its intentions result from a convergence of factors (its innate and acquired psychological and physiological structure, its past experiences, the present context). But it doesn’t form them. Its intentions are formed in an impersonal way. An autonomous being forms its own intentions. So an autonomous being is responsible for its intentions and, therefore, for the acts to which they lead. By contrast, a sub-rational, non-autonomous creature is responsible only for its actions. The intentions of a non-autonomous creatures are not the results of agency. Agency, for the non-autonomous, begins with intentions, but doesn’t itself generate them. For the autonomous, on the other hand, agency is itself responsible for intentions. Words like “agent,” “agency,” etc. are ambiguous; and words like “subject” (as in, “he is a human subject”) are correspondingly ambiguous. In one sense, dogs and infants are agents. In another, they are not. Which is why we don’t hold 3-year olds criminally responsible for their acts. Two-year olds are agents in a sense of the word, but not in the same, robust sense in which you and I are agents. Words like “subject” (as in, “he is a human subject”) are correspondingly ambiguous. For the reasons just given, agency in this more robust sense is identical with rationality and, therefore, with autonomy; and agency in this sense is identical with moral responsibility. Respect for a person’s autonomy is therefore nothing other than respect for his agency and thus for his very existence, to the extent as he is, in the robust sense of the word, a subject.
Contrary to what Kant tries to show, none of this entails that one’s own welfare necessarily involves one’s respecting other people’s autonomy (rationality/agency/subjecthood). But it shows that one’s welfare depends on, if it isn’t identical with, one’s being moral to oneself—on one’s not encroaching on one’s own autonomy. It also shows that ethical responsibility and agency are coeval with rationality and autonomy. In any case, Kant’s attempt to identify morality with self-interest, though not itself a success, is driven by a cogent analysis of the nature of agency and its connection to rationality and morality.
 
 



________________


[1].   “ACI” is short for “are there any categorical imperatives?”
[2].   See my book Ethics, Sections 6.0–6.3 for a discussion of the principle underlying the viewpoint now being put forth.
[3].   The asterisk is meant to indicate that I’m not using the same wording as before.
[4].   Kant wrote a book titled The Critique of Pure Reason and one titled The Critique of Practical Reason. Few, if any, did as much to elucidate this distinction as Kant. Aristotle was also aware of the distinction and did much to elucidate it. In my judgment, Kant and Aristotle are, ultimately, the best ethicists of all time. (I doubt I’m alone in this judgment.) It’s no accident that the ethical systems of these two ethicists, unlike those of most (if not all) others, were efforts to validate the assumption that rationality and morality are, in some way or other, coincident. Harry Frankfurt is another such ethicist (and, in my judgment, his work is, partly for that reason, uniquely valuable).
[5].   “NSG” is short of “no self-government.”
[6].   This section presupposes that dogs aren’t rational. If they are, then pretend that I’m talking about some other, less gifted sort of animal.
[7].   It seems wrong to describe animals as “irrational.” The way in which a chipmunk’s mind falls short of rationality isn’t comparable to the way done so by the mind of an otherwise rational human being in the grips of a psychotic break. The latter’s basic condition is one of rationality but his current condition is not one of rationality. But a chipmunk’s failure to be rational is its basic condition, and isn’t one of illness. The otherwise rational, but currently psychotic, person is said to be “irrational.” We’d make that word ambiguous were we to use it to describe the chipmunk. So I’ll describe chipmunks, and other such things, as “sub-rational.”
[8].   Psychoanalysts say that one often engages in “intellectualization” so as to escape from what is really bothering one and so as to facilitate one’s ability to continue to deal with it in a neurotic, self-defeating way.




The empirical sciences make assumptions that they are not themselves capable of justifying. Philosophy justifies those assumptions; that is its job.
 
 
Philosophical Knowledge
 
What it is and why philosophy-departments don't want you to have it
J.-M. Kuczynski
 
Philosophy as providing the justification for the empirically unjustifiable assumptions on which empirical science depends
2.0   The main confusion underlying empiricism
3.0 Why the claim that there is no such thing as philosophical truth is self-defeating
3.1 What philosophers agree about
3.2 What philosophers don't agree about
4.0 How Psychological and Sociological Factors Thwart Philosophical Progress
Philosophy as providing the justification for the empirically unjustifiable assumptions on which empirical science depends
 
       An empirical[1] discipline is one whose findings, when justified, are justified by their consistency with sensory observation. Biology is an empirical discipline; so is physics.
      Any given empirical discipline makes assumptions that cannot be justified by that discipline or, indeed, by any empirical discipline. For example, when investigating the external world, and thus when doing physics or biology, one must assume that one’s senses give one accurate information about it.  For if our sensory experiences turned out to be hallucinations, then any hypotheses based thereupon would be spurious.
       But this assumption cannot itself be given an empirical justification. More plainly, observation cannot tell you that it itself is a source of accurate information. Witnesses cannot self-corroborate. Thus, a physicist could not coherently attempt to provide experimental support for his belief that his senses are accurate. For it is only through his senses that he can know whether those experiments were even conducted, as opposed to merely dreamt, or what their outcomes were, supposing that they were in fact conducted.
     Of course, to the extent that we are able to determine to what degree, if any, this or that particular sensory experience is veridical, we do so on the basis of other sensory experiences. But when judging that, last night at 4:00 am (sleep-time), I wasn’t really in the presence of a talking cow, I am assuming the veridicality of the experiences with which my cow-experiences fail to cohere. In general our sensory experiences can provide only a relative justification for the judgments we make about this or that specific perception: relative to the assumption that those experiences are typically accurate, inferences can be made as to the degree of accuracy of this or that particular perception. But we cannot legitimately assume that our sense perceptions are accurate when trying to show that sense-perception is a legitimate source of information about the external world. 
       So, since the hypotheses generated by physics are based on sensory experiences, and therefore presuppose that such experiences are typically accurate, physics cannot possibly justify that presupposition, and neither, for the very same reason, can any other empirical discipline. Therefore, unless that presupposition can be justified, we know nothing about the external world, and, as a result, all of the empirical sciences crumble. It is the task, not of the scientist, but of the meta-scientist---of the philosopher, in other words---to provide that justification. 
      The assumption that our senses are a viable source of information about the external world is but one of many assumptions on which empirical knowledge rests but for which no empirical justification can be provided and for which, therefore, a philosophical justification must be provided. It is the purpose of this book to identify the most important of these assumptions and to provide the requisite philosophical justifications for them.
 
2.0   The main confusion underlying empiricism   
 
        Philosophy is regarded with more suspicion than most other disciplines.  One reason for this is that it is a non-empirical discipline.  But that is not the only reason. Mathematics is a non-empirical discipline. But it isn’t regarded with suspicion. Why this double standard?
       First of all, because of the close connections of mathematics to empirical disciplines such as physics, people often assume that, like physics, mathematics must be empirical. Also, the importance of some branches of mathematics to scientific and technological innovation makes it clear that, even if mathematics is non-empirical, it’s unwise to question its methods. Don’t look a gift-horse in the mouth.
          But there is another reason why, despite it’s being quite as non-empirical as philosophy, mathematics is erroneously seen as empirical and why, as a result, it isn’t the object of the same overt hostility and suspicion as philosophy, which, unlike mathematics, is seen for the non-empirical discipline that it is.
       For obvious reasons, people tend to think that it is through visual observation of figures on chalk-boards (or some such) that one learns geometry and that, given any branch of mathematics, the same thing mutatis mutandis is true of the way in which one learns the truths belonging to it.
     This reasoning embodies a confusion that has stymied intellectual progress for centuries. The message borne by a perception, or any other mental representation, is known as its “content.” One way in which sense-perceptions can add to what we know is by transmitting their contents to us. I see a dog running towards me, and I know on that basis that, indeed, there is a dog running towards me. Here what I learned from my sense perception coincided with the content of that very perception.
         But there is a very different way in which sense perception can add, or at least help to add, to what one knows. A sense perception may trigger ratiocinative processes that yield knowledge of truths that were not part of that perception’s content.[2] Many truths learned in this way couldn’t possibly be any part of any perception’s content. An illustration is in order.
           You see figures on a blackboard that vaguely resemble circles, triangles, etc. These sense perceptions help you learn that:
 
(BH)[3] The area of Euclidean triangle is ½ bh.
 
Those visual perceptions directly apprise you of various non-mathematical facts (e.g., that there is a blackboard nearby on which there are various markings). Those perceptions do not themselves transmit BH to you. So how do they help you become aware of that principle? The answer: By precipitating thought-processes that in their turn lead to your seeing that BH is correct.
      You can see specific markings on specific surfaces; you can see specific rocks and specific people; you can see specific objects. (Given that there are no non-specific objects, “specific object” is a pleonasm, and we might as well have just said: “you can see objects.”) But you cannot see (or otherwise sense-perceive) principles. (The parenthetical qualification will henceforth be left unstated.) There are two reasons for this:
 
Reason #1: Principles are general. BH says that, for any x, x’s being a triangle has the consequence that x’s area is ½ its base times its height. One cannot see general truths. One sees particulars: particular rocks, trees, people, events, and so forth. One can see instances of general truths, but not general truths per se.
 
Reason #2:  Principles express dependence-relations. In other words, they are to the effect that, given P, Q must be the case, or at least is disposed to be the case, this being equivalent to: P’s being the case depends on (or is disposed to depend on) Q’s being the case. BH says that x’s being a triangle depends on x’s being such that its area is ½ its base times its height.
     So far as one’s senses apprise one of anything, they apprise one of what is the case, not of what must be the case. There are several reasons for this. One of them is that P’s having to be the case is equivalent to its being impossible that P should fail to be the case; and one cannot sense-perceive the non-existent, let along the impossible.[4]       
 
        Thus, our senses have two quite distinct roles in the acquisition of knowledge: an information-transmitting role and a thought-triggering role.
        Here is one way of making it clear how these two roles differ. You have a visual perception that is experientially just like that of seeing of a dog running towards you; and on that basis you believe that, indeed, there is a dog running towards you. But it turns out that you weren’t really seeing a dog; you were having a hallucination. Question: did your sensory experience give you knowledge to the effect that there was a dog running towards you? No. It may have been that there was a dog running towards you. But your sense perceptions didn’t provide you with knowledge of any such fact.
         Bearing these points in mind, consider the following, very different scenario. You have visual experiences that are experientially just like the visual experiences you’d ordinarily have of drawings of figures on a chalkboard. Those experiences precipitate a long train of mathematically impeccable reasoning that results in your accepting BH. It turns out that your visual perceptions of the chalkboard were hallucinatory. Does it follow that you don’t know that a triangle’s area is ½ its base times its height?
       No. Those visual experiences merely prompted the thought-process that led to your accepting BH. Since that thought-process was itself impeccable, even though it was initiated by hallucinations, the result was indeed knowledge of BH. Those hallucinations no more constituted your justification for believing BH than your turning the key in the ignition of your car constitutes the road-trip that you subsequently make.
      But in the first scenario, any justification you had for believing that there was a dog running towards you vanished when it turned out that the experiences on which your belief was based were hallucinatory. So far as you had any justification for believing that a dog was running towards you, that justification lay in your visual experiences. So, given that those experiences were hallucinations, it follows that you had no justification for believing that a dog was running towards you and, therefore, that you didn’t know it. In the other scenario, your visual experiences weren’t themselves constitutive of your justification for accepting BH. They were merely precursors to the thought-processes that did provide you with such a justification. So the fact that those visual experiences were hallucinations in no way undermines your justification for accepting BH.
       A story will help put these points into focus. A coconut lands on Newton’s head. This causes him to conduct various investigations, which bear rich mathematical and scientific fruit. The blow to Newton’s head wasn’t constitutive of Newton’s subsequent ratiocinative activity, which was impeccable; it merely initiated it. It is along these lines that one must understand the relationship between, on the one hand, your grasp of the fact that a Euclidean triangle’s area is ½ its base times its height, and, on the other hand, the visual perceptions (of chalk figures, or whatnot) that, in due course, led to your grasping this fact.
   One last scenario will make it clear just how much the reason-triggering role of sense perception differs from its information-transmitting role. Smith reads a proof of some mathematical theorem. Smith understands what he is reading and duly becomes aware of the proof in question. It is, of course, through visual perceptions that he becomes aware of that visual theorem. Brown hears a lecture in which that same proof is set forth. That lecture is simply a reading of the article that Smith read. (So the words Brown hears are the very words that Smith read.) Brown understands what he is hearing and duly becomes aware of the proof in question.
     Smith’s sense-perceptions bear no resemblance, even of the most abstract kind, to Brown’s perceptions. And yet Smith and Brown come away from their respective experiences with the same mathematical knowledge. There is no way to reconcile this last fact with the supposition that it is through sense-perception that one becomes aware of mathematical truths; and it must be supposed that, in the situation just described, the visual and auditory experiences in question merely occasioned ratiocinative processes that, unlike those sense-perceptions, endowed in whom they occurred knowledge of the relevant theorem. Given any mathematical principle---or, indeed, any logical or philosophical principle----an exact analogue shows that, so far as sense-perception had a hand in a given person’s acquiring knowledge of that principle it was merely by functioning as a trigger for ratiocinations that, unlike any sense-perception, were capable of awakening the relevant ratiocinative faculties.
      The fact that the senses sometimes function in this way undermines the facile the claim that all knowledge is empirical and therefore delegitimizes any conceivable attempt to delegitimize the discipline of philosophy.
      Let us end by making a point that will make it clear what is meant by the (already defined, but, even when properly defined, oft-misunderstood) word “empirical.” When our senses transmit knowledge to us, the resulting knowledge is empirical. (Also, inferential and theoretical knowledge based on knowledge thus transmitted to us is empirical. So our knowledge of the truths described by Relativity Theory, though obviously not acquired directly from sense-perception, is empirical.) Knowledge is not empirical if it results from purely ratiocinative processes, regardless of whether those processes were occasioned by sense-perceptions. Non-empirical knowledge is purely conceptual: it is knowledge, not of the structures or interrelations of denizens of the spatiotemporal world, but of the structures and interrelations of concepts. Non-empirical knowledge is typically (though probably not always) obtained by analyzing concepts. For this reason, it is often described as analytic.[5]
 
3.0 Why the claim that there is no such thing as philosophical truth is self-defeating
 
      I've heard it said that, in philosophy, "there is no right or wrong." First of all, this is itself a philosophical statement. So if it's true, then it's false, and if it's false, then it's true. Therefore it's false, given that no true statement is inconsistent with itself. (P is inconsistent with Q if the one must be false if the other is true. ‹x is a triangle›[6]  is inconsistent with ‹x has four sides› because the one must be false if the other is true.)
     The position that there is no philosophical truth is a common one. Every semester, at least ten students of mine openly advocate it. When such a student is asked why he holds that view, he always take one of three views:
 
(i) All legitimate knowledge is empirical knowledge; therefore, philosophy, being a non-empirical discipline, is no source of knowledge,
 
(ii) All legitimate knowledge is scientific knowledge therefore, philosophy, being a non-science, is no source of knowledge,
 
and
 
(iii)  There is no truth where there is disagreement.
 
         (i) is straightforwardly false, given that mathematics yields knowledge and that it isn’t an empirical discipline. Also, as we’ve seen, any given empirical discipline makes assumptions that it cannot justify and that it, unless they’re justified, that discipline fails to yield knowledge. So, supposing that, in (ii), the term “scientific knowledge” refers to the results generated by empirical sciences, it follows that (ii) is false. And supposing that, in (ii), that term refers, not just to empirical disciplines, but also to non-empirical disciplines (e.g. mathematics, philosophy), then what it says in no way implies that philosophy fails to yield knowledge.
        (iii) is easily shown to be false. If one person disagrees with another, at least one of those people must be wrong. If Smith thinks that 2+2=5 and Jones disagrees, his position being that 2+2=6, then, even though each has the wrong arithmetical belief, each is right to think that the other is wrong.  If Smith thinks that 2+2=5 and Jones disagrees, his position being that 2+2=4, then, in addition to having the right arithmetical belief, Jones is right to think that Smith is wrong. So where there is disagreement, there is truth. Consequently, the alleged fact that there is more disagreement in philosophy than in other disciplines doesn't warrant the conclusion that there isn't such a thing as philosophical truth.
 
3.1 What philosophers agree about
 
      There probably is more disagreement within the discipline of philosophy than there is within most other disciplines. But in philosophical disagreements have nothing to do with the logical structure of discipline of philosophy and instead have to do with egos of the people involved in this disagreements. . The problem isn't that there aren't agreed-upon methods of resolving disputes. Nor is the problem that people disagree as to how those methods are to be applied. The problem is that, for whatever reason, philosophers practically never admit that they're wrong. They are proven wrong---and, when this happens, they usually know it. But, when proven wrong, they respond, not by admitting that they’re wrong or even privately changing their views, but rather by coercing people over whom they power into towing their line. Since people don't depend for their well-being on how philosophical disputes are settled, market forces don't weed out bad philosophers the way they weed out bad doctors and engineers. That said,  there is nothing inherent in the discipline of philosophy that prevents disputes from being resolved: one must distinguish the discipline itself from the personalities of its practitioners.
      Also, despite everything just said, there is considerable agreement among analytic philosophers, and this agreement often concerns foundational issues. For example, analytic philosophers, setting aside completely incompetent ones, are unlikely to disagree as to whether a given proposition expresses a legitimate rule of inference, and, given a pair of propositions, they're unlikely to disagree as to whether the one entails the other . P entails Q if P cannot possibly be true if Q is false. (Thus, ‹x is triangle› entails ‹x  has three sides. ›) A proposition is what is affirmed by an utterance of a declarative sentence.[7]
        Further, given two propositions, philosophers are likely to agree as to whether the one confirms the other. (P confirms Q if, other things being equal, Q is less likely to be true if P is false than if P is true. Given that Smith clearly isn’t a butler or chauffeur, Smith's living in a big house and driving a Rolls Royce confirms, but does not entail, that Smith is wealthy. Why doesn’t it entail it? Because Smith might have stolen the car and he might not be able to afford the house.)  So, granting that there is more disagreement in philosophy than there is botany or astronomy, there is also a great deal of agreement in philosophy.
 
3.2 What philosophers don't agree about
 
      That said, after ego-driven fakery is set aside, there is at least as much disagreement in philosophy as there is agreement; and even though, as we've seen, philosophers agree about some foundational issues, they disagree about others. For example, even though, when asked whether one proposition entails another, different philosophers tend to give the same answer, there is no consensus among philosophers as to what it is for one proposition to entail another. Indeed, there is no agreed upon answer to the question "what are propositions?." Nor, consequently, is there any agreed upon answer to the question "to what extent, and in what way, are the structures of propositions reflected in those sentences that we use to express them?" This last question, though seemingly arcane and technical is profoundly important, the reason being that, in the answer to it, lies the answer, or a large part of the answer, to the question “in what respects does a person’s knowing a language enhance his cognitive abilities?”
        In the pages to come, we'll encounter dozens of other equally important philosophical questions that have yet to be resolved. We'll also find that, when supplemented with a modicum of technical rigor, a willingness to listen to one's intuitions, however heterodox they may be, often yields plausible answers to questions that, despite centuries of trying, philosophers have failed to answer with anything other than brazen falsehoods .      
 
4.0 How Psychological and Sociological Factors Thwart Philosophical Progress
 
       I suspect, on average, students of biology at first-tier institutions are way ahead of their counterparts at counterparts at bottom-tier universities in respect of their likelihood to discover biological truths. But philosophical discoveries are only marginally more likely to be made by students at top-tier institutions than at bottom-tier ones. I made this claim in the last section, but didn't defend it. Now I will defend it. My reason for discussing this topic is that, by doing so, we'll have the chance the discuss philosophical disputes that we won't have occasion to discuss in the pages following this preface.
        There are two facts that, once clearly stated, are likely to be accepted, since they are consistent with generally accepted truths about human psychology, and that make it clear that this hypothesis of mine is at least approximately correct. The second fact is by far the more important one.
    Fact #1:  Whereas what passes for mathematical/musical ability in institutional contexts really is mathematical/musical ability, what passes for philosophical ability in such contexts is more likely than not to be a mere mimicry of it. Why is this? Two reasons. First, even though an interest in philosophy is extremely widespread, genuine ability at it is extremely uncommon. Second, whereas the difference between somebody who has musical talent and somebody who lacks it is brazenly obvious to almost everyone, the only exceptions being those who are tone-deaf or otherwise severely cognitively defective, the difference between somebody who has philosophical talent and somebody who lacks it is invisible to people who do not themselves have it. Given these two facts, it becomes inevitable that the people in charge of institutions whose very purpose is to cultivate philosophical insight haven't a shred of it themselves and are therefore can't judge who has philosophical talent and who doesn't. When judging whether a given person is philosophically gifted, such a person is forced to rely on some belief of his to the effect that people who have philosophical ability are likely to have other characteristics whose presence, unlike that of philosophical ability itself, are easy to detect. Those characteristics are typically ones that conduce to institution-internal success (e.g. orderliness, discipline in regards to following instructions, complacency in regards to forming views of one's own views) but are seldom ones that have anything to do with a person's degree of philosophical acumen. As a result, philosophy professors are likely to be people who should have become bureaucrats, not philosophers. would have made good bureaucrats but don't make good philosophers. 
   Fact #2: 99 times out of a 100, a brilliant student of philosophy at Cambridge or Princeton will use every ounce of intellect that he has to defend the views of his professors, since his professional future is in their hands; and he will make every effort to smear a position, however plausible, that isn’t in lockstep with those of his professors. He’ll find ways to defend behaviorism, functionalism, modal realism, or whatever happens at the time to be the line one must toe if one is to move forward in the philosophical world. 99% of the time, people gifted with philosophical intelligence use it to rationalize philosophical views that, although clearly broken, happen to be held by the people who give out philosophy-professorships. I will now give several examples of this.
         Boris Kment, a contemporary of mine who received his degrees from Oxford and Princeton and must therefore surely be extremely intelligent, takes it for granted that, given some true claim about what would have been the case hold in virtue of the things that happen alternative universes that exist as concretely as our own.  For example, suppose that Smith has exactly two cars; and, with that assumption in mind, consider the statement:
 
(1) If Smith had three cars, he would have an odd number cars.
 
      According to Kment, the meaning of (1) is:
 
(2) There  exists an alternative universe that is just likes ours except that, in it, Smith has three cars; and in that universe, Smith has an odd number of cars.[8]
 
I disagree with Kment. In my view, the meaning of (1) is: 
 
(3) The statement that Smith has an odd number of cars follows from the statement that Smith has three cars. In other words, one is guilty of holding a self-contradictory view if one holds that Smith holds three cars but not an odd number of cars.         
 
        Is my view right? I don't know. But here's what I do know. It isn't by going to other universes that we know that (1) is correct. It is by considering whether it makes sense. To be sure, there are no alternate universes where Smith has three cars but where he doesn't have an odd number of cars. But that's because it makes no sense to deny (1). So, while I don't know whether my view is right, I do know Kment’s view isn't exactly self-evidently correct.[9]  
        Question: Why does somebody of Kment’s level of intelligence not bother to consider alternatives to his view or even to consider questions that, although presupposing the correctness of his view, concern anything other than minor technicalities?     
        Answer: Kment’s adviser at Princeton was David Lewis (1940-2000). Like Kment, Lewis held that (2) is the correct analysis of (1) and that all statements of its kind are to be analyzed along the same lines.[10] In fact, this view, which is known as “modal realism,” is the cornerstone of Lewis’s work. Lewis was a philosophical genius and, in most philosophical contexts, was unusually flexible. But he wouldn’t budge when it came to modal realism. For him, that was a line in the sand: accept it or get lost. Kment accepted it. And, ten years after receiving his doctorate, he still does. In that time, everything he's published has been simply repeated or elaborated on points that he made in his dissertation. That said, Kment is tenured at one of the top ten departments in the country and I've been told more than once that he's one of the two or three finest philosophical minds of his generation.      
           But, when one looks at the philosophical legacy of Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889-1951), one finds even starker examples of the principle that philosophers use their intelligence, not to find the truth, but to defend orthodoxies and to discredit any truth that should happen to conflict with those orthodoxies.
      Wittgenstein was the most highly ranked professor at Trinity College Cambridge, then the most prestigious philosophy department in the world, and his views became orthodoxies. Unfortunately, those views were not only false but idiotic. His major work is titled Philosophical Investigations. The main thesis of that work is, I quote, that “thinking is not a mental process.” His position was that to think is to engage in overt behaviors that need not have mental accompaniments. And he held that, should such behaviors have mental accompaniments, they are in no way enriched by them---those mental accompaniments do not add, or help, to add a cognitive dimension to those behaviors. Whatever is going on in the relevant person's head is, to use Wittgenstein's term, a "free wheel."
       Thus, Wittgenstein denied that what a person says is to any degree determined by what his beliefs are. For, according to Wittgenstein, what a person says is what a person thinks; so there can’t be thought behind the speech. There is just the speech. The speaker’s psychology is irrelevant. In fact, Wittgenstein went so far as to deny that there was anything to the mind other than what that person’s body did.
       So according to Wittgenstein, what determines what a person is thinking is not what that person is thinking. (It's not hard not to state this contention of Wittgenstein's in a way that doesn't make it sound like a joke.) Whether one is thinking this as opposed to that is determined by how one's body is moving, what noises one is making, and where (in the cultural, not the geographical sense of "where") those noises and body-movements are occurring. Wittgenstein’s view was that you are the mask that you wear.[11]
         Wittgenstein thus held that cannot experience pain without acting as though one is pain and, more generally, that what we refer to as “experiences” partly or entirely consist of the behaviors to which they tend to give rise. In his view, it  isn't just what we think that is determined by how our bodies interact with those of others in our culture: what we feel is also so determined.
       In denying that thoughts had any existence apart from their overt manifestations, Wittgenstein was obliterating the distinction between voluntary and involuntary behavior. A voluntary movement is one that is caused by an intention on the part of the agent. But intentions are thoughts, or at least involve them; so, since Wittgenstein held that there is nothing to a person’s thoughts other than his body movements, he was effectively denying that there is any difference between involuntary movements (such as those involved in an epileptic fit) and voluntary ones (such as those involved in my typing this sentence).    
            Wittgenstein’s view was that we’re zombies who don’t think or feel anything unless we wiggle and jiggle in culturally accepted ways. This is not a summary of his position. It is his position. If it sounds as though I’m ridiculing it, that’s only because I’m stating it clearly.     
            To anyone who is not a hollowed out pseudo-person, these claims are brazenly absurd. I suspect that, in his attempt to describe the psyche, Wittgenstein was describing himself. For hundreds of pages, Wittgenstein insists that
 
(i) Thought has no existence independently of overt bodily behavior,
 
(ii) Thought has no existence outside of a cultural context: to think is to act (or, in any case, for one's body to move) in ways that are in keeping with the mores (or, to use Wittgenstein's term, "forms of life") constitutive of one's culture
 
and
 
(iii) Although some noises (e.g. an utterance of "it's raining") are meaningful, there are no such things as meanings: meaningfulness is a characteristic of certain behaviors and ink-marks and noises. But meanings per se are non-entities.
 
     (i) and (ii) are self-evidently false. (iii) isn't self-evidently false, but it is false. A logical consequence of
 
(a) Smith and Jones are both tall
 
is
 
(b) There exists some property---namely, tallness---that Smith and Jones share.
 
        Given the existence of properties, the existence of meanings is readily established. Given any statement S, there are properties p1…pn such that S is true if p1…pn are jointly instantiated and S is false otherwise. For example,
 
(c) John is tall
 
is true if the each of the following properties is instantiated, and otherwise false: the property of being identical with John, the property of being tall, and the property of a being a thing x such that x is tall and x is identical with John. (Of course, if the last of these properties is instantiated, so are the other two. But given the (c) contains discrete parts corresponding to "John" and "tall," the corresponding proposition cannot possibly consist of just one property, and the decomposition of that proposition is therefore to be identified with the membership of the set containing all three of the just-mentioned properties.)
     Of course, it is by no means obvious what properties are, and it is by no means clear that a deflationary conception of them is the wrong one. But that is neither here nor there: what matters is that they do exist and therefore that (iii) is false.
         Stated as directly as possible, Wittgenstein's three main views are:
 
(a) We're empty shells. There's nothing on the inside. 
 
(b) We are the masks we wear. 
 
(c) Nothing means anything.
 
      Speaking from a psychiatric, as opposed to a philosophical standpoint, (a), (b), and (c) perfectly articulate the outlook of the psychopath. A psychopath is not an insane person. Nor is a psychopath necessarily an evil person. A psychopath is an empty fraudster whose personality-architecture is far too rudimentary for him to even grasp what a value is, let alone have one. Psychopaths are weak, underdeveloped con-artists; they aren't "cool" super-villains.
       That Wittgenstein believed (a)-(c) to describe the human condition suggests that he himself was an empty shell who valued nothing and saw no meaning in anything. It suggests, in other words, that he was a psychopath. In Chapter 27, it will be argued that he was in fact a psychopath. [12]
           Let us relate these points to our thesis that philosophers are more likely to rationalize existing orthodoxies, no matter how obviously false, than to look for philosophical truths.  During Wittgenstein's 25 years at Cambridge and for several decades after his death, many of the brightest philosophers in Britain treated Wittgenstein’s views as simple truths. And most of those who didn’t agree with all of Wittgenstein's contentions didn‘t dare concede that, on the whole, his thinking was basically sound. As a result, some capable philosophers advocated some views that obviously no merit.
        For example, Norman Malcolm (1911), a hardcore Wittgensteinian, denied that people dream.[13] His argument: Dreams, supposing them to exist, are mental processes; and we know from Wittgenstein that we don’t have mental processes.   
        Another hardcore Wittgensteinian, Gilbert Ryle (1900-1976), said that the difference between voluntary and involuntary actions isn’t that the former result from certain kinds of mental states that the latter do not result from; the difference, he said, is that voluntary motions are culturally more acceptable, and tend to look more elegant, than involuntary ones.[14] According to Ryle, what makes a ballerina’s movements voluntary is that they look good (or we like them or they’re culturally approved of, or some such); and what makes a person’s projectile vomiting involuntary is that it doesn’t look so good. (I don’t know what Ryle would say about the odd person who voluntarily projectile vomits.) 
        Ryle also held that, if I can see how your body is moving, I know what’s going on in your mind at least as well as you do. So if somebody wants to know whether you are having a migraine, they should ask me, not you, unless you happen to be looking at yourself in a mirror.    
         Ryle was not stupid. He graduated with a double first class degree from Oxford. And, even though most of what he said is Wittgensteinian, and therefore false, one can tell from the way he said it that his was a subtle and  penetrating mind---or would have been, had he not matriculated in a culture of Wittgenstein-worship.     
       Ryle was not a great philosopher; he was merely a potentially great philosopher. But his colleague at Oxford, Peter Strawson (1919-2006), was a great philosopher. Unfortunately, like other British philosophers of his generation, Strawson was very reluctant to question The Master. As a result, he committed several hideous gaffes. One example is his “ascriptivist” analysis of moral responsibility. Another is his “expressivist” analysis of the concept of truth.     
       Strawson’s ascriptivism: Give or take some irrelevant nuances, Strawson held that, if it's correct, the statement"
 
(a) “X should be praised for doing Y”
 
holds in virtue of the fact that:
 
(a*) X deviates from the way in which people usually behave, and it does so in a way that pleases us.
 
           And he held the same thing mutatis mutandis to hold of any other ascription of moral responsibility. So held that, if they are true, the statements:
 
(b)  “X should be blamed for doing Y,"
 
and
 
(c) “X is responsible for doing Y, but does not on that account deserve either praise or blame”
 
hold in virtue of, respectively, the fact that
 
(b*)  Y is counterstatistical in a way that we don’t like
 
and the fact that
 
(c*) Y is not counterstatistical. 
 
         If Strawson is right, X doesn’t even have to have intentions for any of these statements to be true. Strawson's position thus entails that intentions either don’t exist or don’t do anything and therefore might as well not exist.   
        Strawson's analysis of ascriptions of moral responsibility is obviously false. Inanimate objects don’t have intentions; so we can’t be held responsible for anything. And it's only a person's behavior is the result of an intention of his that we hold him responsible for it. We don’t hold somebody with Parkinson’s responsible for his tremors.
         If Strawson were right, a corpse that fell on Smith could appropriately be blamed for Smith's subsequent death. But we don't blame the corpse; we blame the prankster who threw the corpse off a nearby rooftop.
          Strawson is saying that whether a given person has a given intention depends on whether we ascribe an intention to him. So he's advocating the antithesis of the traditional view, which I regard as self-evidently correct, that whether that ascription is correct depends on whether that person has that  intention. Strawson's view turns the living into the dead and the dead into the living. Sad about grandma's death? No problem! Just ascribe an intention to her---that'll bring her back. Don't like your boss? No need to worry! Just stop ascribing intentions to him---that'll zombify him.
      Strawson was a brilliant man. So why did he advocate this grotesquely mistaken view? Because Wittgenstein advocated it. But whereas Wittgenstein said obscurely and he provided no argument for it, Strawson  said it clearly and provided a semblance of an argument for it. So Strawson's article wasn't redundant.
        Strawson’s expressivism: According to Strawson, the expression “true” means nothing. “It is true that snow is white” has the same meaning as “snow is white.” In prefacing the words “snow is white“ with the words “it is true that”, one is doing in a polite way what one would be doing in an impolite way by shouting “snow is white” while banging one’s fist on a table: one is showing one’s collocutor how convinced one is that snow is white. So the term “true” helps one express one’s feelings about a claim: they give one a civil way of express one’s certainty as to its truth. But that’s all that word does.       
       Strawson's expressivism is no less misguided than his acriptivism. First of all, the word “true” is not redundant. There is no  sentence that means that same thing as “everything Plato said was true” that doesn’t contain the word “true” or some synonym thereof.  Suppose that S1.…Sn is a complete list of everything every said by Plato. The sentence “everything Plato said was true” would not have the same meaning as “S1 is true and S2 is true and…Sn is true.” Supposing that S37 is the proposition that there are infinitely many prime numbers, the statement “everything Plato said is true, but Plato never said that there are infinitely many prime numbers”, though false, would be coherent. (That's why one would have to know about Plato’s life to know whether that statement was true or not.) But statement “Plato said that there are infinitely many prime numbers and Plato never said that there are infinitely many prime numbers” would contradict itself. (That's why one wouldn't have to know anything about Plato’s life to know whether that statement was true or not.)[15]    
      "What about Strawson’s claim that “snow is white” and “it is true that snow is white” are synonymous? Surely that's got to be right."
        It is not. The first attributes a color to a substance. The second attributes a truth-value to a proposition; so the second, unlike the first, is only indirectly about snow. Consider the sentence: “it is probable that snow is white.” That sentence clearly concerns a proposition. Snow is either white or it isn’t. When you say that snow is probably white, you’re not saying that it’s vaguely white or that it’s whiteness is only semi-existent. You are saying that, in saying that snow is white one, what one is saying is more likely than not to be correct.
       So “it is probable that snow is white” is about the sort of thing that people can affirm. Snow cannot be affirmed. Neither can whiteness. Nor can sentences. Sentence-meanings are what can be affirmed. (Actually, we'll see in Chapter 4 that one affirms the meanings of occurrences of sentences (particular utterances or inscriptions of them), not of sentences per se. We'll also see that the meaning of any given sentence-occurrence is different from the meaning of the sentence thereby occurring. Strawson was the first person to make these claims, and his argument for them are solid. The arguments presented in Chapter 4 are based on them.)
         The meaning had by the expression “that snow is white” in “it is probable that snow is white” coincides with counterpart in “it is true that snow is white.” So the latter, though equivalent with "snow is white", is about a proposition about snow, and therefore isn‘t in any direct sense about snow. “Snow is white“, on the other hand, clearly does directly concern snow. Two statements are equivalent if neither can possibly be true if the other is false.
         Strawson had precisely the sort of intelligence one needs to see that, for these reasons, “true” is meaningful. So why did Strawson say otherwise? Because Wittgenstein said otherwise.
     Why did Wittgenstein say otherwise? An integral part of Wittgenstein’s philosophical system is that meanings don’t exist. Wittgenstein granted that some noises were meaningful and that others weren’t; but he denied that there are such things as meanings.
      Why did Wittgenstein hold this? It's a corollary of his rejection of the presumption that a least part of what distinguishes my saying “it’s raining,” which is a genuinely linguistic act, from a coffee machine's accidentally making those the same noises, which is not a linguistic act, is that, in the first case but not the second, those noises resulted from intentions embodying certain beliefs (e.g. my belief that it's raining). A belief is necessarily a belief that such and such is the case: the object of a belief is always a proposition. A proposition is what one affirms when one makes a statement (e.g. when one sincerely says "it's raining"). Since Wittgenstein didn’t believe in beliefs, he didn’t believe in meanings; and since he didn’t believe in meanings, he didn’t think that “true”, which denotes a property of meanings, can possibly have a meaning.
        Of course, it isn't just propositions that can be described as "true." Occurrences of sentences can also be so described. But, in saying “Jimmy’s words are the truth," one is saying in an abbreviated that the thing Jimmy affirmed is true. And propositions are, by definition, things that are affirmed (and denied and questioned, etc.). 
          Wittgenstein dedicated the second half of his professional career to establishing the non-existence of beliefs and everything else that exist only if meanings do as well. This led him to make a number of demonstrably false claims.
       One of such claim is that, if a person says “I am in pain”, he is no more stating anything about his mind than he would be by writhing in agony. Saying "I am in pain," according to Wittgenstein, is merely a way of showing that one is in pain. So it's meaningless, except in the same non-linguistic sense as a baby's sobbing.
        Here’s one way of showing that this position is false. Suppose that, in response to your saying that I am in pain but am trying to conceal it, I say:
 
(A) If I am in pain, then certain neurons in my brain are firing that wouldn’t otherwise be firing; since, with the help of modern technology, I can demonstrate to you that those neurons are not firing, it is not the case that I am in pain. 
 
      If Wittgenstein were right to say that “I am in pain” was as devoid of meaning (in the linguistic sense) as the pain-driven howling of an injured animal, then (A) would have the same meaning, or lack thereof, as:
 
(B) If aaargh!, then certain neurons in my brain are firing that wouldn’t otherwise be firing; since, with the help of modern technology, it is not the case that ouch![16]
 
        But B is meaningless and A is meaningful. So they don't have the same meaning, and Wittgenstein is wrong.   
        This blunder of Wittgenstein’s led John Austin (1911-1960), a faithful follower of his to make a similar, albeit subtler, mistake. Here is Austin's reasoning[17]:
 
(AA)[18]   Let S be a case of my saying to a friend: "I promise to give you a ride to the airport"  S is not affirmation of some pre-existing fact. The promised referred to in S is S itself.  But S doesn't describe itself. No utterance describes itself (with a few contrived exceptions, e.g. "this statement is false"). But, supposing for argument's sake that S does describe itself,  S's function isn't to describe itself, but rather to oblige the person who uttered it to perform a certain act.
    For exactly similar reasons, if a preacher says: "I now pronounce you man and wife," he's not describing some pre-existing fact. In uttering those words, the preacher was performing a social function. His wasn't a descriptive, but performative utterance, as was S.
     Performative utterances are meaningful. S isn't like " glarbojibjibjabber." Therefore, it isn't in virtue of affirming propositions that performative utterances are meaningful. To this extent, Wittgenstein was right to deny that meanings must exist in order for statements to be meaningful.
 
          Austin's contention is false. If I say, "grass is green," what I am saying is either true or false. There is some truth or falsehood that I'm affirming---some proposition, in other words. And if I say "if grass is green, then grass isn't colorless," I am saying of that proposition that some other proposition follows from it. If, when occurring on its own,  "grass is green" didn't affirm anything, then "if grass is green, then grass isn't colorless" would be as meaningless as:
(i) "if glarbojibjibjabber, then grass isn't colorless."
    
      Also, if embedding "grass is green" in a larger sentence changed what it meant, then "if grass is green, grass isn't colorless" wouldn't say that grass's not being colorless was a consequence of its being green.
      By parity of reasoning, if x is an utterance of the obviously meaningful sentence:
 
(ii) “if I promise to give you a ride to the airport next Tuesday, you’ll kill me if I break my word,”
 
and y is an utterance of:
 
(iii) “I promise to give you a ride to the airport next Tuesday,”
 
then y must affirm some truth or falsehood. If it didn't, x would be as meaningless as an utterance of (i). But clearly does affirm some truth or falsehood. And the same is therefore true of utterances of (i).
           Thus, the spuriousness of Austin's position is a consequence of the fact, about to be demonstrated, that embedding a sentence P in ‹if P, then Q› does not typically change P's meaning. The fact that
 
(I) there is an even prime larger than two
 
is false can be deduced from that:
 
(II) If there is an even prime larger than two, there is a prime number that is divisible by one, itself, and two, which is not possible
is true.  
       But (II) wouldn't necessarily be true if the occurrence in it of (I) had a meaning different from its usual one. For example, (II) would be true if that occurrence meant that 4 is an even prime larger than two. More importantly, if that occurrence had a meaning different from its usual one, (II) wouldn't mean what it currently does, and it wouldn't necessarily say anything relevant to whether there was an even prime greater than two.
           In general, if P meant one thing on its own and a different thing in ‹if P, then Q›, it would become impossible state indirect arguments.[19] in (An indirect argument is one of the form: if P, then Q; not-Q; therefore not-P.) But, to Austin's discredit, such arguments obviously can be stated.
           In conclusion, so far as the philosophers just discussed are representative of philosophers in general, first-class philosophical thinkers are more likely to use their intelligence to defend orthodoxies, even wretchedly misguided ones, than to look for the truth. Ryle, Strawson, and Austin were at the world's first or second highest ranking philosophy department. And yet that they not only advocated views that any ten year old knows to be false. But they didn't just advocate them: they spent years of their lives urging acceptance of them. So these high-ranking members of high-ranking departments advocated views that were 100% false. So no one, even at a bottom-tier institution, could possibly say anything that's more false than what these high-rollers said. Hence my view students and professors of philosophy at first-tier institutions aren't as likely as one would think to produce better work than their counterparts at bottom-tier universities.
 
________________


[1]    Expressions that are italicized and boldfaced are very important ones whose meanings must be known. In most cases, those terms are defined and explained in a footnote, if they aren't defined in the main text. The term "sensory observation" refers to any instance of sight, hearing, touch, etc.              
[2]   Fodor makes this point, in an exceptionally clear and forceful manner, in his (1981) essay “The present status of the innateness controversy,” which is one of the two or three best philosophical papers I have ever read. What I say in Chapter 9 of the present book is heavily informed by my reading of that paper.
[3]    “BH” stands for “base times height.” It is my practice to give names to sentences that are frequently referred to, since it eliminates unnecessary verbiage from my prose and (partly, though not primarily, for that reason) makes it easier to follow.   
[4]    All principles express dependence relations, though this isn’t always obvious. Consider the principle that:       (MD) military dictatorships tend to be less responsive than democratically elected governments to the needs of those whose welfare they are duty-bound to promote.        
           MD is to the effect that, human psychology being what it is, x’s being a military dictatorship depends on x’s being less likely than a democratically elected government, other things being equal, to meet the demands of those whose interests it is duty-bound to promote.     
         Because all principles express dependence relations, Reason #1 and Reason #2 ultimately coalesce. A principle is not merely a general truth. That’s why “any given tiger in North America is in some zoo” is not a principle. A principle must be intrinsically, as opposed to contextually, explanatory.            
             To be sure, “any given tiger in North America is in some zoo” can be explanatory---but only under rather special conditions. The way in which “a body’s mass increases as it accelerates” is explanatory is clearly not so context-dependent---or, even if it is context-dependent to the same degree, it isn’t context-dependent in the same way.                      
           Unfortunately, since this manuscript is already overdue, these vague remarks are the best I can do in the way of making it clear how a truth must be explanatory for it to be a principle as opposed to a mere general truth.
[5]    Why “probably not always”? Because, it seems to me, there are some non-empirical facts (e.g., nothing can be located, in its entirety, in two disjoint places at a given time) of which one can have knowledge without having to have analyzed anything. Also, it seems to me, that in order to analyze a concept and thus to obtain knowledge through conceptual analysis, one must already have non-empirical knowledge.      
       Some individuals hold that there is non-empirical knowledge that does not concern the structures or interrelations of concepts and therefore is not analytic, as we are using this term. For example, Kant (1787) held that there is non-empirical, non-analytic knowledge. In Chapter 10, it is argued that all non-empirical knowledge is indeed analytic.        
       Actually, this last statement isn’t really accurate, for reasons I discuss in my (2006) article, The analogue-digital distinction and the cogency of Kant’s transcendental arguments.
[6]  The “‹” and the “›” are known as quasi-quotation marks. this context they may be treated as quotation marks. But, strictly speaking, they are not quotation-marks, and the differences between them and quotation marks are important in some contexts. An example of a variable is the expression "x" in "for any object x, if x has three cars, then x has more than one car." An example of an anaphoric pronoun is the "he" in "if a man owns more than three cars, he owns at least one car." It's obvious that anaphoric pronouns are similar to variables, if not identical with them.) What is the purpose of quasi-quotation marks? Consider the expression: “if P and Q and R, then R.” That expression isn’t true or false. So the sentence “For any propositions P, Q, and R, the sentence ‘if P and Q and R, then R’ is true” is not true. But the sentence “for any propositions P, Q, and R, a true sentence  results when, given the open-sentence 'if P and Q and R, then R,' the variables are uniformly replaced with arbitrary sentences” is true. And (A) is a concise way of saying this. In general, quasi-quotation marks make it possible to express generalizations about sentences in a concise way. Quine was the first to see the need for quasi-quotation marks and duly introduced them in his (1941) book Mathematical Logic.
      Why, incidentally, did I choose to explain the meanings of the terms "variable" and "anaphoric pronoun", not by defining them, but by giving examples of sentences in which they are used? Three reasons. First, to my knowledge, no viable definitions have been given, at least not in print. (In yet to be published work, I put forth what I believe to be definitions of them that are not totally implausible.) Second, any accurate definition of these terms would be extraordinarily hard to follow for anyone who didn't have a lot of background in semantics.  accurate definitions are very hard to produce. This is a consequence of the fact that, with some trivial exceptions, all definitions are extremely intricate.
     The exceptions include ones where, given an expression belonging to one language, one is merely identifying its counterpart in some other language. They also include stipulative definitions, e.g.  "let 'blerk' mean triangle." And there do seem to be some cases where, non-translational, non-stipulative definitions are not to so hard to produce, e.g. "a 'triangle' is a three-sided, straight-edged, closed, planar figure."
      But a few comments about that definition are in order:
 
(i) That definition embodied an analysis of the word "triangle" and, for that reason, wasn't easy to produce. (I didn't produce it; I merely repeated it.)
 
(ii) Nobody learns what "triangle" means by being given such a definition.
 
(iii) A definition (or analysis, or whatever it is) is useless unless knows what is meant by terms (e.g. "planar", "closed") whose meanings one is unlikely to know unless one knows the meaning of "triangle."
 
(iv) That definition fails to fix the meaning of the word "triangle" and is thus not a viable definition. This is because the terms "straight", "closed", and so on, do not themselves have unambiguous meanings outside of artificial contexts. They are actually variables, not constants, whose meanings are specific, either implicitly or explicitly, by the dialectical context. The reasons for this are given in Chapter 1 of my book Analytic Philosophy, in the section titled "mathematical logic," which is the at the very end of that chapter.
 
 
[7]  . In Chapter 3 of Analytic Philosophy, I provide a detailed answer to the question "what properties must an entity have if it is to be capable of being what we are thereby affirming in uttering declarative sentences?" In Chapter 3 of the present work, I put forth a truncated version of my answer to that question.
[8] See Kment (2007).
[9] After attending a lecture that Kment gave in 2006, I asked him in private why (3) isn’t the right analysis of (1). His response was that my analysis was self-evidently false and that my question didn‘t deserve a response. (Out of the 20 or so people who publicly asked Kment questions about his lecture, only one audience-member, Bert Bandman asked a question that didn’t assume the truth of Lewis’ view. Bandman asked whether there were any alternatives to the view that statements such as (1) demanded that we posit the existence of alternative universes. Kment rolled his eyes, looked at his watch, and then said with a sigh: “yes, but none that are worth considering.” Audience-members snorted at Bandman and laughed heartily at Kment’s witty and informative reaction to his question. They then proceeded to ask questions which assumed the correctness of Kment’s view and were sometimes prefaced by admiration for the patience and decency Kment had shown in his response to Bandman‘s deeply inappropriate question.
     Apparently, only one audience member, besides myself, had any reservations about granting the existence of concrete (as opposed to purely fictitious) alternative universes. Which I found odd, given that we were at a philosophy conference, not a Grateful Dead concert.
[10] See Lewis (1973, 1984).
[11] Interestingly, British actors have a similar view. “To think like Hamlet“, they say (this is not a quotation), “you must first act like Hamlet. Fake it till you make it. If you fake it long enough, you won’t be faking it anymore: the mask you put on will now be your real face.“ American actors have the opposite view: “In order to act like Hamlet”, they believe (again, this is not a quotation), “you must first be Hamlet:  you must have his thoughts, feelings, and so on.” Actors who follow this principle are known as “method actors.”
[12] The psychopath must not be confused with the cynic. A cynic is somebody who himself has strong values but believes that, for the most part, others either don't have them or do have them but fail to comply with them. (Schopenhauer was a cynic; so was La Rochefoucauld. These thinkers are heroes of mine.) The cynic is, in many ways, the antithesis of the psychopath.
      The word "cynic", I must point out, is ambiguous.  Sometimes the word "cynic" refers to somebody who doesn't have values or has serious reservations about whether it's worthwhile to comply with them. But I will use the word "cynic" to refer to somebody who is skeptical, not about whether values are worth having, but about whether people are trying to comply with them.
[13] See Malcolm (1956).
[14] See Ryle (1949).
[15] See Russell (1919, p. 168) for a similar argument. The argument that I just put forth was, in respect of its substance and its wording, deliberately modeled on Russell's argument.
[16] This argument is an adaptation of one put forth by Peter Geach (1972). Geach was attempting to refute a doctrine called emotivism. But the structure of Geach's argument is the same as the structure of mine.
[17] See Austin (1962) for Austin's own rendition of his argument.
[18] "AA" is short for "Austin's argument."
[19] At least in English, unless English were changed in profound ways. It’s hard to believe that, in other languages, embedding a sentence P in a conditional of which it is the antecedent changes P’s meaning. So, in the aforementioned respect, English is presumably representative of all human languages, a consequence being that indirect arguments would be inexpressible, in any human language. But, so far as we know, they are expressible in all of them, without any of them having to undergo any changes at all.
 
A Priori Knowledge
 
A Dialogue
 
 
MAX: Dr. K. What is a priori knowledge?
 
Dr. K: It is knowledge that is constitutive of one’s ability to reason and to learn from sensory experience.
 
MAX: So a priori knowledge is knowledge that enables you to learn from experience and therefore is not itself acquired through experience.
 
Dr. K: Correct.
 
MAX: What proof is there that we have such knowledge?
 
Dr. K: We couldn’t learn anything from experience, even the the most rudimentary truth, unless we have such knowledge. Therefore, we have such knowledge.
 
MAX: Please clarify.
 
Dr. K: First of all, for Q to be a consequence of P is for not-Q to be incompatible with P. Do you follow?
 
MAX: Yes. x has three sides is a consequence of x is a triangle, because x does not have three sides is incompatible with x is a triangle.
 
Dr. K: Precisely. And if you can’t see that certain things follow from certain things, you can’t learn anything.
 
MAX: I will grant that provisionally, so as to let you complete your argument. But I question it.
 
Dr. K: Very well. Sensory observation apprises you of what is, not of what isn’t, and certainly not of what cannot possibly be.
 
MAX: True.
 
Dr. K: Therefore, observation doesn’t apprise you of truths of the form P is incompatible with Q.
 
MAX:  Explain.
 
Dr. K: For P to be incompatible with Q is for it to impossible for P and not-Q to be jointly actual. Only actualities can be observed. Impossibilities must be deduced.
 
MAX: So observation can’t tell you what is incompatible with what.
 
Dr. K: Therefore, it cannot tell you what follows from what.
 
Max: Now I see. For Q to be follow from P is for not-Q to be incompatible with P. So if you don’t what is incompatible with what, you don’t know what follows from what.
 
Dr. K: Exactly.
 
MAX: And if you don’t know what follows from what, you can’t deduce anything.
 
Dr. K: That’s right.
 
MAX: But couldn’t you deduce the relevant principles from sensory experience?
 
Dr. K: Because that would itself involve deduction! 
 
MAX: Ah! I didn’t think of that. But it makes sense. If I can’t deduce specifics from specifics, then I certainly cannot deduce how to deduce specifics from specifics…from specifics.
 
Dr. K: Right. 
 
MAX: A creature that cannot see bearing relations among specific truths cannot see bearing realtions among bearing relations.  
 
Dr. K: A creature cannot acquire knowledge of any sort of bearing relations unless it already has such knowledge.
 
MAX:  So a creature that doesn’t have such knowledge ab initio cannot acquire more such knowledge. 
 
Dr. K. Right. Such a creature could not learn how to reason better, since it could not reason in the first place. 
 
MAX: And given that we can learn how to reason better, we have always been able to do so.
 
Dr. K: And the deductive knowledge with which we started is what we call a priori knowledge. Not all deductive knowledge is a priori, obviously, but all such knowledge presupposes a priori deductive knowledge
 
MAX: But if these principles are within us---if knowledge of them is constitutive of our ability to reason---then why do people have to take logic classes and read logic books to learn about these principles? Why is knowledge of them---or, at least, conscious knowledge of them such a rare thing?
 
Dr. K: The principles of which we have a priori knowledge are not the objects of thought; they are not what we think about; they are our ability to think.
 
MAX: I think I understand. If all of the logic-knowledge that a given person acquired in college were erased from his mind one day, but that person were otherwise unaffected, he would still have a mind. He would still have the ability to reason. In fact, his ability to reason, except in very specific and artificial domains, would be unaffected.
But if a given person’s a priori knowledge were erased from his mind, there would be no mind left. There would be no intellect, certainly, and I don’t know that there would be much else.
 
Dr. K: Exactly. Ordinary knowledge---in other words, knowledge of the non-a priori variety—is a relation between the subject, on the one hand, and the truth known, on the other. A priori knowledge is not such a relation; for without such knowledge, the subject isn’t there to begin with.
 
MAX: So a priori knowledge is impersonal?
 
Dr. K: Chomsky uses the term subpersonal. But, yes, it would appear so.
 
MAX: So there is a knower but no known.
 
Dr. K: That would seem to follow.
 
MAX: And you don’t find that perplexing?
 
Dr. K: I do find it perplexing.
 
MAX: But you’re convinced you’ll sort it out.
 
Dr. K: I am. I think that’s enough for one session, Max.
 
MAX: See you tomorrow, Dr. K.
 
 
 
Analytic Truth vs. Formal Truth
 
A Dialogue
 
by
 
J.-M. Kuczynski PhD
 
 
 
MAX: Dr. K, What is an analytic truth?
 
Dr. K: One that holds entirely in virtue of its own content, for example: cubes are three-dimensional figures.
 
MAX: So a truth is analytic if, given only what it says about the world, it could not possibly fail to be true.
 
Dr. K: That’s right.
 
MAX: So Dr. K. plays the piano is a non-analytic truth, since, even though it is true, its content---what it says about the world, in other words---does not by itself guarantee its truth.
 
Dr. K: Exactly.
 
MAX: And triangles have three sides would be analytic, since, given only what it says, it could not fail to be true.
 
 
Dr. K: Yes. That is an example, if only a rather trivial one.
 
MAX:  Do you mean that it’s a trivial example of an analytic truth, or that it is an example of a trivial analytic truth?
 
Dr. K: Both.
 
MAX: How about this? x is a triangle just in case x is a closed, planar, straight-edged three-sided figure such that any given two of its sides intersect but not all three of them intersect.
 
Dr. K: Yes, that is an example of a relatively non-trivial analytic truth.
 
MAX: So an analytic truth isn’t exactly a definitional truth. An analytic truth is one that holds entirely in virtue of considerations of logic and meaning.
 
Dr. K: That’s right.
 
MAX: And an analytic truth may therefore be utterly non-trivial.
 
Dr. K: Correct. It sounds as though you have an example in mind.
 
MAX: I do. To wit, there are continuous functions that cannot be differentiated at any given point.
 
Dr. K: That is indeed analytic, and it is utterly non-trivial.
 
MAX: What is a tautology?
 
Dr. K: A definitional truth.
 
MAX: I see. So ‘a bachelor is an unmarried man’ is a tautology.
 
Dr. K: Correct.
 
MAX: So all tautologies are analytic, but not all analytic truths are tautologies.
 
Dr. K: Not exactly.
 
MAX: Explain.
 
Dr. K: Take your example: ‘a bachelor is an unmarried man.’ The meaning of that statement is: The word ‘bachelor’ has the same meaning as the expression ‘unmarried man.’ Which is not analytic, since it is an empirical truth about language. 
 
MAX: Please clarify that last point.
 
Dr. K: It isn’t a matter of logic that ‘bachelor’ has the same meaning as ‘unmarried man.’ Those expressions could mean anything. It is a matter of empirical fact, of historical happenstance, that they have the meanings that they do in fact have.
 
MAX: I see. It is incoherent to deny that triangles have three sides. It is incoherent---not obviously incoherent, perhaps, but incoherent nonetheless---to deny that a triangle is a three-sided, straight-edged figure any given two of whose sides intersect but not all three sides of its intersect. It is incoherent---not by any means obviously incoherent, surely, but still incoherent---to deny that there are continuous functions that cannot be differentiated at any point.  But one could coherently---not correctly, but coherently---deny that ‘bachelor’ has the same meaning as ‘adult unmarried man.’
 
Dr. K: Exactly. That is why ‘a bachelor is an unmarried man’ is an empirical truth, whereas the others that you mentioned are non-empirical, striclty analytic truths.
 
MAX: So the old saying that analytic truths are tautologies is wrong.
 
Dr. K: Yes. Very wrong.
 
MAX: Because, in actuality, no analytic truths are tautologies.
 
Dr. K: Correct.
 
MAX: Because a tautology is a definitional truth. It is a definition, or partial definition, in other words. And definitions hold in virtue of contingent, non-analytic facts about how words are used.
 
Dr. K: Exactly, if a given word is used in a given way, that is a matter of brute historical fact. It has nothing to do with analytic relations among concepts.
 
MAX: Are all mathematicall truths identical with analytic truths?
 
Dr. K: Yes.
 
MAX: Are all analytic truths identical with mathematical truths?
 
Dr. K: No.
 
MAX: Explain.
 
Dr. K: Consider the statement
 
(1) all mathematical truths are analytic truths.
 
Question: Is (1) true?
 
MAX: Yes. You just said so.
 
Dr. K: Is (1) analytic?
 
MAX: Yes.
 
Dr. K: Correct. But I would like to hear your reasoning.
 
MAX: 1+1=2 is a truth of mathematics and it is therefore analytic. If it were an empirical fact that 1+1=2, then (1) would be false. Since (1) is true, it follows that 1+1=2 is a non-empirical, analytic truth. In general, if a truth is analytic, it is analytic that it is analytic.
 
Dr. K: Correct. Bearing in mind what you just said, Max, let us once again consider (1). We have agreed that it is and also that it is analytic.
 
MAX: That’s right. 
 
Dr. K: Right. But is (1) a truth of mathematics?
 
MAX: No. (1) is a truth about mathematics. It is not itself a truth of mathematics.
 
Dr. K: Exactly. (1) does not belong to mathematics, even though it concerns mathematics.
 
MAX: And even though it follows from a truth of mathematics.
 
Dr. K: That’s right, Max. 
 
MAX: Sir, before we continue, I would like to summarize the argument that we must went through, to make sure that I really understand it.
 
Dr. K: Good idea. Proceed.
 
MAX: Let (a) be the statement:
 
1+1=2
 
And let (b) be the statement:
 
1+1=2 is analytic.
 
(a) is analytic, and (a) is a truth of mathematics.
(b) is also analytic, but (b) is not a truth of mathematics.
(b) is a philosophical, not a mathematical, statement as to the nature of mathematical truth.
Any given mathematical truth is analytic. It follows that (1) is analytic, where (1) is the statement:
 
All mathematical truths are analytic truths
 
But (1) is not itself a truth of mathematics.
 
Dr. K: You stated the argument perfectly.
 
MAX: Good, but I have a question. According to a friend of mine, Kurt Gödel proved that the truths of mathematics are not analytic. 
 
Dr. K: That is not what Gödel proved. That is the opposite of what he proved, in fact. But before I tell you why, I would like to hear what else this friend of yours told you.
 
 
MAX: According to this person, Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead tried to prove that all mathematical truths are tautologies, and Godel proved them wrong.
 
Dr. K: Did this friend of your say anything else?
 
 
MAX: That when people refer to Gödel’s Proof, this is what they are referring to.
 
Dr. K: Ok. Russell and Whitehead tried to prove that the class of arithmetical truths is recursively definable. Gödel proved that it is not recursively definable. Do you know what a recursive definition is?
 
MAX: Yes. First of all, a recursive definition is always a definition of a class.
 
Dr. K. That’s right.
 
MAX: Given a class k, a recursive definition of k is a true statement of the form
 
alpha belongs to k,
phi of x belongs to k whenever x belongs to k, and
nothing else belongs to k
 
Dr. K: Exactly. Suppose that k is the class of natural numbers. Please recursively define k.
 
MAX: 0 belongs to k. if n belongs to k, so does n+1. And nothing else belongs to k.
 
Dr. K: Good.  k is the smallest class containing 0 and containing the successor of anything that it contains. 
 
MAX: I like that way of putting it.
 
Dr. K: Notice that the members of the class of natural numbers can be arranged in a progression.
 
MAX: You mean, they can be arranged in a discrete series that has a first member and no last member.
 
Dr. K: Exactly. And this is true of all recursively definable classes.
 
MAX: That makes sense. Given any class k, a recursive definition of k has the form
 
Alpha belongs to k;
If x belongs to k, then phi of x also belongs to k, and
Nothing else belongs to k.
 
So if we want to arrange the members of k as a progression, we just start with alpha. Alpha is the first member of the progression, in other words.
Then we put phi of alpha. Which is the second member.
Then we put phi of phi of alpha. Which is the third.
And so on.
And every member of k is somewhere on that list.
 
Dr. K: Exactly. phi is a recursive function if it satisfies the following two conditons. First, phi is defined for each of its own ouputs. Second, there is some object x such that x is one of phi’s inputs but x is not one of phi’s outputs. Do you follow?
 
MAX: Yes. The first condition guarantees that phi of x can be iterated infinitely many times, and second condition guarantees that the subsequent series does not loop.
 
Dr. K: Precisely. Now, suppose that k is a statement-class.
 
MAX: You mean, a class that contains statements, as opposed to numbers.
 
Dr. K:  Exactly. And suppose that k is recursively defined. Do you follow, Max? Can you give me an example of a recursively defined statement-class?
 
MAX: Yes. Let k be the smallest class that contains the statement snow is white and that, whenever it contains a statement, also contains the statement p and p. in that case, k is the smallest class containing:
 
Snow is white,
Snow is white and snow is white,
Snow is white and snow is white and snow is white,
and so on.
 
Dr. K: Exactly. Now suppose we replace S with some very obvious truth of arithmetic, such as 1+0=1.
 
MAX: In that case, k is a recursively defined class of arithmetical truths.
 
Dr. K: Right. And what Russell and Whitehead tried to show is that, given the right choice of S and the right choice of phi, the resulting class contains every truth of arithmetic.
 
MAX: And this is what Gödel proved to be false.
 
Dr. K: That’s right. He proved that there is no recursive definition of the class of truths of arithmetic.
 
MAX: So he proved that, for any statement S and any recursive function phi, at least one truth of arithmetic is absent from the following series:
 
S
phi of S
phi of phi of S
phi of phis of phi of S
And so on
 
Dr. K: Yes. That is exactly what he proved.
 
MAX: So he proved that there is no algorithm---no purely formal procedure---for generating all of the truths of arithmetic.
 
Dr. K: Correct.
 
MAX: So he proved that there is purely formal characteristic that distinguishes the truths of arithmetic from other truths.
 
Dr. K: Correct.
 
MAX: But the truths of arithmetic are analytic.
 
MAX: So they are analytic, but they are not formally true.
 
Dr. K: Correct.
 
MAX: So what Gödel proved is that the truths of arithmetic are analytically true but not formally true.
 
Dr. K: Correct.
 
MAX: So my friend was wrong.
 
Dr. K: Very.
 
MAX: And you will tell me how Gödel proved this?
 
Dr. K: I will. But not now. We have quite a few bridges to cross before we can discuss the specifics of Gödel’s proof.
 
MAX: What about the non-specifics? What is the general idea? Can you give me at least a vague idea of what it is that he proved and, possible, of how he proved?
 
Dr. K: Yes. I can do that. First of all, incompleteness is a property of statement-sets---of sets of statements, in other words.
 
MAX: I follow.
 
Dr. K: And to say that a statement-set is incomplete is to say that there is no recursive definition of it.
 
MAX:  And to say that a statement-set is complete is to say that there is a recursive definition of it.
 
Dr. K: Correct.
 
MAX:  So, if k is the set of truths of the form, x is a natural number, then k is complete, since it is generated by the following recursion:
 
x belongs to k if x = 0;
x belongs to k if y belongs to k and x=y+1;
otherwise, x does not belong to k
 
Dr. K: Spot on.
 
MAX:  But I cannot think of an example of an incomplete statement-set.
 
Dr. K: Most scientifically important statement-sets are incompletely. It is impossible to axiomatize---in other words, to recursively define---statement-sets that have any real scope or explanatory power. 
 
MAX:  Could you please give me an example?
 
Dr. K: I will give you the simplest example that I can think. But it is also the most important example that I can think of, and Godel’s own incompleteness-theorem, as well as the technique he used  to prove it is based on the theorem I am about to say.
 
MAX: What is the statement-set in question?
 
Dr. K: The set of all statements of the form x is a real numbe. Let R be that statement-set. There is no recursive definition of R.
 
MAX: I suppose that makes sense. If there were such a statement-set, then the real numbers could be represented as a discrete series. Since that is not possible, that statement-set is incomplete.
 
Dr. K: That’s right. But let me state the proof. Once I do so, some interesting and profound, but also quite counterintuitive, mathematical truths will become comprehensible to you.
 
MAX:  I am listening with rapt interest, Dr. K!
 
Dr. K: Good. First of all, any real number can be expressed as an infinitely long series of integers. Thus, the number 1 is identical with
 
point 9 9 9 9 9 9 repeating
 
And the number 2 is identical with:
 
one point 9 9 9 9 9 repeating.
 
And so on.
 
MAX: That’s right.
 
 
Dr. K: Bearing this in mind, let L be a list of real numbers, expressed as infinitely long series of integers.
 
MAX:  So the first member of L is one infinitely long series of integers; then, right belong that, there is another such series; and, right below that, is a third such series. And so on.
 
Dr. K: Exactly. L is a top-down list, and each entry on the list is a real number, expressed as an infinitely long integer series.
 
MAX: And L is arbitrarily chosen. In other words, L can be as inclusive a list of real numbers as we want it to be.
 
Dr. K: Correct. Are you ready to take the next step, Max?
 
MAX:  Yes.
 
Dr. K: Let D  be a function that does the following. And here you have to listen very carefully. If the nth figure in the nth member of L is 9, then D replaces that figure with 1. And if that figure is less than 9, then D adds 1 to it. Do you follow, Max?
 
MAX:  I think so. Suppose that the first integer in the first member of L is 9. In that case, D replaces that integer with 1. And suppose that the second integer in the second member of L is 4. In that case, D replaces that integer with 5. And if the third integer in the third member of L is 2, then D replaces that integer with 3. And so on, for each entry on L.
 
Dr. K: Exactly. You will notice that D generates an infinitely long series of integers.
 
MAX:  Right. If the first integer in the first member of L is n, and n is less than 9, then the first integer in D of L is n+1. If n equals 9, then D replaces n with 1.
 
Dr. K: Correct. What about the second member of L?
 
MAX: If n is the second integer in the second member of L, and n is less than 9, then D replaces with n with n+1. If n equals 9, then D replaces n with 1.
 
Dr. K: And the third member?
 
MAX:  If n is the third integer in the third member of L, and n is less than 9, then D replaces with n with n+1. If n equals 9, then D replaces n with 1.
 
Dr. K: You clearly understand, Max. I am now going to ask you a difficult question.
 
MAX: I am ready.
 
Dr. K: Is D of L itself a member of L? In other words, is D of L one of the numbers listed on L?
 
MAX: No, it is not. D of L is different from the first entry on L, since the first integer in the first entry is different from the first integer in D of L. And D of L is different from the second entry on L, since the second integer in the first entry is different from the second integer in D of L. And for any number y, the yth integer in the yth entry on L is different from the yth entry in D of L.
 
Dr. K: Exactly.
 
MAX: Therefore, D of L differs from each of the entries on L, and D of L therefore does not itself occur on L.
 
Dr. K: Correct.
 
MAX: L is an arbitrary list of real numbers. It could any list of real numbers, even an infinitely long one. No matter how long we make L, D of L is not on L.
 
Dr. K: I am going to ask you another question, Max. If a class is recursively definable, can its members be listed?
 
MAX: Yes. If k is recursively definable, then there exists some object alpha, and some recursion phi, such that alpha belongs to k and such that, if x belongs to k, so does phi of x. So we can make a list that contains every member of k. We put alpha first; and we put phi of alpha second; and we put phi of phi of alpha third; and so on. And there is no member that does not occur on this list. 
Dr. K: Precisely. And if there is no way to make a list out of k’s member, what follows?
 
MAX: That k is not recursively definable.
 
Dr. K: Exactly.
 
MAX: So the class of real numbers is not recursively definable.
 
Dr. K: Correct. And the same is therefore of the class of true statements of the form x is a real number.
 
MAX: I see. So if S is that class, then S is incomplete, meaning that there is no recursive definition of it.
 
Dr. K: Precisely.
 
MAX: And Godel’s theorem about arithmetic is similar to the incompleteness-theorem that you just stated.
 
Dr. K: Yes, and his method of proof is based on the technique that we just used, which is known as diagonalization.
 
MAX: Why is it called that?
 
Dr. K: D of L starts at the top left of L. It replaces the first integer in the first member of L with some other integers. Then it moves down one entry, and one decimal place to the right. And it replaces the second integer in the second entry on L. And so on.
 
MAX: I see. So D of L generates a perfectly diagonal path, from the very top left of L, that moves downards, and to the right.
 
Dr. K: Correct. Let lambda is some list of objects, and suppose that each of entries in lambda is itself a list. 
 
MAX: So lambda is just like L. L was a list. And each entry on L was itself a list, since each entry was a series, and therefore a list, of integers.
 
Dr. K: Precisely. And then define a functoin delta such that, if x is the first member of the first member of lambda, then delta replaces x with y, where y is not identical with x; and, if z is the second member of the second member of lambda, then delta replaces z with w, where w is not identical with z. And so on, for each of the entries on lambda.
 
MAX: In that case, delta generates a list of objects, delta of lambda. And delta of lambda is not itself on one of the items listed on lambda. 
 
Dr. K: Right.And delta of lambda a diagonalization of lambda.
 
MAX: So suppose somebody says, ‘lambda is a complete list of objects having property phi.’ And suppose that delta of has phi. In that case, that person is wrong.
 
Dr. K: And we have proved the incompleteness of lambda by diagonalizaing on it.
 
MAX: Do all proofs of incompleteness involve diagonalization?
 
Dr. K: No. Godel’s proof uses a very exotic form of it. But the proof I am about to state, of which Gödel’s proof is a corollary, does not involve diagonalization.
 
MAX: So you have proved an incompleteness-theorem of your own.
 
Dr. K: Yes.
 
MAX: And that theorem is related to Gödel’s theorem?
 
Dr. K: Yes. Gödel’s theorem follows from it.
 
MAX: But your theorem, as well your proof, are presumably easier to understand than Gödeltheorem?
 
Dr. K: Yes. Dramatically.
 
MAX: I am all ears, Sir!
 
Dr. K: A logic---a system of logic, in other words---is simply a recursively defined statement-set.
 
MAX: I think I understand. A logic is the same thing as an axiomatic system, and an  axiomatic system is a recursively defined statement-set.
 
Dr. K: And in other audio, you and I will tell our listeners what an axiomatic system is.
 
MAX: Agreed.
 
Dr. K: Let me ask you a question, Max. Is the class of all recursively defined statement-sets itself a recursively defined statement?
 
MAX: I want to make sure I understand the question, Sir. . A logic is by definition a recursively defined set of statements. So any given logic is, by definition, recursively defined. But is the class of all logics itself recursively defined? That is what you are asking, am I right?
 
Dr. K: Yes.
 
MAX: I don’t know the answer to that question, Sir.
 
Dr. K: I will answer it for you, then. Let L1 be an arbitrary logic---an arbitrarily recursively defined statement-in other words.
 
MAX: Ok.
 
Dr. K: And let S be some statement that does not belong to L1.
 
MAX: Ok.
 
Dr. K: And let L2 the same as L1, except that S is a member of L2.
 
MAX: I see. So S belongs to L2, but not to L1. But otherwise L1 and L2 are the same.
 
Dr. K: Exactly. Is L2 recursively definable.
 
MAX: Yes. L1 is recursive, by supposition. So it is generated by some statement of the form:
 
sigma belongs to L1, and, if zeta belongs to L1, does phi of zeta.
 
It follows that L2 is generated by the statement:
 
S belongs to L2, and, if zeta belongs to L2, so does psi of zeta,
 
where psi is just like phi, except that psi of S equals sigma.
 
 
Dr. K: Exactly, Max. Exactly. So L2 contains S; and it contains psi of S, which is sigma, and it contains psi of psi of S; and so on.
 
MAX: So L2 is recursively defined, and so is L1. But the recursion that generates L1 fails to generate L2.
 
Dr. K: Exactly. And L1 was an arbitrarily chosen statement class.
 
MAX: Ah! So if L1 is supposed, for argument’s sake, to be a recursive definition of the class of all recursively defined statement-sets, then we can produce another recursively statement-set, by doing what we just did a moment ago with S. Which means that L1 is not a recursive definition of the class of all recursively defined statement-sets.
 
Dr. K: Right. The assumption that there is a recursive definition of the class of all recursively defined statement-sets self-refutes.
 
MAX: Which means that there is no definition of the class of all recursively defined statement-sets.
 
Dr. K: Exactly.
 
MAX: Which means that there is no recursive definition of the class of systems of logic.
 
Dr. K: Correct.
 
MAX: Which means that there is no recursive characterization of the concept of logical truth.
 
Dr. K: Correct.
 
MAX: Which means that the class of truths of logic is incomplete.
 
Dr. K: Correct.
 
MAX: Which would seem to be more general, and perhaps more significant in other ways, than the fact that the class of arithmetical truths is incomplete.
 
Dr. K: I agree. But we can use the method of proof that we just used, in our proof of the incompleteness of logic, to prove Gödel’s theorem.
 
MAX: How’s that?
 
Dr. K: Let k be an arbitrary class of arithmetical truths. If we can figure out a way to identify so much as a single truth of arithmetic that does not belong to k, then k is incomplete.
 
MAX: Ah! Very good! And since k is arbitrarily chosen---since, in other words, k is any given class of arithmetical truths---it follows that arithmetic is incomplete.
 
Dr. K: And that is what Gödel did. He proved that, given any class k of arithmetical truths, it was possible to construct a truth of arithmetic not belonging to k.
 
MAX: And I want to hear all about, but I don’t think I can handle any more information today, Sir.
 
Dr. K: Then let’s adjourn. See you tomorrow,