OCD and Philosophy
Short Papers on OCD, Psychopathy, and Psychopathology


What are Some Characteristics of OCD in Children? The Failure of Political Philosophy to Engage Reality OCD and Philosophy
How to Get Rid of OCD
What are Some Characteristics of OCD in Children? OCD: The Philosopher’s Illness
The Obsessive-compulsive Must Accept his Own Sadistic Sexuality Institutional Psychopathy
The Psychology of the Bureaucrat Psychopaths are Rogue Bureaucrats
And Bureaucrats are Non-rogue Psychopaths How Double-think is Possible
Bureaucratic Bloat Responsible for OCD-spike Submitting to Feminism Makes It More Psychopathic What is the Prognosis for People with OCD?
The Way to Beat OCD is to Have a Purpose in Life Is OCD a Disease?
Social Anxiety is about Rage Structural Therapy
Effective Therapists Must Have and Project Inner Strength Reading-related Difficulties in People with OCD
The Limitations of CBT in the Treatment of OCD Turn OCD Against Itself
How do I get over my OCD? Intrusive Thoughts
Why People with OCD Have Them Physical vs. Mental Illness
How to Treat Compulsions that are not Accompanied by Obsessions? Why Psychopaths Overachieve
The Therapeutic Significance of a Healthy Sex Life Autism as Pseudo-self-containment
The Two Ways in which Intellectual Activity Promotes Intelligence How Mental Illness Differs from Physical Illness
Psychiatric Munchausen’s by Proxy
What is the Prognosis for People with OCD?
How is Rationalization Different from Auto-hypnosis?
 
OCD and Philosophy
Obsessive-compulsives and philosophers have a lot in common. First if all, they are both compulsive doubters. They doubt the obvious. They rationalize their doing so by saying that they are trying to be rigorous and that they are trying not to believe things that are false. But that is, indeed, a mere rationalization. Both the obsessive-compulsive and the philosopher are impotent, being too fearful to engage the world. And to the extent that they have potency, it lies in their ability to manipulate linguistic or otherwise symbolic proxies of reality. So instead of dealing with the world on its own terms---instead of dealing with the world in the world—they try to internalize as much of the world as possible into the sphere of their own thought, where they are dominant. And they are dominant there both because they are more inclined towards thought than towards action and also, more importantly, because it is their own mind where, of course, they ipso facto have total power.
Or at least the illusion thereof—more on this in a moment.
Then there is the fact that both the philosopher and the obsessive-compulsive are unduly preoccupied with logical niceties and fine points of argumentation. This is at least partly a derivative of their sense of impotence: when one has no material of one’s own to work on— which is the case whenever one is too afraid of the world to venture out into it and get material--- one preoccupies oneself with secondary material—with matters of grammar, logic, argumentation and the like.
Plus, by conditionalizing the acceptance of hypotheses on subtleties of proof and argumentation, they are able to rationalize continuing to remain in their own heads; they are able to rationalize commandeering debates, and holing them up within their own thought-scape, pending the resolution of niceties of logic and dialectical protocol which, of their very nature, are incapable of being definitely resolved.
There is another, somewhat less invidious dimension to the just-discussed similarity between the philosopher and the obsessive-compulsive. Neither the philosopher nor the obsessive-compulsive has any real doubts, even of a purely intellectual variety, as to the contents of the external world. In any case, neither has any more such doubts than the next person. But both are indeed more doubtful than the next person. They are more doubtful, and with good reason, as to the contents of the internal world. With the both the philosopher and the obsessive- compulsive, their supposed doubts about the external world are displaced, projected doubts about the internal world. They are both people whose minds are veritable caldrons of primal desires but who, being moral, do their best to suppress and repress their basal urges. The result is that, while their understanding of the external world is in fact perfectly good, notwithstanding their asseverations to their contrary, they are quite in the dark as to the internal world, believing or half-believing themselves to be logic-driven, Cartesian ratiocinators, when, in fact, their Cartesianism is only a veneer, which holds only of the thinnest and most uppermost mental stratum of theirs, the rest of their respective psyches being Nietzschean cesspools.
And both of these types of people fancy themselves ‘rational actors’—people who have gotten the better of the base side of themselves---when in reality they are anything but rational actors, the truth being that they are driven by rage, narcissism and fear. Indeed, their intellectualism is a reaction to, and attempt to cloak their own darkly retrograde psychological condition.
And their insistence on the rationality of man is merely an idealization—a projection of a self-image that they half-have and are 100% trying to have. And the Lockean/Cartesian
 
insistence on the non-existence of the unconscious—on the brazenly spurious idea that mind extends only as far consciousness---is merely another tendentious rationalization, and a decidedly more sterile and superficial one than their false, but not entirely misconceived insistence on the primacy within people of rationality.
There is a second similarity between the obsessive-compulsive and the philosopher. They are both pathologically concerned with ethics—with questions of right and wrong and good vs. evil. In both cases, this is because they are crypto-criminals—people whose fundamental orientation with respect to others is anti-social—this being reflected in their solipsism and skepticism---but who also have strong, nay draconian, superegos and thus do everything in their power to suppress their criminal side. And to this end they enlist their pre-existing penchant for dwelling on technicalities of logic; which, when transferred from the sphere of knowledge-theory into the domain of ethics, results in their dwelling on technicalities of a legalistic nature. And this is why many an obsessive-compulsive, and also many a philosopher, goes into law.
Philosophers tend to be extremely sensitive to, and intelligent about, niceties of language.
This is obviously true of some obsessive-compulsives, but it is unknown whether it is categorically true of them. But supposing that it is, this, I think, is a derivative of their fear-based retreat from the external world, which is the realm of action, into the internal world, which is the realm of thought. After all, sensitivity to linguistic niceties being cut from much the same cloth as sensitivity to logical niceties, and the latter being, as we have already seen, a by-product of the philosopher’s and the obsessive-compulsives replacing of reality with cognitive proxies thereof.
One last point: I have noticed that a hugely disproportionate number of philosophers, including myself, are professional level musicians. Around 40% of philosophy professors fall into this category. I don’t know whether the same is true of the class of obsessive compulsives— it presumably isn’t. But even though there is not, in all likelihood, a categorical connection between OCD and musicality, there may be a sub-categorical connection, as in, there may be a relatively comprehensive sub-set of the class of obsessive-compulsives whose members are also musical and whose being musical is connected to their OCD. In any case, it seems that musicianship and philosophical ability are related in that both involve decrypting and then re- encrypting information; they are both about organizing information—and doing so with obsessional concern for the logical interrelations holding among bits of information organized, and a proportionate disregard for the correspondence of that information to external reality.
 
What are Some Characteristics of OCD in Children?

A listener of mine, Emma, asked me: What are some early signs of OCD in children?
Here is my answer: First of all, all children are OCD. In fact, OCD is actually a prolongation into adulthood of the child's 'binary' emotional relation to the world. When you send a child to camp, he kicks and screams and cries. Then he has to come home, he cries again. Also, children, much like obsessive-compulsives, are soothed by repetition and like familiarity. They like to be told the same story at bedtime, night after night, and sleep with the same stuffed animal. That said, children who are actually OCD--i.e. who will be OCD as adults--do have some distinctinve characteristics. The main difference between them and non-OCD children is that they tend to have rituals and peculiarities that are specific to them. All children like to sleep with same stuffed animal night after and be told the same story night after night. But only OCD children have to sleep with a glass of water next to the bed or have to put their left shoe on before their first. Also, OCD children tend to be more cholicy and more emotionally intense and extreme than others children---more prone to bouts of depressive withdrawal. But I stress that OCD is never itself the issue, and OCD is not eliminated by being confronted head-on. OCD is about withdrawal from a frightening world into a safe space of thought and ritual, and the only way to conquer OCD is to conquer fear. Which one does by developing strengths of character and intellect. OCD is given rise to by emotional vulnerability, which in turn is given rise to by actual vulnerability--by defenselessness. And the way to defeat OCD is to give proper, non- neurotic defenses to the person in question.
 
The Failure of Political Philosophy to Engage Reality
I wrote an audio-article in which I said that both philosophy—specifically, philosophical skepticism---and OCD were about retreating from the exigencies of external actual reality into the safety of internal pseudo-reality. And in keeping with this, I said that both OCD and philosophy are intellectualized impotence.
In any case, a listener of mine who goes by the name of L and H Productions, made the following point in response to my article. He said: “What about political philosophers? Don’t they engage the world? Aren’t they a counter-example to your point, that philosophy is about autistic non-engagement?”
Yes and no. Mostly no. Consider Plato, as he is a paradigm case of political philosophers. Plato’s system was completely a priori. Yes—he was talking about how to reform the world. But really, that isn’t what he was doing. He really talking about how to replace the world with a world of his own—a world that had little reality, and little justification, outside of his own thought-space. So Plato was really talking about replacing the actual world his thought-world.
He wasn’t in any real way engaging the actual world.
And the absurdity of what Plato was doing comes out in a lot of ways. In, for example, the rigidity of the society that he was proposing; in the stereotyped—and in that respect decidedly OCD---protocols governing both education and, more generally, interactions between different people; and, moreover, in the absurd idea, put forth in this dialogue The Laws, that even the most minor violations of law should be punished by death; and, finally, in the incoherent idea that society should be ruled by a philosopher king—incoherent, because societies are to be run by sapient doers, not sapient thinkers; societies are to be run by people who do not flee from the world into intellectual constructions and, therefore, are not to be run by philosophers, granting, of course, that they are to be run by people who are philosopher-like to the extent, but only to the extent, that they are intelligent.
Or consider Marx, another textbook case of a philosophical philosopher. Yes—he was talking about how to change the world. But really, he was talking, quite explicitly, about destroying the existing social structure and replacing it with one that had no real basis---other than a totally fabricated one	in reality, and which, when it was implemented, led to loss of life
and opportunity on an unprecedented scale.
Now, not all political philosophers are as guilty as Marx and Plato of failing to engage actual political realities. Some political philosophers do not simply propose that existing political realities be replaced with their childish a priori fantasies.
For example, John Locke made a number of extremely reasonable points about law and economics that, when implemented, were enormously successful. And much the same is true, though in some respects to an even greater degree, of Adam Smith and David Hume, who, along with Locke, created the discipline of modern free-market economics.
But Adam Smith was really an ex-philosopher who left the discipline of philosopher in order to start a new discipline. And Locke and Hume were hard-core empiricists: their whole agenda, as philosophers, was to empiricize philosophy. Their criticism of existing philosophy was that it failed to engage the world, and their objective was to reinvent the discipline in such a way that it did engage the world.
So, yes, their political philosophies—which were very good	did engage the world; but
to the extent that they did, they were almost anti-philosophical political philosophies.
That said, political theory can engage the world, and that does represent a limitation on
 
the scope of my point about philosophy categorically being in the nature of an autistic withdrawal from reality.
But there is one last point to make, which does to some extent buttress my conception of philosophy as autistic retreat. Hume and Locke were arch-empiricists, meaning that, in their view, you don’t know it if you don’t see it (or otherwise have direct sensory evidence of it).
Now, empiricism collapses into the view that we can of nothing except our own conscious states; for the empiricist rejects all rules of inference would enable us to posit the existence of anything-
--the empiricist says that we can know it only if it is a datum of consciousness and, therefore, that if we have to posit it, meaning infer its existence, then it doesn’t exist.
So in their attempt to make philosophy engage the world, Locke and Hume empiricized philosophy. But in empiricizing philosophy, Locke and Hume made philosophy collapse into pure skepticism, pure skepticism being the most compete conceivable autistic withdrawal from reality into one’s own mind. And what this shows is that, even when philosophers try to make philosophy not be an autistic retreat, it ends up being precisely that. Which does rather confirm my conception of philosophy as autistic retreat.
 
How to Get Rid of OCD


A listener of mine asked me the following question: Is there an effective treatment that can eliminate OCD for good?

Here is my answer:
There is only one way to 'get rid' of OCD, and that is to find a calling in life in which one's obsessive compulsive tendencies are an asset, as opposed to a liability. OCD is not so much an illness as it is a distinctive way of processing emotional information. In the wrong environment, that psychological architecture can hold one back; in right one, it can push one forward. Many writers, composers, mathematicians, lawyers, philosophers and creative and analytical people of many stripes (e.g. Beethoven, Einstein, Dr. Johnson) have OCD; such people have found callings in which their OCD works for them. So it's not about eliminating it; it's about putting it to one's advantage. I myself have done that in a very big way. I am being OCD right now, in writing such a thorough answer, but in being so thorough in this context, I am putting to my obsessive-compulsive tendencies to non-pathological use, instead of letting them express themselves as OCD. And that is point: one doesn't get rid of mental illnesses by getting rid of them; one chooses to work in areas in which those mental illnesses are functional and, therefore, not mental illnesses
 
What are Some Characteristics of OCD in Children?
A listener of mine, Emma, asked me: What are some early signs of OCD in children?
Here is my answer: First of all, all children are OCD. In fact, OCD is actually a prolongation into adulthood of the child's 'binary' emotional relation to the world. When you send a child to camp, he kicks and screams and cries. Then he has to come home, he cries again. Also, children, much like obsessive-compulsives, are soothed by repetition and like familiarity. They like to be told the same story at bedtime, night after night, and sleep with the same stuffed animal. That said, children who are actually OCD--i.e. who will be OCD as adults--do have some distinctinve characteristics. The main difference between them and non-OCD children is that they tend to have rituals and peculiarities that are specific to them. All children like to sleep with same stuffed animal night after and be told the same story night after night. But only OCD children have to sleep with a glass of water next to the bed or have to put their left shoe on before their first. Also, OCD children tend to be more cholicy and more emotionally intense and extreme than others children---more prone to bouts of depressive withdrawl. But I stress that OCD is never itself the issue, and OCD is not eliminated by being confronted head-on. OCD is about withdrawl from a frightening world into a safe space of thought and ritual, and the only way to conquer OCD is to conquer fear. Which one does by developing strengths of character and intellect. OCD is given rise to by emotional vulnerability, which in turn is given rise to by actual vulnerability--by defenselessness. And the way to defeat OCD is to give proper, non- neurotic defenses to the person in question.
 
OCD: The Philosopher’s Illness


A philosopher is somebody who thinks but does not act. He is someone who withdraws into his own mind. Philosophical skepticism is simply an excuse for the philosopher to remain holed up in his own mind.
Skepticism is the view that we cannot know to what extent, if any, our sense- perceptions are accurate.
The skeptic’s position collapses into the absurdity it is no less rational to believe that our sense-perceptions are uncaused and therefore inexplicable than it is to believe that they are caused and therefore explicable.
So the fact that people are drawn to skepticism cannot be understood in terms its merits, given that it has none, and is to be understood in terms of its emotional appeal.	And its emotional appeal is that it allows people to crawl into a safe space inside their heads. It allows them to deny the reality of threats with which the external world is teeming.
A consequence is that the skeptic doesn’t have to act. If there is no external reality, and there are no external threats, then it isn’t necessary to do anything. If all there is to life is what is inside the impregnable fortress of one’s own consciousness, then there is nothing to do: all there is to do is watch.
But there is a big problem with skeptic’s retreat from reality into thought. Thought inevitably refers one back to the external world. And the only way to prevent it from doing as much as to stop engaging in it. So if the skeptic is to remain in his safe haven of pure consciousness, he must keep retreating: it is not enough for him to hole himself up inside his consciousness. For if he is holed up there but he lets himself think then he will start chipping away at the walls of his self-isolation. So he must put himself within a fortress inside that fortress, and so on. Which means that he has to paralyze his own thought-processes, since, when left to follow their own course, they push him back into the external world.
Notice that skeptic’s main weapon—his main way of preserving his aloofness from reality—is doubt. And this is the main weapon of the obsessive-compulsive. Whenever it comes time to act, the obsessive compulsive is afflicted by action-crippling doubt.
He consciously experiences this doubt as unpleasant. But that is neither here nor there, since it has no effect on the effect of that doubt, which is to keep the obsessive-compulsive inside his safe haven of thought—of thought which doesn’t engage the world and eventually, for that very reason, collapses in on itself.
And the reason the obsessive-compulsive obsesses is that he has nothing else to do. He has to obsess since he has prevented himself from acting. He is holed up inside his consciousness, and the only objects on which he can act are ideas; and the only way left to him to act on them is to pour his consciousness on them—after all, consciousness, along with this ideas, are all he has left. And what is to obsess except to stream one’s consciousness onto some idea?
As for his compulsions: these are his mind’s way of pushing him back out into the world. The sane part of the obsessive-compulsive’s mind wants him to rejoin the living and thus to get out of his own head. The only way to do that is to find a way to get his obsessiveness to be converted into action. After all, obsessiveness is all he has. And compulsiveness is obsessiveness about behavior.
So the obsessive-compulsive’s compulsiveness represents the sane side of him. True— the compulsions themselves are insane. But they are insane only because, as an insane person, he
 
needs an insane pretext to act sanely. The sane part of the obsessive-compulsive—the part of him that wants him to act---is like a parent who is trying to feed a toddler who refuses to eat, and the insane part of the obsessive-compulsive—the part of him that doesn’t want to act---is like the toddler. And the sane part of the obsessive-compulsive is, as it were, pretending that the spoon in his hand is an airplane and that the peas on the spoon are little passengers; and, in this way, by speaking the toddler’s language—his delusion-embodying language---the parent gets the toddler to do something good for himself.
So there it is. OCD is about refusal to act. It is about defensively holing oneself up inside consciousness. And getting the obsessive-compulsive to act---and thus to stop being obsessive-compulsive—is like a taking a cat out of a tree. It takes a lot of time and a lot of sensitivity. And the way to do is by exerting a firm and steady, but gentle pressure.
There is good news, thought. This cat in a tree that the obsessive-compulsive is---is sane. He knows that he is on a tree; he knows, deep down, that he has to get out of the tree. But he’s a bit gun-shy.
The obsessive-compulsive cat in a tree is not like the schizophrenic cat in a tree. The latter doesn’t know that he is in a tree or that he is a cat. And getting him to come down from three is dramatically more difficult, since, precisely because he doesn’t grasp reality as it is, there is no language in common between him and the person who is trying to talk him down.
But obsessive-compulsive sees things as they are. His problem is not deludedness; it is fearfulness. And since he does see reality as it is, one can use reason on him, as long as one does so gently, so as to not intensify his fears.
 
The Obsessive-compulsive Must Accept his Own Sadistic Sexuality
An essential part of the treatment of the obsessive-compulsive is getting him to accept his own sexuality, which invariably has an extremely sadistic and/or masochistic character. If he does not accept his sexuality, there will be a continuation of the alienatedness of thought from feeling that is responsible for OCD. And he does accepts his sexuality, this will effectuate an OCD-eliminate reconciliation of thought and feeling.
Let me put these points into context.
All mental illness involves some kind of withdrawal from reality. But there are two different ways of withdrawing from reality and thus two different kind of mental illness. There are mental illnesses that effectuate this withdrawal by destroying the coherence of one’s ideation: these are known as psychoses.
And there are mental illnesses that effectuate this withdrawal not by diminishing the coherence of one’s thinking but by paralyzing one’s will. These are known as neuroses. Neuroses do not destroy the coherence of one’s thought.
Or rather---they do not the coherence of one’s intellection, that is, of one’s mental activity so far as it is concerned with the discerning of logical relations. But there is a respect in which they diminish the coherence of one’s mentation: they estrange intellection from its ordinary emotional concomitants. So the neurotic can think, and he can also feel, but his thoughts are alienated from his feelings, the result being that his will is weakened. And the reason for this weakening of will is that, as philosophers have long known, action is not solely about thought, nor solely about feeling, but about the two operating jointly and symbiotically; and in the neurotic, this symbiosis has been disrupted.
In the psychotic, this symbiosis has not been disrupted; but the psychotic’s intellection is incoherent, so that, even though his will is intact, it is led on so many fool’s errands by his compromised powers of reasoning.
The obsessive-compulsive’s intellection is coherent. Nay, hyper-coherent. Indeed, it is made hyper-coherent by the fact that it is estranged from the usual emotional concomitants of thought and can thus pursue its own course without being weighed down by the usual emotional resistances. But the obsessive-compulsive’s will is as atrophied as his intellect is hypertrophied--
-and for the very same reason, this being the just-mentioned alienatedness of thought from feeling. And the restoration of the obsessive-compulsive’s personality consists entirely in restoring this thought-feeling balance.
And this is done by two doing two things. First, by finding a profession for the obsessive- compulsive that is congenial to him and that enables him to flourish without having to perform the impossible the impossible feat of changing his own psychological architecture.
Second, by reconciling him to his own sexuality, which, precisely because his affect, and therewith his sexuality, is so alienated from, and thus not tempered by, his judgement, assumes particularly extreme forms and, consequently, sadistic or masochistic forms. And the reintegration of his sexuality is accomplished by reconciling him to urges and ceasing to regard them as an abomination.
And the truth is that his sexuality is no more abominable than anyone else’s; it only seems that way because, in him, the sadistic and masochistic undercurrents of human sexuality are exposed, owing to the fact that his sexuality has not been absorbed into the usual narratives and rationalizations. And the reason for this non-absorption is, of course, that the thought-feeling balance responsible for these narratives and rationalizations has been disrupted.
 
Be it noted that the obsessive-compulsive, having as he does a strong and intact conscience, never actually carries out acts that are actually, as opposed to symbolically sadistic or masochistic; so there is no danger in reconciling him to his own sadism and/or masochism.
 
Institutional Psychopathy
A psychopath is someone who has no conscience. There is a phenomenon known as 'institutional psychopathization', this being the process whereby an entire institution becomes psychopathic, in the sense that the institution as a whole is without principle and also in the sense that the people composing it are without principle. Once an institution becomes just slightly psychopathized, it quickly succumbs to wholesale psychopathization. And a number of institutions and professions have become, or are in the process of becoming, psychopathic. This main reason for this is that, owing to technological advances, many institutions are not only obsolete and therefore serve no positive function, but actually thwart progress and prevent people doing what those same institutions are supposed to do. As a result, those institutions are fraudulent, and therefore psychopathic, and the same is therefore true of the people composing them, who have no choice but to being stone-psychopaths themselves if they want to be employed by those institutions. Many university-departments and academic disciplines are not completely and utterly psychopathic. This is glaringly where the humanities and social sciences are concerned. I believe that some branches of psychotherapy have become psychopathized, this being why psychiatrists are proverbially likely to make their patients’ problems even worse.
Because psychopathy is now being spread by psychopathic institutions and professions, it is dramatically more widespread than it used to be. Consequently, the old saw that only 1%-3% of the population consists of psychopaths is now pathetically outdated and also presupposes a narrow as well as antiquated conception of what a psychopath is. Most psychopaths in our time are not slick con-men but are rather bureaucrats, who discharge their psychopathy not by running Madoff-style swindles but by misdeploying educational and professional resources. I am hosting an ‘Ask me anything’ session on psychopathy, where I will answer any questions that you have on psychopathy. Please go to www.amafeed.com and type ‘psychopathy’ in the search bar. I’m the first result that pops up.
 
The Psychology of the Bureaucrat


People are internally conflicted only when they are autonomous—only, in other words, when they decide for themselves how to act and what to think. To be internally conflicted is to have two incompatible decision-making protocols. And if one has no such protocols—in other words, if one does not decide for oneself what to think or do—then one cannot have two incompatible such protocols and thus cannot be internally conflicted.
A bureaucrat is somebody who has surrendered all of his decision-making responsibilities to the bureaucracy that employs him. So long as a given person’s decision-making protocol is capable of being in conflict with the bureaucracy that hosts him, that person is not a bureaucrat. And so long as the condition obtains, he can be internally conflicted, since, under that circumstance, he has, or at least can have, two decision-making protocols, one corresponding to the bureaucracy in question and one that is his own.
It is only when those two protocols merge, and it is therefore only when his own decision- protocol is absorbed into and therefore eliminated in favor, the institution’s decision-protocol, that the person in question becomes a bureaucrat.
One is either completely a bureaucrat or completely not a bureaucrat. If somebody is only half a bureaucrat, then he can to some extent make decisions for himself and therefore is not a bureaucrat at all. What can happen is that a person may be weak and, without crossing the line, so to speak, that separates non-bureaucrats from bureaucrats, may in contexts like a bureaucrat and may, by virtue of being obviously weak, be tolerated by bureaucrats. But even this arrangement is unstable and will work only if the non-bureaucrat in question is an utter ‘bump on a log.’
Given that bureaucrats are not internally conflicted, they are not neurotic or otherwise psychodynamic. They can be—and indeed categorically are---broken, and the breaks within them may be in located along the psychical fault lines that, in a psychodynamic person, would be the meeting-points of two opposed emotional forces. In someone who is psychodynamic, these fault lines corresponding to mind-internal tensions; but in the bureaucrat, they correspond to veritable schisms---to rents or cracks. In a psychodynamic person, these fault-lines are places where there is too much psychical activity—where there is a plurality of mutually opposed psychical forces; and because these fault-lines are still psychical hot-spots in the psychodynamic person---because intra-psychical communications, as it were, pass through them and along them
—their existence is not an existential threat to the integratedness of the psyche in question.
But in the bureaucrat, these fault-lines are indeed schisms---they are crevasse-like gaps or canyons---which are to no degree populated by psychical forces, and their existence therefore does pose an existential threat to the psyche in question.
And when a bureaucrat is made consciously aware of these fault-lines within his own psyche, he responds, not with psychological resistance, but with abject fear. Bureaucrats do not have resistance-reactions. Resistances are about internal conflict: one part of the person’s mind accepts what he is being told about himself, but another opposed part refuses to accept it.
Bureaucrats are not internally conflicted and therefore do not have resistance-reactions. A bureaucrat will hiss and seethe like a wounded viper when a spot-light is shined on the cracks in his psyche: but this hissing and seething is not about resistance: it is about pure, non-conflicted, utter hatred of the person who is shining that light.
The bureaucrat’s psychological architecture is not identical with, and is not easily
 
understood in terms of, that of a psychodynamic person . The bureaucrat’s architecture is to be understood in terms of that of the psychopath. The psychopath, like the bureaucrat, is incapable of internal conflict, since internal conflicts are mediated by conscience, and the psychopath has no conscience. The difference between the bureaucrat and the psychopath is that because the bureaucrat was once a person---because he was a person before his own decision-protocol was replaced by that of the corresponding institution---his psychological architecture, though non- psychodynamic and therefore effectively dead, has a formal similarity to that of the psychodynamic person: the bureaucrat’s psyche is the skeleton of a once existent but now dead and gone psychodynamic psyche. By contrast, the psychopath’s psyche does not even have a skeletal or formal similarity to that of a normal person.
There is no one way that bureaucrats look or sound. But they often have a distinctively nasal sound---a distinctly monotonic nasal sound. It sounds like this

https://www.podomatic.com/podcasts/jmkuczynski13629/episodes/2018-02- 06T20_06_58-08_00

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9uoIOM72Z80

This sound is easily imitated and often is imitated, usually in comedic contexts. In any case, this sound, with its distinctive lack of resonances has to do with the bureaucrat’s impoverished emotional architecture: the missing resonances correspond to the emotional gaps— the dead zones or empty spaces—within the bureaucrat’s psyche.
 
Psychopaths are Rogue Bureaucrats And Bureaucrats are Non-rogue Psychopaths

The reason psychopaths can pass lie detector tests is that psychopaths don’t believe anything. So they don’t have to lie. In the psychopath, rationalizations have replaced beliefs. In other words, what it is convenient to believe has replaced what is actually believed. So nothing is believed. But certain propositions are accepted, as long as it is convenient to accept them.
The bureaucrat does not believe anything. But he accepts certain propositions because the bureaucracy that employs him requires him to accept them. In other words, he accepts those propositions because it is convenient to accept them.
Thus, in the bureaucrat, what it is convenient to believe has replaced what is actually believed. Rationalizations have replaced beliefs. Institutional pseudo-reality has replaced actual reality.
So what is the difference between the bureaucrat and the psychopath?
Ultimately, there is no difference. But so far as there is a difference, it is this: the bureaucrat is part of an organized collective of psychopaths, whereas the so-called psychopath is not a part of such a collective. So the psychopath is a rogue bureaucrat, and the bureaucrat is a non-rogue psychopath.
But if the bureaucrat were removed from his host-institution and were not quickly embedded in another bureaucracy, his behavior would immediately become that of the psychopath. The bureaucrat’s appearance of propriety and decency is just that—an appearance. There is nothing there: the bureaucrat is just as amorphous and insubstantial as the psychopath, but he has the external reinforcement of an institution. So it is this external reinforcement that gives the bureaucrat’s character any semblance of legitimacy or cohesiveness. And he knows this. He knows that, without this external reinforcement, he would turn into a protoplasmic blob of amorphous sub-humanity. So he knows that he has to march in lock-step with his host- institution, lest he turn into such a blob.
Thus, the bureaucrat depends not just for his income but for his very identity on his following rules and protocols.
 
How Double-think is Possible?
How is double-think possible? How is it possible for a person to have a given belief at one time and then believe the opposite a moment later? The answer: It isn’t possible.
But double-think is possible?
So how is that possible? How can double-think be possible if it is not possible to shift freely between opposed and incompatible beliefs?
It is possible because double-think is about not believing anything.
Double-think is not about shifting between veritable beliefs. It is about shifting between institutionally or socially mandated acceptances that are in some respects functionally similar to beliefs but are not beliefs.
Who is it that engages in double-think? Bureaucrats. Bureaucrats are the ones who engage in double-think.
And what is a bureaucrat?
Someone who believes whatever his institutional tells him to believe.
In other words, someone who believes nothing. Someone who has no beliefs at all. Someone who, although he doesn’t believe anything, nonetheless pretends to have certain beliefs, depending on what the institution in question requires of him.
But so far as a person is able to engage in double-think, it is because he doesn’t believe anything.
So far as a person is able to keep track of his various lies, it is because, underneath his lies, there is a core of veritable beliefs. But in the bureaucrat, this core of true belief has been infiltrated by double-think. Since double-think is to real belief what plastic flowers are to real flowers, this means that the bureaucrats ability to believe anything has been rotted out. And this in turn means that the bureaucrat’s agency has been rotted out, agency being the ability to decide for oneself what to think and do. This is because in order to decide for oneself what to do one has to have beliefs as to how one ought to act. And if one cannot have beliefs, then one cannot have beliefs as to how one ought to act. And if one cannot have beliefs as to how one ought to act, one cannot act. One can only engage in reflexive pseudo-actions.
And this is the bureaucrat’s situation: it isn’t that the bureaucrat isn’t doing what he knows he should do. It is that he doesn’t know anything, since he doesn’t believe anything, and he therefore can’t do anything. When the bureaucrat says that his ‘hands are tied’, he is telling the truth. The truth is that his hands are tied: he can’t do anything at all.
Of course, when the bureaucrat says ‘my hands are tied’, he is claiming that the institution is not letting him act as he wants to do. But the truth is that he can’t do anything. He can only reflexively respond to institutional dictates.
So is isn’t that the institution isn’t letting him do such and such. It’s that the institution hasn’t ordered him to do such and such. For the bureaucrat, there is no difference between being allowed to do such and such and being required to such and such. This difference exists only for people who can decide for themselves what to do, and the bureaucrat has no such ability.
 
Bureaucratic Bloat Responsible for OCD-spike
When I was a graduate student, I gave a paper to one of my professors to look at. I still half-believed that my so-called ‘professors’ were in fact professors, as opposed to the arch- bureaucrats that they proved to be (and that I already semi-consciously knew them to be). When he and I were discussing my paper, he would refuse to weigh in on any statement that fell outside of his artificial so-called ‘specialization.’ He would say: ‘ah, you’d have to ask so and so about that: you see, he’s the philosophy of mind expert in the department; my specialization is meta- ethics.’ In fact, he wouldn’t even reference so and so by name; he would just point in the direction of his office. It was the most utterly cowardly and small thing one could imagine. And it is artificial and absurd in the extreme to hold, as this professor did, that within a discipline like philosophy, there could legitimately exist such rigidly mutually exclusive sub-discipline or that intellectual labor could with any legitimacy be subdivided in a way that validated such subdivisions.
And this professor’s ‘work’ for lack of a better, like that of everyone else in the department, was a mere caricature of actual intellectual work, as it had been completely drained of meaning and realness by submission to the just-mentioned institutional, bureaucratic protocols that were masquerading as legitimate intellectual or scientific protocols.
There is a psychology professor at Harvard, by the name of Howard Gardner, who claims that intelligence is subdivided in the seven rigidly defined mutually isolated types: verbal, musical mathematical, social, etc.
This is radically absurd as well as destructive in the extreme of human intellectual potential. One mark of truly intelligent people is that they are able to reinvent themselves intellectually—that their intelligence, though functionally encapsulated, at least within limits, is able to migrate about and embody itself in new aptitudes, nay, in aptitudes that are not even in the same discipline, or even in some cases in the same kind of discipline, as the aptitudes that preceded them.
And I know this from my own case. I was told that I was a moron. Then after reinventing myself—or simply being placed in a new environment that triggered intellectual development---I was told, either by a person or a test-score, that I was genius of such and such a kind, but that I was moron of thus and such a kind. Then, after another such revolution had occurred, I was told that I was moron in such and such a respect but a genius in thus and a respect. And so on.
My abilities were changing; I was acquiring new ones and letting others lie fallow. But what was happening was that a core of intelligence was putting on new hats and taking off old ones; it wasn’t that there was rigid pre-determined intellectual template that my intelligence was doomed to inhabit; it was that I was in fact intelligent and, owing to changing exigencies and to changing incentive and disincentive-structures, my intelligence was repositing itself in different skills and interests and, indeed, intelligences.
When a person sustains damage to a certain part of his brain, the functions previously discharged by that brain-center will come to be discharged by other brain-centers. To some extent, those other brain-centers are merely performing analogues of that function; in some cases, however, to at least some degree, they seem to be assuming the very same function. In any case, it is clear that intellectual recovery, and intellectual growth in general, depend on intelligence’s being able to migrate around, from module to module. This is clear, I stress, both in cases involving brain-damage and also in cases, such as my own, of garden-variety intellectual growth.
And Howard Gardner’s theory automatically rules out all of that growth as impossible.
 
And it thereby strips educational and psychiatric institutions of any reason to recognize it, and it gives them every possible reason to deny it when it happens and, therefore, to thwart the corresponding cases of intellectual growth.
Gardner’s theory is a pitiful and brazen rationalization of rigid and artificial purely institutional sub-divisions---of bureaucratic divisions of labor—that have only the most superficial correspondence to facts about the structure of intelligence. But educational and mental health-related institutions can certainly do quite enough to thwart intellectual growth in people as to make it seem as though Gardner’s pseudo-theory is correct. And I refer to it as a pseud-theory because that is what it is: it is a bureaucratic action that is dressed up as a psychological theory, with ruinous consequences.
And this is why OCD is on the rise. OCD has always has existed; that much is clear, given what a well-defined constellation of symptoms it involves. But OCD has definitely been on the rise in recent years.
Why is this?
OCD is what happens when one’s acceptance of legalistic, logical or pseudo-logical protocols is used to tamp down one’s emotions---one’s aggression, one’s sexuality, one’s vitality. And a spreading educational and legal bureaucracy—which is supported by fake experts, as Howard Gardner, with their fake and undermining theories, such as Gardner’s theory of intelligence---are making it increasingly difficult for people of great potential, and of correspondingly strong passions, to discharge those passions in a way that is constructive or, indeed, that is anything other than blind rage. And this rage is filtered through internal legalistic and pseudo-logical protocols that mirror the institutional protocols of the educational system in which the person in question is trapped. So, yes, there has been a rise in OCD. And that rise is in lock-step with the spread of cancerous educational and professional bureaucracies, and it is exacerbated by Howard Gardner-style theories, which are nothing but a broken educational bureaucracy’s rationalizing itself.
To sum up: More bureaucracy equals more suppressed rage. More suppressed rage, coupled with half-acceptance of bureaucratic protocols, equals rage that is expressed in the distinctively, bureaucratically repetitive and detail-oriented way that is the hallmark of OCD.
 
Submitting to Feminism Makes It More Psychopathic
A psychopath is someone who does not have a functioning superego, and psychopathy is the condition of not having a functioning superego. The main difference between men and women is that men have internalized superegos and women have externalized superegos. A man’s superego is a relation between that man and himself. A women’s superego is a relation between that woman and other people. A woman’s superego cannot function autonomously; it cannot function unless it is given external reinforcement. And that reinforcement comes from the internalized superegos of the men in her life. For a woman, manly, firm, and morally centered men are the very embodiment of conscience. Therefore, when men are not manly or firm or centered, and when instead they are weak and effeminate and uncentered, women’s superegos have no external reinforcement and thus become defunct.
Here is a concrete way of thinking about this. Suppose that Smith is the President of your country. If there is a national crisis, and Smith responds by being indecisive and weak and effeminate, then the country will rightly become irate; and it will respond either by disintegrating into a condition of nation-level psychopathy or it will replace Smith with somebody who is strong and centered and decisive. In other words, if that country is to avoid degenerating into a condition of psychopathy, it must replace its current weak and effeminate leader with a real and therefore manly leader. And the reason for this is that, although an effeminate person can have conscience, such a conscience is not self-contained; in order to function, an effeminate person’s conscience depends on some other conscience. Therefore, in contexts where there are no true men, there are no functioning consciences, and the result is a condition of complete psychopathy.
Consequently, when a self-described feminist woman is being hysterically psychopathic, the worst way to respond is by attempting to appease her or by submitting to her. Her psychopathy is a product of the absence of a functioning male conscience in her life. And if you respond to her in a weak and submissive manner, you are showing her that you lack a functioning conscience, in consequence of which her psychopathy will rage on. In fact, it will rage on even more virulently than before since, now that she has discovered that you have no conscience, she has discovered there to be one less functioning superego in the world to resist her own lack of a functioning superego.
By contrast, if you are firm, manly, and centered, then you are giving her superego the needed reinforcement of a functioning superego, in consequence of which her superego will then become operational.
Being firm does not mean being violent. Being violent is a way of being weak and effeminate, just as being submissive is a way of being weak and effeminate. Being violent and being submissive are two sides of the same feminine coin. The appropriate way to act is like a man: firm but not violent, decisive but not rigid, and principled but not judgmental. If men acted in this way, then even the most psychopathic and hysterical of feminists would begin to act with genuine integrity. In a way, the feminist woman’s psychopathic hysteria is her petulant and childish way of asking men to be men and therefore to take control, just as the misbehavior of a young boy is his way of asking his father to be a father and therefore to be a source of structure and discipline.
 
What is the Prognosis for People with OCD?
Somebody on Quora.com asked the following question:
What is the prognosis for patients with Obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD)? Here is my answer:
People who have OCD have it because it provides them with relief from anxiety—from anxiety so intense as to be almost inconceivable to people who have not had OCD. But OCD is just a defense-mechanism. And as is the case with most defense-mechanisms, there comes a time in the subject’s life when it starts to do more harm than good. At that point, the obsessive- compulsive has to make a decision: What do I want? Do I want mere freedom from anxiety? Or do I want to live and grow? It is 100% up to him what he chooses. If he chooses to grow, he will, and his OCD, without exactly vanishing, will assume productive forms. If he chooses not to grow, he won’t.
OCD, though an affliction, is ultimately a voluntary one. If the obsessive-compulsive chooses to remain in his defensive bubble of isolation from the world, then his OCD will defeat him. If he chooses to re-engage the world, then his OCD will assume non-pathological and in fact productive forms, as it did with Beethoven and Einstein.
OCD, though an affliction, is an affliction of the will—and is thus unlike cancer or asthma, which have nothing to do with the integrity of one’s will. And OCD is eliminated, or at least made to assume adaptive forms by duly exercising one’s will in growth-oriented ways.
The symptoms of OCD are involuntary only in a relative sense. Relative to a determination to remain within his defensive bubble of non-engagement, there is nothing much that the obsessive-compulsive can do about those symptoms. He can engage in a bit of ‘cognitive-behavioral therapy’, but the effects of such therapy will be shallow and short-lived, absent a determination on the obsessive-compulsive’s part to grow and change himself in a way that makes his OCD irrelevant. On the other, if he does choose to leave his defensive bubble and
re-engage the world, then, indeed, his OCD will become irrelevant. So relative to a determination on his part to re-engage the world, the symptoms of OCD are voluntary.
So ultimately OCD is indeed voluntary, and if one sees it for the voluntary condition that it ultimate is, then the prognosis is 100% positive. But if one sees it as a garden-variety pathology, then the prognosis is negative. A garden-variety condition is one that does not afflict one’s will and that falls outside the scope of the one’s will. OCD is an affliction of one’s will; it is a weakening of one’s will, in consequence of a withdrawal from the world. And by choosing to go back out into the world, the obsessive-compulsive strengthens his will and causes one’s OCD to assume benign if not productive forms.
 
The Way to Beat OCD is to Have a Purpose in Life

Charles Manson’s followers gave him everything: money, sex, labor, drugs, adoration. And what did give them? Nothing. Or almost nothing. He gave them one thing---and it was the most important thing of all: a purpose. He made them believe that they were part of an important cause. A person with a cause and no money has almost everything. A person with all the money in the world and no cause has almost nothing. And Manson gave his minions a cause, and they gave Manson everything else.
Jim Jones’ followers gave him everything. They provided him with slave labor. They barely slept. And at least until the last few months, they did all of this voluntarily. And what did Jim Jones give his followers? Nothing. Or just one thing—he gave them a sense of purpose. He gave them a cause that was their own.
These were profoundly evil men—consummate manipulators. But it was for that very reason that they knew exactly what people need. If they hadn’t known as much, they couldn’t have been such successful predators. And what people need, as these two knew, is a purpose.
People will put up with pain and strife if they have a purpose. And they won’t if they
don’t.
Getting rid of OCD is hard. If a given obsessive-compulsive has a purpose in life that his
OCD is preventing him from fulfilling, then he will get over his OCD. Otherwise he won’t. OCD is simply too painful to get rid of unless one really has to. And one really has to if, and for the most part only if, OCD is interfering with one’s purpose in life.
But there is deeper connection between having a purpose in life and getting rid of OCD. OCD is about having a bifurcated psychological structure. It is about being of two minds—not having a single hegemonic set of values to which all psychical activity is subordinate and, for this reason, not having any way of resolving the internal conflicts that are wrenching one’s psyche apart.
If one has a grand purpose in life, one has a way of resolving these conflicts; for if one has a master plan to which everything else in one’s mind, including one’s internal conflicts, are subordinated, in which case these conflicts can and will be resolved. And therewith one’s OCD will go away. If one has no master plan, there is no way to resolve one’s internal conflicts. And except in the unlikely event that those internal conflicts simply fade away, one’s OCD will persist.
The good news is that one wouldn’t have OCD in the first place unless one did have some grand purpose in life, the reason being that OCD is what happens when one is estranged from one’s own purpose. OCD is about alienatedness from one’s true self and one’s true purpose, and the way to get over it is to find that purpose and actualize it.
 
Is OCD a Disease?


When a condition is described as a ‘disease’, it is usually implied that the person who has it cannot simply ‘will it’ away. That person may be responsible for getting it, as is the case with someone who get lung cancer because of smoking, but once has it, so is it assumed, his continuing to have it is not about his simply failing to make the right effort of will.
Given that OCD very clearly is an illness of sorts, it seems to follow that someone who has OCD is ‘stuck with it’, in the way in which someone who has lupus or asthma is simply stuck with it—that, although his condition may be treated, as asthma can be treated, and even eliminated, it is not a question of simply willing it away.
But here is the problem: OCD, though indisputably a disease, is a disease that afflicts the will itself. It is an affliction of the will. A person with osteoporosis is somebody with porous bones, not a porous will. A person with cancer is somebody with damaged cells, not with a damaged will. But somebody with OCD is somebody with a damaged will. And the only way to fix a damaged will is by exercising that will. And that is what the obsessive-compulsive must do. And if he doesn’t do that, he is quite as responsible for his condition as is a fat person who refuses to stop overeating.
Let me put these points into context.
People with OCD can be willful---in fact, they are categorically so—and they can also, in some contexts, be legitimately highly determined—in fact, they are unusually likely to be capable of being determined to an exceptionally high degree. But in other respects, their will, though functional, has been ruptured: their will is like that of an exceedingly strong person who has pulled a muscle: that person is still strong and, in some context, can exercise that strength— but his ability to exercise his strength is more much context-dependent than it would be if he didn’t have a ruptured muscle.
Somebody with OCD is somebody whose psyche has been bifurcated into two a Dr.
Jekyll half and Mr. Hyde half—into an id-half and a superego-half. And these two halves are at war with each other: the bestial, criminal side of the obsessive-compulsive wants to come out, but the angelic morality-driven side won’t let it; so the criminal side has to leak out in symptoms. And, in any case, the paralysis of will that is the hallmark of OCD is the result of a stalemate between these two sides.
But at the end of the day, it is entirely up to the obsessive-compulsive what he does. He isn’t like a paralytic who simply can’t move; he is somebody who, although he can exercise his will, won’t. He won’t because of the anxiety he will experience. But he still can. If he were offered a million dollars, he would, regardless of the anxiety.
To be sure, the obsessive-compulsive is diseased; he does have a very real psychopathology. But his being diseased consists not in his being unable but rather in his being unwilling to do the right thing. And getting over OCD involves strengthening the obsessive- compulsive’s atrophied willingness to act; and the way to strengthen it is to get him to act—first a little, then a lot.
That is not all there is to getting over OCD: the conflicts underlying the obsessive- compulsive’s paralysis of will must be addressed. But in order for them to be addressed meaningfully, they must be accompanied by veritable doing on the part of the obsessive- compulsive. The purpose of the psychoanalytic interpretations must be to direct the will—to indicate pathways that it should follow—but unless it actually follows those pathways, those
 
analytic constructions will be so much theory. And psychoanalysis is not about theory; it is practice: it is about getting the patient out of the bubble of his mind, which, ultimately, can only be done by doing it.
 
Social Anxiety is about Rage


People who have social anxiety don’t want to be around people. And they don’t want to be around people because they hate people, or at least are angry at them.
And notice that the effect of social anxiety is to keep the person who has it away from people. When he is around people, he is upset. When is alone again, he stops being upset. He tells himself that he fears others. And there is a certain truth in this. But really it is more that he fears that he might do them; he is afraid of the danger that his own anger towards others might put him in.
In this respect, social anxiety is similar to shyness. Shyness is ultimately about intense rage towards others. This becomes immediately obvious to anyone who has actually entered into serious communication with a shy person: what becomes clear---because they explicitly affirm as much—is how intense their hatred is of others.
In any case, people with social anxiety are not necessarily wrong to hate people. People with social anxiety are often highly intelligent and sensitive people who are misunderstood by others and have been wronged by them. So it is not necessarily incumbent on someone with social anxiety to change his views or feelings about others. But if he wants to function in society, it is incumbent on him to recognize why he has social anxiety. And once he acknowledges that he has it because of anger, his anger will become conscious. And once it becomes conscious, he can put it in its proper place. When anger is unconscious, it widens its target; it spreads indiscriminately, and people become the object of it who would otherwise be targeted by it. But when anger becomes conscious, it is confined to its rightful target--to the specific individuals who have wronged on---instead of being inappropriately applied to all people.
There are two ways for someone with social anxiety to get over it. The first is to acquire power. Hatred is about impotence, and it tends to vanish as one acquires power. The second is to accept that one has anger towards others and not to take oneself to task for it. Instead of beating oneself for one’s misanthropic tendencies, one should accept them and draw strength from them. Much great accomplishment is the result of misanthropy that has been consciously accepted and then duly sublimated.
 
Structural Therapy
The preferred way of treating OCD these days is known as “cognitive behavioral therapy.” CBT be called “behavioral therapy” since there is nothing cognitive about it, as it consists entirely in changing the obsessive-compulsive’s behavior directly, and not way of changing the emotional conflicts responsible for his behavior.
Obviously, the obsessive-compulsive’s behavior does have to be changed; indeed, getting him to become at least minimally functional, and therefore getting him to not be completely crippled by his compulsions, is a prerequisite for him engaging in any sort of meaningful therapy or, indeed, in his having a meaningful life.
But taken by itself, behavior modification is not enough. Indeed, behavior modification, unless supplemented by treatment of underlying emotional disturbances, fails of its own purpose, as in, it fails even to modify behavior, since those emotional conflicts will always find new ways of pathologizing behavior.
The only real way to treat OCD is through structural therapy. Structural therapy is the process of changing the obsessive-compulsive’s mentality from that of someone who is reality- avoidant, and therefore fantasy-oriented, to being someone who is reality-oriented, and therefore fantasy-avoidant. The obsessive-compulsive’s obsessionality is about his preferring symbolic representations of reality to reality and, consequently, his preferring thought to action. And his compulsions are merely externalized obsessions and therefore represent overt expressions of his reality-avoidance.
In order to effect this change of orientation within the obsessive-compulsive, it is necessary to modify his behavior; and cognitive behavioral therapy is therefore a component of structural therapy. But it is a subordinate component, the main component being the just- described reversal in the obsessive-compulsive’s mentality.
 
Effective Therapists Must Have and Project Inner Strength


I recently joined linked in, and I immediately connected with a number of OCD- therapists, all of whom claimed, in their about me sections, that they were looking for opportunities to broaden their therapeutic horizons and learn more about OCD. And I reached out to them, telling them to check out m website, OCD and philosophy and give me their feedback. And I invited a few to do podcasts with me, in which I would give them a chance to discuss their views. Not one responded meaningfully; they all responded by saying ‘thanks!’, and nothing else. In other words, they hit the auto-reply ‘thanks’ button at the bottom of the message.
And when I took a second look at them, I saw that they were timid looking, unadventurous, cautious and scared people. Not bad people, by any means. But not people who projected strength; not people whose presence suggested that they had ever overcome anything; not focused or centered people. But rather people who living life defensively, playing by a pre- existing rule-book, and just trying to keep their heads above water.
And that is understandable. But it means that as OCD-therapists, their batting rate is going to be zero. The essence of any therapeutic relationship is confidence on the patient’s part in the therapist; it is belief, in the competence and integrity, on the part of the analysand in the analyst. The analyst’s words affect the analysand by way of the rapport that exists between them, and that rapport is based on the analysand’s confidence in the analyst. And if that confidence isn’t there, the analyst’s words are not going to mobilize restorative energies within the patient. The analyst will retain the power to hurt the patient with his words, but he will not be able to do much in the way of helping the patient.
Psychoanalysis and psychotherapy are not exercises in computation. Obviously, intelligence and knowledge on the part of the therapist can help enormously; but they help only on the condition that there is an empathic rapport through which they can help. And the essence of that rapport is a belief—or a feeling that is deeper than belief—on the patient’s part in the analyst’s power to heal. And that belief will be possible to sustain only if the analyst is somebody who not only talks the talk but walks the walk. And a few meaningless degrees and certifications will not suffice. There is a singularity of outlook the therapist must have if he is to help the patient, and there is no way he can have such an outlook unless has conquered his own demons. And it seems to me that many a so-called mental health ‘expert’ is an expert only in getting through credentialing programs that are exercises in evading one’s demons and in failing to acquire just the sort of inner strength that is the cornerstone of any effective analyst’s practice.
 
Reading-related Difficulties in People with OCD


People with OCD are generally unusually intelligent, and they tend to do well on standardized tests, especially tests of reading comprehension. But OCD often makes it extraordinarily difficult for such people to read. When reading, their obsessionality flairs up: they have to ritualistically re-read words or phrases—not because they don’t understand what they’ve read, but because their OCD compels them to. Or upon turning the page, they are stricken with a morbid fear that there was some kernel of wisdom that they didn’t take in on the previous page; and they go back and re-read it, then turn the page again—only to be stricken once again by the same fear. And so on.
Two questions arise: What is this about and how is it to be treated? The answer to the second question is clear: They must not back down; they must not not read. They must simply re- train their brains in such a way that their OCD finds different prey. The written is much too valuable to be alienated from—and it is especially value to people with OCD, given their intellectual bent and given also the nature of the disturbances underlying OCD. Which brings us to the answer to the first question, which is:
These reading disturbances are text-book cases of resistance: The very reason the obsessive-compulsive has problems reading is that, when he is reading, he is in danger of reading something that will shed light on his own emotional disturbances.
Be it noted that the very obsessive-compulsives who have the most severe reading-related problems only have them with certain kinds of material. More specifically, they only have them with ‘good’ books and articles—with material that is rich in content. They generally don’t have them with ‘pulp’---with things that are easy to read and not informative. And they have them the most with works that specifically concern psychological maladies. Oftentimes, a given
obsessive-compulsive who practically goes into convulsions when forced to read psychology can read mathematical logic without any problems. In fact, the sanitary of nature of such material may make reading it a kind of haven for him from his OCD.
In this connection, I suspect that oftentimes, when people go into psychologically (but not logically) sterile fields, such as logic and physics, it is, in part (though not entirely, obviously), because of the absence of troubling emotional resonances in work in those disciplines.
And this may explain why the very obsessive-compulsives who have the most severe reading-related difficulties may do the best on reading-comprehension tests: for the material on such tests tends to be sterile; it tends to be narrowly factual and thus not to arouse psychological resistances.
But it is very important to resolve these difficulties early in the obsessive-compulsive’s life. For if he becomes habituated to not being able to read—which often happens---then he will lose out on both the professional and personal benefits of being able to absorb information through the written. And for him, those benefits are especially great. The obsessive-compulsive is a thinker by nature, and he is also a loner, which means that he has a double need for the ‘companionship’ of the written word.
 
The Limitations of CBT in the Treatment of OCD
There is a method of treating OCD known as ‘cognitive-behavioral therapy’ (CBT). CBT involves getting obsessive-compulsives to do the things that they are phobic about doing. So if a given obsessive-compulsive is afraid of touching dirty surfaces with his bare hands, then his CBT may involve him shaking hands with homeless people and not washing hands afterwards.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy really just be called ‘Behavioral therapy’, since there is nothing cognitive about it. In fact, it is anti-cognitive: all cognitive issues are ignored or addressed only by way of their behavioral derivatives.
In any case, it is patently obvious that getting over OCD involves changing one’s behavior. If a given obsessive-compulsive showers 20 times a day, then the first thing he must do is to stop showering twenty times a day. If he spends 10 hours a cleaning, then the first thing he must do is stop spending so much time cleaning.
So there is nothing wrong with behavioral therapy—or ‘cognitive’ behavioral therapy, if you want to call it that. In fact, behavioral therapy is, very obviously, an ineliminable part of the restoration of the obsessive-compulsive’s psychological well-being.
But here is the problem. OCD is extremely productive, as in, it produces symptoms with almost limitless energy and creativity. If one symptom is squashed down, without its underlying causes being addressed, some other symptom will take its place.
This does not mean that all is lost for the obsessive-compulsive. All is most definitely not lost. It just means that the underlying cause of the obsessive-compulsives various obsessions and compulsions must be addressed.
And ultimately there is always one such cause. That cause is that the obsessive- compulsive has fled from reality into a world of symbolic proxies of reality. His obsessions have ideas for their objects, not the external realties for which ideas stand. And his compulsions are merely obsessions that are externalized in behavior.
The cause of this flight from reality into symbolic proxies thereof varies from case to case. So the cause of the cause of OCD varies from person to person. But the cause of OCD does not so vary. It is, in each case, a fear-driven flight from reality into a safe internal world in which ideas have taken the place of realities and in which thinking has taken the place of doing.
And ultimately the only way to improve the obsessive-compulsive’s condition is to get him out of this bubble of pseudo-reality. Getting him out of this bubble involves getting him to behave normally. There is no way to get him to rejoin the living without breaking the back of his various compulsions. For these compulsions---for example, the endless showering and hand- washing, the cleaning, the various repetitive and stereotyped behaviors to which OCD gives rise-
--are, as previously stated, externalized obsessions; and they thus represent the encroachment into the external world of the obsessive-compulsive’s replacement of real realities, as it were, with symbolic realities. The obsessive-compulsive’s various compulsives actions serve as a kind of veil between himself and reality, that prevents him from directly engaging it. And he has to engage it.
Plus, he has to function-which he won’t do, as long as he is compulsive—and he also has to enjoy leave---which he also won’t do so long as he is compulsive.
But the essence of the restoration of the obsessive-compulsive’s sanity is getting him to engage reality. If his behavior is treated without addressing this alienatedness from reality, the obsessions and compulsions will simply assume new form. On the other hand, if his behavior is treated as part of a larger program of reconciling him to reality, then there will be genuine
 
structural improvement, as opposed to the mere replacing of one set of symptoms of with another.
 
Turn OCD Against Itself


If you put a two-year old in ocean-water, it will start crying. But then it gets used to the water. And when you try to take it out two hours later, it starts crying again!
Children are OCD like in many respects. They need comforting routines. They need to be told certain bedtime stories over and over again. They need to sleep with specific stuffed animals. And so on.
But this clinginess of theirs can be turned against itself. Right now, they need to sleep with the snoopy stuffed animal, and they will howl and scream if you try to get them switch to their Dumbo stuffed animal But then, after an initial period of protest, the clinginess they had towards Snoopy will transfer over to Dumbo.
With OCD it’s the same way. It’s the same way, because it’s the very same thing. OCD isn’t just like the just-described obsessive clinginess of children: it is that clinginess. Like all mental illnesses, OCD is regressive: it is the mind’s returning to a modus operandi from its earlier days.
Put another way, OCD is the persistence into adulthood of a childhood defense- mechanism. And that childhood defense-mechanism is one of clinging to certain habits, so as to insulate oneself from a frightening world within a safe little autistic bubble.
And that is what OCD is. OCD is about clinging to certain rituals and habits that make one feel safe. It is the presence, in an adult, of a defense-mechanism that, in other people, ceases to be operative during early childhood.
The other side of the coin is that, underlying the obsessive-compulsive’s rigidity is the same neural plasticity—the same transferability of clinginenss—that is present in the child—that is, indeed, the hallmark of a child’s mind.
The obsessive-compulsive is binary: he is all about all or nothing. Either he loves or hates.
Either he does no exercise or he compulsively exercises. Either he has to have bananas in his morning cereal or he has to not have them in his cereal.
So the obsessive-compulsiveness obsessive-compulsiveness—his clingness—is about binariness; it is about all or nothing-ism. And inherent in his all or nothing-ism is a child-like ability to change---to do 180 degree shifts. So, paradoxically, underlying the obsessive- compulsive’s rigidity is non-rigidity—is neural plasticity.
And the obsessive-compulsive’s greatest asset, therefore, is his OCD itself! He must use the binariness, and concomitant ability to change, to combat the rigidity and fixity of habits to which his OCD disposes him.
Let me be more concrete. There is always something that the obsessive-compulsive has to do that he is afraid of doing---in the same way that the child is afraid of getting into the bathtub. And the obsessive-compulsive must confront this fear, and do it quickly and unblinkingly. And then what will happen is that he will be as obsessive-compulsive about doing this new thing—the thing he had to do but was afraid to do—as he was about not doing it before. Just as the child, once he settles into his bath, will kick and scream when he has to get out of the bath tub.
So turn OCD against itself, by using the all-or-nothingism inherent in, and the neural plasticity inherent in and hidden in that all-or-nothingins, to effectuate growth-critical changes in oneself.
 
How do I get over my OCD?
Somebody on Quora.com asked: How do I get over my OCD? Here is my response:
The right question is not ‘how do I get over OCD?’ so much as it is ‘in what sort of context is my OCD an asset, as opposed to a liability?’ People with OCD are capable of intense thought and prolonged concentration. They are able to be mindful of details without losing sight of the big picture. Their ‘cognitive wiring’ is capable of being an enormous asset. At the same time, in some contexts, that same cognitive wiring—that same intellectual acuity and emotional sensitivity—-may be liability. In contexts, in which the obsessive-compulsive is being subjected to extreme and untoward emotional pressures, his finely tuned psyche and hyper-responsiveness may result in his defensively withdrawing behind a veil of obsessions and compulsions, the ultimate purpose of which is to insulate him from a threatening and toxic external reality. There are thus two components to dealing with OCD: (i) Identifying contexts in which one’s OCD is a strength, as opposed to a weakness and (ii) taking advantage of such contexts to build up one’s self-confidence so that, in adverse contexts, one does not become fearful and withdraw into a protective (but dangerously self-limiting) cloud of obsessions and compulsions.
 
Intrusive Thoughts

Why People with OCD Have Them


If you have a goal, it is easy not to be lazy. But if you don’t have goal. It is hard not to be lazy, since there is no point in not being lazy. Similarly, if you have a goal, it is easy not to succumb to neurotic compulsions. But if you don’t have a goal, it is hard not to do so since there is no point in tolerating the anxiety brought on by not doing so.
As for obsessions, these are always displacements: one obsesses about such and such as a way of not confronting thus and such. And when one has a goal, one’s obsessional energies are naturally channeled in the right direction, since, under that circumstance, one’s mind stands to gain more in the way of relief from anxiety by not obsessing than by obsessing. And when doesn’t have a goal, one’s mind stands to gain more in the way of anxiety-relief by obsessing than by not obsessing, and one is therefore inclined to keep on obsessing.
As for intrusive thoughts, these are one’s mind’s way of telling one—in a compressed, crude, and distorted way---what one has to do. Notice that one’s intrusive thoughts concern sex or violence or sexual violence. This is because the people who have such thoughts are in the process of castrating themselves—they are in the process of trying to become faceless bureaucrats---and their minds are recoiling at this violence that is being done to them, and they are shouting at one’s conscience mind, trying to tell it not to surrender. Intrusive thoughts are not the problem; the person who is making a eunuch of himself is the problem; the intrusive thoughts are the last gasp of the still robust part of one’s mind. In any case, the way to get over obtrusive thoughts is to have a goal in life. So long as one is drifting, one’s mind will be unsatisfied and will hiss and buck, sometimes by flooding one’s consciousness with intrusive thoughts or with compulsions, sometimes in other ways: but so long as one is drifting, it is just a matter of time before one’s psyche begins to disintegrate. And one can be free from psychopathology only so long as a one has a goal that one’s mental energies can organize themselves around and that one’s drives can discharge themselves through.

All people are dominated by compulsions. In the case of the non-obsessive-compulsive, those compulsions are unconscious. In the case of the obsessive-compulsive, they are conscious. And that is what it is to have OCD: it is to consciously experience the compulsions that others only experience unconsciously. Thus, where the non-obsessive-compulsive has the illusion of freedom, the obsessive-compulsive has the illusion of its absence. In actuality, the obsessive- compulsive, by virtue of being aware of the compulsions to which he is subjected, has the ability to liberate himself from those compulsions, whereas the non-obsessive-compulsive, by virtue of not being thus aware, does not.
 
Physical vs. Mental Illness
Almost all physical illnesses are simply deficits—as in, they don’t do those who have them any good. And most mental illnesses are simply deficits. But OCD—though functionally a deficit—is an asset in two important ways. First, those who have it are highly intelligent, meaning that they are good at processing intellectual or cognitive information, and highly sensitive, meaning that they are good at processing affective or emotional information.
Philosophical aside: What we refer to as ‘sensitivity’ is a form of internal awareness—of inwardly directed intelligence: it is about different parts of the mind being in good communication with each other. And what we refer to as “intelligence” is outwardly directed intelligence; it is about being aware of dependence-relations holding among mind-external entities. In any case, the obsessive-compulsive has both kinds of intelligence; indeed, his condition is about those two forms of intelligence being hyper-operative---being over-deployed. So, yes, so long as they are over-deployed, he is seriously impaired; but his impairment has to do with the mutually cancelling effects of powerful cognitive forces, not, as is the case with most psychological impairments, with an absence of such forces.
And this relates to the second respect in which obsessive-compulsives are at an advantage.
Obsessive-compulsives are psycho-dynamic. They are internally conflicted. Which, though not an asset in and of itself, shows that they have ideals and, moreover, that they are taking themselves to task for falling short of those ideals. Where there is no conception of right and wrong—no conception of how, morally and otherwise, things should be—there is no internal conflict. And where there is a conception of right and wrong, there is ipso facto a willingness to try to make things right. And where such willingness exists, it can always be used by the person who has it to make himself better. In the case of the obsessive-compulsive, this willingness is not being optimally deployed; but it is there, which is what matters, since, so long as it exists, it can always be redeployed.
So the obsessive-compulsive, though in a very unpleasant and in some ways objectively bad situation, is best thought as being in a situation not of sheer minuses, but of inverted pluses--
-of assets that are being turned against themselves, not of mere deficits. And this means that in the right hands, the obsessive-compulsive stands not only to make a good recovery but to have a positively good life.
 
How to Treat Compulsions that are not Accompanied by Obsessions?



One of my listeners, Earth Pet, asked the following question. I quote:
“How would you advise attenuating or controlling compulsions for those without the obsessive component?”
Here is my answer.
Obsessions are thwarted compulsions. In other words, when one has a compulsion that one is prevented from acting on, one is left with an obsession. Equivalently, compulsions are obsessions that are expressed in behavior.
So the relationship between the obsession and the compulsion parallels the relationship between intention and subsequent action.
And just as there is always an intention whenever there is an action, so there is always an obsession whenever there is a compulsions. Of course, the obsession does not become an object of consideration in its own right so long as it is discharged sufficiently quickly in action, just as an intention does not become an object of attention in its own right if sufficiently quickly discharged in action. But just as there is an intention whenever there is action, so there is an obsession whenever there is a compulsive action.
So the situation presupposed by the question does not in fact exist.
I will answer all questions in real time, and I will answer them in audio/video form, as I did with this question.
And please visit me at my website www.freudinstitute.com where you can pose questions and actually chat in real time about matters OCD-related matters with clinicians and scholars.
 
Why Psychopaths Overachieve


I was going for my nightly walk and, as is my wont, thinking about the various ventures that I am trying to get off the ground. And, as is also my want, I was plagued with doubts—with self-doubts. And it then occurred to me why psychopaths are so successful: they are not neurotic. Self-doubt is inherently neurotic. It is one thing to know one’s own limitations: that is not self- doubt; that is just plain self-knowledge. But self-doubt is not about self-knowledge or even
quasi-self-knowledge; it is moralistic self-undermining; it is neurotic self-punishment. And because psychopaths don’t have consciences, they don’t doubt themselves and, more generally, they are not neurotic. Neurosis is about a conflict between one’s primal desires and one’s conscience. So psychopaths, having as they do no conscience, are not neurotic; and they are therefore not held by neurosis or, consequently, by neurotic self-doubt or, consequently, by any self-doubt. Non-psychopaths, on the other hand, even exceptionally gifted ones—nay, especially exceptionally gifted ones—are riddled with neurosis and therefore with self-doubt and are therefore prone to self-sabotage. The ideal condition is to be a non-neurotic, non-psychopath; and that condition is achievable, and it is my objective as an analyst to get people attain that condition.
 
The Therapeutic Significance of a Healthy Sex Life



The purpose of psychoanalysis and indeed of all forms of psychotherapy is to get the patient to live in the real world. Freud himself knew this: he explicitly said that the sole functions of psychoanalysis were to get the patient to be able to work and to love.
At the same time, Freud said, or certainly seemed at certain junctures to say, that mental health is all about sex—that mental illness is all about not having a good sex life and that mental well-being is all about having a good one.
Which, if indeed he did say this, is seriously overstated, not positively erroneous.
But there is a way of interpreting this supposed conceit of Freud’s that gives it legitimacy.
Let’s start with the premise that sanity is about living in the real world and insanity is about living in one’s imagination.
To the extent that people are not actually having sex with other human beings, their sex lives are masturbatory and fantasy-based, and are therefore dissociated from reality and, quite literally, insane. And to the extent that people are having sex---provided that it is emotionally engaged sex, as opposed to just masturbation that happens to another person’s body---one’s sex life is reality-based, non- dissociated and, therefore, quite literally sane.
Is there more to having a non-dissociated and sane existence than having a non- dissociated sex life? Yes. Is there more to having a dissociated and insane existence than having a dissociated sex life? Yes. But one’s life is non-dissociated to the extent that one’s sex life is non-dissociated and dissociated others. Moreover, as Freud said, however overstatedly, one’s sex life is to some extent a prototype for the rest of one’s life, as in, there is at least some tendency for the non-sexual component of one’s existence to be non-dissociated if the sexual component of one’s existence is non-dissociated and dissociated otherwise.
To sum up: Sanity is about living in the real world. Masturbation is about not living in the real world. So if one’s sex life is masturbation-based, one is to that extent not sane, even if one is otherwise sane. And if one’s sex-life is masturbation-based, it is unlikely that one is otherwise completely sane.
 
Autism as Pseudo-self-containment

Autistic people seem to live in their own world, and the obvious thing to say about them, therefore, is that they are self-contained. But they are not self-contained. They are pseudo-self- contained. Autism is about needing people early in life and being given trauma instead. And the traumatized child reacts by withdrawing into himself. But his withdrawal is not about being emotionally self-sufficient. It is about quite the opposite. It is about being so dependent on others that unless one is given just the right cocktail of emotional support from others, one hysterically flees into psychotic seclusion. Consider the jilted bride who, instead of going back on the dating scene, continues to wear her wedding dress while pretending that the marriage actually happened. This person is psychotically secluded and therefore isolated from reality—but not
self-contained. Quite the opposite. And the same is true of the autistic.
Being genuinely self-contained is about balance. It is about being given—or having been given—the right level, and the right kind of emotional sustenance from others and, on that basis, being able, like a dolphin that has taken in enough air or a camel that has taken in enough water, to go out on one’s own. This is not what the autistic person is doing. Autism is a way of being damaged. True independence is about the opposite of being damaged. And a sign of true independence is flexibility, and rigidity is a sign of damage-based pseudo-independence.
One last point: Bureaucrats are people who are damaged and have no free will.
Bureaucrats need others to tell them what to do. And when they come across someone who is genuinely independently, they invidiously describe him as having ‘autism’ or ‘Asperger’s’, sometimes going so far as to get psychiatrists to formally diagnose them in this way. But such characterizations are, as we have just seen, the opposite of the truth---and, like many invidious characterizations, not just false but also projective.
 
The Two Ways in which Intellectual Activity Promotes Intelligence


There are two distinct ways in which reading increases intelligence. On the one hand, reading makes one aware of truths of which one was previously unaware, and each such truth is a new weapon in the arsenal of one’s intellect. On the other hand, reading stimulates thought, and its effect on one’s intellect is similar in this respect to the effect that physical exercise has on one’s body. When one exercises, a message is sent to one’s metabolism that it must build
muscle-tissue and make all of the other changes to itself that are required for an exercise- intensive existence. And when one reads or otherwise engages one’s intellect, a message is sent to one’s central nervous system that it must forge new neural pathways and make all of the other changes to itself that are require for a thought-intensive existence. So, reading is not simply about uploading new information. It is also about keeping one’s central nervous system constantly stimulated, so that it continues to keep itself combat-ready, so to speak, and able to take on new tasks and develop new capabilities. And just as one loses stamina, muscle-power and coordination if one does not engage in athletic training, so one loses neural plasticity and intellect if one does not engage in cognitive training. By reading and otherwise engaging one’s intellect, one keeps one’s mind nimble and elastic. Indeed, it is more by keeping one’s mind supple and active than it is by making one aware of new facts that reading promotes intelligence, and the same is true of other forms of intellectual activity. The primary intellectual benefit of vigorous intellectual activity is not that it stocks one’s mind with new ideas, so much as it is that it keeps one’s mind in a state of constant readiness and consequent responsiveness. And this heightened responsiveness, in its turn, makes one’s mind more able to acquire new information.
 
How Mental Illness Differs from Physical Illness

Somebody on Quora dot com asked the following question. I quote:
Do you believe mental illness is “an illness like any other” or is it a distinct and unique phenomenon? Why?
Here is my answer:
Mental illness is not an ‘illness like any other.’ Mental illnesses are contextual in nature.
In some contexts, being obsessive-compulsive is a liability and thus an illness, and in other contexts, being obsessive-compulsive is an asset and thus not a mental illness. And the same is true, to varying degrees, of all other mental illnesses. By contrast, physical illnesses are not contextual in nature: if somebody has asthma or lupus or cancer, that is not asset in some contexts and a liability in others: it is simply a liability. Also, mental illnesses serve a defensive function. Even though, in at least some contexts, OCD is a liability, it serves a protective function: it insulates the subject in a psychological ‘safe-space’: his obsessions and compulsions encircle that safe-space and, although dysfunctional in some respects, provide him some measure of safety from a toxic and threatening environment. And the same is true of psychosis: the psychotic did not become psychotic for no reason. He was in a situation in which he was being threatened and pumped full of negative validations and detriments to his sense of self-worth.
And he therefore decided to distance himself from that destructive negativity by withdrawing into a world of psychotic delusion. So even though psychosis is an illness and is some respects gravely dysfunctional, it does serve at least some protective function. Also, to develop a point hinted at earlier, some mental illnesses involve misdeployed strengths of intellect and character. OCD involves misdeployed intelligence and focus; schizophrenia involves misdeployed creativity and emotional sensitivity. So mental illnesses, though in many respects gravely debilitating, sometimes seem to involve heightened, albeit misdeployed, abilities.
 
Psychiatric Munchausen’s by Proxy

Parents are getting psychiatrists to falsely diagnose their children as having autism, Asperger’s, ADHD, and the like. Such diagnoses—especially false diagnoses of Aspersers and Autism—are nothing more than cloaked child murder. The parent---usually the mother---wants her husband’s attention; can’t get it; and then, in an effort to get it—or to get some surrogate thereof—figuratively murders the child with a false psychiatric diagnosis, which dooms the child in question to the over-attentions of idiot educationalists, psychologists, psychiatrists, and bureaucrats---the effect of which is to damage the child in some way or other, sometimes going so far as damage him in a way that retroactively validates the initial diagnosis. Of course, with rare exceptions, psychiatrists and educational psychologists are none too bright and are all too willing to foist bunk diagnoses on hapless youths, both because they need money and also because they need to feel that their line of goods has some legitimate application, which it doesn’t. But rule of thumb: when a child is sent to a psychiatrist, the first place to look for psychological maladies is in the Munchausen-by-proxy mother’s head, not the child’s. The child’s mind is the place to look for fall out from the blast, not for the blast’s mom-centric epicenter.
 
What is the Prognosis for People with OCD?

Somebody on Quora.com asked the following question:
What is the prognosis for patients with Obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD)? Here is my answer:
People who have OCD have it because it provides them with relief from anxiety—from anxiety so intense as to be almost inconceivable to people who have not had OCD. But OCD is just a defense-mechanism. And as is the case with most defense-mechanisms, there comes a time in the subject’s life when it starts to do more harm than good. At that point, the obsessive- compulsive has to make a decision: What do I want? Do I want mere freedom from anxiety? Or do I want to live and grow? It is 100% up to him what he chooses. If he chooses to grow, he will, and his OCD, without exactly vanishing, will assume productive forms. If he chooses not to grow, he won’t.
OCD, though an affliction, is ultimately a voluntary one. If the obsessive-compulsive chooses to remain in his defensive bubble of isolation from the world, then his OCD will defeat him. If he chooses to re-engage the world, then his OCD will assume non-pathological and in fact productive forms, as it did with Beethoven and Einstein.
OCD, though an affliction, is an affliction of the will—and is thus unlike cancer or asthma, which have nothing to do with the integrity of one’s will. And OCD is eliminated, or at least made to assume adaptive forms by duly exercising one’s will in growth-oriented ways.
The symptoms of OCD are involuntary only in a relative sense. Relative to a determination to remain within his defensive bubble of non-engagement, there is nothing much that the obsessive-compulsive can do about those symptoms. He can engage in a bit of ‘cognitive-behavioral therapy’, but the effects of such therapy will be shallow and short-lived, absent a determination on the obsessive-compulsive’s part to grow and change himself in a way that makes his OCD irrelevant. On the other, if he does choose to leave his defensive bubble and
re-engage the world, then, indeed, his OCD will become irrelevant. So relative to a determination on his part to re-engage the world, the symptoms of OCD are voluntary.
So ultimately OCD is indeed voluntary, and if one sees it for the voluntary condition that it ultimate is, then the prognosis is 100% positive. But if one sees it as a garden-variety pathology, then the prognosis is negative. A garden-variety condition is one that does not afflict one’s will and that falls outside the scope of the one’s will. OCD is an affliction of one’s will; it is a weakening of one’s will, in consequence of a withdrawal from the world. And by choosing to go back out into the world, the obsessive-compulsive strengthens his will and causes one’s OCD to assume benign if not productive forms.
 
How is Rationalization Different from Auto-hypnosis?
Auto-hypnosis can be an enormously powerful tool. First of all, to auto-hypnotize is not to put oneself in a trance or daze. It is simply to give oneself a command to think or feel or act in a certain way, the efficacy of which command does not depend on the outcome of an act of conscious judgment on one’s part. Usually, such commands are issued as well as received unconsciously.
An element of auto-hypnosis is involved in any case where one has a feeling about such and such that extends beyond what the use of one’s critical faculties would warrant. Thus, there is an element of auto-hypnosis in any case where one has the requisite degree of excitement about the plan in question to succeed in carrying it out. Somebody who only followed through on plans that he been validated by his critical faculty would be somebody who never did anything: he would be the ultimate bureaucrat. So an element of auto-hypnosis is involved in doing anything that requires sustained enthusiasm. And auto-hypnosis is therefore not only not a bad thing but a positively essential thing, as in, it is essential for one’s not being the psychological equivalent of a quadriplegic.
Be it noted that auto-hypnosis can also be a bad thing: whenever one stews or obsesses or ruminates or wallows, one is negatively hypnotizing oneself. When autohypnosis has an affirmative character, it encourages action and when it has a negative character it prevents action. So given how much of one’s time one wastes and how much action one one’s part one prevents by negatively auto-hypnotizing, it is clear that auto-hypnosis can indeed be a very bad thing.
But auto-hypnosis is not inherently bad: it is rather that it can be put to bad use. And even when it is bad, its negative effects are surprisingly easily reversed. Once one knows that in obsessing or wallowing, one is really just negatively hypnotizing oneself, it is surprisingly easy to flip a mental switch and replace that negative auto-hypnosis with affirmative auto-hypnosis.
But rationalization is inherently bad.
But how exactly does auto-hypnosis different from rationalization? Isn’t auto-hypnosis the act of making oneself believe something that one knows not to be true or that one at least regards as doubtful, and isn’t auto-hypnosis the same thing?
No. Auto-hypnosis is about generating an attitude of some kind without making one’s acceptance of the legitimacy of that attitude depend on some edict issued by one’s faculty of judgment. The whole point of hypnosis, and of auto-hypnosis, is to create conviction without deploying or therefore misdeploying one’s critical faculties. Auto-hypnosis is about drawing enthusiasm from within oneself, as opposed to from a warped understanding of reality.
Rationalization on the other hand is about generating emotional conviction from a warped understanding of reality, rather than from within the depths of one’s soul.
So auto-hypnosis doesn’t involve a misdeployment of one’s faculty of judgment and it therefore doesn’t result in a perversion of those faculties. By contrast, rationalization does involve such a misdeployment and therefore does result in such a perversion.
