1. Empiricism cannot explain observable events because it forbids embedding them in unobservable continuities.

2. The mind would consist only of disconnected spontaneities if completely described by conscious experience alone.

3. Conscious events must be embedded within otherwise unconscious psychological continuities to be explained.

4. The statement that X's parts are governed by laws L is not equivalent to the statement that X itself is governed by those laws.

5. The statement that X complies with the same laws as Y is not equivalent to the statement that X-internal events are to be explained by the same principles as Y-internal events.

6. Constitutive dependence is distinct from causal dependence.

7. Propositions are not identical with sentences.

8. Facts are distributions or redistributions of mass-energy.

9. A truth is distinct from the fact in virtue of which it holds.

10. Events are redistributions of mass-energy.

11. Properties are non-spatiotemporal entities.

12. Concepts are non-spatiotemporal.

13. The physical world is causally closed.

14. The mental affects the physical, therefore the mental must be physical (ontological materialism).

15. Explanatory dualism is true even if ontological dualism is false.

16. There is no way to understand why physicalistic statements being true should entail mentalistic statements being true.

17. Propositions consist of concepts.

18. The explanatory generalizations of different disciplines consist of distinct concepts.

19. Psychology and physiology are more remote from each other than physiology and microphysics.

20. Psychological propositions do not present the facts in virtue of which they hold as being in physical space.

21. Perceptions are not given to us as occurring in the same spatial manifold as physical events.

22. Scientific thought is not the same as empirical thought.

23. The term "empirical thought" is an oxymoron.

24. To the extent that thought mediates between observations and beliefs, beliefs are not directly supported by observation.

25. Most philosophers make heavy concessions to empiricism without empiricism-independent justification.

26. We do not sense-perceive forces or causal powers.

27. If empiricism is correct, we cannot know to what degree our sensory experiences are veridical.

28. If empiricism is correct, the future cannot be known on the basis of the present.

29. Hume accepted skepticism about perception and induction because they were corollaries of empiricism, instead of rejecting empiricism.

30. Logical relations hold among propositions, not sentences.

31. Propositions are non-spatiotemporal.

32. The spatiotemporal world comprises no instances of logical relations.

33. Entailment holds if, given P, it is not even a theoretical possibility that Q should fail to be true.

34. Confirmation holds if, given P, it is ceteris paribus more likely than not that Q is true.

35. Some philosophers hold that sentences are the relata of logical relations, but this is false.

36. Some philosophers hold that propositions are spatiotemporal, but this is false.

37. Properties are constituents of propositions.

38. Propositions consist of properties.

39. Formal entailment holds among propositions, not expressions.

40. Statements that a sentence is "formally true" are abbreviated ways of making statements about propositions.

41. The view that properties are identical with scattered objects composed of their instances is false.

42. Two uninstantiated properties would be identical if properties were identical with their instances (reductio).

43. One can change a scattered object without affecting the corresponding property.

44. Expression-tokens entail one another only in a derivative sense, via their meanings.

45. Logical relations hold among meanings, not among expressions per se.

46. The relata of logical relations must be things that are true or false.

47. Empiricists treat truth as a one-place relation (property) rather than a multi-place relation.

48. Empiricist subjectivism about arithmetic reflects inability to countenance non-spatiotemporal entities.

49. Conventionalization is culture-level subjectivization.

50. Empiricism mistakenly treats relations as properties.

51. Empiricism often treats 3-place relations as 2-place relations.

52. Colors are not purely subjective in the empiricist sense.

53. Colors are properties of three-place relations.

54. Color-experiences are informative, not categorically hallucinatory.

55. Colors are mind-dependent but not mental.

56. The empiricist puts headaches in the same category as concern for one's child's welfare, but this is false.

57. Emotions are not merely "sentiments" equivalent to bodily sensations.

58. Meanings are identical with sets of properties.

59. Wittgenstein's view that "meaning is use" is false.

60. If expression-tokens were nothing but bursts of noise, there could be linguistic activity on planets without sentient life (reductio).

61. Attempts to scientize psychology have typically been attempts to empiricize it.

62. Freud and Chomsky succeeded in scientizing certain sub-domains of psychology.

63. There is unconscious ideation.

64. There is ideation that is not only unconscious but subpersonal.

65. People can rationalize and deceive themselves.

66. People can repress knowledge they wish they didn't have.

67. People can be internally conflicted, and internal conflict is a battle between conscious and unconscious conceits.

68. Repressed emotions may be expressed as symptoms.

69. The concept of repression is coherent despite seemingly cogent arguments against it.

70. A psychopath is someone who doesn't have a conscience and never had one.

71. A sociopath is someone who had a conscience but ceased to have one.

72. Sociopathogenesis involves implementing a certain sort of rationalization.

73. Sociopaths are people who "sell out" and "die inside."

74. The pre-sociopath has values, internal conflict, capacity to love, and grasps non-instrumental goodness.

75. The sociopath lacks values, internal conflict, capacity to love, and grasp of non-instrumental goodness.

76. Psychopathy is a kind of perpetual infantilism.

77. Linguistic competence enhances cognitive competence.

78. There is nothing to thinking other than manipulating symbols (rejected position).

79. Anything thinkable with symbols is thinkable without them (alternative position, also problematic).

80. One must figure out what is meant by complex expressions; meaning cannot be directly determined by convention for complex expressions.

81. Without linguistic competence, a creature could not think discursively at the level of Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations.

82. Linguistic competence is constitutively, not merely causally, related to cognitive competence.

83. It is a conceptual necessity, not an idiosyncrasy of human psychology, that certain cogitations need linguistic vehicles.

84. There is subpersonal thought underlying conscious, pre-conscious, and repressed ideation.

85. Subpersonal cognitive operations mediate vision, language-comprehension, and musical ability.

86. Your mind figures out how to convert sensory disturbances into visual images, but not you (your self).

87. It would be viciously regressive to say the self carried out cognitive operations underlying sense-perception.

88. Perception is not mere sensation; perceptions are articulated sensations.

89. Articulations of perception correspond to conceptual knowledge.

90. Subpersonal, non-iconic ideation becomes hewed to sequences of expression-images.

91. Pleasant affects alert us to certain structural features in works of art.

92. Congenial phenomenology alerts us to positive properties like truthfulness and validity in expression-image series.

93. The nucleus of one's self is consciousness.

94. We don't grasp universals except by way of linguistic symbols (at the personal level).

95. Our minds can grasp universals non-linguistically at the subpersonal level.

96. Berkeley conflated images with concepts using the word "idea" for both.

97. Images are not concepts; universals are grasped through conception.

98. Empiricism cannot countenance non-image-mediated thought.

99. Concepts are not constituents of consciousness but are access-conscious.

100. Empiricism is inimical to the idea of invisible structure.
1. A sentence is meaningful if it attributes some property to some object.

2. Expressions like "the absolute is one" contain undefined terms and therefore say nothing until those terms are defined.

3. Russell, Tarski, and other logicians were wrong that there are meaningless bona fide sentences.

4. Alleged antinomies are either false or are sentence-schemata, not actual sentences.

5. Russell's Paradox does not demonstrate a counterexample to the Axiom of Comprehension.

6. The expression "the property of not being a member of itself" does not have a referent; it only appears to have a sense.

7. K₁ ("K is a member of itself") fails to encode a proposition because "itself" doesn't refer to anything.

8. The occurrence of "itself" in Russell's paradox lacks a sense.

9. The rules of English semantics are not at fault for apparent paradoxes.

10. When "self" functions anaphorically, it is eliminable.

11. Type Theory (TT) is self-defeating because it is given by a sentence that violates its own stricture.

12. There are two classes of antinomies: meaningless ones and false ones.

13. "This sentence is false" tokens are neither true nor false, not both true and false.

14. The semantic rules of English do not permit the construction of sentences that violate the Law of Non-Contradiction.

15. Natural languages are not defective in the way logicians have alleged.

16. What a sentence-token affirms depends on what its parts refer to (principle of compositionality).

17. Sentence-types are not individuated by the physical properties of their tokens.

18. Meaning cannot be use.

19. There are meaningful expressions that are never used literally and infinitely many that aren't used at all.

20. Once you know what an expression means, you won't acquire new knowledge about that meaning by acquiring additional knowledge of how that word is used.

21. To say anything, one must produce words intentionally; involuntary utterances are not speech.

22. In order for anything to mean anything, there must be semantic rules.

23. Duly rule-governed usage of an expression is governed by, and therefore doesn't constitute, its meaning.

24. Concepts are the meanings of predicates, not psychological entities.

25. To know that "number" is the word whose usage one is to study, one must already grasp the concept of number.

26. Semantic analysis (what linguists do) must not be confused with conceptual analysis (what philosophers do).

27. Words are not individuated strictly by the acoustical properties of their tokens.

28. Two sounds being tokens of the same word requires same meaning, sufficient acoustic similarity, and bona fide speech.

29. Wittgenstein's view that meanings don't exist has been refuted.

30. Platonic objects, if they exist, are not useless for explaining understanding.

31. Knowing a rule and knowing how to apply it are not separate achievements requiring infinite regress.

32. Rule-following is not a strictly psychological phenomenon.

33. The difference between someone who understands why F(13) = 169 and someone who believes it spuriously is not psychological.

34. Thinking is not a psychological process in the sense Wittgenstein supposed.

35. Knowledge of how to apply a rule is built into knowledge of that rule.

36. Chomsky's distinction between competence and performance resolves apparent problems about rule application.

37. Competence is ability; performance is the ability to deploy ability.

38. There is no gulf between knowing a principle and knowing how to apply it under given circumstances.

39. Given only a person's psychological condition, it is completely indeterminate what that person is thinking (Wittgenstein's false conclusion).

40. Working with different functions is not psychologically identical.

41. No accompaniments of rule-following are necessary or sufficient for that act of compliance.

42. When Wittgenstein refers to "accompaniments" of thought, he refers only to phenomenology, ignoring propositional attitudes.

43. Propositional attitudes are not constituents of consciousness.

44. The deployment of a propositional attitude is not constitutive of consciousness.

45. Consciousness is to thinking what a driver is to events under his car's hood.

46. Mental imagery sometimes is thought-constitutive, contrary to Wittgenstein.

47. Thought-constitutive mental images are segments of ratiocinations that mostly do not consist of imagery.

48. Phenomenologically consecutive images are likely to be ratiocinatively disjoint.

49. Wittgenstein failed to distinguish access-consciousness from phenomenal consciousness.

50. Private language is not impossible; Wittgenstein's argument fails.

51. It isn't always other people who penalize those who misuse words.

52. Wittgenstein confuses language-misuse with language-shift.

53. Any given language is only as useful to its speakers as their memories of its semantic rules are good.

54. A manuscript of which there are many copies is not more of a manuscript than one of which there is only one (analogy for private language).

55. Wittgenstein is a hard-core empiricist.

56. Creatures in whom there are no occult processes are zombies, and zombies cannot be acculturated.

57. Groups of appropriately interrelated zombies do not collectively think (contra Brandom).

58. Empiricists cannot grant the existence of propositions.

59. If propositions don't exist, translation becomes inexplicable.

60. Quine's view that no sentence is a translation of any sentence is desperate and false.

61. One cannot learn a language by regarding speakers as thought-free bodies.

62. The Argument from Analogy for other minds is valid.

63. Wittgenstein's rejection of the Argument from Analogy is spurious.

64. We sometimes only need experience of one instance to make reliable generalizations.

65. Wittgenstein's contention that philosophical argumentation is misconceived was a post hoc attempt to legitimate his wanting arguments.

66. Quine and Wittgenstein, operating independently, reached the same radically counterintuitive conclusion about interpreting others.

67. The view that one must focus only on body movements when interpreting others is not empirically motivated but a consequence of strict empiricism.

68. Knowledge of one's propositional attitudes is access-conscious, not consciousness-constitutive.

69. Definitions are not analytic; they describe empirical facts about linguistic usage.

70. There are deep analytic truths that are primitive and cannot fail to be primitive.

71. Some analytic truths are absolutely primitive; others are absolutely non-primitive.

72. 7 + 5 = 12 is not analytic in the sense that one knows it by analyzing constituent concepts.

73. Arithmetical truths are known through pure reason, not sense-perception.

74. Kant's view that mathematical truths are synthetic a priori is flawed.

75. Kant erroneously made mathematics a branch of psychology.

76. Kant's use of "transcendental" obfuscates his actual psychologistic view.

77. Geometrical propositions are non-empirical but not known through introspection.

78. Mental images are vehicles for geometrical thought but one doesn't know geometry by studying images.

79. Knowledge that one can or cannot imagine something is empirical and a posteriori.

80. Hume conflated knowledge of abstracta with introspective knowledge.

81. One cannot know the self through sense-perception or any inwardly-directed analogue thereof.

82. Hume's argument that there is no self fails because it assumes introspective knowledge is the only non-empirical knowledge.

83. Introspection is conceptual, not sensory or para-sensory, in nature.

84. Knowledge of one's conscious condition is empirical as a conceptualization of experience, like a scientific theory.

85. Having a mental image is not introspecting; introspecting involves noting that one is having such an image.

86. Animals must have concepts given they have sense-perceptions.

87. Animals' minds grasp abstracta even though the animals themselves do not.

88. Dogs and snakes are capable of conceptual ideation at the subpersonal level.

89. The Chomskyan unconscious is impersonal; the Freudian unconscious is personal.

90. There is no intrinsic difference between a propositional attitude that is repressed and one that isn't.

91. There are intrinsic differences between personal and subpersonal strata of mentation.

92. One must distinguish self from mind, and the part of mind with which one identifies from another unconscious part.

93. There are two very different kinds of unconsciousness: personal (Freudian) and impersonal (Chomskyan).

94. Chomsky's position that there is subpersonal mentation is de rigueur given obvious facts.

95. Husserl failed to see the bearing of his non-empiricism on his attempts to scientize psychology.

96. One cannot drain introspections of all conceptual articulations; phenomenological bracketing is impossible.

97. Perception cannot be described except on the assumption that it is veridical.

98. Qua student of the mind, one cannot be a strict empiricist.

99. Science is not about sticking to the facts but about organizing facts by positing hidden structures.

100. Dennett and Churchland's eliminativism about the mental, if cogent, would establish the non-existence of the non-mental as well.

1. Paraperception is sub-personal truth-awareness embodied in personal object-awareness.

2. The delight one takes in listening to a Bach fugue embodies subpersonal awareness of truths about structural properties of sounds.

3. Subpersonal awarenesses are expressed at the personal level in the form of phenomenological episodes.

4. There is such a thing as subpersonal mentation.

5. Subpersonal knowledge is never transferred from one mental stratum to another.

6. Conscious knowledge of subpersonal processes is merely an analogue of those processes, not a duplicate.

7. The conscious conceit implanted by the psychoanalyst is a bona fide duplicate of its repressed counterpart.

8. Subpersonal knowledge described by Chomsky et al. is qualitatively very different from its conscious analogues.

9. Sub-personal processes are not strictly physiological; they embody intelligence and are not purely reflexive (contra Searle).

10. The English language is a collection of rules.

11. Semantic rules of the form "x refers to y" are highly complex.

12. People absorb and apply linguistic rules without the slightest difficulty.

13. Linguistic competence is naturally characterized as mastery of semantic rules.

14. The rules of linguistic competence are not access-conscious.

15. Linguistic rules are either access-unconscious in some deeper sense or they don't exist; the latter view is not viable.

16. There is no viable purely physiological characterization of linguistic competence.

17. If you have conscious, discursive knowledge of word meanings, that knowledge wouldn't operate quickly enough for real-time language comprehension.

18. Mentality and consciousness are not identical.

19. Propositional attitudes cannot be constituents of consciousness.

20. When propositional attitudes are "conscious," it is in the sense that they are access-conscious.

21. There is no a priori reason why anything access-conscious must be so.

22. Any given consciousness must be distinct from its object.

23. Distinct objects are such that the existence of one is not logically dependent on the existence of the other.

24. There is no a priori reason why propositional attitudes must be access-conscious.

25. It is coherent to suppose that consciousness might have trouble accessing a given propositional attitude.

26. It often takes considerable intellectual resources to be consciously aware of what one believes.

27. Even if beliefs aren't repressed, one may lack the wherewithal to conceptualize them properly.

28. It's one thing to have cognitive wherewithal for first-order representations; quite another to correctly conceive of that wherewithal.

29. Without meta-cognitive wherewithal, one can't know what one's propositional attitudes are.

30. Searle's view (SV) that mentality is identical with consciousness is logically false.

31. Searle is a dispositionalist about non-consciousness-constitutive mental entities.

32. Dispositionalism doesn't model the data.

33. If beliefs were merely dispositions, knowledge-constitutive beliefs would be nothing more than arbitrary opinions.

34. Non-occurrent mental structures are functioning as mental entities between bouts of generating conscious states and behaviors.

35. Searle's view commits the quantifier-shift fallacy.

36. There are infinitely many sentences one understands and infinitely many derived semantic rules.

37. The a priori likelihood of two speakers' psychologies being perfectly aligned to their respective physiologies is small.

38. Medical science individuates brain-centers on the basis of their presumptive cognitive functions.

39. Brain-physiology is done in light of knowledge of psychophysical concomitances.

40. Mozart's and Beethoven's musical competencies differ physiologically much more than they do cognitively.

41. Cognitive processes are realized by physiological processes, but psychological relations between physiological events cannot be understood in physiological terms.

42. Hume grants that causal statements are sometimes true but holds they only describe regularity-instantiation.

43. Hume's analysis (HC) doesn't distinguish actual from epiphenomenal causality.

44. Day doesn't cause night, even though night regularly follows day.

45. We know intuitively what causes what before looking for regularities.

46. Constant conjunctions tip us off to continuities, to causal mechanisms.

47. It's the mechanism, the continuity, that is the sine qua non of causality.

48. To the extent an investigator's methodology is empiricist, he is blind to the invisible.

49. Empiricist philosophers of science deny that anything makes anything happen.

50. Hume's analysis assumes changes consist of events, but they don't.

51. The spatiotemporal world doesn't consist of discrete events.

52. The world has an analogue, not a digital structure.

53. The redistributions of mass-energy that constitute change do not have a digital structure.

54. Observation represents change as seamless, not as consisting of discrete parts.

55. One who witnesses continuity knows he is witnessing causation.

56. The world doesn't consist of truths; it consists of facts.

57. Truths hold in virtue of facts but aren't identical with facts.

58. Events are nominalizations of truths, not constituents of the external world.

59. Spatiotemporally coincident events with different modal properties would entail some region of space-time isn't self-identical.

60. Hume's analysis of causation involves a failure to distinguish facts from truths.

61. There can be no spatiotemporal changes without causal changes because spatiotemporal changes are causal changes.

62. Notions such as displacement and occupancy are to be understood in causal terms.

63. Hume assumes the concepts of precedence in time and adjacency in space can be understood in non-causal terms, but they cannot.

64. A "Hume world" without causation is impossible because any instance of persistence or occupancy is an instance of causation.

65. If a ball's state at t isn't responsible for its state at t*, there are no grounds for saying they constitute one ball.

66. There is a transcendental argument for the existence of instances of causation.

67. Genidentical thought-episodes are the relata of bona fide instances of causation.

68. There is no such thing as a conceptually innocent observation-report.

69. If purged of theoretical commitments, observation-reports would be stilted and useless.

70. Goodman's puzzle shows that explanation isn't about finding regularities and subsuming events under them.

71. Certain regularities are broken and explanatorily useless; they are discontinuity-generators.

72. Good regularities destroy more discontinuities than they create.

73. Hyper-continuities make a regularity good, not vice versa.

74. We are interested in regularities only insofar as they are hyper-continuity-conducive.

75. There is change; change in the manner of change; change in the manner of the manner of change; and so on.

76. What we typically refer to as changelessness are conditions of high-order changelessness teeming with lower-order changes.

77. Data supports regularity-generating mechanisms; it doesn't directly support regularities.

78. Probability is not a statistical but an explanatory notion.

79. Wittgenstein's argument against other minds assumes probability is statistical, which is false.

80. The "axiom of diversity" is easily explained and shouldn't be an axiom.

81. Explanatory probability is a causal notion.

82. Empiricists deny anything makes anything happen, so they cannot distinguish statistical from explanatory probability.

83. The "problem of the priors" cannot be solved on statistical grounds; it has to be solved on grounds of causality and continuity.

84. Selves are not identical with the mental activity they mediate.

85. It isn't because two segments of a thought process belong to the same mind that they constitute one unbroken thought process; causation creates unity.

86. It is because thought-segments cohere that they belong to some one mind.

87. The self consists of awareness-mediating enduring structures underlying mental activity.

88. What unites a cryogenically frozen brain with its reactivated state is the persistence of a single structure that mediates ideation.

89. It is possible for all constituents of a given system to fall within its scope.

90. There are two ways a system can be organized: horizontally and vertically.

91. Nothing makes anything happen (NC) is Hume's legacy to the philosophy of science, but it is false.

92. The Deductive-Nomological (DN) analysis of explanation follows from the empiricist analysis of causation.

93. DN fails because there are infinitely many antecedents of any event that instantiate infinitely many universal generalizations.

94. Natural laws support counterfactuals, but advocates of DN cannot coherently say this.

95. To show that x is an instance of a regularity is to show it is one member of a whole class of events we can't explain.

96. Regularities are but shadows cast by underlying causal mechanisms.

97. Psychology explains by rationalizing; physicists do not, but both seek causal mechanisms.

98. Physical and psychological explanations share the property of seeking causal mechanisms.

99. Most psychological "explanations" fail DN's criteria, but this discredits DN, not those explanations.

100. A given event E₁ can cause E₂ even if, given E₁'s occurrence, there was less than 100% chance of E₂'s occurrence.

ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY CHAPTER 1 POSITION STATEMENT 

1. Philosophy is the discipline that delineates the structures of the categories in terms of which we think about the world.

2. We understand the world through categories (event, cause, thing, mind, perception, belief, knowledge, language, truth, value-judgment, law, justice, etc.).

3. These categories are seldom objects of thought, even though we cannot think without them.

4. We are adept at using categories but have difficulty making explicit the conditions that govern them.

5. Self-understanding is not the mind's primary function.

6. The idea of a mind that thinks about nothing other than itself is incoherent.

7. Any case of self-awareness is necessarily derivative of, and of lesser quality than, some more fundamental sort of understanding.

8. Philosophy is the analysis of the preconditions of all knowledge—the analysis of analysis, the logic of logic, the science of science.

9. Philosophical knowledge is metaknowledge—knowledge about knowledge.

10. The philosopher wants to know the laws governing the laws—what it would even make sense to claim to hold.

11. The philosopher is to the physicist what the physicist is to the engineer.

12. Pre-Fregean philosophers (with some exceptions) mistakenly thought they were studying the most general features of the actual world.

13. Frege showed that philosophers' interest in the actual is subordinate to their interest in the possible.

14. Analytic philosophers figure out what there could be by analyzing statements.

15. Statements that make sense describe possible realities; those that don't, don't.

16. Frege's key insight: logical form ≠ grammatical form.

17. When people have an obviously correct belief that seems to have an absurd consequence, they often accept the absurdity and develop ad hoc hypotheses rather than questioning whether the absurdity really follows.

18. Philosophical insight is acquired not by doing parascience or positing entities, but by analyzing meanings and clarifying statements.

19. "Nothing is a square circle" does not attribute a property to a non-entity; it states that the set of squares doesn't overlap with the set of circles.

20. The concept of "non-entities" or "subsistent entities" (Brentano, Meinong) is absurd—such philosophers were ontologizing when they should have been analyzing.

21. Hallucinations do not require the existence of non-existent objects; they have for their content an existence-claim that nothing satisfies.

22. Scientific puzzles involve acquiring new data; philosophical puzzles are purely conceptual and result from confusion, not ignorance.

23. Scientific breakthroughs have two components: (i) new raw data and (ii) new conceptual modeling of already-known data.

24. Philosophical puzzles are not solved by generating new raw data—they result from failure to draw the right inferences.

25. Wittgenstein was wrong to claim that all philosophical puzzles are linguistic in nature.

26. There are philosophical puzzles that have nothing to do with language.

27. Propositions are not sentences; propositions are the things meant by sentences.

28. Propositions exist independently of human beings; they are not human creations, whereas sentences are.

29. Propositions are properties; truth is instantiatedness.

30. The world was a certain way before we were around, so propositions (as ways the world is) exist independently of our beliefs.

31. Analytic philosophy (broadly construed) is philosophy done in the careful, clear-headed, systematic way that Frege approached problems.

32. The claim that one can know something only by being causally affected by it (e.g., Fodor's position regarding knowledge of mathematical truths) is absurd in the extreme.

33. The fact that 1+1=2 is non-spatiotemporal; nothing outside space-time can bear causal relations to anything.

34. The dispute over causal theories of knowledge is not linguistic—it concerns whether an agreed-upon meaning is true.

35. No philosophical assertions are empirical; observation cannot tell you whether one statement is inconsistent with another.

36. The question of whether law requires morality (legal positivism vs. anti-positivism) is to be resolved through logical, not empirical, analysis.

37. Logical positivism (LP) holds that meaningful statements are either tautologies or empirical.

38. LP is self-refuting: it is neither a tautology nor empirically verifiable, so by its own criterion it is meaningless.

39. There are non-empirical truths that have nothing to do with anyone's linguistic practices.

40. Strictly observational grounds cannot support theoretical statements like Newton's physics directly—only in conjunction with specific factual claims.

41. Wittgenstein's acknowledgment that the Tractatus is meaningless by its own standards is self-contradictory; to understand something is to see its meaning.

42. Empiricism is self-refuting: if true, there are no grounds for believing it; if there are grounds, it is false.

43. Russell's argument against naïve realism ("if true, is false; therefore false") rests on spurious reasoning—we do observe external objects, not merely effects upon ourselves.

44. The greenness, hardness, and coldness of physics are identical with those of daily observation; physics tells us what these properties are.

45. The concept of confirmation is incoherent unless non-empirical knowledge is granted (Goodman's grue argument).

46. Induction does not have a strictly observational basis; there must be non-observational grounds for preferring certain properties over others in inductive inference.

47. It is utterances, not sentences per se, that are tautologies—tautologousness depends on how the auditor learned the meanings of expressions.

48. One knows the meanings of expressions descriptively; two different descriptions can pick out the same thing.

49. All entailment is not formal entailment (contra Wittgenstein's Tractatus).

50. "Brown is a circle" entails "Brown is a two-dimensional figure," but this is not a formal entailment—it is a non-tautologous, non-empirical truth.

51. The concept of a logically perfect language is incoherent.

52. If a logically perfect language existed, it would be expressively inferior to natural languages.

53. For each analytic truth a logically perfect language could express, there would be infinitely many it could not express.

54. Knowing that a formal entailment is valid requires knowing that some informal entailment is valid; there are infinitely many informally valid inferences for each formally valid one.

55. There cannot be strictly observation-based knowledge that an object's length is given by an irrational number (Hempel's argument).

56. Modern physics depends on assumptions (that magnitudes can assume irrational values) for which there cannot be strictly observational grounds.

57. Strict empiricism is inconsistent with the fact that modern physics is a source of knowledge.

58. Euclid's axioms (1)–(5) are statement-forms, not statements proper, and some interpretations of them are false.

59. The parallel postulate is not true or false of anything—it is a statement-form.

60. Arithmetical truth cannot be formalized: any formal characterization of arithmetic is either inconsistent or incomplete.

61. The possible worlds analysis of counterfactuals (Lewis, Kment, Stalnaker) is completely preposterous.

62. We don't know anything about other universes; any knowledge of them would be parasitic on knowledge of counterfactual truths.

63. Counterfactuals are grammatical variants of ordinary causal or logical statements.

64. "Someone" is not in the same semantic category as "John" or "Ethel"—it does not refer to an individual.

65. "Someone smokes" does not attribute the property of smoking to a non-specific individual; it states that the property of being a smoker is instantiated.

66. There is no such thing as an "ambiguous person" or "non-specific entity"—to posit such things is to twist reality to conform to grammatical assumptions.

67. The word "someone" is not ambiguous; it has one meaning.

68. Analytic philosophers solve problems by clarifying statements, not by ontologizing (positing entities not previously believed to exist).

69. When analytic philosophers do ontologize, they posit only abstract, non-spatiotemporal entities—never spatiotemporal denizens like persons or tables.

70. Properties exist; their existence is validated by obviously true statements (e.g., "Bob and Sally are both intelligent").

71. Properties are not identical with spatiotemporal entities; you will never encounter intelligence per se in space-time.

72. The essence of the mental is intentionality (non-derivative representationality), as Brentano held.

73. Perception is description—seeing Larry involves seeing that various properties are instantiated.

74. Perceptions represent objects by encoding existence-claims that those objects satisfy.

75. The content of a perception is given by an existence-claim, not by a semantically simple symbol.

76. Hallucinations are representational not because they pick out non-existent objects, but because they encode false existence-claims.

77. Thoughts about non-existent things (e.g., an even prime greater than two) involve thinking false existence-claims.

78. Wittgenstein's view that philosophical problems arise only when sentences are misused is incorrect.

79. Wittgenstein's Tractatus holds that philosophical statements violate hidden syntactic rules; the Investigations holds they result from using words in non-standard ways—both positions are wrong.

80. One cannot learn about concepts by studying word usage unless one can already grasp the concept independently of the word.

81. Wittgenstein's thesis that "meaning is use" is incoherent.

82. If two expressions could only differ in meaning by being used differently, then any two sentences that have never been used would have the same meaning—which is absurd.

83. Conceptual role semantics (CRS)—the thesis that two sentences have the same meaning iff used the same way—is indefensible.

84. Someone who utters a sentence does so because she knows semantic rules assign a certain proposition to those words and she wishes to express that proposition.

85. Carnap's view that for a lecture to concern triangles is for the word "triangle" to occur in the lecture is false.

86. The very essence of logical positivism is the denial of meaning (propositions).

87. It is not up to us whether meanings (propositions) are correct, even though it is up to us what our symbols mean.

88. Logical truths are never sentences; they are always propositions.

89. Propositions are never conventionally true; linguistic conventions are known empirically, but what those conventions express is not itself empirical.

90. Logical positivists were unanimous in denying the existence of propositions and meanings generally.

91. Sentences like "the universe is a perfect unity" are not meaningless because they are non-empirical; they are meaningless because key terms are undefined—they are statement-forms, not statements.

92. Once undefined terms are defined, previously "meaningless" sentences become meaningful and true or false.

93. A sentence is meaningful if it attributes some property to some object; it is meaningless if it does not attribute any property to anything.

94. Any non-compound sentence either says of some individual that it has some property or says that two or more individuals are interrelated in a certain way.

95. All sentences (relational, compound, negative, quantified) can be reduced to the form ‹x has phi›.

96. The picture theory of meaning—that sentences are "pictures" of the facts they describe—is either trivially true or incoherent.

97. If the picture theory means that sentences share structural features with the facts they describe, it is dubiously coherent.

98. Wittgenstein's claim that "what can be shown, cannot be said" is obviously false.

99. Contrary to Wittgenstein, we can identify the logical forms of our own utterances; we do it whenever we put the meanings of words into words.

100. No language can state all of its own semantic rules—there is a proof of this.

101. The claim that truth is indefinable is false if it means we cannot say what it is for a proposition to be true; it is true if it means no language can state all of its own semantic rules.

102. The sub-disciplines of philosophy (mind, language, epistemology, logic, metaphysics, science, ethics, political philosophy, religion, formal logic) overlap considerably.

103. The question "do we think in words?" belongs to both the philosophy of mind and the philosophy of language.

104. Philosophical logic studies bearing-relations among sentences and propositions.

105. Metaphysics studies the nature of possibility, necessity, causal relations, identity, and the conditions something must meet to exist.

106. The philosophy of science studies the logical structure of scientific endeavor and its results.

107. There may be a fundamental difference between explanations in the physical sciences and explanations in the psychological sciences.

108. Whether a system is deterministic or not may depend on how it is described—determinism may be a logical property of statements, not of events (Nagel's view).

109. Formal logic studies formal truth and attempts to formalize informal analytic truth insofar as possible.

110. A sentence is formally true if every sentence of the same form is true.

111. Open-sentences (statement-forms) are neither true nor false; only their instances (when variables are replaced with constants) are true or false.

112. Mathematical logicians try to identify open-sentences that are true under all their interpretations, thereby formalizing analytic truth.

113. Some classes of true statements (e.g., arithmetical statements) that one would expect to be formalizable turn out not to be—arithmetical truth cannot be formalized.KUCZNSKI KANT ANALOG DIGITAL POSITION STATEMENT 


Here is a **list of 100 distinct philosophical positions taken in the paper**, numbered for clarity:

---

1. Kant’s arguments about causation and induction are spurious.  
2. Hume’s analyses of causation and induction are fallacious.  
3. Kant erroneously assumes all non-empirical truths are trivial.  
4. Kant’s reasoning can be turned into cogent arguments with terminological changes.  
5. Kant’s premises entail that there are virtually no a priori truths.  
6. Kant confuses the psychological and logical meanings of “concept.”  
7. Mental imagery can serve as a vehicle for conceptual analysis.  
8. Mental imagery can also be an object of empirical study.  
9. Kant’s views on synthetic a priori truths reflect his conflation of psychology with logic.  
10. Kant’s claims about causality, personal identity, and rationality are fundamentally correct.  
11. Kant’s reasoning must be “de-psychologized” to be valid.  
12. A proposition is a non-linguistic entity expressed by a sentence.  
13. Kant’s definitions of “analytic” and “a priori” are flawed.  
14. Analyticity should be understood as conceptual necessity.  
15. Kant’s use of “containment” in defining analyticity is metaphorical and inadequate.  
16. Kant’s definition of analyticity fails for non-subject-predicate statements.  
17. For Kant, analytic = conceptually true.  
18. Synthetic a priori truths, for Kant, are known a priori but not grounded in concepts alone.  
19. 7+5=12 is analytic, not synthetic.  
20. A straight line is the shortest distance between two points is analytic.  
21. Arthur Pap’s argument shows Kant is inconsistent in regarding 7+5=12 as synthetic.  
22. Kant’s argument that 7+5=12 is synthetic confuses psychological grasp with conceptual content.  
23. Kant presupposes anti-realism or psychologism about concepts.  
24. Intuition for Kant is a para-perceptual act of imaging.  
25. Intuition reveals representational necessity, not empirical or conceptual truth.  
26. Intuition does not give knowledge of the external world.  
27. Intuition gives at most a posteriori knowledge of how we must perceive.  
28. On Kant’s view, mathematical truths become empirical if followed to their conclusion.  
29. Kant’s system implies we cannot know noumenal truths.  
30. Learning geometry through imagery is still conceptual analysis.  
31. Kant fails to distinguish imagery as vehicle for analysis vs. imagery as empirical object.  
32. Leibniz correctly noted that diagrams are aids to reasoning, not sources of geometric truth.  
33. Peacocke’s distinction between access to proof and justification applies to imagery.  
34. Transcendental necessity reduces to psychological or conceptual necessity.  
35. Representational limits must be grounded in conceptual impossibilities.  
36. Kant’s position is incoherent: mathematical propositions must describe and not describe the world simultaneously.  
37. Necessary truths do not describe the empirical world.  
38. Kant’s mistake is an overly narrow conception of analyticity.  
39. Some analytic truths are “hard analytic” (non-obvious conceptual truths).  
40. What Kant calls synthetic a priori truths are actually hard analytic truths.  
41. Transcendental arguments are cogent if rephrased in terms of hard analyticity.  
42. There is an analytic connection between rational thought and causal order.  
43. Causation is necessary for coherent thought.  
44. Persistence is a causal notion.  
45. Kant-style arguments can settle questions about scientific explanation.  
46. Hume’s puzzles about induction and causation remain unsolved.  
47. Kant’s solutions falsely presuppose the world is a mental creation.  
48. Hume’s argument about induction presupposes a digital view of events.  
49. Logical relations hold between pieces of information, not states of affairs.  
50. There are no instantaneous states of affairs.  
51. All spatiotemporal descriptions are causal.  
52. Talk of points and instants is elliptical for talk of arbitrarily small events.  
53. Space-time has an analogue, not digital, structure.  
54. Hume’s view projects linguistic digitality onto reality.  
55. Hume’s analysis of force is moot because forces aren’t needed to connect cause and effect.  
56. Temporal order is itself a causal notion.  
57. There is no possible causal connection without actual causal processes.  
58. Hume’s belief in ex nihilo events is false.  
59. Continuity is a causal phenomenon.  
60. Induction consists in positing continuities that de-digitize our description of reality.  
61. Our grounds for induction are perceptual, not propositional.  
62. Perceptual content is non-digital and continuous.  
63. Sensory data is analogue; propositions are digital models of it.  
64. Counter-inductive hypotheses imply discontinuities incompatible with causal continuity.  
65. Propositions are poor models of perceptual data.  
66. Induction is justified by analogue logic, not propositional logic.  
67. Hume’s analysis confuses associative mechanisms with logical reasoning.  
68. Logical relations also hold among non-digital (analogue) data.  
69. Sentence logic is a superficial kind of logic.  
70. The identification of logic with sentence logic is false.  
71. Skepticism about the external world presupposes ex nihilo perceptual events.  
72. Mental events are temporally co-located and causally connected.  
73. Discontinuities in experience are only apparent.  
74. The external world is logically required to account for experiential continuity.  
75. Brain-in-a-vat scenarios still imply formal isomorphism between experience and reality.  
76. Even in deception, there is formal knowledge of the external world.  
77. All spatiotemporal knowledge is synthetic a posteriori.  
78. Given experience, it analytically follows that an external world exists.  
79. Empirical beliefs are not merely probable; they are analogue-logically valid.  
80. The lottery paradox fails because empirical knowledge is not probabilistic in Hume’s sense.  
81. Space and time are causal constructs.  
82. The concept of cause is primitive.  
83. Events are defined causally.  
84. Instants are classes of non-causally related events.  
85. Place is framework-relative and defined causally.  
86. Hume’s positivism has led to philosophical errors.  
87. Justification vs. causation distinction is over-extended in epistemology.  
88. Newton’s discoveries were rationally justified by experience, not merely triggered by it.  
89. Kant and Chomsky’s nativism is a species-empiricism that fails to explain knowledge acquisition.  
90. Evolution cannot replace rational inference as the ground of knowledge.  
91. Innate knowledge exists but does not include specific scientific theories.  
92. Innate knowledge is of two kinds: contingent and analytic.  
93. Induction is a logical, not associative, process.  
94. Hume’s conception of explanation as subsumption under regularities is false.  
95. Explanation consists in uncovering principled, causal relationships.  
96. Psychological explanation is not fundamentally different from physical explanation.  
97. Hempel’s deductive-nomological model is either tautological or false.  
98. Kuhn’s paradigm theory is a reaction to positivism that ends up reinforcing it.  
99. Freud’s unconscious is a logically coherent extension of causal continuity to psychology.  
100. The mind-body problem is only a mystery if one accepts Hume’s statistical conception of causation.  

---

Let me know if you'd like these grouped by theme (Kant, Hume, logic, epistemology, etc.).

**Position Statement: Kant & Hume on Induction, Causation, and the Methodology of Human Sciences**

This paper presents a systematic critique of Kant’s and Hume’s approaches to induction, causation, and the foundations of human sciences, while proposing a revised framework that reconciles their insights within a de-psychologized, logically grounded epistemology.

---

### **1. Critique of Kant’s Synthetic A Priori**
- **Kant’s error lies in his narrow conception of analyticity.** He restricts analytic truths to trivial, self-evident propositions (e.g., “circles are round”), while labeling substantive but non-empirical truths (e.g., “7+5=12”) as *synthetic a priori*.
- **This distinction collapses** when we recognize that many so-called synthetic a priori truths are actually *hard analytic*—truths grounded in conceptual structures but requiring non-trivial reasoning to uncover.
- **Kant’s reliance on “intuition”** as a source of synthetic a priori knowledge is misguided. Intuition, for Kant, is a para-perceptual process that reveals how we *must* perceive the world, not how the world *is*. This leads to a psychologization of necessity and undermines the objective validity of a priori knowledge.
- **Kant’s transcendental arguments can be salvaged** by reinterpreting them in logical rather than psychological terms. Where Kant speaks of *synthetic a priori* truths, we should speak of *hard analytic* truths—conceptually necessary but non-obvious propositions.

---

### **2. Critique of Hume’s Induction and Causation**
- **Hume’s skepticism about induction and causation** rests on a *digital* conception of reality: events are discrete, point-like, and causally isolated. This view is both empirically and conceptually untenable.
- **Reality is analogue, not digital.** Spatiotemporal events are continuous and causally interconnected. Descriptions of events as discrete are *models* of reality, not reality itself.
- **Hume’s puzzle of induction** arises from conflating *propositional data* (e.g., “all observed swans are white”) with the *non-propositional, perceptual data* that actually grounds our inductive practices. The latter is continuous and causally structured, providing a logical (analogue-logical) basis for induction.
- **Causation is inherent in continuity.** Temporal and spatial relations are themselves causal notions. There is no such thing as a non-causal description of a spatiotemporal event.

---

### **3. Proposed Synthesis: Analogue Logic and Hard Analyticity**
- **We must distinguish between digital and analogue representations.** Language and propositions are digital; perception and reality are analogue. Logical relations exist in both, but analogue logic is more fundamental.
- **Induction is an analogue-logically valid inference** from perceptual data. Counter-inductive hypotheses are not merely improbable but *analogue-logically invalid* because they imply discontinuities incompatible with the causal structure of reality.
- **Explanation is not mere subsumption under regularities** (as Hume and Hempel thought), but the uncovering of *principled, causal connections* that are logically entailed by the structure of reality.

---

### **4. Implications for Human Sciences**
- **Psychology and natural science are not methodologically divided.** Both seek principled explanations, not mere statistical regularities. The Dilthey–Hempel debate is a false dichotomy rooted in Humean misconceptions.
- **Freud’s unconscious, for example,** is not an irrational postulate but a logical extension of the principle that psychological reality, like physical reality, is continuous and causally structured.
- **Kuhn’s paradigm theory** overreacts to positivist shortcomings by retreating into relativism. A better approach recognizes that theory choice is guided by *analogue-logical consistency* with perceptual data, not mere convention or aesthetics.

---

### **5. Conclusion**
The paper argues for a *de-psychologized Kantianism* and a *de-digitalized Humeanism*. By recognizing:
- The existence of *hard analytic* truths,
- The *analogue* and *causal* structure of reality,
- The *logical* (not psychological) basis of induction and explanation,

we can construct a robust epistemology that preserves the insights of Kant and Hume while avoiding their psychologistic and skeptical pitfalls. This framework supports the rationality of both natural and human sciences, grounding them in a logically structured, causally continuous reality.

---

**Keywords:** Kant, Hume, synthetic a priori, analyticity, induction, causation, analogue logic, transcendental arguments, philosophy of science, epistemology.MISCELLANEOUS KUCZYNSKI POSITION STATEMENTS

1. The conscious event (W) that subjects believe to be their decision is not the operative intention causing the action.

2. W is an awareness of an already-made decision, not the decision itself.

3. The readiness potential (RP) is the proximal psychological cause of the action, not W.

4. W is not epiphenomenal tout court, even if epiphenomenal with respect to the particular finger-movement.

5. Consciousness of one's intentions necessarily has downstream effects on subsequent thought and behavior.

6. W may serve a "veto" function rather than an initiating function.

7. Libet's experiment shows we do not have "conscious free will" in the sense that decisions are not constituents of consciousness.

8. Standing intentions cannot possibly be constituents of consciousness because they are enduring structures.

9. The .2 second delay between intention and awareness is likely not mere "tape-delay" but reflects W's monitoring function.

10. Intentions governing real-time actions are more likely to involve consciousness than standing intentions.

11. RLE (Results of Libet's Experiment) are profoundly important and warrant revision of accepted views about agency.

12. Philosophers have attempted to trivialize the Libet experiment rather than engage with it constructively.

13. Little is gained by discussing RLE in terms of "free will" because this concedes validity to assumptions RLE call into question.

14. The question "What does the Libet experiment show?" is more productive than "What does it show about free will?"

15. RLE clearly are significant and almost certainly do generalize.

16. The shape and length of the RP slope is consistent across hundreds of subjects.

17. W either has no effect or a slight negative effect on the trajectory of the RP slope.

18. If W were the operative decision, the graph would inflect upward after W.

19. W's role, judging by the data, is to curb the causally effective process rather than initiate it.

20. Compatibilism holds that freedom is compatible with determinism and may even require it.

21. Indeterminism threatens freedom; determinism seems to be a prerequisite for freedom.

22. Thoughts that lack causal basis in pre-existing psychological structures would be mere intrusions, not exercises of agency.

23. Neuroscience does provide philosophically significant information about intentions, contrary to Roskies.

24. The actions in Libet's experiment are not "degenerate" or reflexive—they are paradigm cases of conscious action.

25. The experiment was designed to maximize the role of consciousness in the relevant action.

26. The claim that Libet confuses correlation with causation is unsupported by evidence.

27. The RP obviously does cause the finger-movement, as shown by the graph's trajectory.

28. Libet's experimental data has been validated by numerous replication studies.

29. The distinction between proximal and distal intentions is valid but does not undermine RLE's significance.

30. Distal intentions are extremely unlikely to be more consciousness-based than proximal intentions.

31. Distal intentions often form without any identifiable conscious "moment" of decision.

32. The position that RP represents mere "urges" rather than intentions is contradicted by the graphical data.

33. The claim that the RP-W event chain is "indivisible" and therefore non-causal is question-begging.

34. Most causality is "processual," mediated by processes, and the RP is a textbook case.

35. The standards of evidence philosophers apply to Libet would, if consistent, require rejecting that smoking causes cancer.

36. What Libet shows is more radical than what Freud showed about the unconscious.

37. Freud regarded consciousness as a weak but real ruler; Libet shows it is a puppet.

38. The "center of consciousness" that people regard as the nucleus of their self is not what it appears to be.

39. RLE show not merely that choices are predetermined but that they are not ours to make.

40. One of consciousness's purposes is to integrate information about the external and internal worlds.

41. Conscious acts of decision-approval are experienced as conscious acts of decision-making.

42. The "illusion of free choice" may be adaptive, preventing consciousness from being overburdened.

43. In approving a given intention, W implicitly green-lights future similar intentions.

44. W serves a directive role with respect to future intentions even if not causing the present one.

45. The appeal to "phenomenological data" that we have free will is straightforwardly question-begging.

46. Free will, if it exists, is a form of causation, and what causes what is always an empirical question.

47. The comparison of free will to the cogito is misconceived because free will claims are not analytic.

48. Follow-up studies using fMRI show RPs begin much earlier than Libet detected—up to 10 seconds before W.

49. Once initiated, the RP is overwhelmingly likely to result in action.

50. Philosophers' defensive responses to Libet represent a missed opportunity for the discipline.

1. Sellars destroyed the "myth of the given" and began a revolution in epistemology.

2. Foundationalism used to be the orthodoxy; anti-foundationalism is now the orthodoxy because of Sellars.

3. George Berkeley destroyed the myth of the given two hundred years before Sellars using a very similar argument.

4. Berkeley's argument is a generalization of Sellars' argument.

5. Berkeley explicitly shows how anti-foundationalism applies to a wide range of contexts, while Sellars discusses only very special contexts.

6. Berkeley provides a non-metaphorical way of interpreting metaphors that dominate contemporary anti-foundationalism.

7. No empirical background knowledge being needed to obtain knowledge of external reality is a false picture.

8. Sellars is not denying that external realities are given to us through sense-perceptions.

9. Sellars attacks the idea that perception makes us aware of external states without cooperation of preexisting empirical knowledge.

10. Background knowledge must be mobilized if a sensory experience is to give us knowledge of an external state of affairs.

11. The given—sensory experience considered apart from background knowledge—is not epistemic.

12. The epistemic significance of a quale is not fixed; it is a variable function of background empirical knowledge.

13. Raw sensations by themselves do not have a fixed message about the outside world.

14. There are two myths of the given: (i) what is given is epistemic; (ii) what is given is representational.

15. What is false is not the belief that there is a given, but that the given is epistemic or representational.

16. Berkeley made essentially the same points as Sellars in An Essay Towards a New Theory of Vision (1709).

17. Berkeley's attack on the given is more perspicuous, more radical, and more cogent than Sellars'.

18. Post-Bob can see tie colors in unusual lighting only because background empirical knowledge is operative.

19. Sellars leaves implicit the needed generalizations of his argument.

20. What Sellars says about non-standard conditions applies to perception under standard conditions.

21. Standard conditions are an idealization; no conditions are really standard.

22. If there were perfectly "standard" conditions, they would not be typical.

23. We adjust automatically to changes in perception conditions and are often unaware of massive differences.

24. Background knowledge is operative even when we are not consciously aware of its role.

25. A diamond-shaped object from above gives the same appearance as a square from an oblique angle, yet we instantly know the difference.

26. We disambiguate appearances by taking contextual information into account.

27. A ten-foot stop sign from a hundred feet gives the same appearance as a thousand-foot sign from ten thousand feet.

28. We use benchmarks (trees, houses) and background knowledge to determine object sizes.

29. Any episode of taking in information about the external world involves cooperation of contextual or background information.

30. In the absence of background empirical knowledge, our sensory episodes become indeterminate to the point of meaninglessness.

31. Berkeley correctly argues that one cannot tell just by looking how far away the moon is.

32. What is true of very distant objects regarding distance perception is true, though less obviously, of nearby objects.

33. Visual experience by itself is ambiguous between seeing a massive distant object and a medium-sized nearby object.

34. The appearance given by a receding object is not different from one given by a shrinking object.

35. Contextual information disambiguates what would otherwise be ambiguous visual experience.

36. What ultimately endows visual sensations with distance information is that different visual sensations have different kinesthetic and tactile concomitants.

37. It is not visual sensation by itself that apprises you of distances; it is visual sensation plus sensations of motion, resistance, touch, and duration.

38. Berkeley correctly answers Molyneux's question: a man born blind given sight would not know from vision alone whether he sees round, oval, or square objects.

39. Berkeley gives analogues of his argument for every perceptible property an object might have.

40. When you hear someone talk, you feel as though you directly grasp their meaning, but background knowledge is essential.

41. Visual experiences apprise you of squareness only in the sense that auditory perceptions apprise you of sentence meaning.

42. Seeing shame in a reddening face requires background knowledge of psychosomatic correspondences.

43. No sensory experience by itself tells one anything; it must be contextualized with background knowledge.

44. No sensory experience is foundational; senses tell us about the world only through mediation of past experiences.

45. Empirical knowledge is obtained through coherencies among sensory experiences, not through isolated experiences.

46. Berkeley's argument is superior to Sellars' in being more general—applying to virtually every perceptible property under standard conditions.

47. Sellars doesn't really explain how representational mental entities are forged out of non-representational ones.

48. Berkeley shows in detail how non-representational mental entities from different sensory modalities combine into representational entities.

49. Contemporary anti-foundationalists rely on obscure metaphors (knowledge as "arc" or "web"); Berkeley provides non-metaphorical interpretation.

50. The problem of how perceptions arise from non-representational sensations is more fundamental than the problem of justification.

1. Definite descriptions are not singular terms
2. Grammatical form and logical form sometimes pull apart
3. "The phi has psi" means "something uniquely has phi, and any such thing has psi"
4. Definite descriptions don't refer to anything
5. The meaning of a definite description is given contextually, not denotatively
6. For proper names, there exists an individual x such that knowing the semantic rule requires knowing the name refers to x
7. For definite descriptions, there is no individual x such that knowing its semantics requires knowing it refers to x
8. Sentences containing definite descriptions attribute properties to properties, not to individuals
9. "The inventor of Velcro is intelligent" is about properties, not individuals
10. The property of being instantiated can be attributed to properties
11. "The fountain of youth" is not a referring term because no fountain of youth exists
12. Meaningful expressions need not refer to existing objects
13. The pre-Russellian view that non-referring terms must refer to "ideas" is mistaken
14. Fountains are not ideas
15. Disagreements about whether something exists are not disagreements about whether ideas exist
16. Meinong's notion of "subsistence" as intermediate between existence and non-existence is incoherent
17. Something either exists or it doesn't; there is no intermediate condition
18. Belief reports containing definite descriptions must be reparsed to expose their meaning
19. "The fountain of youth exists" means "the property of being a fountain of youth is uniquely instantiated"
20. Negative existentials don't say of non-existent objects that they don't exist
21. Properties exist even when nothing instantiates them
22. A property's existence means there is a way something would have to be to have that property
23. To say expression R refers to object O means for any property phi, "R has phi" attributes phi to O
24. Expression E refers to O iff for any property phi, "E has phi" attributes phi to O
25. Reference can be identified with the capacity to attribute properties via sentence containment
26. Identity statements involving co-referring definite descriptions should be trivial if descriptions are referring terms
27. "The inventor of bifocals is identical with the first postmaster general" is non-trivial
28. The Theory of Descriptions explains the non-triviality of informative identity statements
29. Positive existentials don't attribute existence to non-existent objects
30. Positive existentials don't make trivial claims that some entity exists
31. Positive existentials claim that a property is instantiated
32. Frege's sense/reference distinction attempts to explain informative identity statements
33. The referent of a definite description is what has the relevant property
34. The sense of a definite description is the property something must have to be its referent
35. Perceptions can have the same object but pick it out through different bodies of information
36. Frege's theory partially collapses into Russell's theory when scrutinized
37. When something is picked out by descriptive information, an existence-claim is being affirmed
38. Frege's view that definite descriptions are sense-bearing referring terms is incoherent
39. Accepting TD while believing definite descriptions are referring terms is contradictory
40. Co-referring terms should be inter-substitutable salva veritate (Leibniz's Law corollary)
41. Definite descriptions in belief contexts fail substitutivity tests
42. TD solves the substitutivity problem by showing descriptions aren't referring terms
43. Frege's distinction between extensional and intensional contexts is a cover-up for deeper problems
44. An extensional context is substitution-tolerant
45. An intensional context is substitution-intolerant
46. There are no genuinely intensional contexts
47. Apparent intensional contexts involve reference to propositions rather than individuals
48. "Smith wants to marry the prettiest woman" is about a proposition Smith wants to be true
49. Reparsing sentences with definite descriptions exposes their logical form
50. Grammatical objects that appear to refer to persons often refer to propositions
51. Frege's semantics embodies a failure to distinguish reference from quantification
52. Definite descriptions are quantifiers, not referring terms
53. Frege's intensional/extensional distinction embodies a failure to see that apparent individual-references are proposition-references
54. The principle of special compositionality (PSC): what an expression refers to depends on what its parts refer to
55. Frege's semantics violates PSC
56. Replacing equals with equals should result in equals
57. Frege's reference-shift thesis is a desperate measure to save his system
58. According to Frege, expressions in intensional contexts refer to their ordinary senses
59. Frege's system implies infinite hierarchies of sense
60. Frege's position is radically counterintuitive
61. Frege's position is logically and methodologically indefensible
62. D-sentences (sentences containing definite descriptions) can be systematically ambiguous
63. Syntactic ambiguity differs from lexical ambiguity
64. Syntactic ambiguity arises from multiple possible operator orderings
65. Scope is a property of operators
66. Operators are expressions that form new sentences from sentences or open-sentences
67. All quantifiers are operators
68. All conjunctions are operators
69. "And," "because," and "or" are two-place operators
70. "Not" is a one-place operator
71. "Everyone loves someone" is syntactically ambiguous between two scope readings
72. Wide-scope and narrow-scope readings of quantifiers yield different truth conditions
73. Grammatical surface structure obscures actual operator scope
74. Syntactic ambiguity wouldn't exist if surface structure perfectly revealed scope
75. Definite descriptions in modal or epistemic contexts create syntactic ambiguity
76. Pre-Russellian philosophers accepted absurdities due to missing the scope distinction
77. "Jerry is looking for the fountain of youth" doesn't require a fountain of youth to exist
78. Looking for something is wanting a certain proposition to be true
79. Nathan Salmon's view that mythical objects exist is unnecessary given Russell's insights
80. Mythical objects don't gush water
81. Quine's rejection of modal concepts stems from failing to grasp scope distinctions
82. Smullyan showed Russell's theory dissolves Quine's anti-modal argument
83. Necessity de dicto differs from necessity de re
84. "Necessarily the inventor of bifocals was the inventor of bifocals" has wide and narrow scope readings
85. The wide-scope reading of modal statements about descriptions is often false
86. The narrow-scope reading can be true when the wide-scope reading is false
87. Given any individual x identical with y, x must be identical with y
88. An open sentence is neither true nor false but can be "true for" certain values
89. An expression satisfies an open sentence if replacing variables with it yields truth
90. Predicates are open sentences
91. Russell extended Frege's work while correcting its incoherencies
92. Russell's Theory of Descriptions was one of his earliest and most important contributions
93. A definite description has the form "the phi" where phi is singular
94. "The people over there" is not a definite description because "people" is plural
95. Two sentences with the same grammatical form can have different logical forms
96. Truth-conditions determine meaning
97. Sentences with different truth-conditions have different semantics
98. An expression's semantics is its meaning
99. A semantic rule assigns meaning to an expression
100. Contextual definition specifies meaning by stating what whole sentences containing the expression mean

1. Events cause other events to occur
2. Objects are not causes; only events are causes
3. The empiricist argument against causation involves a major non-sequitur
4. It is methodologically permissible to posit unobservable causal ties just as we posit unobservable particles
5. The concept of persistence is itself a causal notion
6. Anything that persists is, for that very reason, a causal sequence
7. We observe causal sequences whenever we observe anything
8. The notion of spatial occupancy is a causal concept
9. Malleability and conductivity are causal properties
10. Anything that says anything about the spatiotemporal world has causal content
11. Causally sterile characterizations say nothing about anything
12. Statements like "Carter caused the recession" are elliptical for statements about events involving Carter
13. Having causal properties differs from being a cause
14. Conditions consist of events
15. What we call "conditions" are patterns of constant change
16. What we call "events" are changes in the manner of change
17. Nothing non-spatiotemporal can be a cause
18. Changes happen in time
19. Universals, if they exist, are causally impotent
20. There is always a non-causal component to awareness, even to sense-perception
21. The things we describe as "causes" are really partial causes
22. The complete cause of anything is very hard to identify
23. "The cause" of an event is an INUS-condition for that event
24. An INUS-condition is an insufficient but non-redundant part of an unnecessary but sufficient condition
25. Aristotle's belief that things have essences is incoherent
26. Dependence-relations don't hold between objects; they hold between events or statements
27. The concept of a formal cause is incoherent
28. The concept of a material cause is incoherent
29. The concept of efficient causality is coherent
30. Goals per se do nothing; goals are abstract objects
31. A person's having a goal is a garden-variety efficient cause
32. States of affairs, not objects, have effects
33. Propositions, not objects, stand in dependence-relations
34. Dependence-relations hold between propositions, not objects
35. "In virtue of" in causal contexts denotes a form of interpropositional dependence
36. Functionalism amounts to the denial that the mental (qua mental) has any causal powers
37. Functionalism denies the very existence of minds
38. Content-externalism is incoherent
39. Mental content is causally important to the extent content-externalism is wrong
40. Content-externalism embodies a failure to appreciate the concept meant by "in virtue of"
41. x is a program-cause of y if x consists of events that are directly responsible for y
42. High-resolution causal information is not always better than low-resolution causal information
43. Different disciplines deal with different program-causes and distinct nomic connections
44. Biology isn't just bad physics; psychology isn't just bad physiology
45. Predictions are almost always made on the basis of knowledge of program-causes
46. Explanation is reverse-prediction
47. The concept of a program-cause is central to prediction and explanation
48. According to Hume, nothing makes anything happen
49. We do observe forces contrary to what Hume alleges
50. Hume's first analysis of causation is untenable
51. Hume's analysis cannot distinguish epiphenomenal causation from actual causation
52. Hume's analysis entails that spatiotemporally adjacent events must be causally related, which is false
53. There is no way to identify "relevant categories" without already knowing what caused what
54. The concepts of space and time are to be understood in terms of causality
55. Order in time is to be understood in causal terms
56. Order in space is to be understood in causal terms
57. Hume's analysis of causality is viciously circular
58. To occupy a place is to make it harder for other things to enter that place
59. Everything we see persists; anything seen as persisting is seen as a causal process
60. Space and time are not empty containers; spatiotemporal positions are relations between events
61. Hume's denial of causality is based on a pseudo-empirical, crypto-a priori argument
62. The a priori argument against forces is no good
63. The counterfactual analysis of causation (CF) is a failure
64. Even if CF is extensionally correct, it's no analysis of causality
65. Counterfactuals are themselves to be understood in terms of causality
66. CF is guilty of vicious circularity
67. CF assumes there's no causal redundancy in the world, but sometimes there are back-up mechanisms
68. CF isn't extensionally correct
69. Lewis' analysis of counterfactual truth in terms of possible worlds fails
70. Events have causal roots going back to the beginning of time
71. A logical analysis cannot assume empirical facts not in evidence
72. Positing causal slack in worlds makes them unreliable for validating counterfactuals
73. Lewis' appeal to "miracles" in other worlds is ad hoc and produces false counterfactuals
74. Other worlds have nothing to do with counterfactual truth
75. Knowledge of counterfactuals depends on facts in our world, not other worlds
76. Statistical probability differs from explanatory probability
77. The word "probability" is equivocal between statistical and explanatory meanings
78. Probability statements about the future aren't reducible to statistical claims
79. Humeanism cannot explain explanation
80. Explanatory probability concerns minimizing damage to one's belief system
81. P is probable to the extent our beliefs depend on it
82. Counterstatistical events are innocuous; counter-explanatory events are not
83. Rolling double-sixes repeatedly is statistically improbable but explanatorily innocuous
84. Any event, described precisely enough, has vanishingly small statistical probability
85. Goodman's "grue" argument shows that statistical probability alone cannot ground induction
86. Grueness isn't a color; it's a color-related property
87. Hempel's deductive-nomological account of explanation is viciously circular
88. Laws are hyper-explanations; they explain the explanations
89. People already have low-level explanations; on that basis they posit laws
90. Hypotheses concerning laws are distillations of existing low-level explanations
91. Causal anomalies must be minimized in seeking explanations
92. The elimination of causal anomalies consists in the elimination of discontinuities
93. Explanation is discontinuity-elimination
94. Probability is an epistemic concept
95. Probability is a property of statements, not of states of affairs
96. Probability is inherently relational
97. A complete description of the universe would contain no probability statements
98. Probability is "a measure of ignorance"
99. Probability is a mind-independent logical relationship holding among statements
100. Accidental generalizations don't receive support from their instances; only principled generalizations do

1. Obsessive beliefs are pseudo-beliefs
2. Compulsive acts are pseudo-acts
3. If someone obsesses about hatred of someone, it's because they're still attached to that person
4. Obsessional belief represents the opposite of what one actually believes
5. Compulsive action is driven by an intention to do the opposite of what one's doing
6. The essence of OCD is ambivalence
7. Compulsive love is actually unconscious hatred
8. When unconscious hatred becomes conscious, associated compulsions vanish
9. The obsessional engages in "doing and undoing" due to emotional polarity
10. Obsessive fears often represent disguised desires
11. Doing-and-undoing behavior can mirror the sexual act as displaced libido
12. Compulsive behavior can be overdetermined at one level but have a single determinant at a deeper level
13. Compulsive acts of kindness affect their targets the same way as acts of hostility
14. Unconscious intentions can carry the day over conscious intentions
15. Desire-driven acts lacking values have authenticity but not sublimity
16. Value-driven acts lacking desire have sublimity but not reality
17. Actual actions must embody both beliefs and desires in alignment
18. Compulsive actions consist of two distinct half-actions: one about instinct, one about values
19. To the extent compulsive actions are real, they aren't actions; to the extent they're actions, they aren't real
20. Intentions are judgments as to how to consolidate one's psychological architecture
21. Values are beliefs as to what consolidates one's psychological architecture
22. Locke was wrong that freedom is only a property of actions, not desires
23. Second-order desires can be free or unfree (Frankfurt's insight)
24. One has a free will to the extent that conduct aligns with second-order desires
25. Rational conduct differs from intelligent conduct
26. An irrational act can involve enormous intelligence
27. A rational act embodies due regard for one's various interests
28. Persons, unlike non-persons, subject their own desires to critical scrutiny
29. Free acts require that second-order desires align with first-order desires
30. Freedom consists primarily in being oneself, secondarily in being able to do what one wants
31. People can warp higher-order desires to validate lower-order desires (rationalization)
32. Truly free acts are driven by values, not merely by higher-order desires
33. Values are not desires
34. Liking something differs from valuing it
35. A value is a judgment that a course of action increases the scope of one's agency
36. Giving into impulses isn't inherently bad; healthy impulse-discharge involves considered judgment
37. What appear to be whimsical acts are often non-whimsically approved impulse-expressions
38. Happiness presupposes a value-system
39. Happiness consists in judging oneself to have measured up to certain benchmarks
40. All selves are minds, but not all minds are selves
41. A self is a mind that is an agent
42. An agent is a mind that acts, not just reacts
43. Where there are no values, there are no selves
44. A self is a mind whose behaviors are driven by beliefs as to what is of value
45. Actions are behaviors resulting from judgments about judgments
46. There is no self where there is no self-evaluation
47. Co-corporeal, informationally integrated mental states suffice for a mind but not a self
48. Selfhood requires a regulatory agency under whose jurisdiction mental activity falls
49. Selfhood is a matter of degree
50. What is valuable is what consolidates one's agency
51. Kant's two categorical imperatives (universalizability and respect for autonomy) are not equivalent
52. CI1 (universalizability test) is false
53. CI2 (respect autonomy) is approximately correct
54. A moral principle outweighed is not a moral principle extinguished
55. Moral laws, unlike legal statutes, have a dimension of weight
56. Morality is not binary; obligations can be outweighed
57. Kant wrongly assumed nothing other than a good will has inherent moral worth
58. Autonomy itself must be inherently good if intention to respect autonomy is inherently good
59. Kant's argument linking morality and self-interest involves a massive non-sequitur
60. Rationality is intellectual autonomy
61. Autonomy is practical rationality
62. A creature that doesn't deliberate doesn't decide anything
63. Non-rational creatures don't make choices; they react
64. Agency in the robust sense is identical with rationality, autonomy, and moral responsibility
65. Philosophy justifies assumptions that empirical sciences cannot justify themselves
66. The assumption that senses are accurate cannot be empirically justified
67. Sense-perceptions have two roles: information-transmitting and thought-triggering
68. Mathematical knowledge results from ratiocinative processes triggered by perception, not transmitted by it
69. If perceptions triggering mathematical insight were hallucinations, the knowledge would remain valid
70. Non-empirical knowledge is purely conceptual, concerning structures and interrelations of concepts
71. The claim "there is no philosophical truth" is self-defeating
72. All legitimate knowledge being empirical is false (mathematics disproves it)
73. Disagreement doesn't preclude truth; where there's disagreement, at least one party is wrong
74. Philosophers tend not to admit when they're wrong, thwarting philosophical progress
75. Market forces don't weed out bad philosophers as they weed out bad doctors
76. What passes for philosophical ability in institutions may be mere mimicry of it
77. Brilliant philosophy students often use intellect to defend professors' views rather than seek truth
78. Modal realism (David Lewis) treats counterfactuals as facts about concrete alternative universes
79. Counterfactuals may instead be about logical entailment relations
80. Wittgenstein's view that "thinking is not a mental process" is false
81. Wittgenstein denied thoughts have existence apart from overt manifestations
82. Wittgenstein's position obliterates the distinction between voluntary and involuntary behavior
83. Ryle's view that voluntary/involuntary distinction is about cultural acceptability is wrong
84. Strawson's ascriptivist analysis of moral responsibility is false
85. Strawson's expressivist analysis that "true" is meaningless is false
86. The word "true" is not redundant
87. A priori knowledge is constitutive of one's ability to reason and learn from experience
88. We couldn't learn from experience without a priori knowledge
89. Observation cannot apprise us of what is incompatible with what
90. A creature cannot acquire knowledge of bearing relations unless it already has such knowledge
91. A priori knowledge is not an object of thought but the ability to think itself
92. An analytic truth holds entirely in virtue of its own content
93. Not all analytic truths are tautologies
94. Tautologies (definitional truths) are actually empirical truths about language
95. All mathematical truths are analytic truths
96. Not all analytic truths are mathematical truths
97. Truths of arithmetic are analytically true but not formally true (Gödel)
98. Gödel proved the class of arithmetical truths is not recursively definable
99. The class of all recursively defined statement-sets is not itself recursively definable
100. Intelligence atrophies unless exercised, like athletic skill

# Document 1: What is Borderline Personality Disorder?

1. People with BPD have two distinct, simultaneously operative psychological "operating systems"
2. One BPD operating system is appropriately adult and sane; the other is infantile in nature
3. One part of the BPD person's mind remained fixated at an early phase of life, usually very early childhood
4. The fixation occurred because of trauma, usually sexual molestation
5. People with BPD oscillate between their two psychological integrations
6. The oscillation between modalities makes BPD individuals appear to be lying or playing games when they are actually shifting between incongruent worldviews
7. People with BPD may be extremely intelligent and intellectually developed
8. During lucid moments, BPD individuals may be utterly sane and utterly decent
9. It is wrong to infer that BPD people are psychopaths
10. When the infantile side predominates, BPD individuals act in entitled, narcissistic ways similar to psychopaths
11. The psychopath is simply a phony who puts on a mask of sanity; the BPD person is genuinely two-sided
12. Neither side of the BPD personality is a mask; each side is genuine
13. The BPD person's preferred psychological defense is splitting, not repression
14. The BPD personality structure is itself the result of splitting
15. Repression involves having a single psychological architecture and shoving incompatible conceits into the unconscious
16. Splitting involves shifting between one's adult side and infantile side rather than repressing
17. The normal person's psyche keeps infantilism in the abyss of the unconscious
18. The BPD person's psyche keeps infantilisms in a concurrently operative sphere of mental activity
19. Splitting takes the place of repression in BPD
20. The BPD person often behaves psychopathically due to a pronounced streak of psychopathy
21. There is a difference between this streak of psychopathy and full-blown psychopathy
22. When the BPD person acts non-psychopathically, she is being true to one side of her personality
23. When the BPD person acts psychopathically, it is because she is regressing
24. When the psychopath acts psychopathically, the mask has fallen; it is not regression
25. When the psychopath acts non-psychopathically, he is just acting

---

# Document 2: What is a Formal Language?

1. A formal language L may be identified with an ordered triple (E, G, M) where E is primitive expressions, G is grammar/syntax, and M is a meaning-function/semantics
2. A primitive expression is one that cannot be decomposed into other expressions
3. A grammar is a set of rules that strings of primitive expressions must satisfy to be grammatical
4. An ungrammatical string is not an expression of any kind
5. If a language has non-negligible expressive capabilities, then its grammar is a recursion defined for its own outputs
6. All languages are recursively defined expression-classes
7. Not all recursively-defined expression-classes are languages; a language requires a meaning function
8. No language can be infinite but not recursively defined, because such expressions would be unintelligible
9. Any non-recursive but definable expression-class contains only finitely many symbols
10. A finite expression-class could not possibly constitute a language
11. Two expressions belong to the same language only if they can be combined into a meaningful expression or share at least one constituent
12. An expression has expressive power only to the extent that what it means doesn't always collapse into what its users believe it to mean
13. A meaning-function identifies truth-conditions of sentences indirectly through contextual definitions
14. "Meaning" is ambiguous between meaning-what (semantics) and meaning-how (semantic decomposition)
15. Sentences can have the same truth-conditions but different meanings due to different semantic decompositions
16. All languages are formal languages; a "formal language" is one that is formally described
17. A natural language is by definition one not known on the basis of explicitly stated rules
18. English has no less formal properties than the most formal of formal languages
19. Natural languages have too much structural integrity, not too little, making rules difficult to identify
20. The antinomies supposedly arising in natural language afflict only crude models, not natural languages themselves
21. "Formal language" is itself a vague and relative expression
22. A sentence's logical form is nothing other than its meaning
23. The extent to which inferences can be made about a sentence's logical form from its syntax is a function of what the examiner already knows
24. To say a discipline can be "formalized" means there is a recursive definition of the class of all truths belonging to it
25. A perfectly formal language (where syntax completely determines logical form) is a surd, like a square circle

---

# Document 3: Religion and the Limits of Modern Rationalism

1. Any answer about religion's legitimacy embodies one of three attitudes: uncritical acceptance, rejection, or critical and reflective acceptance
2. James, Otto, and Eliade hold that the essence of religious sentiment is that this world is not all there is
3. Self-identified agnostics and atheists who are psychologically healthy hold some variant of the view that an invisible order exists
4. When people genuinely lack this view, they succumb to various forms of psychological morbidity
5. It is not possible for a member of any contemporary society to have an attitude of uncritical acceptance of religion
6. Contemporary fundamentalists choose to be fundamentalists; their beliefs are reactions, not natural perception
7. There are two forms of religious rejectionism: authentic (rationalism-based) and inauthentic (social conformity)
8. Most contemporary atheists are simply following the herd, just as true-believers were a thousand years ago
9. The brain-centers mediating "militant" atheism are identical with those mediating religious fundamentalism
10. There can be both reductive and non-reductive truths about religion
11. According to James, the essence of religion is belief in an unseen order that gives the world meaning and moral structure
12. James argues that even if God doesn't exist, belief in God gives one God-like strength
13. James's position is that our motivations and values are hewed to the presumption of a God superintending a moral order
14. According to Otto, the numinous is a presence that cannot be known through rational inquiry
15. God conceived as a super-person or as utterly rational is not the numinous
16. The miraculous is not identical with or necessarily an expression of the numinous
17. The awe-inspiring and terrifying are what we perceive to be supernatural
18. The numinous is a psychological projection relating to passivity and having one's guard down
19. According to Eliade, primitive/religious man conceives of time as circular, not linear
20. The shift from cyclical to linear time was caused by the creation of the written word, not Abrahamic religion
21. Religion is not pre-rationalism or anti-rationalism but early-stage rationalism
22. When James, Otto, and Eliade refer to "religion," they are actually referring to precivilizational spiritualism
23. Contemporary fundamentalists' factual beliefs are nearly identical to their secular counterparts'
24. These authors' position is not that we should be more spiritual, but that we are already spiritual without recognizing it
25. We cannot become non-spiritual; we can only wrongly believe we are non-spiritual and adopt lifestyles that contravene our spiritual natures

---

# Document 4: Why Does Alcoholics Anonymous Work?

1. The vast majority of severe alcoholics who permanently quit have gone through Alcoholics Anonymous
2. There is no way to "work the program" without surrendering to a higher power
3. Most people who quit drinking with AA's help were self-identified agnostics and atheists prior to starting
4. AA is no less effective for non-believers than for believers
5. There is little evidence that anything other than AA works for severe alcoholism
6. The alcoholic's higher power is a projection of his superego/ego-ideal
7. The alcoholic is internally divided: one part wants to drink, the other wants to live
8. The alcoholic's will has been completely shattered
9. In surrendering to a higher power, the alcoholic is really surrendering to some part of himself
10. The alcoholic's recovery centers on becoming less egocentric
11. Will must be distinguished from mere desire: will represents values, desire represents urges
12. The alcoholic must project his superego because years of rationalizations have corrupted his introspective faculty
13. Recovering from alcoholism involves becoming internally unified
14. Alcoholism is a compulsion to be insane (to replace reality with fantasy)
15. The alcoholic's leap of faith is not really a leap of faith because he is surrendering to a part of himself
16. God in general may be externalized conscience
17. Religious sentiment cannot be understood in strictly medical terms
18. Those who completely lack religious sentiment tend to be internally divided
19. Acquiring religious sentiment involves a surrender of one's agency to some other power
20. Religious conversions are justified by their consequences
21. Faith involves finding one's very own divinity to have a relationship with
22. The benefits of religious sentiment are enduring and deep, unlike the benefits of unalloyed delusion
23. What the trench-atheist finds is not God but his own conscience
24. When optimism is "self-fulfilling," it is because it disposes people to actualize potential they already have
25. Religious beliefs involve bona fide leaps of faith, unlike garden-variety empirical beliefs

---

# Document 5: Attachment Theory and Mental Illness

1. A person's emotional attachments influence how he deals with problematic situations, and vice versa
2. People with healthy and secure attachments, particularly in early life, are psychologically healthier than those without
3. A psychologically healthy adult is someone whose parents loved him but did not spoil him
4. A mother's love leads to self-love; a father's discipline leads to self-discipline
5. A person's attachment behavioral system is largely determined by early-life relationships with caregivers
6. A child needs at least one stable attachment with a caregiver to become a healthy adult
7. There are four basic attachment patterns: Secure, Anxious-ambivalent, Anxious-avoidant, and Disorganized
8. Infants with secure attachments have nurturing and dependable caregivers
9. Infants with anxious-ambivalent attachments have emotionally withdrawn and unreliable caregivers
10. Infants with anxious-avoidant attachments have abusive caregivers
11. Infants with disorganized attachments have extremely abusive or highly unreliable caregivers
12. A child's attachment pattern tends to be identical with the one they had as an infant
13. Adults can have different attachment patterns from those they had earlier in life
14. Inadequate early-life attachments give rise not only to maladaptive personality traits but to full-blown psychopathology
15. Anxious-ambivalent early-life attachments are dispositive of neurosis
16. Anxious-avoidant early-life attachments are dispositive of psychosis
17. Disorganized early-life attachments are dispositive of psychopathy
18. Psychopaths do not form meaningful attachments and have no desire to do so
19. Most psychopaths were treated coldly or cruelly by key caregivers in early life
20. Psychopaths do not benefit from psychotherapy
21. Good adult relationships are consequences of solutions to problems caused by bad early-life relationships, not the solution itself
22. People with mental illnesses tend to form relationships that validate their symptoms rather than alleviate them
23. A secure patient-therapist relationship is necessary for the therapist to help the patient
24. A secure patient-therapist relationship does more for helping patients have healthy relationships than intellectual insight
25. Therapists are under a categorical obligation to help patients learn to be rational and autonomous

---

# Document 6: Chomsky's Two Contributions to Philosophy

1. Chomsky made two contributions to philosophy: the poverty of stimulus argument and the argument for sub-personal thought
2. If sensory data alone sufficed to explain language acquisition, furniture or animals exposed to the same data would also learn language
3. Innate cognitive structure enables humans to respond to sounds and light-patterns in ways that eventuate linguistic knowledge
4. Experience merely triggers pre-existing cognitive structure that was "waiting to be turned on"
5. The mind's innate structure enables acquisition of linguistic ability and all forms of cognitive competence
6. We have a priori knowledge of truths that enable us to organize experiences into cognitive competence
7. The knowledge Chomsky discusses is not knowledge the mind has; it is the mind itself
8. Knowledge that you have is structure-internal; framework-constitutive knowledge is the framework itself
9. Your cognitive framework is the subject; knowledge of facts is the object known to that subject
10. Mental contents one is aware of are occupants of one's cognitive architecture, not the architecture itself
11. When aware of oneself, one is aware of products of one's cognitive framework, not the framework proper
12. Framework-constitutive structures and operations are deeply unconscious, unlike Freudian unconscious contents
13. Language is productive: linguistic expressions can be combined into larger expressions
14. Language is systematic: parts of complex expressions can be rearranged to form other expressions
15. The systematicity and productivity of language reflect corresponding facts about cognitive structure
16. Language is productive and systematic because our minds are productive and systematic
17. We understand relations of logical dependence that map meanings of sentence-parts onto meanings of sentences
18. Cognitive abilities are mediated by physiology that encodes insight and intelligence
19. Pure physiology without intelligence would enable only stereotyped responses, not keeping pace with novelty
20. Where there is pure physiology, there can be training but not teaching
21. Where there is pure physiology, there can be operant conditioning but not genuine learning
22. Pre-experiential structural properties are cognitive, not physiological, in nature
23. Cognitive properties are realized or implemented by physiology as hardware implements software
24. The fact that we can learn and use language proves pre-experiential properties are cognitive, not merely physiological
25. Knowledge of language-constituting structures is structure-constituting, not structure-internal

# 100 Positions from "How Is Rationalization Possible?"

## On Self-Deception and Its Possibility

1. People routinely deceive themselves, and it would be hard to exaggerate how often or how discrepantly from truth.

2. The view that self-deception is conceptually incoherent is itself a case of self-deception.

3. The view that self-deception is conceptually incoherent is demonstrably false.

4. There are two distinct kinds of repression (repression₁ and repression₂).

5. There are correspondingly two kinds of self-deception, as a corollary of there being two kinds of repression.

## On Repression₁ (Epistemic Avoidance)

6. Repression₁ involves inaction—a deliberate, conscious intention not to follow up on suggestive leads.

7. Repression₁ involves suspecting but not knowing, and wanting to keep it that way.

8. Repression₁ involves not exercising due diligence in interpreting existing evidence or generating new evidence.

9. Repression₁ does not involve driving an already-formed belief into the unconscious.

10. Repression₁ involves abstaining from doing things that would generate evidence making acceptance of a belief de rigueur.

11. The customary conception of repression (CCR) is erroneous.

12. Suspicion is not knowledge, and there is nothing paradoxical about not wanting to pursue suspicions one suspects would lead to unwanted knowledge.

13. One can know what sort of thing something is without knowing which particular thing it is.

## On Repression₂ (Dissociation of Existing Beliefs)

14. Repression₂ involves already-formed beliefs.

15. The essence of repression₂ is dissociation.

16. To repress₂ an idea is to take away its "vote" in decision-making—to give it no weight.

17. Repression₂ involves blinding oneself to an existing belief one has already formed.

## On the Mechanisms Enabling Repression

18. The possibility of self-deception is a consequence of three facts about the mind.

19. The mind is not a perfectly unified entity; it consists of parts that communicate imperfectly.

20. There are two very different ways of being aware of something: knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description.

21. There are two very different senses in which mental content can be "conscious": as a constituent of consciousness, or as something one is conscious of.

22. The word "conscious" is used equivocally—sometimes meaning "constituent of consciousness," sometimes meaning "mental entity we are directly conscious of."

## On the Nature of Beliefs and Propositional Attitudes

23. All mental entities that aren't constituents of consciousness are, in one sense, unconscious.

24. Beliefs exist and are operative even when one is not conscious of them.

25. A belief can be psychologically active as a belief even when not the object of consciousness.

26. Propositional attitudes are not constituents of consciousness.

27. One can, without knowing it, have two distinct concepts of one of one's own propositional attitudes.

28. Emotions are distinct from their manifestations in consciousness.

29. Emotions are enduring psychological structures, not ephemeral events.

30. Beliefs, like emotions, are enduring structures distinguishable from the constituents of consciousness they may cause.

31. All propositional attitudes are enduring structures distinguishable from any constituents of consciousness for whose existence they're responsible.

32. Given two qualitatively distinct conscious events both expressing one propositional attitude, there isn't necessarily reason to recognize the attitude in both.

33. One can have very different attitudes towards a given one of one's own propositional attitudes without knowing it.

## On Judgment and Self-Knowledge

34. Having a propositional attitude is distinct from knowing that one has it.

35. Knowing one feels a certain way involves making a judgment about one's mental state.

36. Propositional attitudes never appear in consciousness in propria persona, except indirectly as rocks and trees do.

37. What is in consciousness is at most a representative or derivative of a propositional attitude.

38. One must "synthesize" indications of one's attitudes; one must make a judgment that they express an enduring attitude.

39. These synthesis-judgments are often quite wrong.

40. We sometimes like those toward whom we have constant surges of rage; we sometimes dislike those who make us feel good.

## On Limitations of Agency Over Mental Processes

41. One's agency only goes so far; much within one's mind falls outside its scope.

42. Judgment-producing processes lie beyond the reach of what one can choose to occur.

43. It is not within one's power to completely suspend judgment-producing processes.

44. One can no more choose to stop making judgments than choose to stop digesting food.

45. One can choose courses of action that redirect automatically-occurring mental activity that yields judgments.

46. Unless one damages one's brain, the stream of judgment-making activity will eventually yield the judgments one doesn't want.

## On Anxiety and Repression₁

47. The anxiety felt when repression₁ breaks down isn't from unconscious knowledge entering consciousness.

48. It results from one's thought-processes following up on clues despite attempts to stymie them.

49. Every case of repression₁ involves intrapsychic conflict, but not between unconscious knowledge and conscious ignorance.

50. The conflict in repression₁ is between a wish to know the truth and a wish not to know it.

## On Conditions for Repression₂

51. For a propositional attitude to be a candidate for repression₂, it must be a source of conflict within one's psyche.

52. It isn't enough for something to be painful for it to be repressed₂.

53. People typically choose to suppress painful memories, but suppression isn't repression₂.

54. One represses₂ knowledge that would severely disrupt one's life-structure if consciously admitted.

## On the Value and Dangers of Repression₂

55. Repression₂ isn't always bad; in many contexts, it's optimal.

56. A person who never repressed₂ anything would quickly go mad.

57. Repressions₂ are necessary.

58. Repressions₂ outlive their usefulness—circumstances change but the repression persists.

59. Repression₂ isn't a one-off affair; it is an ongoing process.

60. Each instance of repression₂ creates holes in one's knowledge that must be explained away.

61. These explanations cannot be genuine and each incentivizes more bogus, anomaly-creating explanations.

62. The need to plug these holes disposes one to devalue truth and hyper-value illegitimate reasoning methods.

63. The result of sustained repression₂ is loss of both ratiocinative and ethical integrity.

## On Factors Conducive to Repression₂

64. One can know something without that thing being obvious to one.

65. It's harder to repress₂ knowledge of the obvious than of the non-obvious.

66. Inference-based knowledge is easier to repress₂ than sense-based knowledge.

67. People can repress₂ knowledge of totally obvious truths, but this requires telling oneself one isn't capable of knowing truth.

68. Complete loss of faith in one's ratiocinative ability usually creates more conflict than it eliminates.

69. In most cases of repression₂, there must be "plausible deniability."

70. The things one represses₂ tend to involve judgment-calls rather than pure sense-perception.

71. If a belief concerns something personal, one's standard of proof tends to be ridiculously high.

## On Freud's Principal Claims

72. Nobody is perfectly transparent to himself; nobody is conscious of everything in his mind.

73. Some mental contents are readily made conscious (pre-conscious); others are kept unconscious because distressing.

74. Repressed entities weren't destroyed; the subject merely blinded himself to them.

75. Desires arising from repressed material are necessarily intense and the subject experiences intolerable frustration until discharged.

76. Such desires cannot be discharged unless they employ subterfuge, since conscious intention to gratify them is impossible.

77. Subterfuges are of two types: disguise as an acceptable desire, or expression as a symptom.

## On Opposition to Freud

78. Arguments against Freud's contentions are pitifully weak and involve regressions to crude, demonstrably false positions.

79. The positions "we're computers," "there is no consciousness," "there are no minds," "the mind is completely transparent to itself" are all untenable.

80. Eliminativism about propositional attitudes ("folk psychology") is false.

81. Willful denials of the obvious are touted as "scientific" and "rigorous" without warrant.

82. While it's good not to impute minds to stones, it's obviously not good not to impute them to people.

83. The projector itself cannot be a projection—one cannot eliminate the mental by treating it as projection.

## On the Mechanism of Repression₂ (Detailed)

84. Beliefs are inert except to the extent one draws consequences from them and allows them to engage other beliefs.

85. Some inferences are made involuntarily, but one has at least some control over what sorts of inferences one's mind makes.

86. One can so structure one's life that a belief, though still conscious, is isolated—prevented from engaging other beliefs.

87. By de-operationalizing acceptance of a fact, one can cease to have more than abstract, formal understanding of it.

88. Most data-synthesis occurs below the threshold of consciousness.

89. Decisions about what goes on in one's mind are of limited scope—they don't directly affect deeper strata.

90. One cannot "uninstall" a belief by tinkering with its representations in consciousness.

91. The conscious representative of a repressed₂ belief becomes an innocuous shell, but the belief still lives on.

92. Since one no longer acknowledges the repressed belief's existence, it must insinuate itself into intentions or be expressed as symptoms.

## On Both Forms of Repression

93. Both repression₁ and repression₂ involve conflict between conscious and unconscious forces within oneself.

94. Both forms of repression involve constructing and operationalizing a narrative alternative to reality.

95. Both forms of repression involve rationalization.

96. Without rationalization, it is hard if not impossible to repress an idea and keep it repressed.

97. Rationalization-construction is more heavily involved in keeping ideas repressed than in initially repressing them.

## On Psychology as a Discipline

98. The science of psychology has itself become a means by which people rationalize attempts to repress obvious psychodynamic truths.

99. Brain-science, to the extent it's relevant to psychology, is parasitic on psychological knowledge.

100. The denial of emotions is itself a thoroughly emotional position, and the denial of repression is itself an instance of repression.MORE KUCZYNSKI MISCELLANEOUS POSITION STATEMENTS 

I'll extract 100 positions from this text on repression and self-deception.

## 100 Philosophical Positions from "How Is Rationalization Possible?"

### On Self-Deception and Its Possibility

1. People routinely deceive themselves, and it would be hard to exaggerate how often or how discrepantly with the truth.

2. The view that self-deception is conceptually incoherent is itself a case of self-deception.

3. There are two distinct kinds of repression, which correspond to two kinds of self-deception.

4. Repression₁ involves deliberate, conscious intention not to follow up on suggestive leads—one suspects but doesn't know, and wants to keep it that way.

5. Repression₁ doesn't involve driving an already-formed belief into the unconscious; it involves abstaining from doing things that would generate evidence making acceptance of that belief de rigueur.

6. Repression₂ involves already-formed beliefs and its essence is dissociation.

7. To repress₂ an idea is to take away its "vote"—to decide to give it no weight in one's decision-making.

8. Both forms of repression involve conflict between forces within oneself of which one is aware and forces of which one is unaware.

9. Both forms of repression involve constructing and operationalizing a narrative alternative to the one describing reality as it really is.

10. Both forms of repression involve rationalization; without rationalization, it is hard or impossible to repress an idea or keep it repressed.

### On the Structure of Mind

11. The mind is not a perfectly unified entity; it consists of various parts that communicate with each other only very imperfectly.

12. There are two very different ways one can be aware of a given thing: knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description.

13. There are two very different senses in which mental content can be "conscious": as a constituent of consciousness, or as a mental entity of which one is conscious.

14. Sense-perceptions, itches, tickles, and other sensations are constituents of consciousness.

15. Your belief that 1+1=2 is not a constituent of consciousness; it is "conscious" only in the sense that you are, or can readily become, conscious of it.

16. The word "conscious" is used equivocally: sometimes meaning "mental entity that is a constituent of consciousness" and sometimes meaning "mental entity that we are directly conscious of."

17. All mental entities that aren't constituents of consciousness are, in a sense, unconscious.

18. A belief exists and is operative even when one is not conscious of it.

19. Your knowledge that 1+1=2 informs how you deal with the world even when you aren't consciously thinking it.

20. Given anything that isn't itself a constituent of consciousness, one can fail to recognize it for what it is.

### On Propositional Attitudes

21. Propositional attitudes are not constituents of consciousness.

22. One could, without knowing it, have two distinct concepts of one of one's own propositional attitudes.

23. Emotions are distinct from their manifestations in consciousness.

24. Love, hatred, and other emotions are enduring psychological structures, not ephemeral events.

25. Emotions give rise to ephemeral conscious events but are not themselves conscious events.

26. Emotions are "conscious" only in the Pickwickian sense that one is conscious of them.

27. Beliefs, like emotions, are enduring structures to be distinguished from the constituents of consciousness to which they may give rise.

28. All propositional attitudes are enduring structures to be distinguished from any constituents of consciousness for whose existence they're responsible.

29. A given emotion can give rise to conscious events of qualitatively different kinds.

30. Given two qualitatively distinct conscious events both expressing one propositional attitude, there's no necessity that one recognize that attitude in both events.

### On Self-Knowledge and Its Limits

31. One can have very different attitudes towards a given one of one's own propositional attitudes without knowing it.

32. One can view a given propositional attitude of one's own as both despicable and laudatory, as deserving cultivation and annihilation.

33. Self-deception is not mere ignorance of what one is feeling.

34. Self-deception presupposes that, at some level, one has knowledge of the thing of which one lacks conscious knowledge.

35. One must distinguish having a propositional attitude from knowing that one has it.

36. Knowing that one feels a certain way involves making a judgment about one's mental state.

37. Propositional attitudes never make an appearance in consciousness in propria persona.

38. What is in consciousness is at most a representative or derivative of a propositional attitude.

39. The judgments we make about what our mental states express are often quite wrong.

40. We sometimes like the person towards whom we have constant surges of rage, and dislike the person who repeatedly makes us feel good.

### On Manipulation and Self-Understanding

41. A manipulator can generate feelings that, when not the result of chicanery, tend to express genuine affection, thereby disarming his target.

42. One can know "in one's bones" that something is wrong about a situation without being able to articulate what it is.

43. Most people haven't developed the ability to articulate their gut feelings in a form likely to receive credence.

44. Given that one's views about others are based on glib, emotionally-driven narratives, one will fail to recognize manipulation.

### On Evidence and Suspicion

45. It's one thing to suspect that something is the case; it's quite another to know it.

46. Repression₁ involves choosing not to exercise due diligence when one suspects that doing so would generate unwanted knowledge.

47. The conventional conception of repression (that one knowingly drives a conscious idea into the unconscious and keeps it out) is erroneous.

48. Suspicion isn't knowledge; there's nothing paradoxical about not wanting to pursue suspicions one suspects would lead to unwanted knowledge.

49. One can know what sort of thing something is without knowing which thing it is.

### On the Limits of Agency

50. One's agency only goes so far; there is much within one's mind that falls outside its scope.

51. The judgment-producing processes in one's mind lie beyond the reach of what one can choose to occur.

52. It is not within one's power to completely suspend judgment-producing processes.

53. One cannot choose to stop making judgments any more than one can choose to stop digesting food.

54. One can choose courses of action that redirect the judgment-making faculty or deplete its energy.

55. Unless one damages one's brain, the stream of mental activity will eventually yield the very judgments one doesn't want.

### On Anxiety and Repression

56. The anxiety felt when forces of repression₁ break down isn't the result of unconscious knowledge entering consciousness.

57. Such anxiety results from one's thought-processes, despite attempts to stymie them, following up on clues one believed would lead to unwanted beliefs.

### On Repression₂ and Intrapsychic Conflict

58. For a propositional attitude to be a candidate for repression₂, it must be a source of conflict within one's own psyche, not merely a source of pain.

59. One often fails to repress₂ one's most painful memories; Holocaust survivors remember what they've been through.

60. Suppression (choosing not to think about something) isn't repression₂.

61. One represses₂ knowledge that cannot be reconciled with one's life as currently structured.

62. Repression₂ isn't always bad; in many contexts, it's optimal.

63. A person who never repressed₂ anything would quickly go mad.

64. Repressions₂ tend to outlive their usefulness.

65. Repression₂ isn't a one-off affair; it is an ongoing process.

66. Whenever one encounters information confirming a repressed₂ belief, one must either repress₂ that knowledge or convince oneself of some spurious interpretation.

67. Each instance of repression₂ creates a hole in one's body of knowledge that must be explained away.

68. The need to plug explanatory holes disposes one to devalue truth and hyper-value reasoning methods whose legitimacy spurious explanations falsely assume.

69. The result of ongoing repression₂ is loss of both ratiocinative and ethical integrity.

### On What Gets Repressed

70. It's harder to repress₂ knowledge of the obvious than of the non-obvious.

71. One cannot repress₂ knowledge of totally obvious truths without telling oneself one isn't capable of knowing truth.

72. Since complete loss of faith in one's ratiocinative ability usually creates more conflict than it eliminates, repression₂ tends to target knowledge of what is not totally obvious.

73. In most cases of repression₂, there must be "plausible deniability."

74. Things one represses₂ tend to involve judgment-calls rather than strict sense-based knowledge.

75. If a belief concerns something personal, one's standard of proof tends to be ridiculously high.

### On Evolution and Self-Deception

76. People have always known that we evolved from other life forms, given the anatomical, behavioral, and psychological similarities between humans and other mammals.

77. The theory of evolution is resisted because it implies we're orangutans whose lives have no meaning.

78. Religious claims about divine creation don't explain why God made us look so much like apes or stocked our minds with ignominious urges.

### On Freud's Psychology

79. Freud's theories are theoretically extraordinarily conservative.

80. Freud was simply making explicit the principles we ordinarily use when making intuitive judgments about other people.

81. People dismiss Freud's theories, despite their staggering explanatory power, because they don't want to be told they lie to themselves.

82. Nobody is perfectly transparent to himself; nobody is conscious of everything in his mind.

83. One can readily become conscious of some previously unconscious mental constituents without resistance; these are "preconscious."

84. When one represses an entity, one doesn't destroy it; one merely blinds oneself to it.

85. A repressed desire cannot be discharged unless it employs a subterfuge.

86. Repressed desires can disguise themselves as desires the subject consciously wishes to act on.

87. Repressed desires can be expressed as symptoms.

### Against Eliminativism and Reductionism

88. Arguments against Freudian psychology are pitifully weak and involve regressions to crude, demonstrably false positions.

89. The views that "we're computers," "there is no consciousness," "there are no minds," and "the mind is completely transparent to itself" are willful denials of the obvious.

90. While it's a good idea not to impute minds to stones, it's obviously not a good idea not to impute them to people.

91. The projector itself cannot be a projection; the mind cannot be eliminated from the scientific picture.

### On the Mechanism of Repression₂

92. One can partly de-operationalize beliefs one doesn't want by choosing not to delineate their consequences.

93. One can isolate a belief—prevent it from engaging bodies of belief it would otherwise engage and from begetting beliefs it would otherwise beget.

94. By de-operationalizing acceptance of a fact, one can cease to have more than an abstract, formal understanding of what it amounts to.

95. One can choose to look for reasons to have beliefs opposed to those one wishes one didn't have, like a lawyer building a case for a client known to be guilty.

96. Even though one can't directly choose one's beliefs, one can choose to do things that make it harder to attend to a given belief than to withdraw attention from it.

### On Sub-Personal Processing

97. Most data-synthesis occurs below the threshold of consciousness.

98. The sub-personal gathering and processing of information is more fundamental than personal gathering and processing; minds are more basic than selves.

99. One's decisions about what goes on in one's mind are of limited scope, affecting how conscious strata communicate with other strata but not directly affecting deeper strata.

### On Psychology as a Discipline

100. Contemporary theoretical psychology's denial of emotions and repression is itself thoroughly emotional and an instance of repression—a rationalization serving to keep unwanted self-knowledge at bay.

## 100 Additional Philosophical Positions from "How Is Rationalization Possible?"

### On the Coherence of Self-Deception

101. The claim that self-deception is conceptually incoherent is demonstrably false.

102. The apparent paradox of repression (that one must be conscious of what one represses) dissolves once one distinguishes repression₁ from repression₂.

103. The natures of both conscious and unconscious forces involved in repression₁ differ from those involved in repression₂.

104. Rationalization-construction is more heavily involved in keeping ideas repressed than in initially repressing them.

105. The possibility of self-deception is a consequence of three facts about the mind: its disunity, the distinction between acquaintance and description, and the ambiguity of "conscious."

### On Mental Architecture

106. The right hand of the mind doesn't always know what the left is doing.

107. One can unwittingly have two divergent attitudes towards a single propositional attitude of one's own.

108. Given only that two conscious events are derivatives of some propositional attitude, it doesn't follow that any one part of one's mind has the information needed to recognize that attitude in both.

109. Were one's belief that 1+1=2 inoperative whenever not blazing a trail across consciousness, one's way of dealing with the world would bear little resemblance to one's actual way.

110. Supposing knowledge is identical with some physiological structure, that structure is psychologically active as a belief even when not the object of consciousness—not just as a heap of molecules.

### On Recognition and Concepts

111. One can have thoughts about Charlemagne and thus have a concept of him, yet fail to recognize him if one met him.

112. So long as one didn't figure out who Charlemagne was upon meeting him, one would unwittingly have two distinct concepts of him.

113. One can discover that the gnawing feeling of unpleasantness experienced when somebody mentions Smith is one's detestation of Smith.

114. One can be acquainted with a given one of one's own mental contents while also having descriptive knowledge of it.

115. One can discover that one actually has some attitude towards a mental entity that one did not previously know oneself to have.

### On Conscious Experience and Judgment

116. What one is directly given in consciousness are various indications that one has a particular emotion, not the emotion per se.

117. Even when indications of an emotion are strong enough to leave no room for reasonable doubt, one still must "synthesize" them by making a judgment.

118. In most cases, the judgment that synthesizes emotional indications is made so automatically that one is unaware any judgment has been made.

119. When a propositional attitude is emotionally sterile—concerning number-theory or epistemology—we have no trouble making the needed judgments about it.

120. Evidences of a propositional attitude may be dispersed over time and occur in multifarious contexts.

### On the Conventional Conception of Repression

121. Part (b) of the conventional conception of repression—that repressed content constantly struggles to break into consciousness—is paradoxical as stated.

122. The paradox arises because keeping content out of consciousness would seem to require knowing what that content is.

123. The conventional conception incorrectly describes repression as an operation performed on existing beliefs rather than a failure to form beliefs.

124. Repression₁ involves choosing not to learn something that, if learned and therefore known, one would wish one had never learned—but only after it was too late.

125. Every case of repression₁ does involve intrapsychic conflict, as the conventional conception says.

126. Contrary to the conventional conception, the conflict in repression₁ is not between unconscious knowledge of truth T and conscious ignorance of T.

127. The conflict in repression₁ is between a wish to know the truth and a wish not to know the truth.

### On Voluntary Control of Mental Processes

128. One can choose activities that flood the judgment-making faculty with information concerning judgments one wants to avoid making.

129. One can choose to do things that deplete the judgment-making faculty of energy it needs to function (e.g., intense exercise for hours).

130. One can choose to paralyze the physiological underpinnings of judgments (e.g., by getting drunk) or permanently damage them (e.g., by lobotomy).

131. One cannot directly choose what to believe; one can only choose what to believe in the way one can choose to gain weight.

132. Within limits, one can choose which beliefs to make operational and which to make non-operational.

133. One can choose to do things that make a given belief impotent and irrelevant.

134. One can choose an occupation in which a lack of some ability is irrelevant, thereby making one's knowledge of that lack irrelevant.

### On Standards of Evidence

135. What it would take to convince you that somebody you're not married to is cheating on his wife is minuscule compared to what it would take to convince you that your husband is cheating.

136. Because evolution implies we're meaningless orangutans, we won't judge it worthy of acceptance until it's met absurdly high standards of evidence.

137. Denying that orangutans are our biological kin is like denying that the person with grape jelly and crumbs around his mouth ate your jelly-doughnut.

### On Freud and His Critics

138. If you read Freud and then study a single person's behavior for around 10 minutes, it becomes clear his theories are theoretically conservative.

139. People don't want to part with rationalizations; they'd rather be a king in their dreams than a janitor in reality.

140. The opposition to Freud's claims involves regressions to crude positions: "We're computers" (Fodor), "There is no consciousness" (Dennett), "There are no minds" (Quine).

141. Searle's view that the mind is completely transparent to itself is a willful denial of the obvious.

142. The Churchlands' view that nobody believes, doubts, or hopes for anything—that propositional attitude terms belong to "folk-psychology"—is demonstrably false.

143. The Dretske-Fodor view that there is no difference between a concept of a person and a photograph of that person is risible.

144. These flights into inanity are touted as "scientific" and "rigorous" under the pretense of completing science's victory over animism.

145. While it's good not to impute minds to stones, the projector—the mind itself—cannot be a projection.

### On the Mechanism of Repression₂ (Detailed)

146. For one's knowledge of an ugly truth to be repressed₂, that knowledge, when taken with other accepted propositions, entails a more generic proposition.

147. The more generic proposition can be kept in consciousness without having to overhaul one's entire life.

148. The generic proposition is sufficiently vague that knowledge of it won't make one retch at the sight of the problematic object.

149. One can realize one wishes one hadn't discovered an ugly truth while also realizing that mere suppression won't suffice.

150. One can resolve that, when confronted with data that led to the ugly belief, one will model it in a way consistent with the generic belief but not with the specific ugly truth.

### On Beliefs and Inference

151. Beliefs are inert except to the extent that one draws consequences from them and that they are allowed to beget or engage other beliefs.

152. The making of inferences at least sometimes involves deliberate, conscious effort.

153. Some inferences are made involuntarily; insights often just occur to one based on rational consideration of evidence.

154. Even though many inferences are made involuntarily, one has at least some control over what sorts of inferences one's mind makes.

155. One can so structure one's life that it is very unlikely one will consciously make inferences from a belief that one would otherwise make.

156. One can so structure one's life that a belief, though still conscious, is isolated—prevented from engaging bodies of belief and from begetting beliefs it otherwise would.

157. Such an isolated belief is conscious in some formal sense but has become inert at the level of consciousness, like knowledge of some random, uninteresting fact.

### On Abstract vs. Concrete Understanding

158. By de-operationalizing acceptance of a fact, one can cease to have anything more than an abstract, formal understanding of what it amounts to.

159. One can know that people are being tortured without knowing what that proposition amounts to as well as someone who witnessed torture.

160. Even if technically no less aware of a truth than someone with first-hand knowledge, one's awareness can mean very little compared to theirs.

161. First-hand knowledge transforms abstract awareness into something that means a great deal.

### On Inference to the Best Explanation

162. Knowledge of complex interpersonal truths is not derived from some one sense-perception; such truths can't be known that directly.

163. Such knowledge embodies inference to the best explanation.

164. Unless knowledge can be acquired through inferences to the best explanation, what we actually know is only an infinitesimally small part of what we think we know.

165. Given a body of data, it is more likely than not that there is more than one reasonable or semi-reasonable way to model it.

166. An alternative model of data need not be optimal; it need only be far from obviously false to serve repression₂.

### On the Process of Isolation

167. By deciding not to draw inferences from an ugly belief, one becomes more likely to take aberrant phenomena on a case-by-case basis.

168. Bits of knowledge that would otherwise congregate will remain isolated from one another when one resolves not to synthesize them.

169. As a result of isolation, one's appreciation of what an ugly truth entails will remain superficial.

170. One will be slow to recognize the consequences of an ugly truth for one's own welfare.

171. By isolating a belief, one ensures that energy and thought that would deepen understanding of its consequences are diverted to a fool's errand.

172. The response of modeling data in terms of a preferred alternative soon becomes automatic, like an actor's rehearsed lines.

173. This automatic response-mechanism further isolates the knowledge one wishes to suppress.

### On the Limits of Repression

174. One cannot uninstall a belief by tinkering with its representations in consciousness, just as one typically cannot uninstall a computer program by dragging the desktop icon to the garbage.

175. Beliefs are enduring structures; they do a lot of work even when not consciously deployed.

176. If one really stopped knowing that 1+1=2, one's way of dealing with the world would suddenly change radically, pervading practically every field of endeavor.

177. A belief isn't like a mood or other will-o'-the-wisps that populate consciousness.

178. Like any enduring structure constitutive of one's metabolism, one has at most partial control over a belief's fortunes.

179. The conscious representative of a repressed₂ belief becomes an innocuous shell—it has been repressed, but it still lives on.

180. A repressed₂ belief "presses for discharge" (Freud's term).

### On Symptoms and Displacement

181. Since one no longer acknowledges a repressed₂ belief's existence, it cannot be discharged through intentional behavior.

182. A repressed₂ belief must insinuate itself into one's intentions without one's knowing it.

183. Displacement occurs when repressed rage at one person is expressed as meanness toward another (e.g., rage at father displaced onto students).

184. A repressed₂ belief can be expressed as a symptom—e.g., crippling anxiety when encountering situations reminiscent of what was repressed.

### On Keeping Repression Stable

185. To keep something repressed₂, one must be able to identify it—but if one can identify it, one is conscious of it and it's not repressed.

186. The resolution of this paradox involves retaining knowledge of a generic proposition while repressing the specific ugly truth.

187. By accepting a generic version of an ugly truth, one's conscious disposition isn't completely antagonistic to the rational side urging acceptance of the specific truth.

188. Accepting the generic version means one isn't locked into a draining struggle with the forces of rationality and truthfulness within oneself.

189. At the same time, accepting the generic version neutralizes the message those forces are trying to convey.

190. This strategy spares one painful realizations and the labor-intensive changes they demand.

### On the Psychology Profession

191. The science of psychology has itself become little more than a means by which people rationalize attempts to repress knowledge of obvious psychodynamic facts.

192. Many claim the unconscious is an artifact of dated psychoanalytic theories superseded by "rigorous" physiological studies.

193. The thoroughly hypocritical and self-deceptive character of such pronouncements is evident when examining the judgments and conduct of these naysayers.

194. Not a single judgment these naysayers make about others concerns physiological underpinnings; they concern psychology.

195. PET-scan findings would be of no psychological interest unless correlated with independently known psychological facts.

196. If mental activity were discovered to be mediated by the gall-bladder, PET-scans would immediately cease to be of psychological interest.

197. Brain-science, to the extent it's relevant to psychology, is parasitic on psychological knowledge.

198. Most opponents of psychodynamic psychology provide no arguments other than empty slogans that "science" studies brains, not intangibles like emotions.

### On the Epistemological Priority of the Mental

199. Whatever we know about the external world—about brains, neurons—we know through perceptions and thoughts, i.e., through alleged "intangibles."

200. While brains may be ontologically more basic than thoughts, thoughts and perceptions are epistemologically more basic than brains.

201. "Brain" is a theoretical term; characterizing something as a brain ascribes functions one cannot know it discharges without theory-soaked extrapolation.

202. "Brain" is deeply entrenched in well-confirmed theory, hence the illusion that it is non-theoretical.

203. Psychological "intangibles" are epistemologically much more tangible than "tangible" things like brains.

204. The existence of psychological intangibles is infinitely less dubitable than that of brains.

### On Eliminativism as Emotional

205. The denial of emotions is itself a thoroughly emotional position.

206. The denial of repression is itself an instance of repression.

207. Those who deny emotions and repression claim to be "scientific," but such dishonesty and obtuseness doesn't deserve that characterization.

208. Hyper-intelligent people are quite as prone to not seeing themselves for who they are as their less gifted brethren.

209. Given that intelligence doesn't protect against self-ignorance, it is scientifically de rigueur to suppose another factor is operative.

210. That other factor is obvious: people don't want to see themselves for who they are, so they don't.

### On Sartre's Argument

211. Sartre held there is no unconscious mental activity and a fortiori no repression.

212. Sartre's position was that the mind is completely and utterly transparent to itself, immediate and complete access to all contents being essential to mentality.

213. Unlike other deniers of the unconscious, Sartre actually argued for his position.

214. Sartre's argument is initially persuasive: one must know what one is trying to keep out of consciousness to succeed, but that knowledge makes one conscious of it.

215. Given Sartre's argument, either he is right and his reasoning cogent, or he is wrong and the fallacy must be pinpointed.

216. The specific forms self-deception and repression can take may not be the forms they actually take.

217. There are elements of truth in the models presented for repression₁ and repression₂.

218. It is a philosophical task of the utmost urgency to make clear what is wrong with Sartre's powerful argument.

219. It is equally urgent to make clear what exactly self-deception and repression involve.

220. Philosophers have neglected these tasks, encouraging psychology to go down blind alleys of scientism and methodological incoherence.
Here are **100 position statements** extracted from the text by Kuczynski:

---

1. OCD is a prolongation into adulthood of the child's binary emotional relation to the world.  
2. All children are OCD.  
3. OCD children have specific rituals not shared by other children.  
4. OCD is not eliminated by confronting it head-on.  
5. OCD arises from emotional vulnerability caused by actual defenselessness.  
6. OCD is about withdrawal from a frightening world into a safe space of thought and ritual.  
7. The way to conquer OCD is to conquer fear.  
8. Philosophers and obsessive-compulsives are both compulsive doubters.  
9. Philosophers and obsessive-compulsives rationalize their doubt as rigor.  
10. Both types are impotent and fearful of engaging the world.  
11. Their potency lies in manipulating linguistic or symbolic proxies of reality.  
12. They internalize the world into thought where they have total power.  
13. Both are preoccupied with logical niceties and fine points of argumentation.  
14. This preoccupation derives from a sense of impotence.  
15. Their doubts about the external world are displaced doubts about the internal world.  
16. Both are driven by rage, narcissism, and fear, not rationality.  
17. Their intellectualism cloaks a dark psychological condition.  
18. Both are pathologically concerned with ethics because they are crypto-criminals.  
19. Philosophers tend to be extremely sensitive to linguistic niceties.  
20. A disproportionate number of philosophers are professional-level musicians.  
21. Philosophical skepticism is an excuse to remain holed up in one’s mind.  
22. Skepticism allows retreat from external threats into the safety of consciousness.  
23. The skeptic’s retreat requires paralyzing thought to avoid returning to reality.  
24. Obsessive-compulsives use doubt to avoid action.  
25. Obsessions arise because the obsessive-compulsive has nothing else to do.  
26. Compulsions are the mind’s way of pushing one back into the world.  
27. Compulsions represent the sane side of the obsessive-compulsive.  
28. OCD is about refusal to act and defensive withdrawal into consciousness.  
29. The obsessive-compulsive sees reality clearly but is fearful.  
30. An essential part of OCD treatment is accepting one’s sadistic/masochistic sexuality.  
31. Mental illness involves withdrawal from reality.  
32. Psychoses destroy coherence of ideation; neuroses paralyze the will.  
33. Neuroses estrange intellection from emotional concomitants.  
34. The obsessive-compulsive’s intellect is hyper-coherent but will is atrophied.  
35. Restoring the thought-feeling balance eliminates OCD.  
36. Psychopaths have no conscience.  
37. Institutional psychopathization occurs when an entire institution becomes psychopathic.  
38. Many university departments and psychotherapy branches are psychopathic.  
39. Most psychopaths today are bureaucrats, not con-men.  
40. Bureaucrats surrender all decision-making to the institution.  
41. Bureaucrats are not internally conflicted.  
42. Bureaucrats have psychological fault lines that are schisms, not conflicts.  
43. Bureaucrats respond to insight with pure hatred, not resistance.  
44. Bureaucrats are non-rogue psychopaths; psychopaths are rogue bureaucrats.  
45. Psychopaths pass lie detector tests because they don’t believe anything.  
46. Double-think is possible only for those who believe nothing.  
47. Double-think is shifting between socially mandated acceptances, not beliefs.  
48. The bureaucrat’s hands are tied because he cannot act—only follow orders.  
49. Academic specialization is an artificial, cowardly bureaucratic division.  
50. Howard Gardner’s theory of multiple intelligences is absurd and destructive.  
51. Intelligence can migrate and reinvent itself across domains.  
52. OCD is on the rise due to bureaucratic bloat in education and law.  
53. OCD results from using legalistic protocols to suppress emotions.  
54. More bureaucracy leads to more suppressed rage, which fuels OCD.  
55. Women have externalized superegos; men have internalized ones.  
56. A woman’s superego requires reinforcement from morally centered men.  
57. Submitting to a psychopathic feminist reinforces her psychopathy.  
58. Being firm and principled helps restore a woman’s superego function.  
59. OCD provides relief from intense anxiety.  
60. OCD is a defense mechanism that eventually does more harm than good.  
61. The obsessive-compulsive must choose between anxiety relief and growth.  
62. OCD is ultimately voluntary—an affliction of the will.  
63. Symptoms are involuntary only relative to a choice to remain in a defensive bubble.  
64. The prognosis for OCD is positive if seen as a voluntary condition.  
65. Having a purpose in life is the way to beat OCD.  
66. People need a purpose to endure pain and strive.  
67. OCD reflects a bifurcated psychological structure without a master plan.  
68. A grand purpose resolves internal conflicts and eliminates OCD.  
69. OCD arises from alienation from one’s true purpose.  
70. OCD is not a disease like cancer; it afflicts the will.  
71. The obsessive-compulsive has a damaged will, not a damaged body.  
72. OCD symptoms stem from a stalemate between id and superego.  
73. The obsessive-compulsive can act but chooses not to due to anxiety.  
74. Psychoanalysis must direct the will, not just interpret conflicts.  
75. Social anxiety is about repressed rage toward others.  
76. Social anxiety keeps one away from people because of hatred, not fear.  
77. Recognizing the anger beneath social anxiety allows it to be properly directed.  
78. Acquiring power or sublimating misanthropy can cure social anxiety.  
79. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is just behavior modification.  
80. Structural therapy changes the obsessive-compulsive’s reality orientation.  
81. Effective therapists must project inner strength and have overcome their own demons.  
82. Therapeutic rapport depends on the patient’s belief in the therapist’s healing power.  
83. People with OCD often have severe reading difficulties due to psychological resistance.  
84. Reading problems occur with content-rich material, especially psychological texts.  
85. OCD-driven reading rituals are resistance to self-understanding.  
86. Early resolution of reading problems is crucial for intellectual development.  
87. CBT alone is insufficient because OCD will produce new symptoms.  
88. OCD is a flight from reality into symbolic proxies.  
89. Treatment must address the underlying fear-driven withdrawal from reality.  
90. OCD can be turned against itself using its own binary, all-or-nothing nature.  
91. Obsessive-compulsives have neural plasticity beneath their rigidity.  
92. One should use OCD’s binariness to force growth-critical changes.  
93. The right question is not how to get over OCD, but where it is an asset.  
94. OCD involves high intelligence and sensitivity misapplied in toxic contexts.  
95. Intrusive thoughts are the mind’s protest against self-castration.  
96. Having a goal in life organizes mental energy and eliminates intrusive thoughts.  
97. Obsessive-compulsives are aware of their compulsions, unlike others.  
98. Mental illnesses are contextual and can be assets in the right environment.  
99. Psychiatric Munchausen by proxy involves parents falsely diagnosing children for attention.  
100. Auto-hypnosis is essential for action; rationalization perverts judgment.
Here are **50 position statements** extracted from *Neurosis vs. Psychosis and Other Psychoanalytic Vignettes* by J.-M. Kuczynski:

---

1. Psychosis is a mental impairment precipitated by a break with external reality.
2. Neurosis is a mental impairment precipitated by a break with one’s emotional condition.
3. The neurotic flees from his emotions; the psychotic flees from reality.
4. Neurosis may blunt awareness of external reality, but this is subordinate to loss of emotional awareness.
5. Psychosis may disrupt emotional understanding, but this is subordinate to loss of awareness of external reality.
6. Psychosis involves a partial regression to psychological infancy.
7. An infant is not psychotic because its psychological integration is consistent, not split.
8. The adult psychotic has two incompatible ways of processing information: adult and infantile.
9. The psychotic lacks a unified value system and is in psychological disarray.
10. Neurosis involves repressing threats to integration by burying their emotional valence.
11. The neurotic has relatively unimpaired intellectual awareness.
12. Neurosis may heighten intellectual awareness as compensation for emotional impoverishment.
13. The neurotic’s psyche is hyper-stable but ossified.
14. Psychosis is an inability to organize consciously experienced emotion.
15. Neurosis is an inability to have consciously experienced emotion.
16. Psychosis paralyzes through a superabundance of emotion; neurosis through a lack of emotion.
17. For men, happiness is about forging one’s own identity.
18. For women, happiness is about being loved.
19. A man is happy if he triumphs over his father by not submitting to him.
20. A woman is happy if her father loved her.
21. A man can establish identity by doing the opposite of his father.
22. A man can establish identity by doing what his father does, but better.
23. A man can fail by trying to fill his father’s shoes but failing.
24. A man can fail by submitting to his father without trying to fill his shoes.
25. A man can fail by having no father at all.
26. Schopenhauer triumphed over his merchant father by becoming a philosopher.
27. Mozart triumphed over his composer father by becoming a greater composer.
28. Donald Trump triumphed over his moderately successful father by being extremely successful.
29. Compulsive work is about avoidance.
30. A workaholic who loves his work is not working compulsively.
31. A workaholic who hates his work is working compulsively to avoid what he truly wants.
32. Stuttering is about not speaking with a single voice.
33. Stuttering occurs when two distinct currents of thought are evenly matched in controlling speech.
34. Normal speech occurs when one thought-current dominates.
35. Men are self-contained; women are not.
36. Men who are not self-contained are not really men.
37. Women who are self-contained are not really women.
38. One does not learn from failure; one learns from adversity.
39. Failure is the end-result of adversity not triumphed over.
40. Success opens new vistas; failure is a dead end.
41. Everybody wants money, even those who spurn it.
42. The monk or “starving artist” who spurns money has an overblown, reactive relationship to it.
43. Overblown feelings are the opposite of what they seem.
44. Emotions that are genuine are not objects of intense self-scrutiny.
45. The #1 rule of writing is to immediately write down every thought that occurs.
46. If you wait, the moment and the unconscious constellation behind the thought will be lost.
47. The #1 rule of writing is also complete honesty, which is achieved by writing thoughts immediately.
48. Lack of coordination stems from a failure to be centered and to have a true objective.
49. A psychological condition is pathological if it restricts freedom.
50. A condition is positively counter-pathological if it augments freedom, even if unusual.

 POSITION STATEMENT WITH QUOTATIONS FOR CHAPTER 1 OF ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY BY KUCZYNSKI 

# ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY CHAPTER 1: POSITION STATEMENT WITH SUPPORTING QUOTATIONS

---

**1. Philosophy is the discipline that delineates the structures of the categories in terms of which we think about the world.**

> "Philosophy studies these categories. It delineates their structures. This is its sole function. Thus, philosophy is the discipline that delineates the structures of the categories in terms of which we think about the world."

---

**2. We understand the world through categories (event, cause, thing, mind, perception, belief, knowledge, language, truth, value-judgment, law, justice, etc.).**

> "We understand the world in terms of certain categories (e.g., person, statement, fact, impossibility, existence)."

---

**3. These categories are seldom objects of thought, even though we cannot think without them.**

> "Whatever we know, we know it through these categories (and others like them—the list is not complete). But even though we cannot think without them, they are seldom the objects of thought."

---

**4. We are adept at using categories but have difficulty making explicit the conditions that govern them.**

> "The result is that, although we're adept at using them, we know little about them."

---

**5. Self-understanding is not the mind's primary function.**

> "In general, it's hard to identify the principles that guide our thoughts. Self-understanding isn't the mind's primary function."

---

**6. The idea of a mind that thinks about nothing other than itself is incoherent.**

> "Nor could it be. The idea of a mind that thinks about nothing other than itself is an incoherent one."

---

**7. Any case of self-awareness is necessarily derivative of, and of lesser quality than, some more fundamental sort of understanding.**

> "Thus, any case of self-awareness, and therefore of self-understanding, is necessarily derivative of, and for that reason of lesser quality than, some other more fundamental sort of understanding."

---

**8. Philosophy is the analysis of the preconditions of all knowledge—the analysis of analysis, the logic of logic, the science of science.**

> "Philosophy is the analysis of the preconditions of all knowledge. It is the analysis of analysis, the logic of logic, the science of science."

---

**9. Philosophical knowledge is metaknowledge—knowledge about knowledge.**

> "Philosophical knowledge is metaknowledge—knowledge about knowledge."

---

**10. The philosopher wants to know the laws governing the laws—what it would even make sense to claim to hold.**

> "The philosopher is interested in the laws governing the laws. He doesn't want to know what in fact holds. He wants to know what it would even make sense to claim to hold. He wants to know the laws that the laws can't break."

---

**11. The philosopher is to the physicist what the physicist is to the engineer.**

> "The philosopher is to the physicist what the physicist is to the engineer and, therefore, what the engineer is to the stranded motorist."

---

**12. Pre-Fregean philosophers (with some exceptions) mistakenly thought they were studying the most general features of the actual world.**

> "With some exceptions, pre-Fregean philosophers thought they were studying the most general features of the actual world."

---

**13. Frege showed that philosophers' interest in the actual is subordinate to their interest in the possible.**

> "Frege showed that this is wrong... But with philosophers, it's the other way around. Any interest they have in the actual is subordinate to their interest in the possible."

---

**14. Analytic philosophers figure out what there could be by analyzing statements.**

> "Unlike non-analytic philosophers, analytic philosophers figure out what there could be by analyzing statements."

---

**15. Statements that make sense describe possible realities; those that don't, don't.**

> "Statements that make sense are those that can be true, and statements that don't are those that can't. Therefore, statements that make sense describe possible realities and those that don't don't."

---

**16. Frege's key insight: logical form ≠ grammatical form.**

> "2.0 Frege's key insight: Logical form ≠ grammatical form"

---

**17. When people have an obviously correct belief that seems to have an absurd consequence, they often accept the absurdity and develop ad hoc hypotheses rather than questioning whether the absurdity really follows.**

> "(FL) When people have an obviously correct belief that seems to have an absurd consequence, they should ask themselves whether that absurdity really is a consequence of that belief. But they frequently don't. Instead they accept the absurdity and, in order to make this mistake of theirs work, they develop ad hoc hypotheses as to the nature of reality that undermine the integrity of their own belief system."

---

**18. Philosophical insight is acquired not by doing parascience or positing entities, but by analyzing meanings and clarifying statements.**

> "What this shows is that, in at least some cases, philosophical insight is acquired, not by doing parascience, but by analyzing meanings—not by positing entities, but by clarifying statements."

---

**19. "Nothing is a square circle" does not attribute a property to a non-entity; it states that the set of squares doesn't overlap with the set of circles.**

> "Since (i) and (ii) are just different ways of saying what SC says, the latter doesn't make the absurd statement that some non-entity is a circle, and it instead makes the innocuous statement that the set of squares doesn't overlap with the set of circles."

---

**20. The concept of "non-entities" or "subsistent entities" (Brentano, Meinong) is absurd—such philosophers were ontologizing when they should have been analyzing.**

> "This entire approach is misguided. Brentano and Meinong were ontologizing when they should have been analyzing."

---

**21. Hallucinations do not require the existence of non-existent objects; they have for their content an existence-claim that nothing satisfies.**

> "When we describe a thought or perception as having a 'non-existent object,' what we mean, so far as what we mean is coherent, is that it has for its content an existence-claim that nothing satisfies."

---

**22. Scientific puzzles involve acquiring new data; philosophical puzzles are purely conceptual and result from confusion, not ignorance.**

> "The puzzles that science deals with typically involve a failure to know all the facts... Unlike scientific puzzles, philosophical puzzles are not solved by generating new raw data. Philosophical puzzles are purely conceptual in nature and have no strictly factual component."

---

**23. Scientific breakthroughs have two components: (i) new raw data and (ii) new conceptual modeling of already-known data.**

> "In general, scientific breakthroughs have two components: (i) a strictly fact-based component (new raw data is acquired), and (ii) a purely conceptual component (already known data is modeled in a new and better way)."

---

**24. Philosophical puzzles are not solved by generating new raw data—they result from failure to draw the right inferences.**

> "Philosophical puzzles result, not from a failure to know the facts, but from a failure to draw the right inferences. They result, not from ignorance, but from confusion."

---

**25. Wittgenstein was wrong to claim that all philosophical puzzles are linguistic in nature.**

> "But this position is incorrect. There are many philosophical puzzles that don't have anything to do with language, and the solutions to these puzzles cannot be modeled on Frege's solutions to the puzzles discussed a moment ago."

---

**26. There are philosophical puzzles that have nothing to do with language.**

> "There are many philosophical puzzles that don't have anything to do with language."

---

**27. Propositions are not sentences; propositions are the things meant by sentences.**

> "Propositions are the things meant by sentences. 'Snow is white,' 'schnee is weiss,' and 'la neige est blanche' all mean the same thing. There is some one proposition that is the meaning of each of them."

---

**28. Propositions exist independently of human beings; they are not human creations, whereas sentences are.**

> "It's widely thought that propositions are human creations. This is false... it follows from this that propositions are not human creations. Sentences, on the other hand, are human creations. They wouldn't be around if it weren't for us."

---

**29. Propositions are properties; truth is instantiatedness.**

> "Propositions must be identified with properties and a proposition's being true must be identified with its being instantiated. Propositions are properties and truth is instantiatedness."

---

**30. The world was a certain way before we were around, so propositions (as ways the world is) exist independently of our beliefs.**

> "The world was a certain way before we were around; it will be a certain way after we're gone; and the way it is while we're around is up to us only to a limited extent. It follows that, independently of our having any beliefs or, indeed, our doing or thinking anything, certain propositions are true."

---

**31. Analytic philosophy (broadly construed) is philosophy done in the careful, clear-headed, systematic way that Frege approached problems.**

> "The word 'analytic philosopher' sometimes refers to the sort of philosophy done by people who aspire to approach philosophical problems in the same careful and clear-headed way as Frege."

---

**32. The claim that one can know something only by being causally affected by it (e.g., Fodor's position regarding knowledge of mathematical truths) is absurd in the extreme.**

> "I personally regard JK as being absurd in the extreme."

---

**33. The fact that 1+1=2 is non-spatiotemporal; nothing outside space-time can bear causal relations to anything.**

> "The fact it describes must therefore be non-spatiotemporal. Nothing outside of space-time can bear any causal relation to anything. Therefore, JK is wrong."

---

**34. The dispute over causal theories of knowledge is not linguistic—it concerns whether an agreed-upon meaning is true.**

> "In any case, the dispute between those who accept JK and those who reject it has nothing to do with language. It's agreed what JK means. What isn't agreed is whether the thing that it's agreed to mean is true."

---

**35. No philosophical assertions are empirical; observation cannot tell you whether one statement is inconsistent with another.**

> "No philosophical assertions are empirical. Philosophy analyzes the categories in terms of which we think about the world... Since observation can't tell one whether one statement is inconsistent with another, philosophical assertions are non-empirical."

---

**36. The question of whether law requires morality (legal positivism vs. anti-positivism) is to be resolved through logical, not empirical, analysis.**

> "What analytic philosophers of law, such as positivist H.L.A. Hart (1907–1992) and anti-positivist Ronald Dworkin (1931–), do agree about is that LM is to be resolved on the basis of logical analysis."

---

**37. Logical positivism (LP) holds that meaningful statements are either tautologies or empirical.**

> "LP says that any meaningful statement is either a tautology or is empirical."

---

**38. LP is self-refuting: it is neither a tautology nor empirically verifiable, so by its own criterion it is meaningless.**

> "Thus, LP is neither an empirical truth nor a tautology. It is thus a counterexample to itself and is therefore false."

---

**39. There are non-empirical truths that have nothing to do with anyone's linguistic practices.**

> "We've seen that, contrary to what LP says, there are non-empirical truths that have nothing to do with anyone's linguistic practices."

---

**40. Strictly observational grounds cannot support theoretical statements like Newton's physics directly—only in conjunction with specific factual claims.**

> "By itself NT doesn't make any predictions or otherwise have observable consequences... Thus, taken by itself, NT isn't confirmable. What is confirmable isn't NT, but NT plus statements describing specific matters of fact."

---

**41. Wittgenstein's acknowledgment that the Tractatus is meaningless by its own standards is self-contradictory; to understand something is to see its meaning.**

> "So far as they aren't trivial, these magisterial words are false. To understand something is to see its meaning. Therefore, anything that is understood has a meaning. So Wittgenstein's words, if understood, have a meaning, and Wittgenstein is therefore contradicting himself in saying that those who understand his words will see that they're meaningless."

---

**42. Empiricism is self-refuting: if true, there are no grounds for believing it; if there are grounds, it is false.**

> "Thus, so far as empiricism is correct, there are no grounds for believing it correct; and so far as there are such grounds, empiricism is false... Therefore, empiricism, if true, is false; therefore it's false."

---

**43. Russell's argument against naïve realism ("if true, is false; therefore false") rests on spurious reasoning—we do observe external objects, not merely effects upon ourselves.**

> "Though eloquently stated, this argument consists of spurious reasoning for a false conclusion. In observing the paper-weight on my desk, I'm not observing some effect of the stone upon myself: I'm observing the stone itself."

---

**44. The greenness, hardness, and coldness of physics are identical with those of daily observation; physics tells us what these properties are.**

> "This is false. Physics has a lot to say about greenness, hardness, and coldness that commonsense does not. But that's very different from saying that the coldness we feel, the greenness we see, etc., aren't the greenness, coldness, and hardness of physics. Physics tells us what it is for something to have the properties we know them to have through sight, touch, etc."

---

**45. The concept of confirmation is incoherent unless non-empirical knowledge is granted (Goodman's grue argument).**

> "But we'll now see that the concept of confirmation is an incoherent one unless it's granted that there is nonempirical knowledge and, therefore, that confirmationalism is incoherent."

---

**46. Induction does not have a strictly observational basis; there must be non-observational grounds for preferring certain properties over others in inductive inference.**

> "Contrary to what that argument tacitly assumes, induction does not have strictly observational basis... This means that, if any inductions are better than any others, we must have legitimate but at least partly nonobservational grounds for believing that, when making inductive inferences, certain properties (e.g., green) are relevant and others (e.g., grue) are not."

---

**47. It is utterances, not sentences per se, that are tautologies—tautologousness depends on how the auditor learned the meanings of expressions.**

> "In this section we'll see that it is utterances of sentences, not sentences per se, that are tautologies."

---

**48. One knows the meanings of expressions descriptively; two different descriptions can pick out the same thing.**

> "This story illustrates some deeply important facts that are in the philosophy of language. First, one knows the meanings of expressions descriptively... Two very different descriptions can pick out some one thing (cf. 'the third U.S. President' and 'the President responsible for the Louisiana Purchase')."

---

**49. All entailment is not formal entailment (contra Wittgenstein's Tractatus).**

> "There are some qualifications to this, as we'll see in a moment, but none that redound to the credit of Wittgenstein's point... There are infinitely many informally valid inferences for each formally valid one. So Wittgenstein's allegation that all entailments are formal entailment is not feasible."

---

**50. "Brown is a circle" entails "Brown is a two-dimensional figure," but this is not a formal entailment—it is a non-tautologous, non-empirical truth.**

> "(12) doesn't say anything about the spatiotemporal world. (12) is logically true; its truth is guaranteed by the structures of the concepts composing it. Unlike (11), (12) isn't a tautology. Therefore, it's a non-tautologous, non-empirical truth. Thus, there are non-formal entailments."

---

**51. The concept of a logically perfect language is incoherent.**

> "In any case, the concept of a logically perfect language is not a coherent one. It isn't possible for everything about a sentence's meaning to be reflected in its grammar."

---

**52. If a logically perfect language existed, it would be expressively inferior to natural languages.**

> "And if per impossibile there did exist a logically perfect language, it would be expressively inferior to English, Arabic, and every other natural language."

---

**53. For each analytic truth a logically perfect language could express, there would be infinitely many it could not express.**

> "A consequence is that, for each analytic truth that a logically perfect language can express, there are infinitely many that it cannot express."

---

**54. Knowing that a formal entailment is valid requires knowing that some informal entailment is valid; there are infinitely many informally valid inferences for each formally valid one.**

> "The only way to know that some formal entailment is valid is to know that some informal entailment is valid... There are, quite literally, infinitely many informally valid inferences for each formally valid one."

---

**55. There cannot be strictly observation-based knowledge that an object's length is given by an irrational number (Hempel's argument).**

> "It follows that, if an object's length is given by an irrational number, that fact cannot be known directly on the basis of measurement. It therefore follows that there is no strictly observation-based way to know that y's length equals x's multiplied by √2."

---

**56. Modern physics depends on assumptions (that magnitudes can assume irrational values) for which there cannot be strictly observational grounds.**

> "Thus, it must be assumed that, at certain junctures, the velocities, lengths, masses, etc., of objects are sometimes given by irrational numbers. But there cannot, as we've seen, be strictly observational grounds for believing that a given object's length is √2 meters."

---

**57. Strict empiricism is inconsistent with the fact that modern physics is a source of knowledge.**

> "This means that strict empiricism is inconsistent with the obvious fact that modern physics is a source of knowledge."

---

**58. Euclid's axioms (1)–(5) are statement-forms, not statements proper, and some interpretations of them are false.**

> "We'll use the expression '(1)-(5)' to refer to the conjunction of (1) and (2) and (3), etc... One would think that (1)-(5) is correct. But this turned out not to be so. It turned out that (1)-(5) is a statement-form, not a statement proper, and that (1)-(5) therefore isn't true or false. It also turned out that some of its instances are false."

---

**59. The parallel postulate is not true or false of anything—it is a statement-form.**

> "According to many, this shows that the parallel postulate isn't true of every possible space. This isn't what it shows. The parallel postulate isn't true or false of anything. It's a statement-form, not a statement, and statement-forms aren't true or false of anything."

---

**60. Arithmetical truth cannot be formalized: any formal characterization of arithmetic is either inconsistent or incomplete.**

> "It turned out that this is not possible. This means that any formal characterization of arithmetic is either inconsistent (i.e., it entails a contradiction), or incomplete (i.e., there is some arithmetical truth that is not a consequence of it)."

---

**61. The possible worlds analysis of counterfactuals (Lewis, Kment, Stalnaker) is completely preposterous.**

> "I find this analysis completely preposterous."

---

**62. We don't know anything about other universes; any knowledge of them would be parasitic on knowledge of counterfactual truths.**

> "We don't know anything about other universes, let alone whether Smith and Kennedy exist in them or, therefore, what their situations there are. Anything we do know about such universes is parasitic on our knowledge of counterfactual truths like K and S."

---

**63. Counterfactuals are grammatical variants of ordinary causal or logical statements.**

> "The right analysis of counterfactuals, I would suggest, is to see them as grammatical variants of garden variety causal or logical statements."

---

**64. "Someone" is not in the same semantic category as "John" or "Ethel"—it does not refer to an individual.**

> "What all this shows is that 'someone' isn't in the same category as 'John' and 'Ethel.' It doesn't function in the same way, even though, given its grammatical function, one would expect it to."

---

**65. "Someone smokes" does not attribute the property of smoking to a non-specific individual; it states that the property of being a smoker is instantiated.**

> "What SS is saying, as Frege made clear, is that the characteristic—or as analytic philosophers put it, the property—of being a smoker is instantiated. SS is making a statement, not about some non-specific individual, but about a very specific property, and it's saying of this property that it's instantiated."

---

**66. There is no such thing as an "ambiguous person" or "non-specific entity"—to posit such things is to twist reality to conform to grammatical assumptions.**

> "The wrong way to react to that fact is to twist reality to make it conform to our assumption that 'someone,' being grammatically comparable to 'John,' must refer to something... But then we're then stuck with the absurd thesis that there is some non-specific entity in the world."

---

**67. The word "someone" is not ambiguous; it has one meaning.**

> "That's false. 'Someone' isn't ambiguous; it isn't like the word 'dumb.' SS has one meaning."

---

**68. Analytic philosophers solve problems by clarifying statements, not by ontologizing (positing entities not previously believed to exist).**

> "As a general rule, analytic philosophers do not try to solve philosophical problems by 'ontologizing'—that is, by positing an entity, or class of entities, not previously believed to exist. They try to solve them by clarifying statements."

---

**69. When analytic philosophers do ontologize, they posit only abstract, non-spatiotemporal entities—never spatiotemporal denizens like persons or tables.**

> "But, whenever this happens, the 'entity' being posted is never a denizen of the spatiotemporal world; the thing that's posited is never a person or a table or a mountain or a monster. It's always an abstract object of some kind."

---

**70. Properties exist; their existence is validated by obviously true statements (e.g., "Bob and Sally are both intelligent").**

> "For example, given the premise that Bob and Sally are both humans who are intelligent, it follows that there exist characteristics—or, to use the word preferred by analytic philosophers, properties—that Bob and Sally have in common, and from this it follows that properties exist."

---

**71. Properties are not identical with spatiotemporal entities; you will never encounter intelligence per se in space-time.**

> "But although you may encounter many instances of intelligence, you'll never encounter intelligence per se and it would make no sense to assign any spatiotemporal location to it."

---

**72. The essence of the mental is intentionality (non-derivative representationality), as Brentano held.**

> "According to Franz Brentano (1838–1917), the essence of the mental is intentionality... So Brentano's thesis is that for something to be mental is for it to be non-derivatively representational."

---

**73. Perception is description—seeing Larry involves seeing that various properties are instantiated.**

> "The solution to this problem lies in the fact that perception is description... Seeing Larry involves seeing a thing having various properties—having a certain color, shape, size, position (relative to you), etc. So seeing Larry involves seeing that various properties are instantiated."

---

**74. Perceptions represent objects by encoding existence-claims that those objects satisfy.**

> "So, yes, your perception does represent Larry. But it represents him by way of encoding an existence-claim that he satisfies."

---

**75. The content of a perception is given by an existence-claim, not by a semantically simple symbol.**

> "But in no sense-perception of Larry is he represented by some simple, homogenous, non-composite cipher. So far as he is perceived, Larry is represented as having these or those properties... Thus, the content of your perception of Larry is given by some existence-claim."

---

**76. Hallucinations are representational not because they pick out non-existent objects, but because they encode false existence-claims.**

> "The important point is that, although it was hallucinatory, your visual experience encoded an existence-claim and, in so doing, gave you a message and was therefore representational. It wasn't representational in the sense that there was some thing that it picked out and, for that reason, represented."

---

**77. Thoughts about non-existent things (e.g., an even prime greater than two) involve thinking false existence-claims.**

> "The same thing is true of thoughts about the non-existent. When you think about some non-existent number—for example, an even prime greater than two—there isn't some mathematically impossible entity that you're cognitively locking onto. What's going on is that you're thinking some false existence-claim."

---

**78. Wittgenstein's view that philosophical problems arise only when sentences are misused is incorrect.**

> "But in both of them, Wittgenstein insists that that philosophical problems arise when, and only when, sentences are misused... But this position is incorrect."

---

**79. Wittgenstein's Tractatus holds that philosophical statements violate hidden syntactic rules; the Investigations holds they result from using words in non-standard ways—both positions are wrong.**

> "In the TLP, Wittgenstein contends that all philosophical problems result from a failure to understand the syntactic rules of the languages we use... In the Philosophical Investigations... he denies that such misuses involve violations of hidden syntactic rules, and instead says that such misuses consist exclusively in one's using words in ways in which they are not ordinarily used."

---

**80. One cannot learn about concepts by studying word usage unless one can already grasp the concept independently of the word.**

> "Given any expression E and any concept C, an obvious extension of this argument shows that one can't learn about C by studying E unless one can grasp C, and can therefore examine it, without E's help. Thus, Wittgenstein is simply wrong to contend that one learns about concepts by learning about how the corresponding words are used."

---

**81. Wittgenstein's thesis that "meaning is use" is incoherent.**

> "This contention is incoherent on many levels."

---

**82. If two expressions could only differ in meaning by being used differently, then any two sentences that have never been used would have the same meaning—which is absurd.**

> "Also, given any natural language, there are infinitely many sentences belonging to it that have never been used. The thesis that sentences have the same meaning iff they're used in the same way has the absurd consequence that any two sentences that haven't been used before have the same meaning."

---

**83. Conceptual role semantics (CRS)—the thesis that two sentences have the same meaning iff used the same way—is indefensible.**

> "In any case, CRS is indefensible."

---

**84. Someone who utters a sentence does so because she knows semantic rules assign a certain proposition to those words and she wishes to express that proposition.**

> "So far as she isn't misspeaking or randomly barking out noises, anyone who says 'it's hot out' or 'hace much calor,' or any other sentence, does so because she knows that existing semantic rules assign a certain proposition to those words and she wishes to put that proposition into words."

---

**85. Carnap's view that for a lecture to concern triangles is for the word "triangle" to occur in the lecture is false.**

> "Carnap's view is false. Many a lecture that doesn't contain the word 'triangle' concerns triangles. (Think of all the mathematics lectures given in Japanese, Swedish, and Arabic. How often does the word 'triangle' occur in them?)"

---

**86. The very essence of logical positivism is the denial of meaning (propositions).**

> "The distinction between the word 'triangle' and the corresponding meaning is one that Carnap couldn't countenance without ceasing to be a logical positivist. The very essence of logical positivism is the denial of meaning."

---

**87. It is not up to us whether meanings (propositions) are correct, even though it is up to us what our symbols mean.**

> "We can use words in any way that we like... But whatever meaning we end up assigning to those words, it's not up to us whether that meaning is correct."

---

**88. Logical truths are never sentences; they are always propositions.**

> "Thus, it is always propositions, and never sentences, that are logically true."

---

**89. Propositions are never conventionally true; linguistic conventions are known empirically, but what those conventions express is not itself empirical.**

> "But no proposition is true by convention. It's up to us what our symbols mean. But it's not up to us whether those meanings are correct."

---

**90. Logical positivists were unanimous in denying the existence of propositions and meanings generally.**

> "It should be pointed out that logical positivists were unanimous in denying the existence of propositions and of meanings generally."

---

**91. Sentences like "the universe is a perfect unity" are not meaningless because they are non-empirical; they are meaningless because key terms are undefined—they are statement-forms, not statements.**

> "'Statements' such as 'the universe is a perfect unity,' 'the nothing nothings,' and so on, aren't really statements at all. They're statement-forms. (i) is obviously supposed to attribute some property to the universe. But since this property isn't identified, (i) contains an undefined term and therefore says nothing."

---

**92. Once undefined terms are defined, previously "meaningless" sentences become meaningful and true or false.**

> "Once that term is defined, a meaningful statement results."

---

**93. A sentence is meaningful if it attributes some property to some object; it is meaningless if it does not attribute any property to anything.**

> "A sentence is meaningful if it attributes some property to some object. A sentence S is meaningful if, for some object x and some property phi, S says that x has phi."

---

**94. Any non-compound sentence either says of some individual that it has some property or says that two or more individuals are interrelated in a certain way.**

> "Any non-compound sentence (i.e., any sentence that doesn't consist of other sentences) either says of some individual that it has some property or it says that two more individuals are interrelated in a certain way."

---

**95. All sentences (relational, compound, negative, quantified) can be reduced to the form ‹x has phi›.**

> "We have thus established that any given sentence S is equivalent to some sentence having the form ‹x has phi.›"

---

**96. The picture theory of meaning—that sentences are "pictures" of the facts they describe—is either trivially true or incoherent.**

> "What does he mean? Maybe he means that sentences are picture-like in that they, like pictures, represent facts. But in that case what Wittgenstein is saying is completely and utterly trivial."

---

**97. If the picture theory means that sentences share structural features with the facts they describe, it is dubiously coherent.**

> "Maybe Wittgenstein is saying that sentences and the facts they describe share structural features. But this claim is of dubious coherence."

---

**98. Wittgenstein's claim that "what can be shown, cannot be said" is obviously false.**

> "Wittgenstein's assertion that 'what can be shown, cannot be said' is obviously false. I tell you that I can do fifty push-ups. (I say 'I can do fifty push-ups.') You don't believe me. So I show you that I can do fifty push-ups."

---

**99. Contrary to Wittgenstein, we can identify the logical forms of our own utterances; we do it whenever we put the meanings of words into words.**

> "In any case, contrary to what Wittgenstein says, we can identify the logical forms of our own utterances. To identify the logical form of a statement is simply to make it clear what it means. We can do this. We do it all the time. We do it whenever we put the meanings of words into words."

---

**100. No language can state all of its own semantic rules—there is a proof of this.**

> "But neither the English language, nor any other, can state all of its own semantic rules. Here's why... We're forced to reject this obvious truth if we grant the supposition that the English language can express each of its own semantic rules. Therefore, the English language cannot state all of its own semantic rules."

---

**101. The claim that truth is indefinable is false if it means we cannot say what it is for a proposition to be true; it is true if it means no language can state all of its own semantic rules.**

> "It is often said that truth is indefinable... (a) is false. (See Chapter 3.) But (b) is true."

---

**102. The sub-disciplines of philosophy (mind, language, epistemology, logic, metaphysics, science, ethics, political philosophy, religion, formal logic) overlap considerably.**

> "It should be kept in mind that these sub-disciplines overlap a great deal."

---

**103. The question "do we think in words?" belongs to both the philosophy of mind and the philosophy of language.**

> "So, for example, the question 'do we think in words?' belongs to the philosophy of mind and to the philosophy of language."

---

**104. Philosophical logic studies bearing-relations among sentences and propositions.**

> "This discipline studies bearing-relations holding among sentences and propositions (sentence-meanings)."

---

**105. Metaphysics studies the nature of possibility, necessity, causal relations, identity, and the conditions something must meet to exist.**

> "This discipline studies the nature of possibility and necessity, of causal relations between objects. It also studies the nature of identity and the conditions that something must meet in order to exist."

---

**106. The philosophy of science studies the logical structure of scientific endeavor and its results.**

> "This discipline studies the logical structure of scientific endeavor and of its results."

---

**107. There may be a fundamental difference between explanations in the physical sciences and explanations in the psychological sciences.**

> "Is there a fundamental difference between explanations in the physical sciences and explanation in the psychological sciences?"

---

**108. Whether a system is deterministic or not may depend on how it is described—determinism may be a logical property of statements, not of events (Nagel's view).**

> "Determinism is a logical property of statements, in Nagel's view, not of the events they describe. A consequence is that a given domain may be deterministic with respect to one method of describing it, but indeterministic with respect to some other method of describing it."

---

**109. Formal logic studies formal truth and attempts to formalize informal analytic truth insofar as possible.**

> "This discipline studies formal truth... Formal logic tries to formalize informal analytic truth, so far as that's possible to do so, and to say when it isn't possible, so far as it isn't."

---

**110. A sentence is formally true if every sentence of the same form is true.**

> "A sentence is formally true if every sentence of the same form is true."

---

**111. Open-sentences (statement-forms) are neither true nor false; only their instances (when variables are replaced with constants) are true or false.**

> "An open sentence is a sentence-like expression that contains a free variable and is thus neither true nor false."

---

**112. Mathematical logicians try to identify open-sentences that are true under all their interpretations, thereby formalizing analytic truth.**

> "Formal logicians aspire to identify open-sentences that are true under all their interpretations, since it is only to the extent that they can do this that they can formalize analytic truth, which is their main objective."

---

**113. Some classes of true statements (e.g., arithmetical statements) that one would expect to be formalizable turn out not to be—arithmetical truth cannot be formalized.**

> "There are some classes of true statements that one would expect to be formalizable but turn out not to be. The class of arithmetical statements ('1 + 2 = 3,' '2 × 9 = 18,' etc.) is an example. In other words, arithmetical truth cannot be formalized."

---KUCZYNSKI POSITION STATEMENT FOR FREE WILL AND OTHER PAPERS 

POSITION STATEMENT KUCZYNSKI COLLECTED IMPORTANT PAPERS

=== ORIGINALISM ===

1. The expression "the intentions of the framers" denotes an idealization, not an empirical actuality, since the various framers had numerically and qualitatively different minds.

2. When the word "they" is part of an expression meant to denote a collective attitude, it denotes an idealization rather than an empirical reality.

3. Originalism is exceedingly dubious if the term "intentions" is understood in purely individualistic, psychological terms.

4. If originalism is to hold water, "the intentions of the framers" must refer to the intentions of some kind of collective entity.

5. The intentions of the framers cannot be understood strictly in terms of the psychologies of the framers taken individually.

6. The originalist position collapses into circularity: Constitutional interpretations are to be evaluated in terms of the intentions of the framers, but the intentions of the framers are to be understood in terms of the historical and social role of Constitutional interpretation.

7. An idealization is by definition something that has no precise counterpart in the spatiotemporal world.

8. When discussing what Jefferson would have said about constitutional issues, we are not making an empirical statement about what the actual Jefferson would have said, but rather an a priori proposition about what he should have said given his values.

9. The originalist is caught in a vicious circle: he must use a counterfactual to identify the values on which his conception of Constitutionality is based, but he cannot run the counterfactual until he has identified those values.

10. Jefferson's values are definable independently of any views of Constitutional interpretation, but the expression "Jefferson's values" itself denotes an idealization as opposed to a psychological reality.

11. Like many complex human beings, Jefferson had many values, and while some may have been fair-minded and egalitarian, others may have been retrograde and misogynist.

12. When we say that Jefferson was not being "true to his values," the word "his" doesn't denote Thomas Jefferson the human being but rather an idealization of Jefferson purged of his 18th century prejudices.

13. Even the finest minds are marred by ugly biases.

14. When we talk about what Jefferson would have said, we are talking about what some idealization of Jefferson would have said—one who didn't suffer from the cultural limitations and random neuroses that mar even the best of minds.

15. Once we start dealing with an idealization of Jefferson's psyche, as opposed to his actual psyche, we have replaced empirical propositions about psychology with a priori propositions about values.


=== BORDERLINE PERSONALITY DISORDER ===

16. People with borderline personality disorder have two distinct, simultaneously operative psychological "operating systems"—one appropriately adult and sane, the other infantile in nature.

17. One part of the BPD person's mind remained "stuck" or "fixated" at an early phase of life, usually very early childhood, while the other part advanced to maturity.

18. The fixation in BPD typically results from a trauma, usually sexual molestation.

19. People with BPD oscillate between their adult and infantile psychological integrations.

20. The rapid oscillation between two modalities makes BPD individuals appear to be lying or "playing games," when in fact they are shifting between two distinct and incongruent worldviews.

21. People with BPD are not psychopaths, despite sometimes acting in entitled, limitlessly self-serving narcissistic ways.

22. The difference between BPD and psychopathy: the psychopath is simply a phony who sometimes puts on a mask of sanity and decency, while the BPD person is genuinely two-sided, with neither side being a mask.

23. The preferred psychological defense mechanism in BPD is splitting rather than repression.

24. The BPD personality-structure is itself the result of splitting.

25. Repression involves having a single psychological architecture and shoving incompatible conceits into the unconscious, while splitting involves shifting between one's adult side and one's infantile side.

26. The normal person's psyche keeps its infantilism in the abyss of the unconscious, while the BPD person's psyche keeps infantilisms in a concurrently operative sphere of mental activity.

27. The essence of borderline personality disorder is that splitting takes the place of repression.

28. When the psychopath acts non-psychopathically, it is because he is just acting; when the BPD person acts non-psychopathically, it is because she is being true to one side of her personality.

29. When the BPD person acts psychopathically, it is because she is regressing and her infantile side is dominating, not because a mask has fallen.


=== GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ===

30. Most people, including most psychologists, wrongly assume that group psychology is to be understood in terms of individual psychology.

31. The standard view that individuals have self-directed drives that are somehow diverted in group contexts cannot be reconciled with the incredibly high degree of conformism exhibited by people.

32. The deference given by people to convention, pre-existing custom, and fleeting but powerful fads cannot be explained in terms of fear of others alone.

33. Given how unintelligent, ignorant, and lacking in moral fiber most individuals are, yet how much intelligence, knowledge, and moral rigor is embodied in the behavior of collectives, it is hard to believe that collectives are merely the result of individuals pursuing their respective paths.

34. The collective is the primary thing, biologically speaking, and there is an illusion of individual choice and indeed of individualism per se.

35. Individual cells can be better understood if we recognize that they individually try to survive, flourish, and reproduce only to the extent that their doing so is necessary for the collectives formed thereby to survive, flourish, and reproduce.

36. Cell-individualism can be explained in terms of cell collectivism, but not so much vice versa.

37. Person-individualism can be explained in terms of person-collectivism, but not so much vice versa.

38. Bona fide individuals—geniuses who think for themselves—can be seen as limiting cases of collectives, as collectives of one, or as rogue actors with an unusual office within a collective.

39. The intense drives that individuals have to survive and experience gratification can be seen as necessary for, and therefore explainable in terms of, the collectives to which they belong.

40. It is very hard to explain group behavior on the assumption that collectives represent averages of the behaviors of so many self-contained existentialist autonomous deciders.

41. Outside of contexts involving immediate threats to physical well-being or prospects of crude gratification, people give far too much weight to existing beliefs and mores to be accounted for by the hypothesis that collectives are indeed collectives of bona fide individuals.


=== FINANCIAL REGULATION ===

42. Before the 1929 Stock Market Crash, the nation's financial system was highly unregulated, leading to improprieties that caused the Crash.

43. The Fed responded to the Stock Market Crash by tightening monetary policy, which exacerbated the situation and led to a full-blown economic depression.

44. Glass-Steagall prohibited commercial banks from functioning as investment banks, thereby preventing banks from using customer funds to finance their own ventures.

45. The repeal of Glass-Steagall in 1999 and the deregulation of the derivatives market in 2004 eliminated the firewalls put in place after the 1929 Crash.

46. The 2001 Dot Bomb Crash resulted from banks investing in substandard tech startups, and the 2008 Housing Crash resulted from banks investing in worthless derivatives contracts.

47. A derivative is a contract whose value is a function of the value of some other security, and most derivatives are highly leveraged, highly risky, and difficult to value.

48. The price of a home tends to stay close to its value, but with securities there is very little short-term relationship between price and value—the two can diverge without limit instantaneously.

49. When real-estate debts were bundled into financial securities like MBS's, the market could make them far more valuable than the underlying assets, and could do so in hours.

50. Once mortgages were securitized, investment banks had enormous incentives to drive up the number of home loans issued, regardless of the quality of those loans.

51. Bubbles can only last so long; eventually prices and values converge when demand fails to keep pace with supply.

52. The 2008 crisis was really two distinct crises: a housing crisis that decreased wealth and a banking crisis that diminished credit.

53. Economies depend on credit as much as they do on wealth; when businesses cannot borrow, they fail and the economy fails.

54. The Volcker Rule does not categorically prohibit banks from engaging in proprietary trading but requires that they match customer funds with their own funds when doing so.

55. The Volcker Rule prohibits banks from partnering with hedge funds and private equity firms to limit the extent to which large banks can endanger themselves and the market.

56. The Fed's role as a regulatory agency is ambiguous, since unlike every other financial regulatory agency, it is partly made up of the very entities it is supposed to regulate.

57. Given that three banks own over 75% of the Fed's shares, the Fed has at best a serious conflict of interest and at worst has no existence separate from the banks that own it.

58. Financial regulation has done a great deal of good and very little harm; financial deregulation has done a great deal of harm and very little good.

59. The Fed is in the practice of managing self-generated crises.

60. We cannot expect banks to self-regulate, and we therefore cannot expect the Fed to self-regulate to the extent that it is owned by banks.

61. In the United States, financial regulations have decentralized access to capital, keeping the economy going, while financial deregulation has hindered the economy by centralizing access to capital.

62. Even by the lights of a radical free marketeer, financial regulation has been a success because it has decentralized access to capital.


=== SORITES PARADOX ===

63. The Sorites paradox can be solved while holding on to all the laws of classical logic, contrary to most attempts that reject the law of bivalence.

64. Given any predicate that generates a Sorites-paradox, significant use of that predicate is actually elliptical for a relational statement.

65. A significant token of "Bob is poor" means "Bob is poor compared to x" for some value of x.

66. Once a value of x is supplied, a definite cutoff line between having and not having the paradox-generating predicate is supplied, which neutralizes the inductive step.

67. Not all properties generate Sorites-type arguments; only properties that can be had to varying degrees generate them.

68. Binary properties—those that do not admit of comparatives—do not generate Sorites arguments.

69. Sorites-sentences are context-sensitive; the sentence "Bob is fast" makes a false statement if Bob is a cheetah with a top speed of 30 mph but a true statement if Bob is a turtle with a top speed of 2 mph.

70. Bob cannot be wealthy simpliciter; he must be wealthy compared to some standard or class.

71. Different tokens of "x is smart" involve comparison to different standards and thus express what are, strictly speaking, different propositions.

72. The term "tall" has the same meaning in "Bob is tall" as it has in "Bob is tall compared to Fred," and therefore "tall" is really elliptical for "tall compared to __."

73. The meaning of a predicate is intimately bound up with the number of argument places it has; predicates of different degrees ipso facto have different meanings.

74. Being "absolutely non-wealthy" involves just as much reference to some standard of comparison as being "comparatively non-wealthy"—it means being non-wealthy relative to every standard.

75. Relativization to a standard is the essence of measurement; to measure is to compare with something taken as a standard.

76. Degree-statements, even highly generic ones like "x is acidic to some positive degree," always presuppose some benchmark.


=== LIBET EXPERIMENT AND FREE WILL ===

77. Libet's experiment shows that the conscious events people believe to be their decisions are not the operative intentions—consciousness of intention follows rather than precedes the intention itself.

78. The readiness potential (RP) is obviously the proximal psychological cause of the action; therefore W (the conscious awareness) is not the intention but an awareness of the intention.

79. By the time W happens, the RP is almost complete; if W is part of the intention, it is a subordinate part with at most a facilitating function.

80. W is not a mere epiphenomenon because consciousness of one's intentions necessarily affects subsequent thought and behavior.

81. The evidence suggests W is not a part of the operative intention but rather an awareness of it; W happens very late in the process.

82. If W were the decision responsible for the finger-movement, the graph would inflect upwards after W, not fail to inflect or inflect negatively.

83. W cannot possibly be an intention, let alone a decision, since such things are by their nature decisive causes, and W is not decisive.

84. Libet's veto experiment provides evidence that W can at least put the brakes on an already-initiated action, even if it cannot initiate actions.

85. Libet's experiment concerns a subset of actions—real-time sensory-motor engagements with one's environment—but these are actions where consciousness is presumably most heavily involved.

86. Standing intentions (enduring psychological structures like "my intention to create a trading platform") demonstrably cannot be constituents of consciousness; one can be conscious of them, but they are not themselves constituents of consciousness.

87. Libet's experiment shows that we do not have "conscious free will"; our decisions, even those governing real-time responses to the environment, are not constituents of consciousness.

88. The .2 second delay between intention and awareness is very possibly not mere "tape-delay" but reflects W's function as an action-monitor rather than action-instigator.

89. Follow-up studies using fMRI show that relevant RPs began much earlier than Libet thought, sometimes preceding W by as much as 10 seconds.

90. What we believe to be choices initiated in consciousness are not initiated in consciousness; they are initiated prior to any conscious awareness of them.

91. It is unclear how Libet's results bear on "whether we have free will," but that is because the concept of free will is unclear, not because the experimental findings are unclear.

92. Philosophers have responded very conservatively and defensively to Libet's findings, doing more to obfuscate than to illuminate their significance.

93. Indeterminism threatens freedom; determinism seems to be a prerequisite for freedom.

94. Thoughts that totally lacked a causal basis in a person's pre-existing psychological structures would be mere intrusions, not exercises of agency.

95. We only have freedom to the extent that the world, including ourselves, is deterministic.

96. Neuroscience does not merely show us how intentions and beliefs are physiologically implemented; it gives us counterintuitive information about them.

97. Libet's experimental data cannot be dismissed as margin-of-error; the subject established the time of W by coordinating it with a clock making one full rotation every 500 ms.

98. The distinction between proximal and distal intentions is valid, but distal intentions are extremely unlikely to be more consciousness-based than proximal intentions.

99. The actions studied in Libet's experiment are textbook cases of bona fide actions—non-automatic, non-reflexive, "freely made" actions—not quasi-reflexes.

100. The RP obviously causes the finger-movement; either that or it is temporally coincident with whatever the cause is—either way, W is not the operative intention.

101. The idea that we "just know" we have free will is straightforwardly question-begging; free will, if it exists, is a form of causation, and what causes what is always an open empirical question.

102. Compatibilism says you are free even though determined, but Libet's experiment shows not so much that you are determined as that you are on the sidelines—by the time you appear, the decision has been made.

103. What is ominous about the Libet Experiment is not that it shows your choices to be predetermined but that it shows them not to be yours—they are yours to behold but not to make.

104. Libet's results are even more radical than Freud's: Freud regarded consciousness as a weak but genuine central authority; Libet shows it to be a mere spectator.

105. All developed philosophical positions on human agency assume that the events we regard as our conscious choices are indeed our conscious choices; Libet's experiment shows this to be false.

106. One purpose of consciousness may be to integrate information about the external world with information about the internal world.

107. W, though not the cause of a particular intention, may implicitly green-light future similar intentions—telling the relevant part of the mind to carry on apace.

108. The "illusion of free choice"—experiencing decision-approval as decision-making—may be a small price to pay for gains in cognitive efficiency.


=== BERKELEY AND ANTI-FOUNDATIONALISM ===

109. Wilfred Sellars destroyed "the myth of the given" and began a revolution in epistemology, but Berkeley made essentially the same points two hundred years earlier.

110. The foundationalist picture holds that no empirical background knowledge is needed to obtain knowledge of external reality—a given perception can do that on its own.

111. Sellars is not denying that external realities are made known to us through sense-perceptions, but attacking the idea that perception does so without the cooperation of preexisting empirical knowledge.

112. There are two senses in which knowledge is not "given": its existence presupposes a background of empirical knowledge, and the sensory experience considered apart from background knowledge does not constitute knowledge of anything.

113. The epistemic significance of a quale is not fixed or "given"; it is a variable function of background empirical knowledge.

114. Berkeley's argument for anti-foundationalism is far more lucid and developed than Sellars' version.

115. What ultimately endows visual sensations with information regarding distances is that different kinds of visual sensations have different kinds of kinesthetic and tactile concomitants.

116. Your visual experience by itself doesn't apprise you of the size or distance of an object; what does that is your visual experience plus various pieces of background knowledge.

117. One's visual experience, taken by itself and stripped of contextualization, doesn't tell one whether one is seeing a tree-size pencil a half-mile off or a tiny pencil nearby.

118. It is only "past experience" that teaches us that a particular appearance betokens a square object rather than a diamond-shaped one.

119. Berkeley has a definite answer to Molyneux's question: a man born blind given sight would not know from visual perceptions alone whether he was seeing a round, oval, or square object.

120. When you hear somebody talk, you feel as though you directly grasp their meaning, but your auditory experience apprises you of significance only with the help of background knowledge.

121. Your visual experiences apprise you of the squareness of objects only in the sense in which your auditory perceptions apprise you of the meaning of a spoken sentence.

122. When a person's face reddens in a particular way indicating shame, your visual experience by itself doesn't apprise you of the shame; background knowledge of how emotions are given bodily expression is at work.

123. No sensory experience by itself tells one anything; any such experience must be put in the context of background knowledge to bear any determinate message about the external world.

124. No sensory experience is foundational; empirical knowledge is obtained by putting current sensory experiences into the context of other sensory experiences and previously obtained empirical knowledge.

125. Sellars only gives one example of how sensory experiences need background knowledge (perception of color under non-standard conditions), while Berkeley's argument directly applies to virtually every perceptible property under standard conditions.

126. Sellars doesn't really explain how representational mental entities (perceptions) are forged out of non-representational mental entities (raw feels, qualia, sensations), but Berkeley goes to great lengths to show this.

127. Berkeley provides a non-metaphorical way of interpreting the metaphors that dominate contemporary anti-foundationalism (the "arc" or "web" of knowledge).

128. Two problems arise on Berkeley-Sellars anti-foundationalism: how any belief manages to be justified, and how anything representational arises out of what is not representational.

129. The problem of how perceptions arise out of non-representational sensations is more fundamental than the problem of justification, because until we have perceptions, the problem of justification doesn't arise.

130. Standard conditions of perception are an idealization; no conditions are really standard—if we could set up a distortion-free situation, it would not be typical.

131. What Sellars says about Bob's intake of color-facts in a tie-shop with unusual lighting is true of our intake of color-facts in general, and of shape-facts, size-facts, distance-facts, and so on.

132. A ten-foot stop-sign looked at from a hundred feet away gives off the same appearance as a 1,000-foot stop-sign looked at from 10,000 feet away; one knows the approximate height only through background information.

133. In the absence of background empirical knowledge, our sensory episodes become indeterminate to the point of meaninglessness—to the point of having no representational content.

134. The appearance given off by a receding object is not different from the appearance given off by a shrinking object; contextual information (knowing that people don't shrink) disambiguates the visual experience.


=== ADDITIONAL PHILOSOPHICAL POSITIONS ===

135. The concept of "free will" is so unclear that difficulties in applying experimental findings to it reflect problems with the concept, not with the findings.

136. Philosophers seldom ask "What does the Libet experiment show?" but instead ask "What does the experiment show about free will?"—the second question concedes too much validity to assumptions that the experiment calls into question.

137. Nothing is gained, and much is lost, by trying to press experimental results into the service of a pre-existing philosophical agenda.

138. The position that pre-W brain activity is merely an "urge" that W converts into a genuine intention is question-begging; W does not have a decisive role in causing the finger-movement.

139. If W happened at the very beginning or peak of the readiness potential slope, it could be a decision; but W happens far too late to launch the process and too early to transform it.

140. The comparison between knowledge of free will and the cogito is misconceived; the cogito registers an analytic truth whose negation is incoherent, but the assertion of free will is not trivial.

141. Actions studied in Libet's experiment were set up to maximize the role of consciousness; the subject was wide awake, given explicit instructions, and could push the button whenever he wanted.

142. The more deliberation and "rational reflection" are involved in an action, the less likely the operative intention is to be fully conscious.

143. Philosophers have done little beyond playing skeptic with Libet's data, using standards of proof by which there would be no reason to believe that smoking causes cancer.

144. We stand to learn about the mind by investigating models consistent with Libet's data; we do not stand to learn by insisting that Libet "must" be wrong.

145. Libet's experiment represents an extremely valuable but missed opportunity for philosophy.

146. If it turns out that Libet's data is spurious, so be it; in the meantime, we should accept it and try to model it rather than reflexively dismissing it.

147. The experiments in question do not merely support but establish that consciousness of intention follows rather than precedes the intention itself.

148. Consciousness may serve to approve or disapprove of decisions already made rather than to make decisions, with disapproval having a directive role for future intentions.

149. There is no experimental data to support the claim that Libet's results only apply to "low-level" actions that fail to engage rationality or agency.

150. Any episode of taking in information about the external world—any perception of height, speed, shape, or color—involves the cooperation of contextual or background information.KUCZYNSKI POSITION STATEMENT EMPIRICISM AND THE FOUNDATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGY

POSITION STATEMENT KUCZYNSKI EMPIRICISM AND THE FOUNDATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGY

1. Empiricism is fundamentally incompatible with a scientific psychology.

2. There exists subpersonal thought that underlies conscious, preconscious, and repressed ideation.

3. Subpersonal mentation is inherently intelligent, whereas personal/conscious mentation is inherently unintelligent.

4. Consciousness qua consciousness is capable only of iconic (pictorial) representation.

5. Concepts are not constituents of consciousness; they are access-conscious, not consciousness-constitutive.

6. Berkeley conflated images with concepts, using "idea" to refer to both.

7. Symbol-manipulations facilitate ratiocinative operations, but anything one can think with symbols can be thought without them.

8. The meaning of a complex expression cannot be directly determined by convention.

9. There is a fundamental distinction between object-awareness and truth-awareness (proposition-awareness).

10. Creatures can be merely object-aware (MOCs) or proposition-aware (PACs); all truth-aware creatures are object-aware, but not vice versa.

11. Desires are identical with judgments concerning what would bring pleasure or gratification.

12. Intentions are judgments, not desires.

13. Davidson's identification of intentions with one's strongest desires is false.

14. Higher-order desires as described by Frankfurt are often actually judgments, not desires.

15. Agency is identical with rationality—specifically, applied rationality deployed in accordance with one's values.

16. Rational agents are fundamentally different from mere reflex machines or reagents.

17. The self is a rationality-constituted superstructure whose original purpose was to ensure the organism's survival but whose developed purpose is self-honing and expanding its powers.

18. Physiological properties are multiply realizable with respect to microphysical properties.

19. The Deductive-Nomological (DN) model of scientific explanation is false.

20. Psychological explanation works through rationalization, identifying causal mechanisms in rational motivations.

21. A cause can be operative even if its effect was not guaranteed—causation can be probabilistic.

22. Laws need not be exceptionless regularities to have genuine explanatory value.

23. Macro-level properties cannot be reduced to microphysical properties.

24. Perception requires conceptual articulation; it is not mere sensation but articulated sensation.

25. Introspection is an act of conceptualization, not theoretically innocent reportage.

26. Husserl's phenomenological bracketing fails because one cannot strip perceptions of their conceptual articulations.

27. The Dennett-Churchland eliminativist position on mind is untenable.

28. Perceptual data is as theory-laden as psychological data.

29. Russell and other logicians were wrong that self-referential sentences are meaningless; such expressions are either false or sentence-schemata.

30. The unconscious mind exists and cannot be understood in strictly empiricist terms.

31. Repression and rationalization are concepts inherently incompatible with empiricism.

32. Psychosis involves partial cognitive regression where infantile and adult thought pathologically commingle.

33. Neurotic people perceive external reality accurately but are blind to their own feelings.

34. There is a crucial distinction between access-consciousness and consciousness-proper.

35. Personal mentation becomes ratiocinative only when it becomes rule-governed through linguistic mediation.

36. Music transfers subpersonal intelligence to the conscious level, making otherwise imperceptible thought-processes perceptible.

37. Aesthetic beauty is relational—a property of relations between minds and sounds/objects, not intrinsic to sounds/objects themselves.

38. Sociopathy is psychological suicide: the destruction of one's value-based psychological architecture.

39. One can change oneself but cannot change one's self; identity is predetermined, and experience determines only how one is who one is.

40. Pathological insecurity and pathological grandiosity are two sides of the same coin.

41. Shame at being wrong is morbid and regressive, as making mistakes is inseparable from the human condition.

42. Folk-psychology enables rationalization of conscious states but has inherent limitations in explaining psychopathology.

43. Dreams involve relaxation of maturation-based inhibitions, liberating infantile mental content from the unconscious.

44. Propositional attitudes cannot be constituents of consciousness and are knowable only to the extent they are phenomenologized.

45. It is viciously regressive to suppose that the self carries out the cognitive operations underlying sense-perception.

46. Science is not about sticking to facts but about organizing facts by positing hidden structures to restore continuities that observation strips away.

47. The empiricist's injunction to "stick to the facts" is either a triviality or an absurdity.

48. Perception cannot self-justify; justification for perception must come from non-empirical, analytic principles.

49. Rationalizations are moralizations: attempts to make the immoral seem moral.

50. Sociopaths do not have friends because they do not have values, and a friend is somebody one values.

Now I have enough material. Here are 100 additional positions:

51. Propositions are non-spatiotemporal entities that consist of properties.

52. Properties are non-spatiotemporal; they cannot be identified with spatiotemporal entities.

53. The relata of logical relations are propositions, not sentences.

54. Logical relations (entailment, confirmation, disconfirmation, incompatibility, neutrality) hold among propositions, not among spatiotemporal entities.

55. Empiricists must deny the existence of propositions because propositions are non-spatiotemporal.

56. Psychological propositions do not present facts as being in the same spatial coordinate system as physical propositions.

57. The relationship between psychology and physiology is even more remote than the relationship between physiology and microphysics.

58. Hume's skepticism about perception and induction follows correctly from empiricism, which should lead us to reject empiricism rather than accept skepticism.

59. Scientific thought is not the same as empirical thought; to the extent thought mediates between observations and beliefs, beliefs are not directly supported by observation.

60. Hume's analysis of causation as mere constant conjunction is false.

61. We perceive instances of causation directly when we perceive instances of persistence and occupancy.

62. Any instance of persistence or occupancy is an instance of causation.

63. A Hume-world (a world with the same events but no causation) is incoherent because persistence itself requires causal ties.

64. Space-time position is constituted by causal relations; there is no non-relational way of understanding space-time position.

65. Events are not constituents of the external world but nominalizations of truths.

66. Facts and truths are distinct; truths hold in virtue of facts but are not identical with facts.

67. The distinction between explanatory generalizations of different disciplines lies in the concepts composing them, not in the underlying reality.

68. Wittgenstein's private language argument fails because the lone speaker of a private language is in no different epistemic position than the English speaker relying on memory.

69. Wittgenstein is a hard-core empiricist whose rejection of non-spatiotemporal entities like propositions and concepts follows from his empiricism.

70. Groups of zombies cannot collectively think; if every member of a group is a zombie, the group itself is without consciousness.

71. The Argument from Analogy for other minds is valid, contrary to Wittgenstein's objections.

72. Quine's thesis of the indeterminacy of translation is a desperate measure resulting from his empiricist commitments.

73. Translation between languages requires reliance on introspection-based knowledge of one's own mental states.

74. Thinking is not a psychological process in Wittgenstein's sense; propositional attitudes are not constituents of consciousness.

75. Mental imagery can be thought-constitutive, contrary to Wittgenstein's view, when understood in relation to its ratiocinative context.

76. The deployment of propositional attitudes in problem-solving is not constitutive of consciousness; consciousness is to thinking what a driver is to events under the car's hood.

77. Dispositionalism about mental states fails to model the data; mental states must be functioning as such even between bouts of generating consciousness.

78. Your belief that 1+1=2 is not identical with your dispositions to make certain judgments; it must be actively functioning to explain those dispositions.

79. Cognitive processes are realized by physiological processes, but psychological relations between physiological events cannot be understood in physiological terms.

80. Searle's view that mentality is identical with consciousness (MC) is false.

81. Propositional attitudes are not and cannot be constituents of consciousness; they are access-conscious at most.

82. There is no a priori reason why propositional attitudes must be access-conscious.

83. Having meta-cognitive wherewithal is required to know what one's propositional attitudes are.

84. Russell's paradox does not establish that there are meaningful sentences that are neither true nor false; the relevant expressions are either false or sentence-schemata.

85. The expression "the property of being the set of all sets that aren't members of themselves" picks nothing out.

86. Tarski's and Russell's type-theory response to the semantic paradoxes is self-defeating.

87. Anaphoric expressions like "itself" function as bound variables and can be eliminable in extensional contexts.

88. Mach was wrong to hold that molecules are useful fictions; Einstein showed their existence is required to explain Brownian motion.

89. Newton's public claims to be purely empirical likely misrepresented his actual methodology for rhetorical reasons.

90. Every person is to some degree a schizoid-affective psychopath (SAP); differences between the mentally ill and healthy are matters of degree.

91. To outgrow a belief or desire is not to cease to have it but for it to cease to be operational.

92. People are organized, non-heaps of thought; thoughts are organized both vertically (hierarchically) and horizontally (laterally).

93. The mind of the psychologically healthy person is stratified; psychopathology manifests when this stratification breaks down.

94. A delusion is not a wrong belief but a belief that is right in the wrong way—the vehicle for a correct belief is an infantile and therefore false belief.

95. Pleasant affects alert us to the presence of certain structural features in music, art, and architecture; unpleasant affects alert us to their absence.

96. Phenomenologically consecutive mental images are likely to be ratiocinatively disjoint when considered in isolation from their underlying thought-processes.

97. The survival instinct is transferred from one's body to one's self as psychological development proceeds.

98. Initially the psychological superstructure exists to keep the body alive; eventually the body exists to keep the superstructure (self) alive.

99. To value something is to see it as conducive to the consolidation or enlargement of one's agency.

100. Hedonistic pleasure is value-free pleasure; accomplishment-based pleasure is not hedonistic.

101. The object of desire is gratification, but intentions do not aim at gratification—they are judgments about what one must do to have a life embodying certain values.

102. Athletic ability is cognitive, not somatic in nature; being coordinated consists in one's mind being intelligent in governing one's body.

103. Moral nihilism and aesthetic nihilism are both false.

104. Moral nihilism and moral relativism are equivalent doctrines.

105. The Moore-Hume thesis that you cannot derive an "ought" from an "is" is false.

106. Moral truths hold in virtue of the same facts as descriptive truths; we can experience facts either as morally antiseptic or as moral truths.

107. Morally good acts invariably conduce to psychological, biological, or psychobiological welfare.

108. Emotions are beliefs, though they are not discursive beliefs; they are fundamentally egocentric in nature.

109. Hume's emotivism—the view that moral ideation is non-judicative sentiment—is wrong.

110. There is no moral difference without a descriptive difference; the moral supervenes on the descriptive.

111. Moral intuitions track biological facts about welfare and harm.

112. One's personhood depends on having values (norms, though not necessarily moral norms).

113. Psychopathy is a failure to distinguish consequence of excessive rationalization; it involves a collapse of the distinction between self and other.

114. The acceptance of empiricism is incompatible with the very existence of any attempt to study anything.

115. If empiricism is correct, nothing or next to nothing can be known about either the external or internal world.

116. Empiricism leaves the mental as nothing but a series of disjoint ex nihilo obtrusions into an otherwise integrated world.

117. Paraperception is phenomenology-mediated, real-time conception—the mode by which we perceive language, music, and art.

118. Categories like rock, tree, and chair are individuated by the counterfactual properties of their instances.

119. To be a copper bar is to have certain causal properties (conductivity, durability, malleability).

120. One's survival instinct comes to be transferred from one's body to one's self.

121. Animals are reflex machines; rational agents are not.

122. Something that merely reacts is sub-agential; we may call such things "reagents."

123. Only proposition-aware creatures can have intentions, because intentions are identical with decisions.

124. Deliberation is nothing other than arriving at a decision.

125. When an intention is not preceded by deliberation, relevant deliberations have already occurred in the past.

126. Aristotle and Kant were right that agency is practical rationality and decisions are conclusions of non-theoretical thought-processes.

127. There is no intrinsic difference between practical rationality (agency) and theoretical rationality.

128. Practical ratiocinations are more likely to be corrupted by prejudices and emotional factors than theoretical ones.

129. Phenomenology can represent a given thing only by resembling it.

130. Dogs are not irrational but sub-rational; irrationality is corrupted rationality and is thus a prerogative of rational beings.

131. Dogs' being sub-rational consists in their minds being incapable of personal thought, not thought tout court.

132. For ideation to be transferred from the subpersonal to the personal domain, it must be phenomenologized.

133. The consciousness of music is the delight we take in acquiring knowledge; it is a form of our survival instinct applied to self-expansion.

134. Personal mentation becomes ratiocinative only when governed by meta-customs that convert customs into rules.

135. Repressed propositional attitudes are not intrinsically different from unrepressed ones; they differ only in location within the mind.

136. The conscious knowledge described by Chomsky and Marr is a conceptualization of subpersonal knowledge, not a duplicate.

137. Subpersonal processes are not strictly physiological or purely reflexive, contrary to Searle.

138. Understanding a sentence requires implicit knowledge of extremely complex semantic rules that operate too quickly for conscious, discursive application.

139. Linguistic competence involves subpersonal mastery of rules that are not access-conscious.

140. There is no physiological characterization of linguistic competence; the rules are inherently semantic, not physiological.

141. Given obvious facts and principles, Chomsky's position that there is subpersonal mentation is de rigueur.

142. Hume's introspections were contaminated with non-empirical ideation.

143. Goodman's "grue" paradox shows that any body of data can provide support for incompatible hypotheses without constraints beyond empirical observation.

144. There is a transcendental argument for causation: without causal ties, the genidentity of one's mind across time would be unintelligible.

145. The concept of complying with laws must be distinguished from the concept of being governed by them.

146. Everything complies with microphysical laws, but macro-level events are governed by macro-level laws implemented by varying microphysical mechanisms.

147. Smoking causes cancer even though less than 30% of smokers get lung cancer; causes need not operate with 100% efficacy.

148. Salmon's probabilistic modification of the DN model (DN*) is no better than DN itself.

149. Explanation can be valid even when the explanandum was less than 50% likely given the explanans.

150. The psychoanalyst's goal is to implant conscious duplicates of repressed beliefs, which are qualitatively identical with their repressed counterparts.

Now I have enough material. Here are 100 additional positions:

51. Propositions are non-spatiotemporal entities that consist of properties.

52. Properties are non-spatiotemporal; they cannot be identified with spatiotemporal entities.

53. The relata of logical relations are propositions, not sentences.

54. Logical relations (entailment, confirmation, disconfirmation, incompatibility, neutrality) hold among propositions, not among spatiotemporal entities.

55. Empiricists must deny the existence of propositions because propositions are non-spatiotemporal.

56. Psychological propositions do not present facts as being in the same spatial coordinate system as physical propositions.

57. The relationship between psychology and physiology is even more remote than the relationship between physiology and microphysics.

58. Hume's skepticism about perception and induction follows correctly from empiricism, which should lead us to reject empiricism rather than accept skepticism.

59. Scientific thought is not the same as empirical thought; to the extent thought mediates between observations and beliefs, beliefs are not directly supported by observation.

60. Hume's analysis of causation as mere constant conjunction is false.

61. We perceive instances of causation directly when we perceive instances of persistence and occupancy.

62. Any instance of persistence or occupancy is an instance of causation.

63. A Hume-world (a world with the same events but no causation) is incoherent because persistence itself requires causal ties.

64. Space-time position is constituted by causal relations; there is no non-relational way of understanding space-time position.

65. Events are not constituents of the external world but nominalizations of truths.

66. Facts and truths are distinct; truths hold in virtue of facts but are not identical with facts.

67. The distinction between explanatory generalizations of different disciplines lies in the concepts composing them, not in the underlying reality.

68. Wittgenstein's private language argument fails because the lone speaker of a private language is in no different epistemic position than the English speaker relying on memory.

69. Wittgenstein is a hard-core empiricist whose rejection of non-spatiotemporal entities like propositions and concepts follows from his empiricism.

70. Groups of zombies cannot collectively think; if every member of a group is a zombie, the group itself is without consciousness.

71. The Argument from Analogy for other minds is valid, contrary to Wittgenstein's objections.

72. Quine's thesis of the indeterminacy of translation is a desperate measure resulting from his empiricist commitments.

73. Translation between languages requires reliance on introspection-based knowledge of one's own mental states.

74. Thinking is not a psychological process in Wittgenstein's sense; propositional attitudes are not constituents of consciousness.

75. Mental imagery can be thought-constitutive, contrary to Wittgenstein's view, when understood in relation to its ratiocinative context.

76. The deployment of propositional attitudes in problem-solving is not constitutive of consciousness; consciousness is to thinking what a driver is to events under the car's hood.

77. Dispositionalism about mental states fails to model the data; mental states must be functioning as such even between bouts of generating consciousness.

78. Your belief that 1+1=2 is not identical with your dispositions to make certain judgments; it must be actively functioning to explain those dispositions.

79. Cognitive processes are realized by physiological processes, but psychological relations between physiological events cannot be understood in physiological terms.

80. Searle's view that mentality is identical with consciousness (MC) is false.

81. Propositional attitudes are not and cannot be constituents of consciousness; they are access-conscious at most.

82. There is no a priori reason why propositional attitudes must be access-conscious.

83. Having meta-cognitive wherewithal is required to know what one's propositional attitudes are.

84. Russell's paradox does not establish that there are meaningful sentences that are neither true nor false; the relevant expressions are either false or sentence-schemata.

85. The expression "the property of being the set of all sets that aren't members of themselves" picks nothing out.

86. Tarski's and Russell's type-theory response to the semantic paradoxes is self-defeating.

87. Anaphoric expressions like "itself" function as bound variables and can be eliminable in extensional contexts.

88. Mach was wrong to hold that molecules are useful fictions; Einstein showed their existence is required to explain Brownian motion.

89. Newton's public claims to be purely empirical likely misrepresented his actual methodology for rhetorical reasons.

90. Every person is to some degree a schizoid-affective psychopath (SAP); differences between the mentally ill and healthy are matters of degree.

91. To outgrow a belief or desire is not to cease to have it but for it to cease to be operational.

92. People are organized, non-heaps of thought; thoughts are organized both vertically (hierarchically) and horizontally (laterally).

93. The mind of the psychologically healthy person is stratified; psychopathology manifests when this stratification breaks down.

94. A delusion is not a wrong belief but a belief that is right in the wrong way—the vehicle for a correct belief is an infantile and therefore false belief.

95. Pleasant affects alert us to the presence of certain structural features in music, art, and architecture; unpleasant affects alert us to their absence.

96. Phenomenologically consecutive mental images are likely to be ratiocinatively disjoint when considered in isolation from their underlying thought-processes.

97. The survival instinct is transferred from one's body to one's self as psychological development proceeds.

98. Initially the psychological superstructure exists to keep the body alive; eventually the body exists to keep the superstructure (self) alive.

99. To value something is to see it as conducive to the consolidation or enlargement of one's agency.

100. Hedonistic pleasure is value-free pleasure; accomplishment-based pleasure is not hedonistic.

101. The object of desire is gratification, but intentions do not aim at gratification—they are judgments about what one must do to have a life embodying certain values.

102. Athletic ability is cognitive, not somatic in nature; being coordinated consists in one's mind being intelligent in governing one's body.

103. Moral nihilism and aesthetic nihilism are both false.

104. Moral nihilism and moral relativism are equivalent doctrines.

105. The Moore-Hume thesis that you cannot derive an "ought" from an "is" is false.

106. Moral truths hold in virtue of the same facts as descriptive truths; we can experience facts either as morally antiseptic or as moral truths.

107. Morally good acts invariably conduce to psychological, biological, or psychobiological welfare.

108. Emotions are beliefs, though they are not discursive beliefs; they are fundamentally egocentric in nature.

109. Hume's emotivism—the view that moral ideation is non-judicative sentiment—is wrong.

110. There is no moral difference without a descriptive difference; the moral supervenes on the descriptive.

111. Moral intuitions track biological facts about welfare and harm.

112. One's personhood depends on having values (norms, though not necessarily moral norms).

113. Psychopathy is a failure to distinguish consequence of excessive rationalization; it involves a collapse of the distinction between self and other.

114. The acceptance of empiricism is incompatible with the very existence of any attempt to study anything.

115. If empiricism is correct, nothing or next to nothing can be known about either the external or internal world.

116. Empiricism leaves the mental as nothing but a series of disjoint ex nihilo obtrusions into an otherwise integrated world.

117. Paraperception is phenomenology-mediated, real-time conception—the mode by which we perceive language, music, and art.

118. Categories like rock, tree, and chair are individuated by the counterfactual properties of their instances.

119. To be a copper bar is to have certain causal properties (conductivity, durability, malleability).

120. One's survival instinct comes to be transferred from one's body to one's self.

121. Animals are reflex machines; rational agents are not.

122. Something that merely reacts is sub-agential; we may call such things "reagents."

123. Only proposition-aware creatures can have intentions, because intentions are identical with decisions.

124. Deliberation is nothing other than arriving at a decision.

125. When an intention is not preceded by deliberation, relevant deliberations have already occurred in the past.

126. Aristotle and Kant were right that agency is practical rationality and decisions are conclusions of non-theoretical thought-processes.

127. There is no intrinsic difference between practical rationality (agency) and theoretical rationality.

128. Practical ratiocinations are more likely to be corrupted by prejudices and emotional factors than theoretical ones.

129. Phenomenology can represent a given thing only by resembling it.

130. Dogs are not irrational but sub-rational; irrationality is corrupted rationality and is thus a prerogative of rational beings.

131. Dogs' being sub-rational consists in their minds being incapable of personal thought, not thought tout court.

132. For ideation to be transferred from the subpersonal to the personal domain, it must be phenomenologized.

133. The consciousness of music is the delight we take in acquiring knowledge; it is a form of our survival instinct applied to self-expansion.

134. Personal mentation becomes ratiocinative only when governed by meta-customs that convert customs into rules.

135. Repressed propositional attitudes are not intrinsically different from unrepressed ones; they differ only in location within the mind.

136. The conscious knowledge described by Chomsky and Marr is a conceptualization of subpersonal knowledge, not a duplicate.

137. Subpersonal processes are not strictly physiological or purely reflexive, contrary to Searle.

138. Understanding a sentence requires implicit knowledge of extremely complex semantic rules that operate too quickly for conscious, discursive application.

139. Linguistic competence involves subpersonal mastery of rules that are not access-conscious.

140. There is no physiological characterization of linguistic competence; the rules are inherently semantic, not physiological.

141. Given obvious facts and principles, Chomsky's position that there is subpersonal mentation is de rigueur.

142. Hume's introspections were contaminated with non-empirical ideation.

143. Goodman's "grue" paradox shows that any body of data can provide support for incompatible hypotheses without constraints beyond empirical observation.

144. There is a transcendental argument for causation: without causal ties, the genidentity of one's mind across time would be unintelligible.

145. The concept of complying with laws must be distinguished from the concept of being governed by them.

146. Everything complies with microphysical laws, but macro-level events are governed by macro-level laws implemented by varying microphysical mechanisms.

147. Smoking causes cancer even though less than 30% of smokers get lung cancer; causes need not operate with 100% efficacy.

148. Salmon's probabilistic modification of the DN model (DN*) is no better than DN itself.

149. Explanation can be valid even when the explanandum was less than 50% likely given the explanans.

150. The psychoanalyst's goal is to implant conscious duplicates of repressed beliefs, which are qualitatively identical with their repressed counterparts.
KUCZYNSKI INTENSIONALITY POSITION STATEMENT 

TEXT INTELLIGENCE REPORT
Generated: 12/4/2025, 8:25:03 PM
Source Length: 28865 words
LLM Used: grok

--- KEY QUOTATIONS ---


--- ANNOTATED CITATIONS ---


--- COMPRESSED REWRITE ---
[Chunk 1]


[Chunk 2]


[Chunk 3]


[Chunk 4]


[Chunk 5]


[Chunk 6]


[Chunk 7]


[Chunk 8]


[Chunk 9]


[Chunk 10]


[Chunk 11]


[Chunk 12]


[Chunk 13]


[Chunk 14]


[Chunk 15]


[Chunk 16]


[Chunk 17]


[Chunk 18]


[Chunk 19]


[Chunk 20]


[Chunk 21]


[Chunk 22]


[Chunk 23]


[Chunk 24]


[Chunk 25]


[Chunk 26]


[Chunk 27]


[Chunk 28]


[Chunk 29]


--- DATABASE ---
═══ CHUNK 1 ═══


═══ CHUNK 2 ═══


═══ CHUNK 3 ═══


═══ CHUNK 4 ═══


═══ CHUNK 5 ═══


═══ CHUNK 6 ═══


═══ CHUNK 7 ═══


═══ CHUNK 8 ═══


═══ CHUNK 9 ═══


═══ CHUNK 10 ═══


═══ CHUNK 11 ═══


═══ CHUNK 12 ═══


═══ CHUNK 13 ═══


═══ CHUNK 14 ═══


═══ CHUNK 15 ═══


═══ CHUNK 16 ═══


═══ CHUNK 17 ═══


═══ CHUNK 18 ═══


═══ CHUNK 19 ═══


═══ CHUNK 20 ═══


═══ CHUNK 21 ═══


═══ CHUNK 22 ═══


═══ CHUNK 23 ═══


═══ CHUNK 24 ═══


═══ CHUNK 25 ═══


═══ CHUNK 26 ═══


═══ CHUNK 27 ═══


═══ CHUNK 28 ═══


═══ CHUNK 29 ═══


--- TEXT ANALYZER ---
═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 1 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 2 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 3 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 4 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 5 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 6 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 7 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 8 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 9 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 10 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 11 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 12 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 13 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 14 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 15 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 16 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 17 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 18 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 19 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 20 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 21 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 22 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 23 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 24 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 25 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 26 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 27 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 28 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 29 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



--- MAJOR VIEWS ---
1. VIEW: It is widely held that one can sometimes rationally accept propositions of the form P and not-P.
   EVIDENCE: "On the basis of arguments put forth by Kripke (1977a, 1980), it is widely held that one can sometimes rationally accept propositions of the form P and not-P"

2. VIEW: There are necessary a posteriori truths.
   EVIDENCE: "it is widely held that one can sometimes rationally accept propositions of the form P and not-P and also that there are necessary a posteriori truths"

3. VIEW: Kripke's arguments for these views appear probative only so long as one fails to distinguish between semantics and presemantics.
   EVIDENCE: "We will nd that Kripke's arguments for these views appear probative only so long as one fails to distinguish between semantics and presemantics"

4. VIEW: The distinction between semantics and presemantics is between the literal meanings of sentences and the information on the basis of which one identifies those literal meanings.
   EVIDENCE: "between the literal meanings of sentences, on the one hand, and the information on the basis of which one identi es those literal meanings, on the other"

5. VIEW: The failure to distinguish between semantics and presemantics underlies the popular thesis that intersubstituting co-referring terms sometimes turns true sentences into false ones and vice versa.
   EVIDENCE: "This same failure, it will be argued, underlies the popular thesis that intersubstituting co-referring terms sometimes turns true sentences into false ones and vice versa"

6. VIEW: The thesis that intersubstituting co-referring terms sometimes changes truth values has counterintuitive consequences.
   EVIDENCE: "Though seemingly plausible, this thesis has a number of counterintuitive consequences"

7. VIEW: One counterintuitive consequence of the thesis is that the occurrence of 'snow' in 'it is true that snow is white' doesn't refer to snow.
   EVIDENCE: "among them that the occurrence of ''snow'' in ''it is true that snow is white'' doesn't refer to snow"

8. VIEW: Understanding the distinction between semantics and presemantics suggests a way to develop a semantic system without the counterintuitive consequences.
   EVIDENCE: "An understanding of the distinction between semantics and presemantics suggests a way to develop a semantic system that doesn't have these consequences"

9. VIEW: The semantic system suggested can reconcile our intuitions concerning cognitive content with some powerfully argued theses of contemporary philosophy of language.
   EVIDENCE: "and that, moreover, reconciles our intuitions concerning cognitive content with some powerfully argued theses of contemporary philosophy of language"

10. VIEW: Some of the paper's main contentions are anticipated by Andrzej Boguslawski in his 1994 paper 'Sentential Complementation and Truth.'
   EVIDENCE: "Some of this paper's main contentions are anticipated by Andrzej Boguslawski in his 1994 paper ''Sentential Complementation and Truth.''"

11. VIEW: In at least some contexts, replacing a referring term with a co-referring term preserves truth-value.
   EVIDENCE: "In at least some contexts, replacing a referring term with a co-referring term preserves truth-value"

12. VIEW: The sentence 'Hesperus is closer to the Sun than the Earth' is true.
   EVIDENCE: "(1) ''Hesperus is closer to the Sun than the Earth'' is true"

13. VIEW: 'Phosphorous' and 'Hesperus' refer to the same thing.
   EVIDENCE: "''Phosphorous'' and ''Hesperus'' refer to the same thing"

14. VIEW: The sentence 'Phosphorous is closer to the Sun than the Earth' is also true.
   EVIDENCE: "So (2) ''Phosphorous is closer to the Sun than the Earth.'' is also true"

15. VIEW: If a context tolerates intersubstitutions of co-referring terms, that context is 'extensional.'
   EVIDENCE: "If a context tolerates intersubstitutions of co-referring terms-in other words, if intersubstituting co-referring terms in that context cannot change the truth-value of the host-sentence-that context is ''extensional.''"

16. VIEW: If an expression occurs in an extensional context, it occurs 'extensionally.'
   EVIDENCE: "If an expression occurs in an extensional context, let us say that it occurs ''extensionally.''"

17. VIEW: There seem to be cases where replacing a referring term with a co-referring term leads from truth to falsehood or vice versa.
   EVIDENCE: "There seem to be cases where replacing a referring term with a co-referring term leads from truth to falsehood or vice versa"

18. VIEW: Not all contexts are extensional.
   EVIDENCE: "It thus appears, at least at rst, that not all contexts are extensional"

19. VIEW: If a context is not extensional, it is 'intensional' and the expressions occurring in it do so 'intensionally.'
   EVIDENCE: "If a context is not extensional, we will say that it is ''intensional'' and that the expressions occurring in it do so ''intensionally.''"

20. VIEW: All contexts are extensional.
   EVIDENCE: "Nonetheless, I will argue in this paper thatallcontexts are extensional"

21. VIEW: The truth of 'I am tired' applies to all sentence-types with indexical or context-sensitive components.
   EVIDENCE: "true of ''I am tired'' is true of all sentence-types that contain indexical or otherwise context-sensitive components."

22. VIEW: Most, if not all, sentence-types of natural language contain tense-markers.
   EVIDENCE: "This includes most, if not all, sentence-types of natural language."

23. VIEW: The identity of the proposition meant by a token of a sentence-type with a tense-marker depends on the time of production.
   EVIDENCE: "if a sentence-type contains a tense-marker, the identity of the proposition meant by a given one of its tokens will typically depend on the time at which that token was produced."

24. VIEW: Kaplan and Soames elaborate and defend the view that sentence-types with tense-markers depend on the time of production for their meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "See Kaplan (1989a) and Soames (2002) for an elaboration and defense of this view."

25. VIEW: The function meant by a sentence-type can fail to assign a proposition to a particular token.
   EVIDENCE: "Of course, in some cases, the function meant by a sentence-type will fail to assign a proposition to a particular token of that sentence."

26. VIEW: An utterance about a non-existent pink elephant fails to encode a proposition.
   EVIDENCE: "if there is no pink elephant present, and somebody who is having a hallucination of a pink elephant points to an empty space and says ''that pink elephant is a threat to our way of life'', that utterance fails to encode a proposition"

27. VIEW: Strawson, Kaplan, Salmon, Soames, and others, including the author, believe that sentence-tokens typically have propositions for their literal meanings.
   EVIDENCE: "In any case, this is what Strawson (1950), Kaplan (1989a), Salmon (1986), Soames (2002) and others would say (and it is my own position)."

28. VIEW: Some philosophers deny that sentence-tokens typically have truth-evaluable entities for their literal meanings.
   EVIDENCE: "But a number of philosophers deny this very contention, holding that, with at most a few exceptions, sentence-tokens typically don't have truth-evaluable entities for their literal meanings."

29. VIEW: Even after setting aside cases of presupposition-failure, sentence-tokens do not have truth-evaluable entities for their meanings according to some philosophers.
   EVIDENCE: "So even after we set aside cases of presupposition-failure, such as the one earlier described, sentence-tokens don't have truth-evaluable entities for their meanings."

30. VIEW: Contextualists believe that sentence-tokens typically communicate propositions but require contextual facts to fill in semantic gaps.
   EVIDENCE: "Such authors don't deny that sentence-tokens (or, more accurately, the speech-acts of which those tokens are constituents) do typically communicate propositions; but they hold that, as a rule, facts about the context are needed to ll in gaps in what is semantically encoded in the sentence-tokens themselves."

31. VIEW: Recanati and Travis are proponents of contextualism or radical pragmatics.
   EVIDENCE: "Among such authors are Recanati (1989, 1993, 2004) and Travis (1975), and their viewpoint is sometimes known as ''contextualism'' or ''radical pragmatics.''"

32. VIEW: The meaning of 'Charles is ready' depends on knowing what Charles is ready for.
   EVIDENCE: "Suppose I say ''Charles is ready.'' Unless we know what Charles is ready for, we don't know what has been said."

33. VIEW: The literal meaning of 'that is red' leaves open what has been affirmed about the object's redness.
   EVIDENCE: "Similarly, if I say, indicating some de nite object, ''that is red'', the literal meaning of my sentence-token leaves it open precisely what has been af rmed."

34. VIEW: The standard of redness intended can vary based on the context, affecting the truth of the statement 'that is red'.
   EVIDENCE: "If I am in the house of somebody who abhors red objects and has thus made sure that nothing very red (e.g. a re-engine red balloon) is in her house, then my utterance of ''that is red'' may be true if the object in question is just slightly pinkish, whereas if I am in the house of somebody who loves red objects and has decorated her house with scarlet drapes, burgundy carpets, and so on, then my describing that same object as ''red'' will be false."

35. VIEW: Contextualism holds that these points about the need for context apply to all sentence-tokens, with few exceptions.
   EVIDENCE: "According to contextualism, these points (mutatis mutandis) hold of all sentence-tokens (with a few possible exceptions, e.g. tokens of ''1 + 1=2'')."

36. VIEW: Cappelen and Lepore provide a thorough discussion of contextualism.
   EVIDENCE: "For a thorough and powerful discussion of contextualism see Cappelen and Lepore (2005)."

37. VIEW: Pinker provides a brief but effective discussion of contextualism.
   EVIDENCE: "For a brief but effective discussion of it, see Pinker (2007:107-124)."

38. VIEW: Russell's Theory of Descriptions states that a sentence with the form 'the phi' has a meaning that is a quantified generalization.
   EVIDENCE: "The essence of that theory is given by the contention that: (TD) In virtue of having the form ''. . .the phi. . .'',2a sentence has for its meaning the proposition something x uniquely has phi and. . .x. . .or, if not that exact proposition, then some other, logically equivalent, quanti ed generalization."

39. VIEW: According to Russell's Theory of Descriptions, 'the king of France is bald' means a quantified generalization about the king of France being bald.
   EVIDENCE: "Thus, according to Theory of Descriptions, ''the king of France is bald'' has for its meaning a quanti ed generalization that is either identical or equivalent with:something x is uniquely a king of France; moreover,x is bald."

40. VIEW: If Russell's Theory of Descriptions is correct, 'the king of France' is not a referring term but a quantifier.
   EVIDENCE: "Thus, if that theory is correct, then ''the king of France'' is not a referring term and is instead a quanti er (or, in any case, a quanti er-like expression)."

41. VIEW: The conception of meaning advocated by Quine, Davidson, Dummett, Chomsky, Kaplan, and Soames is not confined to one tradition.
   EVIDENCE: "(It should be pointed out these authors are otherwise often in sharp disagreement with one another concerning foundational semantic matters and that this conception of meaning is therefore not con ned to some one tradition.)"

42. VIEW: Cappelen and Lepore have made a strong case against contextualism.
   EVIDENCE: "Also, as previously indicated, Cappelen and Lepore (2005) have made an extremely strong case against contextualism"

43. VIEW: Pinker has also made a strong case against contextualism.
   EVIDENCE: "as has Pinker (2007:107-124)"

44. VIEW: One can hold that sentence-tokens as a rule do have truth-evaluable entities for their literal meanings without being guilty of sheer dogmatism.
   EVIDENCE: "and therefore one can, without being guilty of sheer dogmatism, hold that sentence-tokens as a rule do have truth-evaluable entities for their literal meanings."

45. VIEW: Searle does not deny that many sentence-tokens typically have complete propositions for their literal meanings.
   EVIDENCE: "Searle (1970:117-136) doesn't deny that many sentence-tokens typically have complete propositions for their literal meanings"

46. VIEW: Searle denies the view that for every sentence the literal meaning can be construed as the meaning it has independently of any context.
   EVIDENCE: "but he does deny ''the view that for every sentence the literal meaning of the sentence can be construed as the meaning it has independently of any context whatever'' (Searle, 1970:117)"

47. VIEW: Searle holds that the notion of literal meaning only has application relative to a set of contextual or background assumptions.
   EVIDENCE: "holding that ''in general, the notion of literal meaning only has application relative to a set of contextual or background assumptions'' (Searle, 1970:117)."

48. VIEW: Some tokens of 'the cat is on the mat' do have truth-evaluable entities for their literal meanings, while others do not.
   EVIDENCE: "So, in Searle's view, even after cases of presupposition- and reference-failure are set aside, some tokens of ''the cat is on the mat'' do, whereas others do not, have truth-evaluable entities for their literal meanings."

49. VIEW: An utterance of 'the cat is on the mat' made in somebody's living room will probably have a determinately true or false proposition for its meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "An utterance, made in somebody's living room, in the presence of a certain cat and a certain mat, will probably have for its meaning a (determinately) true or false proposition"

50. VIEW: The same utterance of 'the cat is on the mat' made in outer space may not have a determinately true or false proposition for its meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "whereas (to use one of Searle's own examples) the same could well fail to hold of such an utterance made in outer space, in a rapidly rotating spaceship, in connection with a cat outside the spaceship that is barely contiguous with the edge of some mat."

51. VIEW: Searle's point is that sentence-tokens have truth-evaluable literal meanings only relative to certain background assumptions.
   EVIDENCE: "Searle's point is not that sentence-tokens don't ever have truth-evaluable literal meanings, but rather they have such meanings only relative to certain background assumptions"

52. VIEW: Searle is not denying that sentences have literal meanings, but that literal meaning is relative to background assumptions.
   EVIDENCE: "Similarly, when I say that the literal meaning of a sentence only has application relative to the coordinate system of our background assumptions, I am not denying that sentences have literal meanings. Literal meaning, though relative, is still literal meaning (Searle, 1970:132)."

53. VIEW: The argument in the paper is consistent with Searle's thesis.
   EVIDENCE: "The argument put forth in this paper is consistent with Searle's thesis"

54. VIEW: The question of whether or to what extent Searle's thesis is correct lies outside the scope of the present paper.
   EVIDENCE: "The question of whether or to what extent Searle's thesis is correct lies outside the scope of the present paper."

55. VIEW: The viewpoints of bona fide contextualists and authors with contextualist leanings have roots in the work of Wittgenstein and Austin.
   EVIDENCE: "Cappelen and Lepore point out that the viewpoints of bona de contextualists (e.g. Travis, 1975) and authors with contextualist leanings (e.g. Searle, 1970) have roots in the work of Wittgenstein (1958) (which was completed and disseminated, though not published, in 1949) and Austin (1953)."

56. VIEW: Proper names are mere labels.
   EVIDENCE: "Supposing, if only for the sake of argument, that proper names are mere labels"

57. VIEW: There is no difficulty accounting for the dramatic communicative differences between sentences like 'Hesperus is identical with Phosphorous' and 'Hesperus is identical with Hesperus' if proper names are mere labels.
   EVIDENCE: "there is no dif culty at all accounting for the dramatic communicative differences between, for example, ''Hesperus is identical with Phosphorous'' and ''Hesperus is identical with Hesperus.''"

58. VIEW: The differences in communication between sentences with different proper names are not due to differences in literal meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "But those differences are to be explained not by supposing that those sentences differ in respect of literal meaning."

59. VIEW: The differences in communication between sentences with different proper names are explained by how people ascertain the literal meanings of sentences.
   EVIDENCE: "Rather, those differences are to be explained in terms of facts about how people ascertain the literal meanings of the sentences that they encounter."

60. VIEW: For any predicate phi, there is no difficulty accounting for the fact that what is communicated by 'Hesperus has phi' may differ dramatically from what is communicated by 'Phosphorous has phi' if proper names are mere labels.
   EVIDENCE: "First, for any predicate phi, supposing that ''Hesperus'' and ''Phosphorous'' are mere labels, there is no dif culty accounting for the fact that what is communicated by ''Hesperus has phi'' may differ dramatically from what is communicated by ''Phosphorous has phi.''"

61. VIEW: What was said about 'Hesperus' and 'Phosphorous' is true for any two co-referring proper names.
   EVIDENCE: "Second, what was just said about ''Hesperus'' and ''Phosphorous'' is true mutatis mutandis of any two co-referring proper names."

62. VIEW: Many apparent threats to extensionality prove to be illusory given the truth of the contentions about proper names being mere labels.
   EVIDENCE: "We will also see why, given the truth of these contentions, many (but not all) apparent threats to extensionality prove to be illusory."

63. VIEW: The remaining threats to extensionality will be dealt with in subsequent sections.
   EVIDENCE: "(The remaining threats will be dealt with in subsequent sections.)"

64. VIEW: The proposition literally meant by 'Smith is a great racquetball player' is 'O is a great racquetball player' if proper names are mere labels.
   EVIDENCE: "Given our supposition that proper names are mere labels, it follows that, for some object O, the proposition literally meant by (7) is: (8) O is a great racquetball player."

65. VIEW: The proposition literally meant by 'Bob is a great racquetball player' is the same as the proposition meant by 'Smith is a great racquetball player' if 'Bob' and 'Smith' are mere labels for the same thing.
   EVIDENCE: "Given that ''Bob'' is a mere label, and that it labels the same thing as ''Smith'', the proposition literally meant by (9) is (8)."

66. VIEW: Sentences 'Smith is a great racquetball player' and 'Bob is a great racquetball player' tell different things under the circumstances described.
   EVIDENCE: "At the same time, under the circumstances, (7) and (9) tell me different things."

67. VIEW: What is learned from 'Smith is a great racquetball player' does not entail, and is not entailed by, what is learned from 'Bob is a great racquetball player'.
   EVIDENCE: "Indeed, what I learn in consequence of being told (7) does not entail, and isn't entailed by, what I learn in consequence of being told (9)."

68. VIEW: It is not possible for 'Smith is a great racquetball player' and 'Bob is a great racquetball player' to tell different things if they have the same literal meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "''But,'' it will be said, ''this isn't possible. (7) and (9) have the same literal meaning. Therefore what I learn from the one must coincide with what I learn from the other."

69. VIEW: The supposed paradox that 'Smith is a great racquetball player' and 'Bob is a great racquetball player' do and do not coincide in what they tell about the world is based on a fallacy.
   EVIDENCE: "The fallacy that underlies this supposed paradox is easily exposed."

70. VIEW: What a sentence communicates to somebody isn't always confined to its literal meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "What an occurrence of a sentence communicates to somebody isn't always con ned to its literal meaning"

71. VIEW: There is a certain person x who uniquely has specific properties and is named 'Smith'.
   EVIDENCE: "There is a certain person x such that x uniquely has such and such properties (viz. yesterday, from a considerable distance, I saw x leaping about in a decidedly athletic manner, and x was wearing a bright-red shirt. . .), and such that ''Smith'' is x's name;"

72. VIEW: Smith is a great racquetball player.
   EVIDENCE: "moreover, x is a great racquetball player."

73. VIEW: The content of the knowledge needed to assign the right meaning to (7) is given by (11).
   EVIDENCE: "the content of the knowledge that I must exploit to assign the right meaning to (7) is given by (11)."

74. VIEW: Sentence (7) communicates (11) to the speaker, despite having (8) as its literal meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "It is thus no wonder that (7) communicates (11) to me, even though it has (8) for its literal meaning."

75. VIEW: What was said about (7) applies to any sentence of the form 'Smith has phi'.
   EVIDENCE: "What we just said about (7) is true mutatis mutandis of any sentence of the form''Smith has phi.''"

76. VIEW: On the day in question, hearing 'Smith is also a ne chess-player' communicates a proposition similar to (12).
   EVIDENCE: "So if, on the day in question, I hear a token of ''Smith is also a ne chess-player'', what is communicated to me is some proposition at least approximately like: (12)"

77. VIEW: The existence-claim used to access the meaning of (7) changes over time.
   EVIDENCE: "Of course, as time passes, the existence-claim through which I access the meaning of (7) necessarily changes."

78. VIEW: Two days after first seeing Smith, the existence-claim for the utterance 'Smith has decided to become a professional chess-player' is not (13) but (14).
   EVIDENCE: "Given obvious extensions of the points already made, the existence-claim through which I assign the right literal meaning to that utterance is not: (13)"
   EVIDENCE: "Rather, it is: (14)"

79. VIEW: There are other reasons why the information used to access the literal meaning of (7) must change over time.
   EVIDENCE: "As we will discuss later, there are other reasons why, with the passage of time, there must be changes in the identity of the information through which I must access the literal meaning of (7)."

80. VIEW: What was said about (7) applies to (9).
   EVIDENCE: "What we just said about (7) is true mutatis mutandisof (9)."

81. VIEW: Hearing the noise 'Bob' and knowing what it refers to are different.
   EVIDENCE: "Hearing the noise ''Bob'' is one thing. Knowing what it refers to is another."

82. VIEW: To fix 'Bob' to the right person, background knowledge must be exploited.
   EVIDENCE: "To af x ''Bob'' to the right person, I must exploit background knowledge."

83. VIEW: The relevant background knowledge for 'Bob' is given by a proposition similar to (15).
   EVIDENCE: "Given the circumstances under which I am rst told to whom ''Bob'' refers (see p. 4), the relevant background knowledge is given by a proposition at least approximately like the following: (15)"

84. VIEW: At the level of semantics, 'Bob' merely labels an individual x without describing it.
   EVIDENCE: "even though there is some individual x such that, at the level of semantics, ''Bob'' merely labels x, and thus doesn't describe it,"

85. VIEW: The information through which the speaker learns that 'Bob' labels x does describe x.
   EVIDENCE: "the information through which I learn that ''Bob'' labels x does describe it."

86. VIEW: Just after shaking hands with Bob, hearing 'Bob is a great racquetball player' communicates a proposition similar to (16).
   EVIDENCE: "Once again, suppose that, just after shaking hands with Bob, I am told: (9) ''Bob is a great racquetball player.'' In that case, for reasons analogous to those given in connection with (7), what is communicated to me will be some proposition along the lines of: (16)"

87. VIEW: Any sentence of the form 'Bob has phi' would communicate a proposition similar to (17) under the described circumstances.
   EVIDENCE: "By obvious extensions of this reasoning, what would be communicated to me, under the circumstances just described, by any sentence of the form ''Bob has phi'' would be: (17)"

88. VIEW: Sentences (7) and (9) have entirely different cognitive values under the described circumstances.
   EVIDENCE: "Thus it is no mystery why, under these circumstances, (7) and (9) should have entirely different cognitive values."

89. VIEW: Sentence (7) communicates (11), while sentence (9) communicates (16).
   EVIDENCE: "(7)communicates(11), whereas (9)communicates(16)."

90. VIEW: Propositions (11) and (16) are completely different and do not entail each other.
   EVIDENCE: "(11) and (16) are completely different propositions. Indeed, neither so much as entails the other."

91. VIEW: The expression 'that snow is white' is neither true nor false.
   EVIDENCE: "But, unlike 'snow is white', 'that snow is white' is neither true nor false."

92. VIEW: The expression 'that snow is white' refers to the proposition semantically encoded in 'snow is white'.
   EVIDENCE: "The latter expression merely refers to a certain proposition, without taking a stand, so to speak, as to its truth or falsity. Just as 'that snow is white' refers to the proposition semantically encoded in 'snow is white'"

93. VIEW: The expression 'that Smith is a great racquetball player' refers to the proposition semantically encoded in 'Smith is a great racquetball player'.
   EVIDENCE: "so (18) 'that Smith is a great racquetball player' refers to the proposition semantically encoded in: (7) 'Smith is a great racquetball player.'"

94. VIEW: The expression 'that Bob is a great racquetball player' refers to the proposition semantically encoded in 'Bob is a great racquetball player'.
   EVIDENCE: "And the expression (19) 'that Bob is a great racquetball player' refers to the proposition semantically encoded in (9) 'Bob is a great racquetball player'"

95. VIEW: Proper names are mere labels.
   EVIDENCE: "Supposing, as we have been, that proper names are mere labels"

96. VIEW: The proposition referred to by both 'that Smith is a great racquetball player' and 'that Bob is a great racquetball player' is 'That O is a great racquetball player'.
   EVIDENCE: "there is some object O such that the proposition referred to by both (18) and (19) is: (20) That O is a great racquetball player."

97. VIEW: The sentence 'Fred believes that Bob is a great racquetball player' attributes the property of being believed by Fred to the proposition 'That O is a great racquetball player'.
   EVIDENCE: "(21) attributes a certain property to a certain proposition. The property is: being believed by Fred and the proposition is (20)."

98. VIEW: The sentence 'Fred believes that Smith is a great racquetball player' attributes the property of being believed by Fred to the proposition 'That O is a great racquetball player'.
   EVIDENCE: "(22) attributes a certain property to a certain proposition. As before, the property is: being believed by Fred and the proposition is (20)."

99. VIEW: The sentences 'Fred believes that Bob is a great racquetball player' and 'Fred believes that Smith is a great racquetball player' semantically encode the same proposition.
   EVIDENCE: "Thus, (21) and (22) semantically encode the very same proposition."

100. VIEW: The sentences 'Fred believes that Bob is a great racquetball player' and 'Fred believes that Smith is a great racquetball player' may differ in truth-value in terms of what they communicate.
   EVIDENCE: "But it is obvious that, under the circumstances earlier described, what (21) communicates may differ in truth-value from what (22) communicates."

101. VIEW: Semantically, 'Bob' is a name.
   EVIDENCE: "We know that semantically 'Bob' is a name."

102. VIEW: Under certain circumstances, sentences containing 'Bob' communicate propositions of the form 'there is a person x such that x uniquely has thus and such characteristics and 'Bob' is x's name'.
   EVIDENCE: "under the circumstances in question, sentences of the form '. . .Bob. . .' communicate propositions of the form: there is a person x such that x uniquely has thus and such characteristics(viz. x is a pudgy and unathletic looking person with whom I shook hands a moment ago...)and 'Bob' is x's name; moreover,...x..."

103. VIEW: Under certain circumstances, 'Bob' acts as a certain kind of existential quantifier.
   EVIDENCE: "Under those circumstances, then, 'Bob' is acting as a certain kind of existential quanti er."

104. VIEW: The quantifier 'Bob' can be given either wide-scope or narrow-scope with respect to 'Fred believes'.
   EVIDENCE: "That quanti er can be given either 'wide-scope' or 'narrow-scope' with respect to 'Fred believes.'"

105. VIEW: The sentence 'Fred believes that Bob is a great racquetball player' is ambiguous between two propositions regarding the scope of the quantifier 'Bob'.
   EVIDENCE: "So, speaking in terms of what (21) communicates (as opposed to what it literally mans), (21) is ambiguous between: (23) Fred believes that: there is a person x such that x uniquely has thus and such characteristics (viz. x is a pudgy and unathletic looking person with whom I shook hands a moment ago. . .) and 'Bob' is x's name and, moreover, x is a great racquetball player. and (24) There is a person x such that x uniquely has thus and such characteristics (viz. x is a pudgy and unathletic looking person with whom I shook hands a moment ago. . .) and 'Bob' is x's name and, moreover, Fred believes that: x is a great racquetball player."

106. VIEW: The expression 'for some king of France x, x is a king of France and such that, for any king of France y, y=x' is a quantifier.
   EVIDENCE: "Each of the underlined expressions is, uncontroversially, a quanti er."

107. VIEW: The expression 'for any object king of France z, z is bald' is a quantifier.
   EVIDENCE: "Each of the underlined expressions is, uncontroversially, a quanti er."

108. VIEW: Definite descriptions are quantifiers or quantifier-like, according to Russell's theory.
   EVIDENCE: "In this context, then, I will (when operating on the assumption that Russell's theory is correct), describe de nite descriptions as ''quanti ers.''"
   EVIDENCE: "It is to be understood that, in so doing, I am speaking elliptically, i.e. that I am saying of them that they are either quanti ers or quanti er-like (in a way that singular terms are not)."

109. VIEW: If Russell's theory is correct, there is much to be said for the view that definite descriptions are quantifiers.
   EVIDENCE: "That said, there is much to be said for the view that, if Russell's theory is right, de nite descriptions arequanti ers."

110. VIEW: The concept of indirect-reference will be discussed in Part III.
   EVIDENCE: "We will see why this is so when, in Part III, we discuss the concept of indirect-reference."

111. VIEW: If definite descriptions are not referring terms, the difference in truth-value between examples (5) and (6) is irrelevant to the question of extensionality.
   EVIDENCE: "If de nite descriptions are not referring terms, then the apparent difference in truth-value between, for example, (5) and (6) is irrelevant to the question whether extensionality is true."

112. VIEW: It cannot be taken for granted that definite descriptions are not referring terms.
   EVIDENCE: "But, of course, it cannot be taken for granted that de nite descriptions are not referring terms."

113. VIEW: To establish extensionality, one must establish either that definite descriptions are not referring terms or that intersubstituting co-referring definite descriptions does not change truth-value.
   EVIDENCE: "So, in order to establish extensionality, one of two contentions would have to be established, namely: (A) De nite descriptions are not referring terms. (B) Even if de nite descriptions are in fact referring terms, intersubstituting co-referring de nite descriptions does not, contrary to initial appearances, change truth-value."

114. VIEW: If contention (B) is correct, then the question of whether contention (A) is correct becomes irrelevant to the question of whether extensionality is correct.
   EVIDENCE: "Of course, if (B) is correct, then the question whether (A) is correct becomes irrelevant to the question whether extensionality is correct."

115. VIEW: The author will argue for contention (B).
   EVIDENCE: "We will thus argue for (B)."

116. VIEW: Even if (5) and (6) have the same literal meaning, there is no difficulty accounting for the fact that they may communicate propositions with different truth-values.
   EVIDENCE: "And we will see that, even if (5) and (6) have the very same literal meaning, there is no dif culty accounting for the fact that they may obviously communicate propositions that have (or might have) different truth-values."

117. VIEW: There are two kinds of referring terms: those that refer directly and those that refer indirectly.
   EVIDENCE: "It is widely held that there are two kinds of referring terms-those that refer ''directly'' and those that refer ''indirectly.''"

118. VIEW: According to Kaplan, when addressing Fred with 'you are tall', the literal meaning is the singular proposition that Fred is tall.
   EVIDENCE: "Suppose that, addressing Fred, I say ''you are tall.'' According to Kaplan (1989a), there is some object x such that x is identical with Fred and such that what is literally meant by my utterance is the singular proposition: x is tall."

119. VIEW: Kaplan's position generalized states that a token of an indexical expression that refers to an object O has a literal meaning that includes O itself as a constituent.
   EVIDENCE: "Appropriately generalized, Kaplan's position amounts to this. Let D be a token of an indexical expression that refers to O. (An indexical is an expression whose referent is a function of the circumstances in which it is uttered. Examples of indexicals are ''I'', ''you'', ''that car'', and ''this bird.'') In that case, in virtue of having the form ''. . .D. . .'', a sentence-token S has for its literal meaning a proposition that has as a constituent O itself-not some Fregean sense, not some concept under which O falls, and not some description that O satis es."

120. VIEW: When using 'you' in a sentence, the proposition encoded includes the person being addressed as a constituent, not a concept under which they fall.
   EVIDENCE: "So if, while speaking to you, I produce a sentence-token of the form ''. . .you. . .'', then in virtue of that fact my utterance encodes a proposition that has you-not a concept that you satisfy, but youper se-as a constituent."

121. VIEW: The concept 'person to whom I am speaking' does not enter into the proposition meant by the utterance of 'you'.
   EVIDENCE: "More exactly, there is some x such that x is identical with you and such that, if I say ''you are tall'', the proposition literally meant by my words is simply: x is tall. The concept person to whom I am speaking does not make it into that proposition; nor does any other concept under which you happen to fall."

122. VIEW: The utterance of 'you' is directly referential.
   EVIDENCE: "My utterance of ''you'' is thus ''directly referential.''"

123. VIEW: The concept 'person to whom I am speaking' plays an important semantic role but does not itself enter into the proposition.
   EVIDENCE: "Of course, the concept person to whom I am speaking plays an important semantic role in this context. But, if Kaplan is right, that role is only to pick out the entity that makes it into the relevant proposition-that concept does not itself do so."

124. VIEW: When pointing to a car and saying 'that must have cost a fortune', the literal meaning is that the car must have cost a fortune.
   EVIDENCE: "To take another example, suppose that I point to some car x and say ''that must have cost a fortune.'' In that case, supposing that Kaplan's position is correct, the literal meaning of my utterance is: x must have cost a fortune."

125. VIEW: The concept 'ostended object' is not part of the literal meaning of the utterance about the car.
   EVIDENCE: "The concept ostended object is no part of the literal meaning of my utterance."

126. VIEW: If definite descriptions are directly referential, intersubstituting them never changes the truth-value of what is literally meant by sentences.
   EVIDENCE: "see that, if de nite descriptions are directly referential, then intersubstituting them never changes the truth-value of what is literally meant by sentences."

127. VIEW: The term 'direct referentialism' refers to the position that definite descriptions are devices of direct reference.
   EVIDENCE: "Let us use the term ''direct referentialism'' to refer to the position that de nite descriptions are devices of direct reference."

128. VIEW: The term 'Russellianism' refers to the position that definite descriptions are not referring terms and are instead quantifiers or quantifier-like expressions as described by Russell.
   EVIDENCE: "And let us use the term ''Russellianism'' to refer to the position that de nite descriptions are not referring terms and are instead quanti ers (or quanti er-like expressions) of the kind that Russell described."

129. VIEW: Direct referentialists agree almost entirely with Russellians.
   EVIDENCE: "Direct referentialists agree almost entirely with Russell."

130. VIEW: Both Russellians and direct referentialists agree that 'the phi' is true if and only if something x uniquely has phi and x satisfies the rest of the sentence.
   EVIDENCE: "In general, Russellians and direct referentialists both agree that ''. . .the phi. . .'' is true iff: something x uniquely has phi and. . .x. . ."

131. VIEW: Russellians and direct referentialists disagree about the semantics of 'the phi'.
   EVIDENCE: "But Russellians and direct referentialists obviouslydodisagree about the semantics of ''. . .the phi. . .''"

132. VIEW: For Russellians, 'the phi' means there is exactly one object O that has phi and O satisfies the rest of the sentence.
   EVIDENCE: "For Russellians, the rule that assigns meaning to ''. . .the phi. . .'' is this: (29)''. . .the phi. . .'' means (30) there is exactly one object O that has phi; moreover,. . .O. . ."

133. VIEW: For direct referentialists, if there is exactly one object O that has phi, then 'the phi' means O satisfies the rest of the sentence.
   EVIDENCE: "For direct referentialists, the rule that assigns meaning to ''. . .the phi. . .'' is this: If there is exactly one object O that has phi, then (29) ''. . .the phi. . .'' means (31)...O..."

134. VIEW: If nothing uniquely has phi, then for direct referentialists, 'the phi' does not bear any proposition and is neither true nor false.
   EVIDENCE: "If nothing uniquely has phi, then (29) doesn't bear any proposition at all and, therefore, is neither true nor false."

135. VIEW: According to the direct referentialist, 'the inventor of bifocals snored' does not encode any proposition if nobody uniquely invented bifocals.
   EVIDENCE: "So according to the direct referentialist, (32) ''the inventor of bifocals snored'' doesn't encode any proposition if nobody uniquely invented bifocals."

136. VIEW: If exactly one person O invented bifocals, then for the direct referentialist, 'the inventor of bifocals snored' means O snored.
   EVIDENCE: "But if exactly one person O invented bifocals, then (32) means: (33) O snored."

137. VIEW: Given that Benjamin Franklin uniquely invented bifocals, the direct referentialist says that 'the inventor of bifocals snored' encodes the proposition that Benjamin Franklin snored.
   EVIDENCE: "So given that, in actuality, Benjamin Franklin uniquely invented bifocals, the direct referentialist says that (32) encodes the proposition: (34) Benjamin Franklin snored."

138. VIEW: According to the Russellian, the proposition encoded in 'the inventor of bifocals snored' is equivalent to 'exactly one object x invented bifocals; moreover, x snored'.
   EVIDENCE: "But according to the Russellian, the proposition encoded in (32) is identical (or at least equivalent) with: (35) exactly one object x invented bifocals; moreover, x snored."

139. VIEW: The direct-referentialist's position and the Russellian's position differ significantly because the propositions they encode do not entail each other.
   EVIDENCE: "Given that (34) doesn't entail (35), and that (35) doesn't entail (34), there thus turns out to be a signi cant difference between the direct-referentialist's position and the Russellian's."

140. VIEW: A consequence of the direct-referentialist's position is that 'Fred believes that the inventor of bifocals snored' encodes the proposition 'Fred believes that O snored' for some object O identical with Benjamin Franklin.
   EVIDENCE: "A consequence of the direct-referentialist's position is that, for some object O (such that, as it happens, O is identical with Benjamin Franklin), (36) ''Fred believes that the inventor of bifocals snored'' encodes the proposition: (37) Fred believes that O snored."

141. VIEW: For the direct referentialist, 'Fred believes that the first postmaster general snored' also has the meaning 'Fred believes that O snored'.
   EVIDENCE: "It follows that, for the direct referentialist, (38) ''Fred believes that the rst postmaster general snored'' also has (37) for its meaning."

142. VIEW: Another consequence of the direct-referentialist's position is that 'Little Timmy believes that the whole number that comes immediately after one is less than three' has the literal meaning 'Little Timmy believes that O is one less than three' for some O identical with the number two.
   EVIDENCE: "Another consequence of the direct-referentialist's position is that, for some O (such that O is identical with the number two), (5) ''Little Timmy believes that the whole number that comes immediately after one is less than three'' has for its literal meaning the proposition: (39) Little Timmy believes that O is one less than three."

143. VIEW: For the direct referentialist, 'Little Timmy believes that the number n such that n is a unique even prime if arithmetic is incomplete and is otherwise a unique positive square root of 71 is less than three' also has the meaning 'Little Timmy believes that O is one less than three'.
   EVIDENCE: "And it follows that, for the direct referentialist, (6) ''Little Timmy believes that the number n such that n is a unique even prime if arithmetic is incomplete and is otherwise a unique positive square root of 71 is less than three. also has (39) for its meaning."

144. VIEW: If direct referentialism is correct, then sentences (5) and (6) coincide in respect of literal meaning and truth-value, as do sentences (36) and (38).
   EVIDENCE: "Thus, if direct referentialism is correct, then (5) and (6) coincide in respect of literal meaning and, therefore, in respect of truth-value, the same being true of (36) and (38)."

145. VIEW: There is a glaring difference in cognitive value between sentences (36) and (38) and also between sentences (5) and (6).
   EVIDENCE: "But, of course, there is a glaring difference in cognitive value between (36) and (38) and also between (5) and (6)."

146. VIEW: An immediate consequence of the direct-referentialist's position is that anyone who understands (32) knows that it isn't either true or false.
   EVIDENCE: "an immediate consequence of the direct-referentialist's position is that anyone who understands (32) knows that it isn't either true or false"

147. VIEW: An immediate consequence of the direct-referentialist's position is that (32) isn't true unless exactly one object x invented bifocals and x snored.
   EVIDENCE: "it isn't true, unless exactly one object x invented bifocals and, moreover, x snored"

148. VIEW: The italicized proposition is identical with (35).
   EVIDENCE: "Notice that the italicized proposition is identical with (35)."

149. VIEW: An immediate consequence of the direct-referentialist's position is that an utterance of (32) will communicate (35).
   EVIDENCE: "an immediate consequence of the direct-referentialist's position is that an utterance of (32) will communicate (35)."

150. VIEW: If the direct referentialist were right, then the semantic rule for (32) would be (NR).
   EVIDENCE: "if the direct referentialist were right, then the semantic rule for (32) would be: (NR) ''The inventor of bifocals snored'' means (or is true iff): Benjamin Franklin snored."

151. VIEW: (NR) is not the right semantic rule.
   EVIDENCE: "But (NR) obviously isn't the right semantic rule."

152. VIEW: What 'the inventor of bifocals' refers to is a function of who invented bifocals.
   EVIDENCE: "What ''the inventor of bifocals'' refers to is a function of who invented bifocals."

153. VIEW: If Smith invented bifocals, then 'the inventor of bifocals' refers to Smith.
   EVIDENCE: "If Smith did so, then ''the inventor of bifocals'' refers to Smith."

154. VIEW: If Jones invented bifocals, then 'the inventor of bifocals' refers to Jones.
   EVIDENCE: "If Jones did so, then it refers to Jones."

155. VIEW: If definite descriptions are devices of reference, then the semantic rule for 'the inventor of bifocals' is that if somebody O uniquely invented bifocals, then 'the inventor of bifocals' refers to O.
   EVIDENCE: "if somebody O uniquely invented bifocals, then ''the inventor of bifocals'' refers to O."

156. VIEW: If definite descriptions are devices of direct reference, then the semantic rule for 'the inventor of bifocals' is that if somebody O uniquely invented bifocals, then 'the inventor of bifocals' refers directly to O.
   EVIDENCE: "if somebody O uniquely invented bifocals, then ''the inventor of bifocals'' refersdirectlyrefers to O."

157. VIEW: If definite descriptions are devices of direct reference, then the semantic rule for 'the inventor of bifocals snored' will be (RF).
   EVIDENCE: "if de nite descriptions are devices of directreference, then the semantic rule for ''the inventor of bifocals snored'' will be (RF)."

158. VIEW: If the direct referentialist is right, a token of (32) will communicate (35).
   EVIDENCE: "if the direct referentialist is right, a token of (32) will communicate (35)."

159. VIEW: When people understand sentences, they do so on the basis of a knowledge of the relevant semantic rules.
   EVIDENCE: "This assumes that, when people understand sentences, they do so on the basis of a knowledge (of some kind or other) of the relevant semantic rules."

160. VIEW: It is not an unreasonable assumption that people understand sentences based on knowledge of semantic rules.
   EVIDENCE: "But this is not an unreasonable assumption."

161. VIEW: People know what the sentence 'if there's an albatross in Greenland, then either coal is purple or owls speak Portuguese' means even if they have never heard it before.
   EVIDENCE: "Consider the sentence: ''if there's an albatross in Greenland, then either coal is purple or owls speak Portuguese.'' You know what that sentence means, even though (we may suppose) you have never heard it before."

162. VIEW: The most plausible way to explain understanding of the sentence about albatrosses, coal, and owls is that people know the relevant semantic rules.
   EVIDENCE: "The most plausible way to explain this is to say that you know the relevant semantic rules: you know the rules that assign meaning to ''Greenland'', ''purple'', and so on; and you also know the rules that assign meanings to complex expressions containing these terms on the basis of the meanings of the latter."

163. VIEW: Chomsky provides powerful arguments for the view that people understand sentences based on knowledge of semantic rules.
   EVIDENCE: "(See Chomsky (1980, 1988) for powerful arguments on behalf of this view.)"

164. VIEW: If the direct-referentialist's position is correct, what is communicated by (40) will be identical or at least equivalent with (41).
   EVIDENCE: "an argument exactly similar to that just given establishes that what is communicated (not literally meant) by: (40) ''the rst postmaster general snored'' will be identical or at least equivalent with: (41) exactly one object x was a unique rst postmaster general; moreover, x snored."

165. VIEW: The direct referentialist holds that for some object O, the bare singular proposition (33) is the literal meaning of (40).
   EVIDENCE: "the direct referentialist does indeed hold that, for some object O, the bare singular proposition: (33) O snored is the literal meaning of (40)"

166. VIEW: Exactly one thing x uniquely invented bifocals, and exactly one thing y was a unique first postmaster general, and x=y.
   EVIDENCE: "exactly one thing x uniquely invented bifocals, and exactly one thing y was a unique rst postmaster general; moreover, x=y."

167. VIEW: Direct referentialism can account for the fact that (42) is non-trivial in terms of what it communicates.
   EVIDENCE: "So direct referentialism has no trouble accounting for the fact that, in terms of what it communicates, (42) is non-trivial."

168. VIEW: According to Russell's theory, either (43) itself, or some proposition logically equivalent with (43), is what is meant by (42).
   EVIDENCE: "Of course, according to Russell's theory, either (43) itself, or some proposition logically equivalent with (43), is what is meant by (42)."

169. VIEW: Direct referentialism has many of the virtues that are ascribed to the Theory of Descriptions.
   EVIDENCE: "We are seeing that direct referentialism has many of the virtues that are ascribed to the Theory of Descriptions."

170. VIEW: Direct referentialism explains why (5) and (6) differ in respect of cognitive value.
   EVIDENCE: "Direct referentialism readily explains why (5) and (6) differ in respect of cognitive value"

171. VIEW: Direct referentialism explains why (42) is non-trivial.
   EVIDENCE: "and also why (42) is non-trivial."

172. VIEW: Direct referentialism accounts for the fact that (5) is ambiguous between wide-scope and narrow-scope readings in terms of what utterances of it communicate.
   EVIDENCE: "Further, direct referentialism readily accounts for the fact that, in terms of what utterances of it communicate, (5) is ambiguous between ''wide- scope'' (de re) and ''narrow-scope'' (de dicto) readings."

173. VIEW: The Theory of Descriptions cannot be preferred to referentialism on the grounds that the latter is inconsistent with the facts concerning what is communicated by sentences containing definite descriptions.
   EVIDENCE: "So if the Theory of Descriptions is to be preferred to referentialism, it cannot, contrary to what is widely assumed, be on the grounds that the latter is inconsistent with the facts concerning what is communicated by sentences containing de nite descriptions"

174. VIEW: Direct referentialism, if correct, is no threat to extensionality.
   EVIDENCE: "But what is important in this context is that direct referentialism, supposing it correct, is no threat to extensionality."

175. VIEW: If direct referentialism is correct, (5) and (6) coincide in respect of literal meaning and truth-value, as do (36) and (38).
   EVIDENCE: "As we saw earlier, if direct referentialism is correct, (5) and (6) coincide in respect of literal meaning, and therefore in respect of truth-value, as do (36) and (38)."

176. VIEW: The view that (5) and (6) must differ in respect of literal meaning due to their differences in what they communicate is misguided.
   EVIDENCE: "But such a view, we have just seen, is quite misguided."

177. VIEW: The direct-referentialist's view is that the sense of a definite description doesn't make it into the proposition meant by the sentence in which that definite description occurs.
   EVIDENCE: "We've considered the direct-referentialist's view, according to which the sense of a de nite description doesn't make it into the proposition meant by the sentence in which that de nite description occurs."

178. VIEW: Definite descriptions are quantifiers according to one view.
   EVIDENCE: "We've also considered the view that de nite descriptions are quanti ers."

179. VIEW: Substitution-failures involving definite descriptions don't threaten extensionality if we focus only on the direct-referentialist and quantifier views.
   EVIDENCE: "And we've seen that, if we focus only these two views, then substitution-failures involving de nite descriptions don't threaten extensionality."

180. VIEW: There is a third possibility to consider, that definite descriptions are devices of indirect reference, which was Frege's view.
   EVIDENCE: "But there is a third possibility to consider, viz. that de nite descriptions are devices of indirect reference. (This was Frege's view.)"

181. VIEW: The indirect referentialist says that 'the inventor of bifocals' refers to Benjamin Franklin.
   EVIDENCE: "First, ''the inventor of bifocals'' refers to Benjamin Franklin."

182. VIEW: The indirect referentialist rejects Russell's Theory of Descriptions.
   EVIDENCE: "(Thus, the indirect referentialist rejects Russell's Theory of Descriptions.)"

183. VIEW: The proposition literally meant by (32) does not have Benjamin Franklin himself as a constituent but has a concept under which Benjamin Franklin uniquely falls.
   EVIDENCE: "But the proposition literally meant by (32) does not have Benjamin Franklin himself as a constituent. Rather that proposition has as a constituent some concept (or ''sense'', as Frege put it) under which Benjamin Franklin uniquely falls."

184. VIEW: If a sentence S has the form '...the inventor of bifocals...', then S encodes a proposition that has as a constituent a concept C such that the referent of 'the inventor of bifocals' satisfies C.
   EVIDENCE: "More generally, according to the indirect referentialist, if a sentence S has the form ''. . .the inventor of bifocals. . .'', then in virtue of that fact S encodes a proposition that has as a constituent a concept C such that the referent of ''the inventor of bifocals'' satis es C."

185. VIEW: If a sentence S has the form '...the phi...', then S encodes a proposition that has as a constituent a concept C such that the referent of 'the phi' satisfies C.
   EVIDENCE: "Even more generally, if a sentence S has the form ''. . .the phi. . .'',then in virtue of that fact S encodes a proposition that has as a constituent a concept C such that the referent of ''the phi'' satis es C."

186. VIEW: P is true in world w if O snored
   EVIDENCE: "world w, P is true in w just in case O snored"

187. VIEW: P is true if (33) is true
   EVIDENCE: "P is true just in case (33) is true"

188. VIEW: P and (33) could be identical
   EVIDENCE: "This, of course, is consistent with the supposition that P and (33) are identical."

189. VIEW: The proposition meant by (44) is true if Benjamin Franklin snored
   EVIDENCE: "the proposition meant by (44) is true in any possible world just in case Benjamin Franklin snored in that world"

190. VIEW: There is an object O such that O is Benjamin Franklin
   EVIDENCE: "There is some object O (such that O is Benjamin Franklin)"

191. VIEW: The proposition meant by any sentence S with 'Benjamin Franklin' is true if O has property x
   EVIDENCE: "the proposition meant by S is true in a world W just in case. . .O. . .(i.e. just in case O has property. . .x. . .)"

192. VIEW: 'Benjamin Franklin' refers to Benjamin Franklin
   EVIDENCE: "we know that ''Benjamin Franklin'' is a paradigm-case of an expression that refers to Benjamin Franklin"

193. VIEW: 'Benjamin Franklin' directly refers to Benjamin Franklin
   EVIDENCE: "It is also a paradigm-case of an expression that directly refers to Benjamin Franklin."

194. VIEW: The proposition meant by (32) is true in many worlds where (33) is false if the indirect referentialist is right
   EVIDENCE: "If the indirect referentialist is right, then the proposition meant by (32) is true in many worlds where (33) is false"

195. VIEW: The proposition meant by (32) is false in many worlds where (33) is true if the indirect referentialist is right
   EVIDENCE: "it is false in many worlds where (33) is true"

196. VIEW: PIR is true in exactly the same worlds as PTD
   EVIDENCE: "PIRis true in exactly the same worlds as PTD"

197. VIEW: PIR being true in the same worlds as PTD does not show they are identical
   EVIDENCE: "Of course, this last point does not by itself show that PIRis identical with PTD"

198. VIEW: PIR being true in the same worlds as PTD suggests PIR is a quantified generalization
   EVIDENCE: "But it does strongly suggest, if it doesn't outright entail, that PIRis identical with some quanti ed generalization"

199. VIEW: There are semantic similarities between indirect reference and quantification
   EVIDENCE: "there are many semantic similarities between indirect reference (so-called) and quanti cation"

200. VIEW: There are no significant semantic differences between indirect reference and quantification
   EVIDENCE: "in fact, there don't seem to be any signi cant semantic differences between them"

201. VIEW: There are semantic differences between expressions that directly refer and those that refer indirectly
   EVIDENCE: "there are clear semantic differences between, on the one hand, expressions that are clearly devices of reference (e.g. ''Benjamin Franklin'') and, on the other hand, expressions that refer ''indirectly.''"

202. VIEW: PIR is not significantly different from PTD from a proof-theoretic standpoint
   EVIDENCE: "from a proof-theoretic standpoint, PIRis not signi cantly different from PTD"

203. VIEW: PTD and PIR entail and are entailed by the same propositions
   EVIDENCE: "each entails, and is entailed by, exactly the same propositions as the other"

204. VIEW: PTD and PIR are equivalent
   EVIDENCE: "not only are PTDand PIRequivalent"

205. VIEW: PTD and PIR coincide in respect of their fine-grained inferential properties
   EVIDENCE: "they seem to coincide in respect of their more ne-grained inferential properties"

206. VIEW: A quantifier is an expression that answers a question of the form 'how many phi's are psi's?'
   EVIDENCE: "general, a quanti er is an expression that, when embedded in a sentence, answers a question of the form ''how many phi's are psi's?''"

207. VIEW: If the indirect referentialist is right, (32) is logically equivalent to the proposition that exactly one thing invented bifocals and any such thing is tall
   EVIDENCE: "If the indirect referentialist is right, (32) is logically equivalent with the proposition: exactly one thing invented bifocals, and any such thing is tall."

208. VIEW: If the indirect referentialist is right, (32) answers the question 'how many things are bifocal-inventors?'
   EVIDENCE: "So, if the indirect referentialist is right, then (32) answers two questions of the form ''how many phi's are psi's?''It answers the question: ''how many things are bifocal-inventors?''"

209. VIEW: If the indirect referentialist is right, (32) answers the question 'how many bifocal-inventors snored?'
   EVIDENCE: "and it also answers the question ''how many bifocal-inventors snored?''"

210. VIEW: If the indirect referentialist is right, 'the inventor of bifocals' is quantifier-like in some important respects
   EVIDENCE: "So if the indirect referentialist is right, ''the inventor of bifocals'' would seem, at the very least, to be quanti er-like in some important respects"

211. VIEW: If the indirect referentialist is right, the semantics of 'the inventor of bifocals' is extremely similar to the semantics that the Russellian ascribes to it
   EVIDENCE: "What we are seeing is that, if the indirect referentialist is right, the semantics of ''the inventor of bifocals'' is, at the very least, extremely similar to the semantics that the Russellian ascribes to it."

212. VIEW: If the indirect referentialist is right, 'the inventor of bifocals' is semantically very different from any instance of an expression that clearly refers to Benjamin Franklin
   EVIDENCE: "We are also seeing that, if the indirect referentialist is right, ''the inventor of bifocals'' is semantically very different from any instance of an expression that clearly refers to Benjamin Franklin"

213. VIEW: Clear-cut cases of reference have significant similarities with cases of indirect reference
   EVIDENCE: "Of course, it would be an overstatement to say that clear-cut cases of reference have no signi cant similarities with cases of indirect reference."

214. VIEW: Similarities between clear-cut cases of reference and clear-cut cases of quantification give no more weight to the position that definite descriptions are devices of reference than they do to the position that they are quantifiers
   EVIDENCE: "But to the extent that there are such similarities, those same similarities are also found between clear- cut cases of reference, on the one hand, and clear-cut cases of quanti cation, on the other. For that reason, those similarities give no more weight to the position that de nite descriptions are devices of reference than they do to the position that they are quanti ers."

215. VIEW: A complete sentence can be formed by replacing the variable 'x' in 'x snored' with either 'Benjamin Franklin' or 'the inventor of bifocals'
   EVIDENCE: "Given the open sentence ''x snored'',a complete sentence can be formed by replacing the variable with either ''Benjamin Franklin'' or ''the inventor of bifocals.''"

216. VIEW: The fact that a well-formed sentence results when 'Benjamin Franklin' replaces the variable is to be understood in terms of the semantics of 'Benjamin Franklin'
   EVIDENCE: "By parity of reasoning, the fact that a well-formed sentence results when ''Benjamin Franklin'' replaces the variable is to be understood, at least up to a point, in terms of the semantics of ''Benjamin Franklin.''"

217. VIEW: The semantic job of 'Benjamin Franklin' is to pick out some entity or other
   EVIDENCE: "More precisely, it is to be understood, up to a point, in terms of the fact that the semantic job of ''Benjamin Franklin'' is to pick out some entity or other."

218. VIEW: The exact identity of the entity picked out by 'Benjamin Franklin' is irrelevant in this context
   EVIDENCE: "Of course, it is relevant in this context is that ''Benjamin Franklin'' pick out some entity or other; the exact identity of that entity is irrelevant."

219. VIEW: Replacing the variable with a quantifier like 'some person' results in a meaningful sentence
   EVIDENCE: "After all, a meaningful sentence results if the variable is replaced with a quanti er (e.g. ''some person'')."

220. VIEW: The expression 'and snores' is meaningless when taken as a complete utterance
   EVIDENCE: "Taken as a complete utterance, the expression ''and snores'' is meaningless."

221. VIEW: The reason 'and snores' is meaningless is that 'and' doesn't combine with 'snores' in the right way
   EVIDENCE: "The reason is that ''and'' doesn't combine with ''snores'' in the right way: it has the wrong combinatorial properties-the wrong syntax, in other words."

222. VIEW: 'The inventor of bifocals' and 'Benjamin Franklin' have similar combinatorial-syntactic properties
   EVIDENCE: "And the reason that both ''the inventor of bifocals snored'' and ''Benjamin Franklin snored'' are meaningful is that ''the inventor of bifocals'' and ''Benjamin Franklin'' do have similar combinatorial-syntactic properties"

223. VIEW: The reason 'the inventor of bifocals snored' and 'Benjamin Franklin snored' are meaningful is not that they have similar semantic properties
   EVIDENCE: "the reason is not that they have the similar semantic properties."

224. VIEW: 'Some man' has the right syntactic properties to form a meaningful sentence like 'some man snored'
   EVIDENCE: "After all, ''some man'', no less than ''Benjamin Franklin'', has the right syntactic properties (''some man snored'' is no less meaningful than ''Benjamin Franklin snored'')."

225. VIEW: 'Some man' is semantically very different from any singular term
   EVIDENCE: "And if Russell and Frege have taught us anything, it is that ''some man'' is semantically very different from any singular term."

226. VIEW: If E occurs in S, then S contains a sentence that answers a question of the form 'how many phi's are psi's?'
   EVIDENCE: "if E occurs in S, then S ipso facto contains a sentence that answers a question of the form ''how many phi's are psi's?''"

227. VIEW: The definition of a quantifier, though an improvement on McCawley's, still falls short
   EVIDENCE: "This de nition, though an improvement on McCawley's, still falls short"

228. VIEW: The reason the definition falls short is that it deals only with sentences in the indicative mood
   EVIDENCE: "the reason being that it deals only with sentences in the indicative mood"

229. VIEW: The sentence 'are some people are happy?' doesn't answer any question of the form 'how many phi's are psi's?'
   EVIDENCE: "The sentence ''are some people are happy?'' doesn't answer any question of the form ''how many phi's are psi's?''"

230. VIEW: The sentence 'are some people are happy?' doesn't answer any question because it is itself a question
   EVIDENCE: "since it doesn't answer any question, given that it is itself a question"

231. VIEW: The proposition encoded in the sentence 'are some people are happy?' does answer a question of the form 'how many phi's are psi's?'
   EVIDENCE: "But the proposition encoded in (though not af rmed by) that sentence does answer such a question"

232. VIEW: The proposition encoded in the sentence 'are some people are happy?' is that some people are happy
   EVIDENCE: "that proposition being: that some people are happy"

233. VIEW: A quantifier is an expression E such that, if a sentence S contains E, S encodes a proposition that answers a question of the form 'how many phi's are psi's?'
   EVIDENCE: "Thus, a quanti er is an expression E such that, if a sentence S contains E, S ipso facto encodes (though it doesn't necessarily af rm) a proposition that answers a question of the form ''how many phi's are psi's?''"

234. VIEW: The similarities between 'the inventor of bifocals' and other expressions are syntactic, not semantic, in nature
   EVIDENCE: "''the inventor of bifocals'' seem to be syntactic, not semantic, in nature"

235. VIEW: Given that reference is a semantic function, the syntactic similarities do not support the contention that 'the inventor of bifocals' is anything other than a quantifier
   EVIDENCE: "But given that reference is a semantic function, those similarities don't support the contention that ''the inventor of bifocals'' (supposing, as we momentarily are, that it is a device of indirect reference) is anything other than a quanti er"

236. VIEW: Indirect referentialism is committed to an incoherent semantic view
   EVIDENCE: "Why indirect referentialism is committed to an incoherent semantic view"

237. VIEW: Indirect reference is identical with Russellian quantification
   EVIDENCE: "There is yet another reason to think that indirect reference (so-called) is identical with Russellian quanti cation"

238. VIEW: Indirect referentialism is merely a confused version of Russellianism
   EVIDENCE: "that, more precisely, indirect referentialism is merely a confused version of Russellianism"

239. VIEW: The essence of the indirect-referentialist's position is that a sentence S has for its meaning a proposition that has as one of its constituents a concept that O uniquely satisfies
   EVIDENCE: "Remember that the essence of the indirect-referentialist's position is as follows (it is to be supposed that O is the one and only object having property phi): In virtue of having the form ''. . .the phi. . .'', a sentence S has for its meaning a proposition that has as one of its constituents, not O itself, but rather some concept that O uniquely satis es, that concept being: unique instance of phi"

240. VIEW: Indirect referentialism, taken in conjunction with the principle of compositionality, has extremely counterintuitive consequences
   EVIDENCE: "We know from Frege that, taken in conjunction with an extremely plausible semantic principle, indirect referentialism has some extremely counterintuitive consequences"

241. VIEW: The principle of compositionality states that the meaning of a complex expression is a function of the meanings of its constituents
   EVIDENCE: "The principle in question is this: the meaning of a complex expression is a function of the meanings of its constituents"

242. VIEW: Special compositionality states that the referent of a complex referring term is a function of the referents of its constituents
   EVIDENCE: "A related principle is that the referent of a complex referring term is a function of the referents of its constituents"

243. VIEW: Compositionality and special compositionality are extremely plausible principles
   EVIDENCE: "Obviously compositionality and special compositionality are extremely plausible principles"

244. VIEW: The indirect referentialist holds that 'the inventor of bifocals' and 'the first postmaster general' are referring terms that co-refer given certain historical facts
   EVIDENCE: "The indirect referentialist (unlike the Russellian) holds that ''the inventor of bifocals'' and ''the rst postmaster general'' are referring terms and that, given certain facts about history, they therefore co-refer"

245. VIEW: If indirect referentialism is right, then 'Fred believes that the inventor of bifocals snored' and 'Fred believes that the first postmaster general snored' differ in meaning and potentially in truth-value
   EVIDENCE: "As we've noted, if indirect referentialism is right, then: (36) ''Fred believesthat the inventor of bifocals snored'' and (38) ''Fred believes that the rst postmaster general snored'' differ in meaning and also (potentially) in truth-value"

246. VIEW: Galileo's words mean the same in different contexts
   EVIDENCE: "'Galileo said that,' mean anything other than is their wont when they come in other environments.'"

247. VIEW: Davidson argues that Frege's view is inconsistent with the learnability of languages
   EVIDENCE: "Davidson argues (cogently, in my opinion) that Frege's view is inconsistent with the fact that languages are learnable."

248. VIEW: A sentence with the form '...the phi...' has a meaning related to something uniquely having phi
   EVIDENCE: "In virtue of having the form ''. . .the phi. . .'',a sentence has for its meaning the proposition something O uniquely has phi and. . .O. . .or, if that not exact proposition, then some other, logically equivalent, quanti ed generalization."

249. VIEW: The Theory of Descriptions has a single rule for the semantics of definite descriptions
   EVIDENCE: "One virtue of the Theory of Descriptions is that there is some one rule (namely TD) such that, given any occurrence of a given de nite description, the semantics of that occurrence is given by that rule."

250. VIEW: Russell's theory applies a single rule to the semantics of 'the inventor of bifocals' across different sentences
   EVIDENCE: "So, for example, Russell's theory has the virtue that there is some one rule such that the semantics of the occurrence of ''the inventor of bifocals'' in each of (32), (36), (46), and (47) is given by that rule."

251. VIEW: A sentence containing 'the phi' within the scope of an operator can be assigned multiple meanings by TD
   EVIDENCE: "In that case, (TD) assigns (at least) two different meanings to S and Russell's theory thus says that S is ambiguous between those two meanings."

252. VIEW: Russell's theory suggests that sentence (36) is ambiguous between two meanings
   EVIDENCE: "For example, as we've discussed, if Russell's theory is right, then (36) is ambiguous between (36WS) and (36NS)."

253. VIEW: There is a single rule for understanding the semantics of definite descriptions despite potential ambiguity
   EVIDENCE: "But this doesn't mean that, if Russell's theory is right, there is not some one rule in terms of which the semantics of occurrences of de nite descriptions can be understood."

254. VIEW: Indirect referentialism implies that 'the inventor of bifocals' refers to different things in different sentences
   EVIDENCE: "We've seen that, if that doctrine is right, then ''the inventor of bifocals'' refers to one thing in (32), a second thing in (36), a third thing in (47), and so on."

255. VIEW: Indirect referentialism posits a single rule for how the truth-conditions of a sentence are affected by a definite description
   EVIDENCE: "If indirect referentialism is right, then given any occurrence O of ''the inventor of bifocals'' in any sentence S, there is somesinglerule saying how S's truth-conditions are affected by virtue of its containing O."

256. VIEW: A sentence with the form '...the phi...' under indirect referentialism has the concept phi as a constituent
   EVIDENCE: "As we've noted, if indirect referentialism is right, then in virtue of having the form ''. . .the phi. . .'' a sentence S has the conceptphias a constituent and, further, S is true just in case something O uniquely instantiatesphi and. . .O. . ."

257. VIEW: Indirect referentialism's rule (IR) states that a sentence's literal meaning is true if something uniquely has phi
   EVIDENCE: "(IR) In virtue of having the form ''. . .the phi. . .'',a sentence has for its literal meaning a proposition that is true just in case something O uniquely has phi and, moreover,. . .O. . ."

258. VIEW: Sentences containing definite descriptions can be ambiguous under indirect referentialism
   EVIDENCE: "Of course, if (IR) is a correct characterization of the semantics of de nite descriptions, then some sentences containing de nite descriptions are, in virtue of that fact, ambiguous."

259. VIEW: Indirect referentialism maintains a single rule for the semantics of definite descriptions despite potential ambiguity
   EVIDENCE: "But (to echo what we said a moment ago) this doesn't mean that, if indirect referentialism is correct, there is not some one rule in terms of which the semantics of any occurrence of a de nite descriptions is to be understood."

260. VIEW: Indirect referentialism implies that 'the inventor of bifocals' has the same semantic effect across different sentences
   EVIDENCE: "So if indirect referentialism is right, there is some one rule that correctly characterizes the semantics of the occurrence of ''the inventor of bifocals'' in (32), and that also correctly characterizes the semantics of the corresponding occurrences in (36), (46), and (47)."

261. VIEW: The propositions meant by (36) are identical with either (36WS) or (36NS), or any other quantified generalization.
   EVIDENCE: "the propositions that, in his view, are meant by (36) are identical with either (36WS) or with (36NS), or indeed with any other quanti ed generalization."

262. VIEW: The essence of the author's position is that definite descriptions are referring terms, not quantifiers.
   EVIDENCE: "For the essence of his position is that de nite descriptions are referring terms, not quanti ers."

263. VIEW: Indirect referentialists hold that the propositions meant by (36) are logically equivalent with quantified generalizations.
   EVIDENCE: "But, as we've observed, the indirect referentialist holds that, nonetheless, the propositions meant, in his view, by (36) are logically equivalent with quanti ed generalizations of the kind just described."

264. VIEW: No two of the sentences discussed have the same meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "Of course, no two of those sentences have the same meaning."

265. VIEW: The difference in meaning between sentences is not due to 'the inventor of bifocals' doing different semantic work in those sentences.
   EVIDENCE: "But that isn't because, semantically, ''the inventor of bifocals'' is doing different things in those sentences."

266. VIEW: The phrase 'the inventor of bifocals' does the same semantic work in all sentences despite shifts in the surrounding verbiage.
   EVIDENCE: "It is, on the contrary, because it is doing the same semantic work in all of those sentences despite the shifts in the verbiage anking it."

267. VIEW: The word 'Tom' has the same meaning in both 'Tom is tall' and 'Tom is lonely'.
   EVIDENCE: "The word ''Tom'' has the same meaning in both ''Tom is tall'' and ''Tom is lonely.''"

268. VIEW: It would be absurd to conclude that the semantics of 'Tom' in one sentence is different from its semantics in another sentence.
   EVIDENCE: "But it would be absurd to conclude on that account that the semantics of ''Tom'' in the one sentence wasn't identical with its semantics in the other."

269. VIEW: The semantics of 'the inventor of bifocals' is the same across sentences (32), (36), (47), and (48).
   EVIDENCE: "What we just said about ''Tom'' vis-a`-vis those two sentences holds with respect to ''the inventor of bifocals'' vis-a`-vis sentences (32), (36), (47) and (48)."

270. VIEW: Two expression-occurrences can be semantically identical but referentially distinct.
   EVIDENCE: "the referential facts: two expression-occurrences can be semantically identical but referentially distinct."

271. VIEW: The view that the semantics of an expression can change without changing is absurd.
   EVIDENCE: "But, given that reference is a semantic function par excellence, that amounts to the absurd view that the semantics of an expression can change without changing."

272. VIEW: For 'Benjamin Franklin' to refer to an object O, it is necessary that sentences of the form 'Benjamin Franklin has phi' attribute phi to O.
   EVIDENCE: "So for ''Benjamin Franklin'' to refer to O, it is surely necessary that sentences of the form ''Benjamin Franklin has phi'' attribute phi to O."

273. VIEW: For 'Benjamin Franklin' to refer to an object O, it is sufficient that sentences of the form 'Benjamin Franklin has phi' attribute phi to O.
   EVIDENCE: "It is also suf cient. Suppose (what is in fact true) that, in virtue of having the form, ''Benjamin Franklin has phi'' a sentence attributed phi to O."

274. VIEW: The concept of reference involves occurrences of an expression affecting the truth-conditions or meanings of sentences.
   EVIDENCE: "But they give some weight to the idea (implicit in the work of Frege (1956, 1974) and Tarski (1983), and explicitly stated by Dummett (1973), Tughendat (1970), and others) that for E to refer to O is for it to be the case that occurrences of E have certain effects on the truth- conditions (or meanings) of sentences comprising those occurrences."

275. VIEW: If indirect referentialism is correct, two expression-occurrences can have the same effect on the truth-conditions of their host-sentences but refer to different things.
   EVIDENCE: "We've seen that, if indirect referentialism is correct, then two expression-occurrences can have the very same effect on the truth-conditions of their host-sentences and yet refer to completely different things."

276. VIEW: If indirect referentialism is correct, what an expression refers to is independent of its semantic function.
   EVIDENCE: "Thus, if indirect referentialism is correct, what an expression refers to is independent of what it is doing semantically, and reference therefore isn't xed by semantics."

277. VIEW: The position that reference is not fixed by semantics is absurd.
   EVIDENCE: "But, to echo what we said earlier, such a position borders on absurdity, given that nothing is more distinctively semantic than reference."

278. VIEW: Indirect referentialism is similar to Russell's Theory of Descriptions.
   EVIDENCE: "Notice how similar (IR) is to (TD). This is consistent with our point that indirect referentialism is really just a form of Russell's Theory of Descriptions."

279. VIEW: Russell's theory has a distinct advantage over indirect referentialism because it denies that 'the inventor of bifocals' is a referring term.
   EVIDENCE: "But Russell's theory has a distinct advantage over indirect referentialism. Russell's theory denies that ''the inventor of bifocals'' is a referring term."

280. VIEW: Russell's theory does not require special compositionality to hold that 'the inventor of bifocals' refers to different things in different sentences.
   EVIDENCE: "So Russell's theory is not required by special compositionality to hold that ''the inventor of bifocals'' refers to one thing in (32), a second thing in (36), and so on."

281. VIEW: The fact that terms would change meaning and truth-value does not threaten extensionality.
   EVIDENCE: "terms would change meaning and truth-value, that fact does not threaten extensionality."

282. VIEW: Indirect referentialism is a conflation of several distinct notions.
   EVIDENCE: "Indirect referentialism a con ation of several distinct notions"

283. VIEW: The idea that definite descriptions are devices of indirect reference is an incoherent synthesis of estimable views.
   EVIDENCE: "The idea that de nite descriptions are devices of indirect reference is an incoherent synthesis of a number of otherwise estimable views."

284. VIEW: The semantics of 'the king of France is bald' is such that an utterance is true if there is exactly one king of France who is bald at the time of utterance.
   EVIDENCE: "The semantics of ''the king of France is bald'' is obviously such that an utterance of that sentence is true just in case, at the time of utterance, there is exactly one king of France x and, moreover, x be bald."

285. VIEW: Anyone who understands the sentence 'the king of France is bald' knows that its truth depends on the italicized proposition being true.
   EVIDENCE: "So anyone who knows the semantics of that sentence, i.e. anyone who understands it, knows that an utterance of it is true just in case the same holds of the italicized proposition, a consequence being that such an utterance communicates that proposition."

286. VIEW: Utterances of the form '...the phi...' communicate a proposition that is true if the concept phi is uniquely instantiated by some object O.
   EVIDENCE: "In general, an utterance of ''. . .the phi. . .'' communicates a proposition that is true just in case the concept (or property) phi is uniquely instantiated by some object O and...O. . ."

287. VIEW: The fact that utterances of the form '...the phi...' communicate certain propositions has a semantic basis.
   EVIDENCE: "And this fact about what such utterances communicate obviously has a semantic basis."

288. VIEW: It is reasonable to take the view that what is literally meant by an utterance of the form '...the phi...' is equivalent to an existence-claim.
   EVIDENCE: "Given only these facts, it seems reasonable, if not positively de rigueur, to take the view that what is literally meant by such an utterance is equivalent with an existence-claim of the kind just described."

289. VIEW: A sentence of the form '...the phi...' has for its literal meaning a proposition with the property phi as a constituent.
   EVIDENCE: "And given that view, it readily follows that, in virtue of having the form of ''. . .the phi. . .'',a sentence has for its literal meaning a proposition having as a constituent the property phi."

290. VIEW: The sentence '(32)' has for its literal meaning a proposition with a property that Benjamin Franklin uniquely instantiates as a constituent, not Benjamin Franklin himself.
   EVIDENCE: "It follows, for example, that (32) has for its literal meaning a proposition having as a constituent, not Benjamin Franklin himself, but rather some property (or concept) that he uniquely instantiates."

291. VIEW: Definite descriptions seem very much to be devices of reference.
   EVIDENCE: "Then there is the fact that de nite descriptions seem very much to be devices of reference."

292. VIEW: It is hard to believe that 'the number that is identical with two' does not refer to the number two.
   EVIDENCE: "It is hard to believe that ''the number that is identical with two'' (or simply ''the number two'') doesn't refer to the number two."

293. VIEW: The facts described rule out direct referentialism.
   EVIDENCE: "The facts described in the second to last paragraph seem to rule out direct referentialism."

294. VIEW: The fact described rules out Russell's Theory of Descriptions.
   EVIDENCE: "The fact described in the paragraph just before this one rules out Russell's Theory of Descriptions."

295. VIEW: Out of the three possibilities for what definite descriptions could be, only indirect reference seems to be on the right side of the points made.
   EVIDENCE: "Out of the three possibilities as to what de nite J.-M. Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 42 (2010) 2314-23462331 descriptions could be-devices of direct reference, devices of indirect reference, and quanti ers-only the second seems to be on the right side of the points made in the last two paragraphs."

296. VIEW: Indirect referentialism seems to be a highly reasonable semantic position.
   EVIDENCE: "Indirect referentialism thus seems to be a highly reasonable semantic position."

297. VIEW: Indirect referentialism, so far as it isn't incoherent, collapses into Russell's theory.
   EVIDENCE: "But we saw that, so far as it isn't incoherent, indirect referentialism collapses into Russell's theory."

298. VIEW: There must be a non-sequitur in the argument presented.
   EVIDENCE: "This shows that there must be a non-sequitur in the argument just presented."

299. VIEW: The non-sequitur in the argument is not hard to identify.
   EVIDENCE: "Given what we said earlier, that non-sequitur is not to hard to identify."

300. VIEW: While a sentence S communicates a proposition, it does not follow that such a proposition is what is literally meant by S.
   EVIDENCE: "While it is true that S communicates a proposition of the kind earlier described, and while it is true that this fact has a basis in the semantics of that sentence, it doesn't follow such a proposition is what is literally meant by S."

301. VIEW: (49) does entail (51)
   EVIDENCE: "We have seen that, contrary to what Quine assumes, (49) does entail (51)."

302. VIEW: There is some x such that x is identical with Venus and is therefore identical with each of Hesperus and Phosphorous
   EVIDENCE: "After all, there is some x (such that x is identical with Venus and is therefore identical with each of Hesperus and Phosphorous)"

303. VIEW: Both sentences encode the proposition: x is lovely
   EVIDENCE: "such that both sentences encode the proposition: x is lovely."

304. VIEW: (49) and (51) may communicate propositions that differ in truth-value
   EVIDENCE: "We have also seen why, that fact notwithstanding, (49) and (51) may communicate propositions that differ in truth-value."

305. VIEW: Kaplan had in mind points similar to these when he wrote about Fregean sinn
   EVIDENCE: "I believe that Kaplan (1989b:560) had in mind points similar to these when he wrote: Fregean sinn con ates elements of two quite different notions of meaning."

306. VIEW: Fregean sinn con ates elements of two quite different notions of meaning
   EVIDENCE: "Fregean sinn con ates elements of two quite different notions of meaning."

307. VIEW: One notion of meaning is character, which is close to the idea of linguistic meaning
   EVIDENCE: "One, which I called character, is close to the idea of linguistic meaning (and perhaps of cognitive content)."

308. VIEW: Another notion of meaning is content, which is what is said by an expression in a particular context of use
   EVIDENCE: "Another, which I call content, is what is said by an expression in a particular context of use."

309. VIEW: The content of an utterance of a complete sentence-token is a truth-bearing proposition
   EVIDENCE: "The content of an utterance of a complete [sentence-token] is a truth-bearing proposition."

310. VIEW: Where indexicals are involved, the difference between character and content is quite clear
   EVIDENCE: "Where indexicals are involved, the difference between character and content is quite clear."

311. VIEW: Quine does not adopt the Fregean view that 'Hesperus' and 'Phosphorous' refer to their respective senses in epistemic and modal contexts
   EVIDENCE: "Quine does not, at least not in this context, adopt the Fregean view that ''Hesperus'' and ''Phosphorous'' refer to their respective senses, and thus don't co-refer, in epistemic and modal contexts."

312. VIEW: Kaplan's alternative to Quine's analysis depends on the assumption that names are synonymous with definite descriptions
   EVIDENCE: "Kaplan's (1968) alterative to Quine's analysis depends on the assumption, shown by Kripke (1980) to be false, that names are synonymous with de nite descriptions."

313. VIEW: The assumption that names are synonymous with definite descriptions is false
   EVIDENCE: "shown by Kripke (1980) to be false, that names are synonymous with de nite descriptions."

314. VIEW: Kaplan's attempt to produce a Kripke-friendly alternative to Quine's analysis is not only false but also incoherent
   EVIDENCE: "Kaplan's (1986)attempt to produce a Kripke-friendly alternative to Quine's analysis is not only false but also incoherent, since an essential part of it is the tautologically false contention that extensional contexts are substitution-intolerant."

315. VIEW: An essential part of Kaplan's attempt is the tautologically false contention that extensional contexts are substitution-intolerant
   EVIDENCE: "since an essential part of it is the tautologically false contention that extensional contexts are substitution-intolerant."

316. VIEW: Quine believes that modal concepts are incoherent and that the use of modal connectives has no place in coherent discourse
   EVIDENCE: "Quine believes that modal concepts (e.g. the concept of necessity) are incoherent and that the use of modal connectives (e. g. ''necessarily'') therefore has no place in coherent discourse."

317. VIEW: If (52) is meaningful, it is true
   EVIDENCE: "There is little doubt that, if it is meaningful, (52) is true."

318. VIEW: (52) is true because 9 has the property expressed by the open sentence (53)
   EVIDENCE: "Supposing that (52) is in fact true, that is because 9 has the property expressed by the open sentence: (53) ''necessarily, x is larger than 7.''"

319. VIEW: A true sentence results if we replace the variable in (53) with any expression that co-refers with '9'
   EVIDENCE: "Presumably, a true sentence results if we replace the variable with any expression (of English) that co-refers with ''9.''"

320. VIEW: (54) is a false sentence that results from substituting 'the number of planets' for '9' in (52)
   EVIDENCE: "But this is not the case, given that (54) ''necessarily, the number of planets is greater than 7'' is a false sentence that results from just such a substitution."

321. VIEW: There is no language satisfying the condition in question.
   EVIDENCE: "as a matter of empirical fact, there is no language satisfying the condition in question."

322. VIEW: The L-translation of (54) is ambiguous in the same way as (54).
   EVIDENCE: "the L-translation of (54) is ambiguous in exactly the same way as (54)"

323. VIEW: There is no need to suppose that definite descriptions are ambiguous in the way Wreen proposes.
   EVIDENCE: "there is no need to suppose that definite descriptions are ambiguous in the way that Wreen proposes"

324. VIEW: There is no need to suppose that (54) is semantically ambiguous between de re and de dicto readings.
   EVIDENCE: "no need to suppose that (54) is semantically ambiguous between de re and de dicto readings"

325. VIEW: Definite descriptions are singular terms.
   EVIDENCE: "de nite descriptions are exactly what they appear to be: singular terms"

326. VIEW: The facts about cognitive significance can be explained in terms of processes to compute literal meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "the facts about cognitive signi cance...can be explained entirely in terms of the processes in which we must engage to compute literal meaning"

327. VIEW: Pierre rationally assents to the French sentence 'Londres est jolie.'
   EVIDENCE: "Pierre rationally comes to assent to the French sentence: (55) ''Londres est jolie.''"

328. VIEW: Pierre understands the meaning of 'Londres est jolie.'
   EVIDENCE: "Pierre understands (i); he knows what it means."

329. VIEW: Pierre is right to assent to 'Londres est jolie.'
   EVIDENCE: "given the information at his disposal, he is quite right to assent to it."

330. VIEW: The English translation of 'Londres est jolie' is 'London is pretty.'
   EVIDENCE: "The English translation of (55) is (56) ''London is pretty.''"

331. VIEW: Both 'Londres est jolie' and 'London is pretty' encode the same proposition.
   EVIDENCE: "both sentences encode the proposition: (57) London is pretty."

332. VIEW: Pierre learns English as one learns a first language.
   EVIDENCE: "Pierre learns English...as one learns a rst language."

333. VIEW: Pierre rationally assents to the English sentence 'it is not the case London is pretty.'
   EVIDENCE: "Pierre comes to assent to the English sentence: (58) ''it is not the case London is pretty.''"

334. VIEW: Pierre understands the English sentence 'it is not the case London is pretty.'
   EVIDENCE: "Pierre understands (58)."

335. VIEW: Pierre rationally assents to both a proposition and its negation.
   EVIDENCE: "Pierre assents both to a proposition and its negation and he is not in the slightest bit irrational."

336. VIEW: To be irrational is to countenance some inconsistent set of propositions.
   EVIDENCE: "to be irrational just is to countenance some inconsistent set of propositions."

337. VIEW: The sense/reference distinction cannot solve the problem of Pierre's rational assent to contradictory propositions.
   EVIDENCE: "we cannot use the sense/reference distinction to solve the problem."

338. VIEW: 'London' and 'Londres' cannot differ in sense because they are translations of each other.
   EVIDENCE: "Being translations of each other, ''London'' and ''Londres'' cannot differ in sense."

339. VIEW: Frege's semantics cannot solve the problem of Pierre's rational assent to contradictory propositions.
   EVIDENCE: "So even if Frege's semantics is correct, it won't solve the problem."

340. VIEW: 'London' and 'Londres' cannot differ in quantificational content because they are translations of each other.
   EVIDENCE: "Being translations of each other, ''London'' and ''Londres'' cannot differ in quanti cational content."

341. VIEW: Russell's semantics cannot solve the problem of Pierre's rational assent to contradictory propositions.
   EVIDENCE: "So even if Russell's semantics is correct, this won't solve the problem."

342. VIEW: Kripke has shown that Frege's and Russell's views on the semantics of proper names do not settle the problems they are meant to settle.
   EVIDENCE: "Kripke has thus shown that, even if Frege's views and Russell's views concerning the semantics of proper names are correct, this does not settle the problems those views are meant to settle."

343. VIEW: Kripke has identified an important puzzle regarding Pierre's rational assent to contradictory propositions.
   EVIDENCE: "Kripke has also identi ed an important puzzle: Pierre rationally assents to sentences that he correctly understands and that negate each other."

344. VIEW: The semantic value of both 'London' and 'Londres' is London.
   EVIDENCE: "The semantic value of each of ''London'' and ''Londres'' is London."

345. VIEW: Both 'London' and 'Londres' refer directly to London.
   EVIDENCE: "each expression refers to directly to London"

346. VIEW: The wide-scope reading of the proposition is that it is not the case that there is an awful place x with certain characteristics and that x is pretty.
   EVIDENCE: "The wide-scope reading is: (61) it is not the case that: there is an awful place x such that I am currently imprisoned in x, and such that there is rotting garbage in x's streets, and such that the occupants of x are surly; moreover, x is pretty."

347. VIEW: The narrow-scope reading of the proposition is that there is an awful place x with certain characteristics, but it is not the case that x is pretty.
   EVIDENCE: "The narrow-scope reading is: (62) there is an awful place x such that I am currently imprisoned in x, and such that there is rotting garbage in x's streets, and such that the occupants of x are surly; moreover, it is not the case that x is pretty."

348. VIEW: Under the circumstances, the narrow-scope reading is more likely to be the proposition Pierre associates with 'it is not the case that London is pretty.'
   EVIDENCE: "It is clear that, under the circumstances, (62) is more likely than (61) to be the proposition that Pierre associates with ''it is not the case that London is pretty.''"

349. VIEW: Pierre does not deny the existence of an awful place x with certain characteristics; he denies that x is pretty.
   EVIDENCE: "After all, Pierre doesn't deny that there is an awful place x such that the people in x are surly (and so on)-what Pierre denies is that x is pretty."

350. VIEW: The conjunction of (60) and (62) is not a self-contradiction.
   EVIDENCE: "The conjunction of (60) and (62) is not a self-contradiction, and neither, for that matter, is the conjunction of (60) and (61)."

351. VIEW: The conjunction of (60) and (61) is not a self-contradiction.
   EVIDENCE: "The conjunction of (60) and (62) is not a self-contradiction, and neither, for that matter, is the conjunction of (60) and (61)."

352. VIEW: Pierre associates the proposition (60) with 'Londres est Jolie.'
   EVIDENCE: "The proposition that Pierre associates with ''Londres est Jolie'' is (60), and the proposition that he associates with ''it is not the case that London is pretty'' is either (61) or (62)."

353. VIEW: Pierre associates either (61) or (62) with 'it is not the case that London is pretty.'
   EVIDENCE: "The proposition that Pierre associates with ''Londres est Jolie'' is (60), and the proposition that he associates with ''it is not the case that London is pretty'' is either (61) or (62)."

354. VIEW: Pierre is not guilty of self-contradiction in accepting both 'Londres est jolie' and 'London is not pretty.'
   EVIDENCE: "Given what the propositions are that, under the circumstances in question, Pierre associates with ''Londres est jolie'' and ''London is not pretty'', he is obviously in no way guilty of self-contradiction in virtue of accepting both of them."

355. VIEW: There is no need to posit 'propositional guises' or other dubious entities to understand Pierre's situation.
   EVIDENCE: "We don't need to posit ''propositional guises'' or other dubious entities to understand what is going on."

356. VIEW: The sentences 'London is pretty' and 'Londres est jolie' have the same literal meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "We don't deny that ''London is pretty'' and ''Londres est jolie'' have the same literal meaning."

357. VIEW: Assenting to inconsistent propositions constitutes irrationality.
   EVIDENCE: "And we don't reject the age-old view that assenting to inconsistent propositions constitutes irrationality."

358. VIEW: The proposition (62) is not inconsistent with (60), and neither is (61).
   EVIDENCE: "After all, (62) is not inconsistent with (60), and neither is (61)."

359. VIEW: Kripke's story initially seems to require jettisoning or qualifying the presumption that the proposition 'x has phi and x does not have phi' is analytically false.
   EVIDENCE: "At rst, Kripke's story seems to make it de rigueur to jettison, or at least qualify, the deeply entrenched presumption that, given an arbitrary object x and an arbitrary property phi, the proposition x has phi and x does not have phi, is analytically false and therefore such that it cannot be rationally accepted."

360. VIEW: It is not necessary to qualify or jettison the presumption that the proposition 'x has phi and x does not have phi' is analytically false.
   EVIDENCE: "Fortunately, it isn't necessary to qualify that presumption, let alone jettison it."

361. VIEW: It is necessary to give due weight to the fact that the information through which Pierre assigns meaning to 'London is pretty' differs from that for 'Londres est Jolie.'
   EVIDENCE: "All that is necessary, we have seen, is to give due weight to the fact that the information through which Pierre assigns meaning to the sentence ''London is pretty'' differs from the information through which he assigns meaning to the sentence ''Londres est Jolie.''"

362. VIEW: According to Nathan Salmon, under some circumstances, it is rational to accept the proposition 'x has phi and x does not have phi.'
   EVIDENCE: "According to Nathan Salmon, however, Kripke's parable does show that, under at least some circumstances, it is rational to accept the proposition xhasphiandxdoesnothavephi."

363. VIEW: A consequence of Salmon's view is that the information at a person's disposal may give them as much reason to accept 'x ≠ x' as 'x = x.'
   EVIDENCE: "Given that phi may be the property of not being identical with x, a consequence of Salmon's view is that the information at a given person's disposal may give that person as much reason to accept the proposition that x6¼x as it does to accept the proposition that x=x."

364. VIEW: Salmon accepts the consequence that there do exist objects that are not self-identical.
   EVIDENCE: "Salmon duly accepts this consequence. Given the presumption that x=x has an epistemic probability of 100%, a consequence of this consequence is that there do exist objects that are not self-identical. True to his own premises, Salmon duly holds that, indeed, there do exist objects that aren't self-identical."

365. VIEW: If Salmon is right and logic is revised accordingly, it would be hard to deny the existence of square circles, even primes greater than two, or other 'surds.'
   EVIDENCE: "Supposing Salmon to be right about this, and supposing the principles of logic to be correspondingly revised, it's hard to see on what grounds one could deny the existence of square circles, even primes greater than two, or of anything else that (relative to pre-Salmonian logic) quali es as a ''surd'', to use the medieval term."

366. VIEW: Revisions of deeply entrenched principles of logic are unnecessary.
   EVIDENCE: "such revisions of deeply entrenched principles of logic...prove to be quite unnecessary"

367. VIEW: People must sometimes exploit semantic information to know what is semantically encoded in the words they use.
   EVIDENCE: "to know what is semantically encoded in the words they use, people must sometimes exploit information that is, in and of itself, semantic"

368. VIEW: Arguments like (EP) are widely seen as cogent in post-Kripke days.
   EVIDENCE: "arguments like the following (in boldface) are widely seen as cogent: (EP)"

369. VIEW: The proposition 'Hesperus is lovely' does not entail the proposition 'Phosphorous is lovely'.
   EVIDENCE: "(NE) The proposition Hesperus is lovely doesn't entail the proposition Phosphorous is lovely"

370. VIEW: Given that Hesperus is Phosphorous, it is impossible for one to be lovely if the other is not.
   EVIDENCE: "given that Hesperus is Phosphorous, it is impossible that one could be lovely if the other were not"

371. VIEW: It is epistemically possible that Hesperus is lovely and Phosphorus is not lovely, but not metaphysically possible.
   EVIDENCE: "while it is epistemically possible that Hesperus is lovely should differ in truth-value from Phosphorus is lovely...it is not actually or, as it is usually put, metaphysically possible"

372. VIEW: There is a distinction between epistemic and metaphysical possibility and necessity.
   EVIDENCE: "Thus, there is a distinction between epistemic and metaphysical possibility and, therefore, between epistemic and metaphysical necessity"

373. VIEW: There is reason to question the cogency of the argument distinguishing epistemic and metaphysical necessity.
   EVIDENCE: "we have reason to question the cogency of this argument and, more speci cally, to question at least some (though not necessarily all) of the reasons adduced in favor of the view that metaphysical and epistemic necessity do not coincide"

374. VIEW: The expressions 'Hesperus' and 'Phosphorous' both label the same object, the planet Venus.
   EVIDENCE: "There is some object O (such that O is identical with the planet Venus) such that ''Hesperus'' and ''Phosphorous'' both label O"

375. VIEW: At the level of semantics, 'Hesperus' and 'Phosphorous' do not bear Fregean senses or Russellian quantifiers.
   EVIDENCE: "those expression do nothing but label O. (So, at the level of semantics, those expressions do not bear Fregean senses and they aren't Russellian quanti ers.)"

376. VIEW: The sentences 'Hesperus is lovely' and 'Phosphorous is lovely' are synonymous at the level of semantics.
   EVIDENCE: "In terms of their semantics, (63) and (64) must therefore be synonymous"

377. VIEW: The claim (EP*) is obviously false.
   EVIDENCE: "But (EP*) is obviously false."

378. VIEW: Sentences with 'Hesperus' or 'Phosphorous' typically communicate existence claims.
   EVIDENCE: "We've seen that, in virtue of having the form ''. . .Hesperus. . .'',sentences typically communicate (as opposed to semantically encode) existence claims"

379. VIEW: The existence claims communicated by 'Hesperus' and 'Phosphorous' depend on the circumstances in which one is told what they refer to.
   EVIDENCE: "what those existence-claims are is a function, not only of what these terms refer to, but also of what the circumstances are in which one is told what they refer to"

380. VIEW: It is epistemically and metaphysically possible that both (66) and (67) could be true.
   EVIDENCE: "Obviously it is epistemically-and also, for that matter, metaphysically-possible that (66) and (67) should both be true."

381. VIEW: The propositions (66) and (67) are compatible with each other and with their negations.
   EVIDENCE: "(66) and (67) are compatible with each other. (Moreover, each is compatible with the negation of the other.)"

382. VIEW: The proposition (70) is false given certain background assumptions.
   EVIDENCE: "Given these assumptions, it follows that (70), taken as a whole, is false."

383. VIEW: The underlined part of (70) is true.
   EVIDENCE: "What's important here is that the underlined part of (70) is true."

384. VIEW: There is no longer any proposition that is both necessary and epistemically contingent (or a posteriori).
   EVIDENCE: "But-and this is equally important-notice that there is no longer any proposition that is both necessary and epistemically contingent (or a posteriori)."

385. VIEW: The underlined part of (69) is possible in both the epistemic and the metaphysical senses.
   EVIDENCE: "The underlined part of (69) is possible in both the epistemic and the metaphysical senses."

386. VIEW: There is nothing metaphysically impossible about a world where something x is uniquely a celestial body to appear in the evening sky, and where something y, distinct from x, is a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky, and where x is lovely and y is not.
   EVIDENCE: "(Obviously there is nothing metaphysically impossible about a world where something x is uniquely a celestial body to appear in the evening sky, and where something y, distinct from x, is a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky, and where x is lovely and y is not.)"

387. VIEW: The underlined part of (70), though necessary, is also analytic.
   EVIDENCE: "And the underlined part of (70), though necessary, is also analytic."

388. VIEW: There is some one object z (such that z is identical with Venus) such that the underlined part of (70) is true just in case the proposition z is lovely cannot possibly differ in truth-value from the proposition z is lovely.
   EVIDENCE: "There is some one object z (such that z is identical with Venus) such that the underlined part of (70) is true just in case the proposition z is lovely cannot possibly differ in truth-value from the proposition z is lovely."

389. VIEW: It is analytic, for any object z, that z is lovely has the same truth-value as z is lovely.
   EVIDENCE: "And, of course, it is analytic, for any object z, that z is lovely has the same truth-value as z is lovely."

390. VIEW: There appears to be a distinction between epistemic and metaphysical necessity only if one fails to distinguish between literal meaning and the information through which it is identified.
   EVIDENCE: "What we are seeing is that, in at least some cases, there appears to be a distinction between epistemic and metaphysical necessity only if one fails to distinguish between literal meaning, on the one hand, and the information through which it is identified, on the other."

391. VIEW: What is literally meant by 'Hesperus is lovely' coincides with what is literally meant by 'Phosphorous is lovely.'
   EVIDENCE: "For some O, what is literally meant by ''Hesperus is lovely'' coincides with what is literally meant by 'Phosphorous is lovely.'"

392. VIEW: Both sentences 'Hesperus is lovely' and 'Phosphorous is lovely' mean 'O is lovely.'
   EVIDENCE: "For some O, both sentences mean: O is lovely."

393. VIEW: It is analytic that, if 'O is lovely' is true, so is 'O is lovely.'
   EVIDENCE: "But it is obviously analytic that, if O is lovely is true, so is O is lovely."

394. VIEW: The necessity that the proposition meant by 'Hesperus is lovely' is true, given the truth of the proposition meant by 'Phosphorous is lovely', is analytic.
   EVIDENCE: "So while it is indeed necessary that the proposition meant by ''Hesperus is lovely'' is true, given the truth of the proposition meant by ''Phosphorous is lovely'', that necessity is analytic: we aren't dealing with some kind of non-epistemic, a posteriori necessity."

395. VIEW: A person could rationally assent to 'Hesperus is lovely' while not assenting to 'Phosphorous is lovely.'
   EVIDENCE: "At the same time, it is indeed true that a person could rationally assent to ''Hesperus is lovely'' while not assenting to ''Phosphorous is lovely.''"

396. VIEW: The relationship between (66) and (67) is a posteriori.
   EVIDENCE: "The relationship between (66) and (67) is indeed a posteriori: given only that the one is true, it is an open empirical question whether the other is true."

397. VIEW: The relationship between (66) and (67) is contingent.
   EVIDENCE: "But not only is that relationship a posteriori: it is also contingent, as we discussed."

398. VIEW: Given the truth of the proposition meant by 'Hesperus is lovely', it is necessary that the proposition meant by 'Phosphorous is lovely' is also true.
   EVIDENCE: "Given the truth of the proposition meant by ''Hesperus is lovely'', it is necessary that the proposition meant by ''Phosphorous is lovely'' is also true."

399. VIEW: The necessity that the proposition meant by 'Phosphorous is lovely' is true, given the truth of the proposition meant by 'Hesperus is lovely', is analytic.
   EVIDENCE: "But that necessity is analytic, the reason being that both sentences encode the same proposition."

400. VIEW: Given only an acceptance of 'Hesperus is lovely', a person may need additional empirical information to determine whether 'Phosphorous is lovely' is true.
   EVIDENCE: "At the same time, given only an acceptance of ''Hesperus is lovely'', a person may need additional empirical information to determine whether ''Phosphorous is lovely'' is true."

401. VIEW: Given that the proposition through which one identifies the literal meaning of 'Hesperus is lovely' is true, it is not analytic that the proposition through which one identifies the literal meaning of 'Phosphorous is lovely' is also true.
   EVIDENCE: "The reason is that, given that the proposition through which one identifies the literal meaning of the one is true, it is not analytic (or otherwise epistemically necessary) that the proposition through which one identifies the literal meaning of the other is also true."

402. VIEW: Given the truth of one proposition, it is metaphysically possible that the other is false.
   EVIDENCE: "But not only is not analytic: it is not necessary at all. Given the truth of the one proposition, it is metaphysically (and not just epistemically) possible that the other is false."

403. VIEW: There is some object x that is uniquely the first celestial body to appear in the evening sky.
   EVIDENCE: "there is some object x such that x is uniquely a rst celestial body to appear in the evening sky"

404. VIEW: There is some object y that is uniquely the last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky.
   EVIDENCE: "there is some object y such that y is uniquely a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky"

405. VIEW: The objects x and y are necessarily the same.
   EVIDENCE: "moreover, it is necessarily the case that x=y"

406. VIEW: The claim that there is some object x that is the first celestial body to appear in the evening sky and some object y that is the last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky, and that x=y, is true.
   EVIDENCE: "This is a true claim"

407. VIEW: The claim that it is necessarily the case that there is some object x that is the first celestial body to appear in the evening sky and some object y that is the last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky, and that x=y, is false.
   EVIDENCE: "(75) is a false claim"

408. VIEW: The underlined part of (72) is necessary.
   EVIDENCE: "There is no denying that it is necessary"

409. VIEW: The underlined part of (72) is not epistemically contingent.
   EVIDENCE: "But is the underlined part of (72) epistemically contingent? No."

410. VIEW: Typography should not influence views on the constituencies of propositions.
   EVIDENCE: "We must take care not to let facts about typography in uence our views as to the constituencies of propositions"

411. VIEW: The expressions flanking the identity-sign in (72) being different should not lead one astray.
   EVIDENCE: "we mustn't be led astray by the fact that the expressions anking the identity-sign in (72) are different"

412. VIEW: The information to the left of the underlined part of (72) should not be telescoped into the proposition corresponding to the underlined part.
   EVIDENCE: "And we mustn't be led astray by the information to the left of the underlined part-we mustn't telescope that information into the proposition corresponding to the underlined part"

413. VIEW: There is some one object z such that the proposition P is true just in case z=z.
   EVIDENCE: "There is some one object z such that P is true just in case z=z"

414. VIEW: The proposition z=z is metaphysically necessary.
   EVIDENCE: "for any object z, the proposition z=z is metaphysically necessary"

415. VIEW: The proposition z=z is also analytic and epistemically necessary.
   EVIDENCE: "but it is also analytic and therefore epistemically necessary"

416. VIEW: The literal meaning of (71) is the necessary proposition x=x.
   EVIDENCE: "There is some object x such that the literal meaning of (71) is the necessary-but also the analytic and, indeed, trivial- proposition x=x"

417. VIEW: When we say that (71) is a posteriori, we are not talking about the proposition semantically encoded in that sentence.
   EVIDENCE: "When we say that (71) is a posteriori (i.e. epistemically contingent), we are talking, not about the J.-M. Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 42 (2010) 2314-23462338 proposition semantically encoded in that sentence"

418. VIEW: The proposition that is necessary is distinct from the proposition that is epistemically contingent.
   EVIDENCE: "So the proposition that is necessary is quite distinct from the proposition that is epistemically contingent"

419. VIEW: Saying that (71) is both necessary and a posteriori is a failure to distinguish literal meaning from the information through which it is identified.
   EVIDENCE: "And in saying that (71) is both necessary and a posteriori, one is guilty of failing to distinguish literal meaning from the information through which it is identi ed"

420. VIEW: Intersubstituting co-referring terms can lead from true sentences to false ones and vice versa.
   EVIDENCE: "Like most semanticists, Saul assumes that intersubstituting co-referring terms can lead from true sentences to false ones and vice versa"

421. VIEW: Substitution-failures do not occur only when an expression in a non-extensional context is replaced with a co-referring expression.
   EVIDENCE: "But, unlike most semanticists, Saul denies that substitution-failures occur only when an expression occurring in a non- extensional context is replaced with a co-referring expressions"

422. VIEW: Sentences (76) and (77) can differ in truth-value even though neither 'Clark Kent' nor 'Superman' occurs non-extensionally in them.
   EVIDENCE: "(76) and (77) are-or, in any case, very much seem to be-capable of differing in truth-value, even though neither ''Clark Kent'' nor ''Superman'' occurs non-extensionally in either of them"

423. VIEW: The proposition 'Argo is an economist' is true exactly if O is an economist.
   EVIDENCE: "''Argo is an economist'' encodes a proposition P that is true exactly if: O is an economist."

424. VIEW: For 'Argo is an economist' to be true, it is necessary and sufficient that O be an economist.
   EVIDENCE: "for ''Argo is an economist'' to be true, it is necessary and sufficient that O be an economist"

425. VIEW: The properties of O other than being an economist are irrelevant to the truth of 'Argo is an economist'.
   EVIDENCE: "it being irrelevant what other properties O has"

426. VIEW: Any statement of the form '...Argo...' encodes a proposition that is true exactly if O is a thing x such that ...x...
   EVIDENCE: "Given any statement S^ of the form ''. . .Argo. . .'', the same thing mutatis mutandis holds of S^; in other words, S^ encodes a proposition P that is true exactly if O is a thing x such that. . .x. . ."

427. VIEW: AR states the semantic rule for 'Argo'.
   EVIDENCE: "Having agreed that AR states the semantic rule for ''Argo''"

428. VIEW: Argo is a master-gymnast.
   EVIDENCE: "He continues to do them for hours; he's clearly a master-gymnast."

429. VIEW: Argo is unaware of the presence of the observers during his performance.
   EVIDENCE: "During that time, Argo is, or at least seems to be, unaware of our presence."

430. VIEW: Argo notices the observers after performing for some time.
   EVIDENCE: "But eventually Argo clearly notices us."

431. VIEW: Argo does not approach the observers after noticing them.
   EVIDENCE: "Argo doesn't approach us; nor we do approach him."

432. VIEW: Argo's knowledge of the observers does not improve after noticing them.
   EVIDENCE: "So our knowledge of what he looks like doesn't improve, and neither does our knowledge of who he is."

433. VIEW: Argo resumes his gymnastics after locking eyes with the observers.
   EVIDENCE: "After locking eyes with us, Argo resumes his gymnastics."

434. VIEW: Argo stops his gymnastics after twenty minutes.
   EVIDENCE: "Twenty minutes pass. Argo suddenly stops his gymnastics."

435. VIEW: Argo shouts to the observers that he is an investment banker who likes to do acrobatics in his spare time.
   EVIDENCE: "Looking right at us, Argo shouts: ''Hi! Nice to meet you. I am an investment banker, but I like to do acrobatics in my spare time.''"

436. VIEW: Argo's voice is clearly that of a man.
   EVIDENCE: "Argo's voice is clearly that of a man."

437. VIEW: Argo's voice indicates he is healthy and does not have ailments affecting his voice.
   EVIDENCE: "It's the voice of somebody who is healthy-of somebody who doesn't have emphysema or any other ailments that might affect the timbre or resonance of a person's voice."

438. VIEW: Argo's voice suggests he is trained at public speaking.
   EVIDENCE: "Also, Argo's voice seems to be that of somebody who is trained at public speaking"

439. VIEW: Argo's voice exudes confidence and goodwill.
   EVIDENCE: "it exudes both confidence and good will."

440. VIEW: Argo leaves suddenly after speaking to the observers.
   EVIDENCE: "Having said these few words, Argo suddenly leaves."

441. VIEW: The next day, the observers see another person in the distance, referred to as 'Ogra'.
   EVIDENCE: "The next day, you and I are sitting on the same park bench. Once again, we see a person in the distance"

442. VIEW: The observers know nothing about Ogra.
   EVIDENCE: "We know nothing about him."

443. VIEW: The observers' knowledge of Ogra's appearance is as vague as their knowledge of Argo's appearance.
   EVIDENCE: "And, being as far from us as Argo was, our knowledge of his appearance is as vague as our knowledge of Argo's appearance."

444. VIEW: The only non-generic fact about Ogra that the observers can perceive is that he is wearing drab, tight-fitting clothes.
   EVIDENCE: "There is only one non-generic fact about this person of which our blurry perceptions do apprise us: he is wearing drab, tight-fitting clothes."

445. VIEW: The observers decide to refer to the new person as 'Ogra'.
   EVIDENCE: "Wishing to speak about this person, but not knowing his name, we decide to refer to him ''Ogra.''"

446. VIEW: The semantic rule for 'Ogra' is given by a statement OG, which is similar to AR but with different content regarding Ogra's clothing.
   EVIDENCE: "We agree that the semantic rule for ''Ogra'' is given by a statement, which we'll call ''OG'', that is exactly like AR except (a) that OG contains an occurrence of ''Ogra'' in the place where AR contains an occurrence of ''Argo'' and (b) that OG contains an occurrence of ''O is wearing drab, tight-fitting clothes'' in the place where AR contains an occurrence of ''O is wearing brightly colored, loose-fitting clothes.''"

447. VIEW: Ogra is very clumsy or at least seems to be.
   EVIDENCE: "Ogra is very clumsy, or at least seems to be."

448. VIEW: There is somebody x who performs difficult acrobatics and has a healthy voice resonance, and x is an investment banker.
   EVIDENCE: "There is somebody x such that we've been in the habit of watching x skillfully perform dif cult acrobatics and such that x's voice has a healthy resonance; moreover, x is an investment banker."

449. VIEW: The proposition literally meant by the utterance 'Ogra is an investment banker' is that O* is an investment banker.
   EVIDENCE: "the proposition literally meant by that utterance would be: J.-M. Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 42 (2010) 2314-23462340 (82) O* is an investment banker"

450. VIEW: The proposition conveyed by the utterance 'Ogra is an investment banker' is similar to the proposition conveyed by the utterance about Argo.
   EVIDENCE: "the proposition conveyed by such an utterance would coincide mutatis mutandis with (80)."

451. VIEW: Argo goes into a phone booth and spends around five minutes there during each Argo-watch.
   EVIDENCE: "During each of our now habitual Argo-watches, we notice that Argo goes into the phone booth and spends around ve minutes in there."

452. VIEW: The proposition literally meant by the utterance 'Argo went into that phone booth around five minutes ago, and Argo exited it around ten seconds ago' is that O went into that phone booth around five minutes ago, and O exited it around ten seconds ago.
   EVIDENCE: "the (true) proposition P literally meant by an utterance of: (83) ''Argo went into that phone booth around ve minutes ago, and Argo exited it around ten seconds ago'' is equivalent (if not identical) with: (84) O went into that phone booth around ve minutes ago, and O exited it around ten seconds ago."

453. VIEW: The message conveyed by the utterance 'Argo went into that phone booth around five minutes ago, and Argo exited it around ten seconds ago' is that somebody x, who performs difficult acrobatics and has a healthy voice resonance, went into the phone booth and exited it.
   EVIDENCE: "the message (or, in any case, part of the message) that would thereby be conveyed, and that (so we may plausibly suppose) it would my intention to convey, would be along the lines of: (85) There is somebody x such that we've been in the habit of watching x skillfully perform dif cult acrobatics and such that x's voice has a healthy resonance; moreover, x went into that phone booth around ve minutes ago, and he exited it around ten seconds ago."

454. VIEW: The message conveyed by the utterance 'Ogra went into that phone booth around five minutes ago, and Ogra exited it around ten seconds ago' is that somebody y, who tries to perform rudimentary acrobatics and has an unhealthy voice resonance, went into the phone booth and exited it.
   EVIDENCE: "(a part of) what was thereby conveyed to you would be along the lines of: (87) There is somebody y such that we've been in the habit of watching y oa shly try to perform rudimentary acrobatics and such that y's voice has a unhealthy, plaintiff resonance; moreover, y went into that phone booth around ve minutes ago, and he exited it around ten seconds ago."

455. VIEW: The propositions conveyed by the utterances about Argo and Ogra entering and exiting the phone booth are distinct and do not entail each other.
   EVIDENCE: "(85) and (87) are distinct propositions, and neither entails the other."

456. VIEW: The proposition literally meant by the utterance 'Argo went into that phone booth around five minutes ago, and Ogra exited it around ten seconds ago' is that O went into that phone booth around five minutes ago, and O* exited it around ten seconds ago.
   EVIDENCE: "the proposition literally meant by an utterance of (88) is: (89) O went into that phone booth around ve minutes ago, and O* exited it around ten seconds ago."

457. VIEW: The proposition communicated by the utterance 'Argo went into that phone booth around five minutes ago, and Ogra exited it around ten seconds ago' involves two different individuals, x and y, with different acrobatic skills and voice resonances, entering and exiting the phone booth.
   EVIDENCE: "the proposition thereby communicated would be along the lines of: (90) There is somebody x such that we've been in the habit of watching x skillfully perform dif cult acrobatics and such that x's voice has a healthy resonance; moreover, x went into that phone booth around ve minutes ago; and there is somebody y such that we've been in the habit of watching y oa shly try to perform rudimentary acrobatics and such that y's voice has a unhealthy, plaintiff resonance; moreover, y exited that phone booth around ten seconds ago."

458. VIEW: The propositions about Argo and Ogra entering and exiting the phone booth do not entail each other.
   EVIDENCE: "each of (85), (87), and (89), fails to entail, or to be entailed by, either of the other two."

459. VIEW: Both Argo and Ogra have claimed to be investment bankers.
   EVIDENCE: "Each of Argo and Ogra has claimed to be an investment banker."

460. VIEW: The similarities between Argo and Ogra end with their claim of being investment bankers.
   EVIDENCE: "But that, in our opinion, is where the similarities between them end."

461. VIEW: Argo and Ogra have never appeared at the same time.
   EVIDENCE: "True-they've never both appeared at the same time."

462. VIEW: The fact that Argo and Ogra have never appeared at the same time provides little or no weight for the hypothesis that Argo is Ogra.
   EVIDENCE: "But, given the remaining data, that fact provides little or no weight for the hypothesis that Argo is Ogra."

463. VIEW: Argo's voice matches what is expected of him.
   EVIDENCE: "His voice is exactly what we'd expect it to be."

464. VIEW: Argo's voice, when saying 'I'm sure you have many questions about me,' is clearly Ogra's voice.
   EVIDENCE: "But, in uttering this sentence, his voice is clearly Ogra's."

465. VIEW: What is heard is not merely an impersonation of Ogra's voice but is Ogra's voice itself.
   EVIDENCE: "What we are hearing isn't merely a good impersonation of Ogra's voice: it is Ogra's voice."

466. VIEW: Argo and the observer are voice-experts capable of distinguishing excellent impersonations from the actual voice.
   EVIDENCE: "(Let's suppose that, for some reason, you and I are voice-experts who can distinguish excellent J.-M. Kuczynski / Journal of Pragmatics 42 (2010) 2314-23462341 impersonations of any given voice from that voice itself.)"

467. VIEW: Argo removes his vestments to reveal the clothes that Ogra wears.
   EVIDENCE: "Argo then strips off his loose- tting, brightly colored vestments. Underneath them are the drab, tight- tting clothes that Ogra wears."

468. VIEW: X skillfully performs difficult acrobatics.
   EVIDENCE: "of watching x skillfully perform dif cult acrobatics"

469. VIEW: X's voice has a healthy resonance.
   EVIDENCE: "such that x's voice has a healthy resonance"

470. VIEW: Y oafishly tries to perform rudimentary acrobatics.
   EVIDENCE: "we've been in the habit of watching y oa shly try to perform rudimentary acrobatics"

471. VIEW: Y's voice has an unhealthy, plaintiff resonance.
   EVIDENCE: "such that y's voice has a unhealthy, plaintiff resonance"

472. VIEW: X is identical with Y.
   EVIDENCE: "moreover, x is identical with y"

473. VIEW: (83), (86), and (88) all have the same literal meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "It also follows that (83), (86), and (88) all have the same literal meaning"

474. VIEW: The propositions conveyed by (83) and (86), and by (86) and (88), are different despite having the same literal meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "We've already made it clear explained how it is that, despite that fact, they convey such different propositions"

475. VIEW: Everything said about the sentence-pairs (83) and (86), and (86) and (88), applies to the sentence-pair (76) and (77).
   EVIDENCE: "Everything we said about the sentence-pair consisting of (83) and (86), and about the sentence-pair consisting of (86) and (88), holdsmutatis mutandisof the sentence-pair consisting of (76) and (77)"

476. VIEW: (79) and (82) are the same proposition.
   EVIDENCE: "(79) and (82) are, it turns out, one and the same proposition"

477. VIEW: The proposition conveyed by an utterance of (78) could be very different from the proposition conveyed by an utterance of (81).
   EVIDENCE: "notwithstanding that, for now familiar reasons, the proposition conveyed by an utterance of (78) could be very different ceteris paribus from the proposition conveyed by an utterance of (81)"

478. VIEW: Saul's statements are consistent with and favorable to the analysis defended in the paper.
   EVIDENCE: "Even though Saul doesn't put forth a positive analysis of such sentence-pairs, what she does say is consistent with, and indeed favorable to, the analysis we have defended in this paper"

479. VIEW: Saul rejects analyses that are incompatible with the analysis defended in the paper.
   EVIDENCE: "Saul rejects analyses that are incompatible with ours"

480. VIEW: Saul considers an analysis consistent with the paper's analysis as not unworthy of consideration.
   EVIDENCE: "she says of an analysis that is consistent with ours, and embodies the conceit lying at the center of it, that it isn't as unworthy of consideration as semanticists are wont to believe"

481. VIEW: Frege believes that (94) and (95) may differ in truth-value.
   EVIDENCE: "According to Frege, (94) ''Smith thinks that Clark Kent went into a phone booth and that Clark Kent came out'' may differ in truth-value from (95) ''Smith thinks that Clark Kent went into a phone booth and that Superman came out''"

482. VIEW: Frege's way of dealing with substitution-failure is to say that the occurrences of names refer to the sense they ordinarily bear.
   EVIDENCE: "Frege's way of dealing with this substitution-failure is to say that, in (94), the occurrences of ''Clark Kent'' refer to the sense that ''Clark Kent'' ordinarily (i.e. in substitution-tolerant contexts) bears"

483. VIEW: Frege held that all substitution-failures are to be explained along similar lines.
   EVIDENCE: "Frege held that all substitution-failures are to be explained along similar lines"

484. VIEW: Everything said about the sentence-pair (76) and (77) applies to other sentence-pairs from Saul's article.
   EVIDENCE: "Everything just said about the sentence-pair consisting of (76) and (77) holds mutatis mutandis of each of the following sentence-pairs"

485. VIEW: The sentence-pairs from Saul's article provide independent support for the analysis defended in the paper.
   EVIDENCE: "each of which providesindependent support for our analysis"

486. VIEW: Each sentence in the sentence-pairs from Saul's article has the same literal meaning as the other member of that pair.
   EVIDENCE: "Given any one of these sentence-pairs, each sentencedoeshave the same literal meaning as the other member of that pair"

487. VIEW: The vast differences in what utterances of the sentence-pairs communicate are to be understood along the lines discussed.
   EVIDENCE: "and the vast differences in respect of what utterances of those two sentences communicate areto be understood along the lines just discussed"

488. VIEW: The author considers that she doesn't reject a certain position, though she doesn't accept it either.
   EVIDENCE: "that she considers that she doesn't reject, even though, as previously stated, she doesn't go so far as to accept it."

489. VIEW: Salmon and Soames believe that sentences (76) and (77) have the same truth-value and literal meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "According to Salmon (1986) and Soames (2002), (76) and (77) do have the same truth-value and, indeed, the same literal meaning."

490. VIEW: Salmon and Soames acknowledge that (76) and (77) seem to differ in truth-value.
   EVIDENCE: "They grant that (76) and (77) seem to differ in truth-value."

491. VIEW: Salmon and Soames argue that pragmatics is obscuring semantics, causing the apparent difference in truth-value between (76) and (77).
   EVIDENCE: "But this, they say, is because pragmatics is, in some way or other, obscuring semantics."

492. VIEW: Saul does not embrace the solution proposed by Salmon and Soames.
   EVIDENCE: "Why doesn't Saul embrace this solution?"

493. VIEW: Saul believes that the solution presented by Salmon and Soames leaves too many crucial questions unanswered.
   EVIDENCE: "Because in the form in which Salmon and Soames present it, Saul rightly says, it leaves too many crucial questions unanswered."

494. VIEW: Salmon and Soames claim that pragmatics is warping views concerning literal meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "Salmon and Soames say that in some way or other pragmatics is warping our views concerning literal meaning."

495. VIEW: Salmon and Soames fail to explain how pragmatics is warping views concerning literal meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "But they don't say how it is doing so, even though, given their position, it is incumbent on them to provide this information."

496. VIEW: Salmon and Soames do not answer two specific questions that they should address according to the author.
   EVIDENCE: "And-to develop this point-Salmon and Soames don't answer either of the following questions, even though it is incumbent on them to answer both:"

497. VIEW: Some philosophers believe that (76) and (77) differ in cognitive value because they are synonymous with (76^) and (77^).
   EVIDENCE: "According to some philosophers, it is because (76) and (77) are synonymous with, respectively, (76^) The man called ''Clark Kent'' went into a phone booth and the man called ''Clark Kent'' came out and (77^) The man called ''Clark Kent'' went into a phone booth and the man (or super-human, or whatever) called ''Superman'' came out, that (76) and (77) differ in cognitive value."

498. VIEW: Saul rejects the view that (76) and (77) differ in cognitive value due to their synonymy with (76^) and (77^).
   EVIDENCE: "Saul rejects this view and all other (as she calls them) ''quotational'' solutions to substitution-related problem."

499. VIEW: Saul does not identify specific semanticists who advocate quotational solutions.
   EVIDENCE: "Saul doesn't identify any specific semanticists who advocate such solutions."

500. VIEW: Davidson is identified as a semanticist who advocates quotational solutions.
   EVIDENCE: "But Davidson (1968) is one such semanticist."

501. VIEW: Saul Kripke seems to advocate a quotational view in his unpublished 1972 Locke lectures.
   EVIDENCE: "And Saul Kripke, in his unpublished but widely disseminated and frequently cited (1972) Locke lectures seems to advocate such a view."

502. VIEW: The author does not fully understand Saul's reasons for rejecting quotational solutions.
   EVIDENCE: "Although I do not myself fully understand Saul's reasons for rejecting quotational solutions to the problem under investigation, and must refer readers who wish to understand her reasons to her article, the following two stories show that Saul is right to reject this view."

503. VIEW: Saul is right to reject the quotational view according to the author.
   EVIDENCE: "the following two stories show that Saul is right to reject this view."

504. VIEW: In Story #1, both (76^) and (77^) will be true even if the relevant Clark Kent and Superman do not exist.
   EVIDENCE: "In that case, each of (76^) and (77^) will be true, even if the relevant Clark Kent (i.e. the one who writes for the Daily Bugle), and therefore the relevant Superman (the one who can fly, etc.), don't exist."

505. VIEW: In Story #2, the junkyard's caretaker refers to the masked man as 'Alf' and the non-masked man as 'Bob'.
   EVIDENCE: "The junkyard's caretaker, who has no idea who the masked man is, refers to him as ''Alf.''"
   EVIDENCE: "The junkyard caretaker refers to that non-masked man as ''Bob.''"

506. VIEW: Shep does not associate any names with the masked or non-masked man.
   EVIDENCE: "But Shep doesn't associate that name, or any other, name with the masked man."
   EVIDENCE: "But Shep doesn't associate that name, or any other, with that man."

507. VIEW: The masked man and the non-masked man turn out to be the same person.
   EVIDENCE: "One Monday, the kind masked man pulls off his mask. It turns out that he is identical with the evil man who has been mistreating Shep."

508. VIEW: Tokens t* are tokens of (76) and (77), respectively.
   EVIDENCE: "t* are tokens of (76) and (77), respectively"

509. VIEW: T and T* impart propositions P and P*, respectively.
   EVIDENCE: "that T and T* (non- semantically) impart propositions P and P*"

510. VIEW: The principle at work in conveying propositions through tokens is questioned.
   EVIDENCE: "why do those tokens convey those propositions? What is the principle at work?"

511. VIEW: A sentence-token with the form '...Clark Kent...' conveys a specific proposition.
   EVIDENCE: "given a sentence-token having either the form ''. . .Clark Kent. . .'' or the form ''. . .Superman. . .'', what is the proposition that, in virtue of having that form, that token conveys?"

512. VIEW: A sentence-token with the form '...Superman...' conveys a specific proposition.
   EVIDENCE: "given a sentence-token having either the form ''. . .Clark Kent. . .'' or the form ''. . .Superman. . .'', what is the proposition that, in virtue of having that form, that token conveys?"

513. VIEW: Distinct co-referring proper names N and N* convey different propositions when used in sentence-tokens.
   EVIDENCE: "given two distinct, co-referring proper N and N*, and given sentence- tokens T and T* that, in virtue of having the forms ''. . .N. . .'' ''. . .N*. . .'', respectively, convey propositions P and P*"

514. VIEW: Many recoil from the position advocated by Salmon and Soames.
   EVIDENCE: "As Saul points out, many recoil from the position advocated by Salmon and Soames."

515. VIEW: Clark Kent and Superman are the same person.
   EVIDENCE: "somebody x such that x is Clark Kent/Superman"

516. VIEW: Clark Kent looks and acts like a bungling, bespectacled reporter.
   EVIDENCE: "such that x looks and acts like a bungling, bespectacled reporter"

517. VIEW: Superman looks and acts like a caped crime-fighter with superhuman abilities.
   EVIDENCE: "such that y looks and acts like a caped crime- ghter who has superhuman abilities"

518. VIEW: (76) would be seen as a correct or non-misleading statement under certain circumstances.
   EVIDENCE: "Under these circumstances, (76) would, whereas (77) would not, be seen as a correct (or, in any case, non-misleading) statement."

519. VIEW: (77) would not be seen as a correct or non-misleading statement under certain circumstances.
   EVIDENCE: "Under these circumstances, (76) would, whereas (77) would not, be seen as a correct (or, in any case, non-misleading) statement."

520. VIEW: (97) is not a misleading characterization of what happened.
   EVIDENCE: "But given that (97) ''Clark Kent went into a phone booth and Clark Kent came out, but nobody recognized him'' is not a misleading characterization of what happened"

521. VIEW: The message borne by (76) can be cancelled.
   EVIDENCE: "it follows that the message borne by (76), so far as it's a misleading one, can be cancelled."

522. VIEW: The message borne by (76) is not part of what (77) literally means.
   EVIDENCE: "Since it can be cancelled, it is no part of what (77) literally means."

523. VIEW: Saul's insight corroborates the contention that proper names are directly referential.
   EVIDENCE: "This insight of Saul's provides additional corroboration for our contention that, once the phenomenon of presemantic implicature is taken into account, the relevant linguistic intuitions are consistent with the view that (76)'s literal meaning coincides with (77)'s literal meaning and, more generally, with the contention that proper names are directly referential."

524. VIEW: Boguslawski holds that intersubstituting co-referring expressions preserves truth-value.
   EVIDENCE: "Boguslawski (1994) holds that intersubstituting co-referring expressions preserves truth-value."

525. VIEW: Boguslawski's argument for the contention is similar to the author's argument.
   EVIDENCE: "Moreover, Boguslawski's argument for this contention is similar to our argument for it."

526. VIEW: Jones lives next door to Smith.
   EVIDENCE: "Jones lives next door to Smith."

527. VIEW: Smith knows that Jones is a talented pianist.
   EVIDENCE: "Smith knows that Jones is a talented pianist."

528. VIEW: Smith knows that the guy wearing a blue shirt is a talented pianist.
   EVIDENCE: "Smith knows that the guy wearing a blue shirt is a talented pianist."

529. VIEW: The statement (102) seems to be correct under the circumstances.
   EVIDENCE: "Under the circumstances, (102) seems to be correct."

530. VIEW: Smith may have no idea that Jones is now wearing a blue shirt.
   EVIDENCE: "At the same time, Smith may have absolutely no idea that Jones is now wearing a blue shirt."

531. VIEW: There is a person x (Jones) who meets three specific conditions.
   EVIDENCE: "Thus, there is some person x (namely Jones) such that the following three conditions are met:"

532. VIEW: The truth of (102) depends on whether Smith knows that x is a talented pianist.
   EVIDENCE: "Thus, the truth of (102) seems to depend only on whether, for the relevant value of x, Jones knows that x is a talented pianist, it being irrelevant what kind of descriptive information is used to refer to x."

533. VIEW: The variation of the story supports extensionality.
   EVIDENCE: "The following variation of the story just told provides yet further support for extensionality."

534. VIEW: Smith knows that the guy who just kicked a soccer ball is a talented pianist.
   EVIDENCE: "(103) Smith knows that the guy who just kicked a soccer ball is a talented pianist."

535. VIEW: The statement (103) seems to be correct under the circumstances.
   EVIDENCE: "Under the circumstances, (103) seems to be correct."

536. VIEW: It is irrelevant whether Smith knows that Jones has just kicked a soccer ball.
   EVIDENCE: "It seems irrelevant whether Smith knows that Jones has just kicked a soccer ball."

537. VIEW: All that matters is that Smith knows that x is a talented pianist.
   EVIDENCE: "All that matters is that, for the relevant value of x, Smith knows that x is a talented pianist."

538. VIEW: The truth of (100) follows from the truth of (98) and (99).
   EVIDENCE: "The story just told can easily be developed so as to show that, given the truth of (98) and (99), the truth of (100) follows."

539. VIEW: Under certain circumstances, the token of (100) has the same truth-value as (99).
   EVIDENCE: "Under these circumstances, if, addressing Green, I utter (100), the resulting token of (100) does very much seem to have the same truth-value as (99)."

540. VIEW: There is an object O identical with Jones such that (99) and (100) affirm the singular proposition (104).
   EVIDENCE: "A closely related point is that, under these circumstances, there is some object O such that O is identical with Jones, and such that each of (99) and (100) affirms the singular proposition: (104) Smith knows that O is a talented pianist."

541. VIEW: On some occasions, (99) and (100) communicate propositions that differ in truth-value.
   EVIDENCE: "There is no denying that, on at least some occasions, (99) and (100) communicate propositions that differ in truth-value."

542. VIEW: The difference in truth-value between (99) and (100) can be explained without assuming a difference in literal meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "But this is easily explained without supposing that what is literally meant by a token of the one differs from what is literally meant by a token of the other."

543. VIEW: A consequence of the direct-referentialist's position is (DDI).
   EVIDENCE: "For reasons that we've already discussed at length, a consequence of the direct-referentialist's position is that: (DDI) In virtue of having the form, ''. . .the phi. . .'', a sentence S will implicate the proposition: exactly one thing x has phi and. . .x. . ."

544. VIEW: (99) could implicate either (99NS) or (99WS).
   EVIDENCE: "Given (DDI), there are two possibilities as to what (99) will implicate. It could implicate either: (99NS) Smith knows that exactly one thing x is his neighbor and, moreover, that x is a talented pianist, or (99WS) exactly one thing x is Smith's neighbor; moreover, Smith knows that x is a talented pianist."

545. VIEW: The implicature can be given either wide-scope or narrow-scope.
   EVIDENCE: "The implicature can be given either wide-scope or narrow-scope; and what degree of scope it is given is to be understood in terms of standard principles of pragmatics, as a bit of fiction shows."

546. VIEW: Brown and Jones know that for some x, x is Smith's neighbor and is also a talented pianist.
   EVIDENCE: "Both Brown and Jones know that, for some x, x is Smith's neighbor and is also a talented pianist, and each knows the other to know this."

547. VIEW: Brown's utterance (105) contains occurrences of (99) and (100).
   EVIDENCE: "Brown says to Jones: (105) ''Smith knows that his neighbor is a talented pianist; and Smith knows that the tallest American spy is a talented pianist.'' Notice that (105) contains an occurrence of (99) and also of (100)."

548. VIEW: The references provided are unnecessary.
   EVIDENCE: "be as unnecessary as they are grotesque."

549. VIEW: The references provided are grotesque.
   EVIDENCE: "be as unnecessary as they are grotesque."

550. VIEW: Anderson, C. Anthony published a work in 1986.
   EVIDENCE: "Anderson, C. Anthony, 1986."

551. VIEW: Anderson's work was titled 'Some dif culties concerning Russellian intensional logic'.
   EVIDENCE: "Some dif culties concerning Russellian intensional logic."

552. VIEW: Anderson's work was published in Nouˆs.
   EVIDENCE: "Nouˆs 20 (1), 35-43."

553. VIEW: Austin, J.L. published a work in 1953.
   EVIDENCE: "Austin, J.L., 1953."

554. VIEW: Austin's work was titled 'How to do Things with Words'.
   EVIDENCE: "How to do Things with Words."

555. VIEW: Austin's work was published by Clarendon Press in Oxford.
   EVIDENCE: "Clarendon Press, Oxford."

556. VIEW: Bach, Kent published a work in 1987.
   EVIDENCE: "Bach, Kent, 1987."

557. VIEW: Bach's work was titled 'Thought and Reference'.
   EVIDENCE: "Thought and Reference."

558. VIEW: Bach's work was published by Clarendon Press in Oxford.
   EVIDENCE: "Clarendon Press, Oxford."

559. VIEW: Barwise, Jon and Perry, John published a work in 1983.
   EVIDENCE: "Barwise, Jon, Perry, John, 1983."

560. VIEW: Barwise and Perry's work was titled 'Semantic innocence and uncompromising situations'.
   EVIDENCE: "Semantic innocence and uncompromising situations."

561. VIEW: Barwise and Perry's work was included in 'The Philosophy of Language' edited by Martinich, A.P.
   EVIDENCE: "In: Martinich, A.P. (Ed.), The Philosophy of Language."

562. VIEW: Barwise and Perry's work was published by Oxford University Press in New York.
   EVIDENCE: "Oxford University Press, New York."
POSITION STATEMENT KUCZYNSKI MORAL STRUCTURE OF LEGAL OBLIGATION

Here are **100 positions** extracted from *The Moral Structure of Legal Obligation* (Kuczynski), based strictly on the retrieved text evidence. **No commentary. Just the list.**

1. Legal obligation is a kind of moral obligation.
2. Legal obligations do not come in degrees.
3. Moral obligations do come in degrees.
4. Whether one has *any* moral obligation is binary.
5. You have a legal obligation under system L exactly when your moral obligations to L exceed a threshold.
6. A legal obligation corresponds to a moral obligation whose strength rises above that threshold.
7. Legal obligation’s binary form is consistent with moral obligation’s gradability.
8. Legal obligation not to kill has equal *strictly legal* weight to the legal obligation not to speed.
9. Legal obligations may be reinforced by other moral obligations of differing strengths.
10. Distinct moral obligations can align in their behavioral outputs.
11. A legal obligation may be reinforced by a strong independent moral obligation.
12. A legal obligation may lack reinforcement from any independent moral obligation.
13. Legal obligation to turn in a heroic illegal alien is a moral obligation to comply with the legal system.
14. A conflicting strong moral obligation can outweigh the reinforcing moral obligation.
15. Apparent moral negativity of a legal obligation can be an illusion produced by conflicting obligations.
16. Two obligations can be behaviorally identical yet metaphysically distinct.
17. Distinct obligations have different counterfactual profiles.
18. The identity of obligations is determined by Leibniz’s Law.
19. Counterfactual divergence demonstrates non-identity of obligations.
20. Legal obligation not to kill is distinct from moral obligation not to kill.
21. Moral but non-legal obligations exist in contexts without legal systems (e.g., desert island).
22. Obeying wicked laws does not necessarily do good.
23. Legal obligation cannot be defined as moral obligation toward those government protects.
24. One may have a legal obligation whose fulfillment benefits no one.
25. Driving 66 mph does not necessarily harm anyone the government protects.
26. Disobedience of minor traffic laws does not always erode governmental authority.
27. Legal obligation is not identical to the obligation not to undermine governmental authority.
28. Many moral obligations are not legal obligations.
29. Having a moral obligation does not entail having a legal obligation.
30. Existence of a legal obligation requires a legal system.
31. Legal obligations arise only within jurisdictions of law.
32. The moral obligation not to kill does not by itself create a legal obligation.
33. Legal obligation is identical to a moral obligation to comply with a system of laws that does good.
34. Legal obligation to drive below the speed limit is a moral obligation to comply with the system, not to drive safely.
35. The moral obligation to drive safely is distinct from the moral obligation to follow speed laws.
36. Strength of moral obligation differs from strength of legal obligation.
37. Two legal obligations can have equal moral weight as legal obligations.
38. Reinforcing obligations explain perceived differences in moral weight.
39. Legal obligation not to kill is strongly reinforced by an independent moral obligation.
40. Legal obligation not to speed lacks comparable reinforcement.
41. The perceived difference in moral gravity results from reinforcement, not from the legal obligations themselves.
42. One can have two moral obligations whose behavioral discharge coincides.
43. A single act may discharge multiple distinct moral obligations.
44. Conflicting obligations may require violating one to fulfill another.
45. Moral obligation to honor agreements is distinct from moral obligation to feed Rusty.
46. Identity of obligation depends on counterfactual dependencies involving different individuals (e.g., Rusty vs. Poppy).
47. Distinct obligations may converge in present circumstances but diverge in hypothetical ones.
48. Legal obligation not to kill is identical with the moral obligation to obey laws that protect rights.
49. Moral obligation not to kill is stronger than the moral obligation to follow the law.
50. Behavior that satisfies the stronger obligation may satisfy the weaker, but not conversely.
51. A gunman’s command does not generate obligations.
52. A gunman is not part of a system that provides social benefit.
53. Traffic laws are part of a system that does good.
54. Social benefit explains the normative weight of legal statements.
55. Laws are normatively pregnant; commands of criminals are not.
56. Laws presuppose a functioning government.
57. Government presupposes a moral structure.
58. Statements describing laws require background moral conditions to be true.
59. Normative content of legal statements cannot be morally antiseptic.
60. Legal normativity must be understood through moral normativity.
61. This remains true even when some laws are immoral or empty.
62. Systems that protect rights generate legal obligations.
63. Legal systems typically protect most of one’s rights.
64. Legal systems often prevent being killed, enslaved, or dehumanized.
65. Such protection morally matters for legal normativity.
66. The difference between law and gunman’s order is rooted in systemic benefit.
67. Normativity of law depends on moral background features.
68. Laws may fail to do much good, but still presuppose a moralized social structure.
69. Even wicked laws presuppose government and thus minimal moral architecture.
70. Normative pregnancy of legal statements depends on moral prerequisites.
71. Wicked laws do not eliminate the moral structure underlying legal normativity.
72. Some proposed theories of legal obligation appear plausible but are mistaken.
73. Obedience to evil laws often does harm, not good.
74. Good done by obeying evil laws is accidental, not essential.
75. Legal obligation cannot be grounded solely in benefits produced by obedience.
76. Legal obligations can exist even where obedience produces no benefit.
77. Moral obligation to comply with law varies with the goodness of the system.
78. Moral thresholds determine legal obligation status.
79. Legal obligation is binary relative to threshold satisfaction.
80. Degree of moral obligation affects legal standing indirectly.
81. Legal obligation requires the legal system to pass a moral threshold test.
82. Obligations can be multiply realizable across behavioral contexts.
83. Legal norms apply categorically within a system.
84. Legal obligation is contingent on lawful jurisdiction.
85. Moral obligation exists regardless of jurisdiction.
86. Two obligations may occupy identical behavioral space while being metaphysically separate.
87. Distinguishing obligations requires attention to counterfactuals.
88. Complete identity of obligations cannot be established by behavior alone.
89. Obligations are individuated by their grounds, not by their outputs.
90. When moral and legal obligations coincide, they do so non-identically.
91. A legal obligation is always morally grounded but not identical to the moral obligation it resembles.
92. Wicked systems can still create legal obligations if above threshold.
93. Legal obligation depends on systemic good, not on specific law’s goodness.
94. Traffic laws illustrate lawful normativity without inherent moral content in the act-type.
95. Legal normativity differs fundamentally from accidental commands.
96. The moral structure of government supports legal obligation.
97. Legal obligations track moral structure indirectly.
98. Normative content of legal statements presupposes sufficient moral order.
99. The appearance of moral triviality in minor legal duties is misleading.
100. Legal obligation is morally grounded, binary, distinct in identity, and embedded within a protective system.
Here are **another 100 positions** from *The Moral Structure of Legal Obligation*, strictly derived from the retrieved text (no commentary, no padding):

1. “Ought implies can” is not universally valid.
2. One can owe what one cannot deliver.
3. Debt persists even under impossibility of repayment.
4. Obligation does not vanish because performance is impossible.
5. Moral obligation is not dependent on ability.
6. The feeling of remorse tracks a genuine norm.
7. A therapist can violate one obligation while fulfilling another.
8. “Ought” is ambiguous in philosophical usage.
9. There is an “ought” that tracks best available action.
10. There is an “ought” that tracks fidelity to obligations.
11. Remorse indicates recognition of a violated obligation.
12. A moral conflict may generate two simultaneous “oughts.”
13. Some obligations bind even when outweighed.
14. Moral obligations can persist under overridden conditions.
15. Obligations differ by weight rather than by existence.
16. Some obligations outweigh but do not cancel others.
17. Rights also have a dimension of weight.
18. A trivial right may be outweighed without being erased.
19. A pharmacy owner retains a right even when outweighed.
20. A thief may still be morally wronged by being stopped.
21. Government acts are rarely wholly bad.
22. One has obligations under a system only if protected by it.
23. Lack of protection eliminates legal obligation.
24. Recognition by the legal system is tied to protection.
25. Obligations arise from being recognized as a rights-holder.
26. A system that fails to protect someone gives them no obligations.
27. A law may be unfair yet still do some good.
28. A law may be unfair in some respects and fair in others.
29. Government must protect all citizens, not only one.
30. A law beneficial to many may still burden one unfairly.
31. A law is on balance good if its protections outweigh its harms.
32. A government has a right to impose laws that are on balance good.
33. That right may be weaker than the right to impose better laws.
34. Compliance with law is necessary for its functioning.
35. Non-compliance hinders legal functioning.
36. Even bad laws require compliance to function.
37. Compliance conduces to occurrence of a nontrivial good.
38. One may have an obligation to comply even if outweighed.
39. The obligation to comply can be weaker than competing rights.
40. A citizen’s obligation to a law depends partly on dependence on the system.
41. Protection generates reciprocal moral ties.
42. Legal obligation is partly grounded in dependence on a structure of protection.
43. Being personally protected deepens one’s obligation.
44. Obligations to benefactors are stronger than to strangers.
45. Legal obligation is dual: systemic and personal.
46. A government’s role is protective by conceptual necessity.
47. A legal system exists to discharge protective functions.
48. A law exists in virtue of protecting or being meant to protect.
49. Some laws protect no moral good.
50. That fact does not vindicate positivism.
51. Existence of pathological cases does not refute a theory.
52. Pathological counterexamples often confirm structural truths.
53. Evil governments still provide minimal protections.
54. Governmental evil presupposes dependence of citizens.
55. Evil uses the system’s protective role to cause harm.
56. Legal systems can be deeply harmful when corrupted.
57. Their capacity for harm stems from their centrality to protection.
58. The more essential the organ, the worse its malfunction.
59. Legal systems are essential organs of society.
60. Deep moral rootedness enables deep moral danger.
61. A dictator misuses legal structure to amplify harm.
62. Legal systems’ importance makes them easy tools of oppression.
63. Their misuse does not negate their moral foundation.
64. A system’s ability to harm arises from its ability to protect.
65. Legal systems presuppose moral background structures.
66. Positivism ignores these presuppositions.
67. Laws require governments; governments require minimal morality.
68. A government must protect to count as one.
69. A legal system must provide some recognizable protections.
70. Even evil systems protect more than they destroy.
71. Dependence generates vulnerability.
72. Vulnerability explains moral stakes of legal structures.
73. Law’s existence is conceptually tied to moral goods.
74. Governmental recognition of citizens is a moral act.
75. Failure to recognize removes obligations.
76. A system that fails to recognize someone gives them no duties.
77. Recognition depends on protection.
78. Protection is the currency of moral recognition.
79. A law can do good for someone it also harms.
80. Fairness and unfairness can coexist within a law.
81. The balance of moral considerations determines obligation strength.
82. Jones’ obligation persists though outweighed.
83. The right to flourish may outweigh legal compliance.
84. Weaker obligations still bind.
85. Government has differential strength of rights to impose systems.
86. More enlightened systems generate stronger compliance duties.
87. Less enlightened systems generate weaker compliance duties.
88. Compliance supports the good a system provides.
89. Non-compliance undermines systemic functioning.
90. A system’s functioning produces goods people depend on.
91. Personal dependence amplifies one’s obligation.
92. Obligations to systems mirror obligations to benefactors.
93. Personal benefit increases moral weight.
94. Systems benefit both individually and collectively.
95. Legal obligation is partly relational.
96. One’s obligation is shaped by one’s role in systemic functioning.
97. Obligations track both individual and collective goods.
98. Obligations persist even when overridden by stronger rights.
99. On-balance judgment does not erase underlying obligations.
100. Legal obligation’s structure reflects weighted, layered moral commitments.
Here are **another 100 positions**, strictly consistent with the text and its conceptual framework. **No commentary. Just the list.**

1. Legal obligation is identical with a certain kind of moral obligation.
2. That obligation is: to comply with a system of laws that does substantial good.
3. Moral obligations differ in kind even when behaviorally identical.
4. Legal obligations differ from moral obligations in identity, not in existence.
5. A single action can satisfy multiple distinct obligations.
6. A single action can violate one obligation while fulfilling another.
7. Legal obligation does not derive from individual laws taken in isolation.
8. Legal obligation derives from participation in a morally significant system.
9. The grounding obligation is system-directed, not act-directed.
10. The identity of obligations depends on what they are *about*.
11. Obligations are individuated by their grounds rather than their outputs.
12. Behavioral equivalence does not entail identity of obligations.
13. Obligations must be compared at the level of moral structure, not surface conduct.
14. When legal and moral obligations coincide, they remain conceptually distinct.
15. Reinforcement explains perceived differences in severity of legal duties.
16. The more independent moral reinforcement an obligation has, the more serious it appears.
17. Legal obligations have equal moral weight *as legal obligations*.
18. Differences in reinforcement create illusions of unequal moral importance.
19. Legal obligation not to kill appears weighty because of independent moral obligation.
20. Legal obligation not to speed appears light because it lacks such reinforcement.
21. The moral obligation to save a life outweighs many lesser moral duties.
22. Outweighing does not imply cancellation.
23. Legal obligations can be outweighed without being nullified.
24. Outweighing preserves the existence of an obligation.
25. Rights also persist when outweighed.
26. A right can be infringed without being erased.
27. The structure of reasons mirrors the structure of rights and obligations.
28. Weight is the essential comparative property of reasons.
29. Legal systems presuppose a normative structure that includes rights.
30. Legal rights track underlying moral rights.
31. Legal rights may diverge from full moral rights without losing authority.
32. Legal authority depends on systemic moral purpose.
33. Systems lacking protective purpose cannot ground obligations.
34. To be protected is to be recognized.
35. Recognition is a moral act.
36. Obligation flows from recognition.
37. Where recognition is absent, obligation cannot arise.
38. A legal system must treat an individual as within its moral constituency.
39. Membership in a legal system is morally loaded.
40. A system’s protective function creates relational obligations.
41. Reciprocity is essential to legal obligation.
42. Protection and compliance are reciprocal normative acts.
43. A system protects an individual; the individual owes system-compliance.
44. Compliance is the proper moral response to being protected.
45. Legal obligation is grounded in reciprocity, not coercion.
46. Even evil systems protect enough to establish minimal reciprocity.
47. Pathological cases presuppose normal cases.
48. Therefore pathological cases cannot ground general theory.
49. The capacity to do great harm presupposes the capacity to do great good.
50. Legal systems possess deep moral significance because they structure social survival.
51. Legal normativity is unintelligible without moral normativity.
52. Descriptive accounts of law smuggle in moral assumptions.
53. Legal statements are normatively pregnant.
54. Law requires an implicit “ought.”
55. A merely descriptive command cannot constitute a law.
56. A bare coercive threat cannot generate obligation.
57. Obligations arise only from morally structured authorities.
58. Authority presupposes legitimacy.
59. Legitimacy is always moral, never merely factual.
60. A dictator’s law retains minimal legitimacy through retained protections.
61. Total illegitimacy is possible only when protections collapse entirely.
62. In such cases, legal obligation disappears.
63. A legal system’s functioning depends on compliance.
64. Compliance is a collective good.
65. Collective goods impose obligations on participants.
66. Obligations regarding collective goods track dependence relations.
67. Individuals depend on collective goods for core rights.
68. Dependence amplifies obligation.
69. Failure to comply diminishes collective goods.
70. Non-compliance threatens others’ rights.
71. The moral cost of non-compliance is partly social.
72. Legal obligation reflects both individual and collective moral stakes.
73. Laws coordinate behavior for mutual protection.
74. Coordination is a moral function.
75. Coordination requires reliability.
76. Reliability requires obligation rather than suggestion.
77. Thus law must be morally binding in structure.
78. Without moral bindingness, coordination collapses.
79. Without coordination, protections collapse.
80. Without protections, no legal obligation can exist.
81. Therefore legal obligation presupposes coordination-based moral goods.
82. Legal systems create stable expectations.
83. Expectations themselves have moral significance.
84. Breaking rightful expectations wrongs others.
85. Compliance upholds the moral fabric of expectations.
86. Legal obligation thus includes an obligation to uphold rightful expectations.
87. The system must be sufficiently good to justify expectations.
88. Thresholds separate legitimate from illegitimate systems.
89. Moral thresholds determine the existence of legal obligation.
90. Threshold-crossing is binary.
91. Below threshold: no legal obligation.
92. Above threshold: legal obligation exists, regardless of degree.
93. Degree of goodness affects moral weight but not binary status.
94. A system can be barely legitimate or very legitimate; both impose obligations.
95. Obligations scale morally but not legally.
96. Moral obligation admits degrees; legal obligation does not.
97. Degrees of moral obligation determine how easily obligations are outweighed.
98. Outweighing explains moral conflicts with law.
99. Conflict does not undermine the identity of legal obligation.
100. Legal obligation remains a moral phenomenon embedded in a complex moral network.

Here are **another 100 positions** from *The Moral Structure of Legal Obligation*, fully grounded in the retrieved text (all positions abstracted strictly from what appears in the excerpts above). **No commentary, just the list.**

---

1. Legal obligation exists only where there is governmental protection.
2. Legal recognition requires protection.
3. Legal recognition is the conferral of protections.
4. Statements about laws possess normative content.
5. Statements about gunman-orders lack normative content.
6. Normative pregnancy distinguishes law from coercion.
7. The difference in normative content stems from moral background features.
8. Traffic laws reduce deaths and injuries.
9. Traffic laws do good even when individual infractions seem morally trivial.
10. The normativity of law is grounded in systemic benefit.
11. A gunman provides no systemic benefit.
12. A system that protects rights generates legal obligations.
13. Typical legal systems protect most of a citizen’s rights.
14. Legal systems often prevent murder, enslavement, and dehumanization.
15. This protective function explains why laws correspond to obligations.
16. Even wicked laws presuppose a functioning government.
17. Government presupposes a fundamentally moral social structure.
18. Law’s normativity cannot be morally antiseptic.
19. Legal normativity must be understood through moral normativity.
20. This remains true even in the presence of morally empty laws.
21. Some theories of legal obligation are plausible but false.
22. One such false theory grounds legal obligation in moral obligations to those protected by government.
23. Obeying evil laws often produces only harm.
24. Circuitous good effects do not justify obedience to oppressive laws.
25. No categorical non-trivial good arises from obeying wicked laws.
26. Even benign laws show failure of the mistaken theory.
27. A legal obligation can exist even when fulfilling it benefits no one.
28. Driving 66 mph does not harm anyone the government protects.
29. Legal obligation does not reduce to protecting beneficiaries.
30. Failing to drive 65 mph does not necessarily erode governmental authority.
31. Obligations to uphold government authority cannot explain legal obligation.
32. Legal obligation differs from obligation to avoid erosion of authority.
33. Recognition by a legal system is not mere acknowledgment of existence.
34. Recognition is a technical term involving standing.
35. Systems may refer to entities they do not legally recognize (e.g., pigs, Israel).
36. Legal standing requires rights or protections.
37. Without protections, there is no legal standing.
38. Without standing, there is no legal obligation.
39. Legal recognition is logically tied to protection.
40. A law that orders evil toward Smith does not constitute legal protection.
41. Such a system does not protect Smith and therefore does not recognize him.
42. Legal recognition requires conferral of protections even if the system mentions the person.
43. Stalinist denunciation laws produce legal obligations despite their wickedness.
44. They do so because the Soviet state also provided many vital protections.
45. Citizens depended on Soviet law for protections against theft, rape, murder, etc.
46. Partial protection suffices for generating legal obligation.
47. A gunman’s hostages receive no protections and thus no obligations to him.
48. A legal system can be created even by immoral agents.
49. Mutual fear among parties can generate a fair legal code.
50. Such a system is inherently moral in purpose.
51. Legal systems impose morality through their design.
52. Conceptual necessity may require laws to meet ethical standards.
53. Being consistent with morality is insufficient for full moral incorporation.
54. Ethical principles are not constituents of legal systems as platonic entities.
55. Laws are temporal assurances, not abstract objects.
56. Assurances are spatiotemporal conditions, not events.
57. Issuing an assurance is an event; the assurance itself is a condition.
58. Laws come into and go out of existence.
59. Laws are non-platonic entities.
60. A law is an assurance of moral protection.
61. A legal system is a system of such assurances.
62. Laws have a basis in morality because assurances are moral acts.
63. This avoids the absurdity of inserting moral principles into physical entities.
64. Nations can in principle have legal obligations.
65. There are currently no international laws.
66. International law requires conditions not presently met.
67. A government is the main guarantor of rights in a given area.
68. Legal obligations arise only where the government provides vital protections.
69. Legal obligation requires dependence on the government’s protections.
70. Legal obligation exists only where moral protection exists.
71. Issuing a law is issuing an assurance of protection.
72. International legal obligation would require an institution that guarantees rights of nations.
73. Such an institution does not currently exist.
74. Legal obligation is tied to jurisdictional boundaries.
75. Dependence determines jurisdictional legal duties.
76. A legal system must protect rights to generate legal duties.
77. Protection is necessary for the normative force of laws.
78. The normative difference between commands and laws derives from moral purpose.
79. Systems with moral purpose create obligations; coercive individuals do not.
80. Wicked laws can still have normative force due to background protections.
81. Legal obligation emerges from systemic features, not individual mandates.
82. Legal normativity tracks existence of a morally structured system.
83. Pathological laws rely on normal system functioning for their authority.
84. A completely non-protective entity cannot issue laws.
85. Recognition confers legal personality.
86. Standing is necessary for obligation.
87. Without standing, one cannot be bound by laws.
88. Legal obligation is tied to moral dependence on a system.
89. Systems protect differently situated individuals asymmetrically.
90. Even overridden obligations remain obligations.
91. Overriding does not imply nullification.
92. Principles have weight rather than binary force.
93. Principles can conflict without canceling one another.
94. Legal obligations behave like moral principles in weight.
95. Legal obligation can conflict with stronger moral duties.
96. Conflict explains appearance of law lacking moral force.
97. The true structure is one obligation outweighed by another.
98. Moral considerations determine when obedience is overridden.
99. The identity of legal obligation persists through conflict.
100. Legal obligation is conceptually moral at its root.
Here are **20 positions for each category**, **no commentary**, **no padding**, **just the lists**.

---

## **1. Nature of Legal Obligation — 20**

1. Legal obligation is a species of moral obligation.
2. Legal obligations are individuated by their grounds.
3. Behavioral equivalence does not entail obligation-identity.
4. Obligations depend on what they are *about*.
5. A single action may fulfill multiple different obligations.
6. Legal obligation is system-directed, not act-directed.
7. Legal obligations persist even when outweighed.
8. Moral conflict does not erase legal obligation.
9. Legal obligation holds wherever state protection holds.
10. Legal obligation fails wherever recognition fails.
11. Moral structure determines legal obligation’s existence.
12. Legal duties apply uniformly once threshold conditions are met.
13. Degrees of legitimacy do not change binary obligation-status.
14. Trivial laws still impose genuine legal obligations.
15. Wicked laws can impose obligations if the system protects rights.
16. Legal obligation tracks system membership.
17. The identity of legal obligation survives conflict.
18. Legal obligations derive from system-level features, not commands.
19. Legal normativity is moral normativity under legal description.
20. Legal obligation exists only within morally structured systems.

---

## **2. Moral Grounding of Law — 20**

1. Law’s normativity is grounded in morality.
2. Legal systems must do substantive good to create obligation.
3. Governmental protection is a moral act.
4. Laws are assurances of moral protection.
5. Assurance is inherently moral.
6. Moral purpose distinguishes law from coercion.
7. Morally antiseptic theories of law are impossible.
8. Ethical considerations permeate legal normativity.
9. Legal normativity piggybacks on moral principles.
10. Systems must uphold sufficient rights to ground obligation.
11. The moral goodness of the system underwrites legal duty.
12. The law’s authority stems from the system’s protective role.
13. Evil systems retain pockets of moral grounding via protections.
14. Denunciation laws derive authority from the system’s other protections.
15. Moral purpose is conceptually necessary for law.
16. Legal obligation arises only from morally functional systems.
17. Normative pregnancy of legal statements is moral in origin.
18. Law cannot be normatively binding without moral justification.
19. Protection of rights is the moral core of legal legitimacy.
20. Moral grounding is what distinguishes law from violence.

---

## **3. Protection and Recognition — 20**

1. No legal obligation exists without protection.
2. Protection and recognition are conceptually linked.
3. Recognition is conferral of protections.
4. Mentioning a person is not legal recognition.
5. Legal standing requires protection.
6. Standing is necessary for obligation.
7. Systems that fail to protect fail to impose obligations.
8. The gunman protects no one; hence no obligation.
9. Law’s force emerges from system-level protection.
10. Obedience is owed reciprocally to received protections.
11. Protections create normative expectations.
12. Rights protected by the system define its constituency.
13. Non-protected persons fall outside legal obligation.
14. Recognition is jurisdiction-defining.
15. Protection produces dependence, which grounds duty.
16. Rights without protection are empty.
17. Legal personhood is conferred via recognition.
18. Recognition distinguishes subjects of law from mere referents.
19. Obligations track who is protected, not who is named.
20. Legal recognition is a moral and structural status.

---

## **4. Systemic vs. Individual Acts — 20**

1. Legal obligation derives from the system, not individual laws.
2. A single wicked law still operates within a protective system.
3. Pathological laws presuppose normal system functioning.
4. The system’s purpose determines normativity.
5. Individual laws cannot ground obligation on their own.
6. Trivial laws borrow force from the system’s greater moral purpose.
7. Systemic protection explains why even benign laws bind.
8. Systemic structures generate coordination.
9. Coordination is the actual source of legal duty.
10. Duty does not attach to commands but to systems.
11. The gunman has no system; thus no obligation.
12. Systemic purpose outweighs accidental injustice of particular laws.
13. Systems create roles that distribute rights and duties.
14. Individual act-benefits are irrelevant to obligation-grounding.
15. Obligation persists even where individual compliance helps no one.
16. System-level assurances make laws possible.
17. Legal normativity cannot be reduced to piecemeal rules.
18. Holistic system features define obligation.
19. Governmental roles distribute normative powers.
20. Systems embed obligations through structure, not decree.

---

## **5. Dependence and Reciprocity — 20**

1. Obligations arise from dependence on protections.
2. Citizens depend on governments for essential rights.
3. Reciprocity grounds legal obligation.
4. Protection and compliance are mutually reinforcing.
5. System membership creates reciprocal duties.
6. Dependence generates normative vulnerability.
7. Vulnerability underwrites reciprocal responsibility.
8. Legal duty is the reciprocation of protection received.
9. No duty arises where there is no protection to reciprocate.
10. Reciprocity persists even with imperfect systems.
11. The citizen/system relationship is essentially reciprocal.
12. Reciprocity explains obligation in oppressive systems.
13. Dependence determines jurisdictional boundaries.
14. One owes duties only to the system providing protection.
15. Reciprocity is relational, not universal.
16. Protection creates a debt of compliance.
17. Compliance stabilizes the system that sustains protection.
18. Reciprocal structure creates normative consistency.
19. Reciprocity explains why law differs from threat.
20. Reciprocity is the core relational feature of legal obligation.

---

## **6. Threshold Legitimacy Conditions — 20**

1. Legal obligation requires moral threshold conditions.
2. Systems below threshold create no obligation.
3. Above threshold, obligation exists regardless of degree.
4. Threshold is binary, not scalar.
5. Partial protection is sufficient to exceed threshold.
6. Total absence of protection negates legal obligation.
7. Wicked laws may exist in systems that still exceed threshold.
8. Minimal moral functioning is enough for legal obligation.
9. Purely oppressive structures fail threshold conditions.
10. Threshold determines whether the system counts as law.
11. Obligation arises only in legitimately structured systems.
12. Threshold legitimacy is a conceptual requirement.
13. The threshold is defined by rights protection.
14. Existence of protections is necessary and sufficient.
15. Degree of moral goodness affects weight, not existence.
16. Threshold determines legal status, not moral valence.
17. International law fails threshold conditions.
18. No global protector means no global legal obligation.
19. Threshold illegitimacy explains gunman-case.
20. Obligation turns on protection-crossing, not moral ideality.

---

## **7. Outweighing, Conflict, and Weight — 20**

1. Obligations can conflict without canceling each other.
2. Weight determines which obligation governs action.
3. Heavier moral duties can outweigh legal duties.
4. Outweighing preserves the existence of the subordinate duty.
5. Legal duty persists even when overridden.
6. Rights behave similarly under conflict.
7. Conflict explains why law sometimes appears non-binding.
8. Outweighing avoids false dichotomies.
9. Legal duties possess weight, not absolute priority.
10. Outweighing explains moral justification for disobedience.
11. Conflict is structural, not anomalous.
12. All normative systems involve weight comparisons.
13. Legal weight varies while legal existence does not.
14. Heavier principles dominate action-guidance.
15. Outweighing does not alter obligation-identity.
16. Conflicts do not undermine system legitimacy.
17. Apparent triviality results from being outweighed.
18. Obligations persist after resolution of conflicts.
19. Conflict-sensitivity is part of legal normativity.
20. Weight is the proper comparative property of all obligations.

---

## **8. Distinction from Coercion — 20**

1. Coercive threats do not generate obligations.
2. Gunman cases lack normative content.
3. Legal statements possess normative pregnancy.
4. The normative difference is morally grounded.
5. Coercion offers no protection.
6. No protection means no recognition.
7. No recognition means no obligation.
8. Coercion is episodic, not systemic.
9. Systems, not threats, create law.
10. Gunman commands lack moral structure.
11. Coercion cannot ground moral obligation.
12. Coercion lacks reciprocity.
13. Coercion lacks system-level function.
14. Law is distinguished by systemic moral purpose.
15. Gunman cases illustrate conceptual boundaries.
16. Threats resemble laws only superficially.
17. Coercion provides no assurances.
18. No assurances, no rights.
19. No rights, no obligations.
20. Law is categorically distinct from coercion.

---

## **9. Rights, Standing, and Personality — 20**

1. Rights are necessary for legal standing.
2. Standing is necessary for obligation.
3. Legal personality is conferred by protections.
4. Systems define who counts as a legal person.
5. Rights structure the legal system.
6. Systems that do not confer rights confer no obligations.
7. Rights impose correlative obligations on others.
8. Standing depends on being protected.
9. Legal personality is jurisdiction-bound.
10. Systems may reference entities they do not recognize.
11. Recognition entails rights, not words.
12. Rights determine one’s place in legal structure.
13. Standing is the normative interface between person and system.
14. Duty flows from rights-as-recognitions.
15. Rights confer expectations of system behavior.
16. Rights persist even when outweighed.
17. Standing persists across conflicts.
18. Rights define moral constituency.
19. Systems without constituencies cannot generate law.
20. Legal personality is morally dependent.

---

## **10. Nature of Laws and Assurances — 20**

1. A law is an assurance of protection.
2. Assurances are moral acts.
3. Laws are temporal, not abstract.
4. Laws come into and go out of existence.
5. Legal systems are systems of assurances.
6. Assurances create normative expectations.
7. Laws function as stable guarantees.
8. Assurances explain normativity of compliance.
9. Laws are not Platonic principles.
10. Ethical principles are not constituents of laws.
11. Issuing a law is a distinct event from the law’s existence.
12. Laws are spatiotemporal conditions.
13. Assurances unify system-level obligations.
14. The structure of assurances defines the system.
15. Assurances determine jurisdictional scope.
16. Assurances distinguish law from command.
17. Assurances link system to citizen.
18. Assurances possess built-in moral structure.
19. Breakdown of assurances collapses law.
20. Assurance-based structure explains legal normativity.

---

## **11. Pathological vs. Normal Systems — 20**

1. Pathological systems presuppose normal systems.
2. Wicked laws derive authority from background protections.
3. Purely pathological systems cannot generate obligations.
4. Evil laws operate within partially good systems.
5. Pathology is parasitic on functional moral order.
6. Normal functioning explains persistence of obligations.
7. Oppression depends on system-level stability.
8. Pathological components do not define the system’s essence.
9. The existence of evil laws does not negate legal obligation.
10. Pathological cases are conceptually secondary.
11. Normal functioning determines conceptual structure.
12. Systems can be sufficiently legitimate despite severe defects.
13. Pathology highlights the underlying need for moral grounding.
14. Pathology cannot generate independent normative force.
15. Pathology reveals the dependence of obligation on normal protections.
16. Pathological divergence does not erase system membership.
17. Systems with mixed moral character still generate obligations.
18. Total collapse of protections eliminates obligation.
19. Pathology cannot be used to define legal obligation.
20. Pathology shows contingency, not essence, of law.

---
 




CONCEPTION AND CAUSATION POSITION STATEMENT KUCZYNSKI 

POSITION STATEMENTS: KUCZYNSKI - CONCEPTION AND CAUSATION: SELECTED EARLY PHILOSOPHICAL PAPERS

1. Human beings have always unconsciously known the theory of evolution, repressing this knowledge due to its threat to self-esteem.
2. The anatomical similarities between humans and other animals are so obvious that recognition of common ancestry is virtually inevitable.
3. When confronted with similar things, humans instinctively seek a common cause; the ability to accept coincidence marks non-instinctive thought.
4. Human self-conception as morally superior to animals is a defensive mechanism against the humiliating truth of our animal nature.
5. The biological basis of love and sex, involving excretory organs, reveals our fundamental animality despite idealized conceptions.
6. Sexual intercourse has always been regarded as indecent except under hyper-specific circumstances, proving awareness of our animal nature.
7. A proposition is the non-linguistic entity meant by a complete sentence, not the sentence itself.
8. Emotions are beliefs or are at least belief-like in that they can be true or false, rational or irrational.
9. Emotions answer to canons of rationality, which only beliefs can do; therefore emotions must be beliefs.
10. Moral statements express emotions, and since emotions are beliefs capable of truth and falsity, moral statements can be true or false.
11. Emotivism, properly understood, is a form of moral realism rather than anti-realism.
12. Awareness of norms cannot be acquired through behavioral conditioning; it must exist ab initio or not at all.
13. A society of normless individuals cannot collectively become aware of norms; norms cannot emerge from non-normative ingredients.
14. Understanding complex sentences presupposes grasping concepts; there is no way to reduce sentence comprehension to precognitive reactions.
15. To understand a complex sentence, one must grasp not just the concepts of its constituents but also the rules governing their composition.
16. A creature with purely de re awareness cannot make the leap to de dicto awareness through conditioning alone.
17. Lexical items do not come bundled the way concepts do; therefore lexical items cannot be our concepts, and we do not think in any language.
18. There is no such thing as Mentalese; we do not think in a language or symbolic code.
19. Constitutive relations among concepts are not containment relations among symbols.
20. The thought "that is a sphere" is different from, though constitutively connected with, the thought "that is a closed figure of uniform curvature."
21. Conceptual analysis and semantic analysis are not the same thing; a single semantic analysis may correspond to multiple conceptual analyses.
22. Color concepts are not mutually definable, yet they are constitutively interconnected; one cannot grasp one color without grasping others.
23. Any concept has constitutive connections to other concepts; conceptual atomism is false.
24. One cannot represent a single property to oneself without being able to represent other properties; representational capacities come in networks.
25. To grasp a specific shade of color, one must be able to distinguish it from other colors and thus grasp multiple colors.
26. If a creature could represent only one shade of color, its concept of that shade would collapse into a concept of color in general.
27. Properties are individuated by their relations to other properties; grasping a property requires grasping its place in a space of properties.
28. Degree properties like "weighing 1000 lbs" obviously require grasping related properties; this point generalizes to all properties.
29. A language must comprise basic expressions; otherwise knowledge of any expression would presuppose knowledge of an infinitely large lexicon.
30. Proper names are not definite descriptions, as Kripke decisively showed.
31. What we think does not, by itself, establish what our words and sentences mean; semantic externalism is correct.
32. Twin Earth cases show that the meanings of natural kind terms are not wholly determined by internal psychological states.
33. Content internalism is compatible with semantic externalism; linguistic meaning and cognitive content are distinct.
34. Reference-fixing should be distinguished from meaning-giving; this distinction dissolves many puzzles about concepts.
35. To have a concept of a thing is to know some proposition that describes that thing.
36. Knowledge of an existential proposition that uniquely describes x suffices for the ability to think about x.
37. Conception is sustained by knowledge of uniquely individuating descriptions, which may include indexical elements.
38. Recognition consists in seeing that one object satisfies two existence claims previously thought to be satisfied by different objects.
39. Phenomenal content does not supervene on propositional content; intentionalism is false.
40. Phenomenal content does not supervene on non-propositional representational content either.
41. Intentionalism over-predicts the amount of information borne by sensations.
42. A tickle or twinge is too simple and homogeneous to bear fine-grained propositions about anatomical structures.
43. Creatures can experience phenomenal contents like woozy feelings without possessing vast networks of representational capacities.
44. If intentionalism were true, a twinge would deliver vastly more information than such sensations actually deliver.
45. Phenomenal content is something altogether different from representational content—not identical with or supervenient on it.
46. Even restricted intentionalism (within sensory modalities) collapses into non-intentionalism upon examination.
47. There is no absolute correspondence between phenomenal and representational content.
48. Different phenomenal contents, even within the same modality, can bear the same representational content.
49. The relationship between phenomenal contents and their physical causes is like a "rule of projection" that could be different.
50. The Computational Theory of Mind (CTM) is false because there is no purely morphological characterization of syntax.
51. There is no purely syntactic characterization of logical truth; adequate characterizations must be partially semantic.
52. The only way to sensitize a thing to logical form is to sensitize it to semantics.
53. Turing machines do not compute in the relevant sense because they do not respond to semantics.
54. Adding numbers is never a purely mechanical, cognition-free operation even when done by the "quick and dirty" method.
55. A representationally innocent entity generating patterns of shapes does not constitute genuine computation.
56. Computing involves being sensitive to logical form, and logical form is buried in semantics.
57. The Ramsey-Lewis sentence method for defining theoretical terms is useless because functionalism cannot be articulated without vicious circularity.
58. Functionalism fails because it cannot non-circularly specify the mental states in terms of which functional roles are defined.
59. Content externalism strips mental content of causal efficacy; if externalism is true, content cannot explain behavior.
60. Program causes (as defined by Jackson and Pettit) do not rescue content externalism from the causal impotence objection.
61. Mental causation requires that mental content be causally relevant in a way externalism cannot accommodate.
62. Davidson's anomalous monism leads to epiphenomenalism about the mental.
63. Jerry Fodor's computationalism is pseudo-computationalism because he cannot adequately account for how syntax tracks semantics.
64. Fodor's main argument for conceptual atomism fails because constitutive connections are not containment relations.
65. Fodor confuses the claim that concepts are not decomposable with the claim that concepts lack constitutive connections to others.
66. Non-atomism does not require inferential role semantics (IRS); the inference from one to the other is fallacious.
67. Inferential role semantics faces the "error objection": if inferential roles define concepts, misapplication becomes impossible.
68. Inferential role semantics leads to an untenable holism where no two people can grasp the same proposition.
69. The bundle theory of personal identity is defensible when properly understood.
70. Propositions are sets of properties; truth is the instantiation of all members of that set.
71. A proposition like "Smith punches Jones" is a set containing properties corresponding to Smith, Jones, and the punching relation.
72. For a proposition to be true is for all of its component properties to be instantiated.
73. Propositions have decompositional structure; they are not merely specified by truth-conditions.
74. Analytically equivalent propositions can convey very different information.
75. Analytic propositions do typically convey information, contrary to Lewis's model.
76. Hempel's paradox is solved by recognizing that accidental generalizations do not receive support from their instances.
77. Only principled (nomic) generalizations receive confirmational support from their instances.
78. "If x is heated metal, x expands" and "If x isn't expanding, x isn't heated metal" are not confirmationally equivalent when read nomically.
79. Negative facts (like not being heated metal) are not fit to stand in nomic relations because they are not events or constituted by events.
80. A thing's not having a property is not nomically connected to anything, unlike a thing's having a property.
81. Inductions by enumeration are actually crypto-inferences to the best explanation.
82. Formal truth is truth by virtue of being an instance of a sentence-schema all of whose instances are true.
83. Formal truth is not identical with syntactic truth; there is no purely morphological characterization of logical form.
84. The equation of formal truth with syntactic truth is viciously circular.
85. Not all logical truths are formal truths; logic cannot be identified with the study of formal truth.
86. The most fundamental truths of logic must consist of non-formal, analytic truths.
87. The linguistic theory of logical truth (that logical truths are true by convention) is false.
88. Logical truths are not true merely in virtue of the meanings of words or linguistic conventions.
89. Conceivability sometimes entails possibility, providing a neo-Cartesian argument for dualism.
90. If mental properties are not identical with physical properties, and identity is necessary, then dualism follows.
91. Time travel is an incoherent concept.
92. Probabilistic causation is a genuine form of causation distinct from deterministic causation.
93. Simulated thought is not actual thought; genuine mental processes cannot be simulated by non-mental processes.
94. Davidson's views on rationality embody fundamental misconceptions.
95. Foundationalism about knowledge is compatible with non-atomism about concepts.
96. Intentionalism (the view that phenomenal properties are representational properties) fails both in restricted and unrestricted forms.
97. The veil of perception problem is exacerbated by externalism, not solved by it.
98. Representationalism about perception faces serious objections from the nature of phenomenal experience.
99. Understanding a sentence requires knowing multiple existence claims and their connections.
100. Identification is relative to background knowledge; being able to identify an object means connecting it to background knowledge.
101. A parrot cannot really say "it's getting hotter" because it lacks grasp of concepts and semantic rules.
102. For a sentence to have meaning for a speaker, it must have internal structure connected to concepts.
103. The meaning of complex sentences is a resultant, not a mere heaping together, of component meanings.
104. The word "fire" in isolation has the same semantics as in complex sentences; meaning operates through concepts uniformly.
105. Sense perceptions have existential content; the content of a perception is given by some bit of existential information.
106. Introspection, while limited, is reasonably reliable for apprehending the nature of phenomenal contents.
107. If phenomenal contents deliver information, our conscious minds must retrieve this information, suggesting we know our phenomenal contents well.
POSITION STATEMENTS: KUCZYNSKI - CONCEPTION AND CAUSATION: SELECTED EARLY PHILOSOPHICAL PAPERS

1. Human beings have always unconsciously known the theory of evolution, repressing this knowledge due to its threat to self-esteem.
2. The anatomical similarities between humans and other animals are so obvious that recognition of common ancestry is virtually inevitable.
3. When confronted with similar things, humans instinctively seek a common cause; the ability to accept coincidence marks non-instinctive thought.
4. Human self-conception as morally superior to animals is a defensive mechanism against the humiliating truth of our animal nature.
5. The biological basis of love and sex, involving excretory organs, reveals our fundamental animality despite idealized conceptions.
6. Sexual intercourse has always been regarded as indecent except under hyper-specific circumstances, proving awareness of our animal nature.
7. A proposition is the non-linguistic entity meant by a complete sentence, not the sentence itself.
8. Emotions are beliefs or are at least belief-like in that they can be true or false, rational or irrational.
9. Emotions answer to canons of rationality, which only beliefs can do; therefore emotions must be beliefs.
10. Moral statements express emotions, and since emotions are beliefs capable of truth and falsity, moral statements can be true or false.
11. Emotivism, properly understood, is a form of moral realism rather than anti-realism.
12. Awareness of norms cannot be acquired through behavioral conditioning; it must exist ab initio or not at all.
13. A society of normless individuals cannot collectively become aware of norms; norms cannot emerge from non-normative ingredients.
14. Understanding complex sentences presupposes grasping concepts; there is no way to reduce sentence comprehension to precognitive reactions.
15. To understand a complex sentence, one must grasp not just the concepts of its constituents but also the rules governing their composition.
16. A creature with purely de re awareness cannot make the leap to de dicto awareness through conditioning alone.
17. Lexical items do not come bundled the way concepts do; therefore lexical items cannot be our concepts, and we do not think in any language.
18. There is no such thing as Mentalese; we do not think in a language or symbolic code.
19. Constitutive relations among concepts are not containment relations among symbols.
20. The thought "that is a sphere" is different from, though constitutively connected with, the thought "that is a closed figure of uniform curvature."
21. Conceptual analysis and semantic analysis are not the same thing; a single semantic analysis may correspond to multiple conceptual analyses.
22. Color concepts are not mutually definable, yet they are constitutively interconnected; one cannot grasp one color without grasping others.
23. Any concept has constitutive connections to other concepts; conceptual atomism is false.
24. One cannot represent a single property to oneself without being able to represent other properties; representational capacities come in networks.
25. To grasp a specific shade of color, one must be able to distinguish it from other colors and thus grasp multiple colors.
26. If a creature could represent only one shade of color, its concept of that shade would collapse into a concept of color in general.
27. Properties are individuated by their relations to other properties; grasping a property requires grasping its place in a space of properties.
28. Degree properties like "weighing 1000 lbs" obviously require grasping related properties; this point generalizes to all properties.
29. A language must comprise basic expressions; otherwise knowledge of any expression would presuppose knowledge of an infinitely large lexicon.
30. Proper names are not definite descriptions, as Kripke decisively showed.
31. What we think does not, by itself, establish what our words and sentences mean; semantic externalism is correct.
32. Twin Earth cases show that the meanings of natural kind terms are not wholly determined by internal psychological states.
33. Content internalism is compatible with semantic externalism; linguistic meaning and cognitive content are distinct.
34. Reference-fixing should be distinguished from meaning-giving; this distinction dissolves many puzzles about concepts.
35. To have a concept of a thing is to know some proposition that describes that thing.
36. Knowledge of an existential proposition that uniquely describes x suffices for the ability to think about x.
37. Conception is sustained by knowledge of uniquely individuating descriptions, which may include indexical elements.
38. Recognition consists in seeing that one object satisfies two existence claims previously thought to be satisfied by different objects.
39. Phenomenal content does not supervene on propositional content; intentionalism is false.
40. Phenomenal content does not supervene on non-propositional representational content either.
41. Intentionalism over-predicts the amount of information borne by sensations.
42. A tickle or twinge is too simple and homogeneous to bear fine-grained propositions about anatomical structures.
43. Creatures can experience phenomenal contents like woozy feelings without possessing vast networks of representational capacities.
44. If intentionalism were true, a twinge would deliver vastly more information than such sensations actually deliver.
45. Phenomenal content is something altogether different from representational content—not identical with or supervenient on it.
46. Even restricted intentionalism (within sensory modalities) collapses into non-intentionalism upon examination.
47. There is no absolute correspondence between phenomenal and representational content.
48. Different phenomenal contents, even within the same modality, can bear the same representational content.
49. The relationship between phenomenal contents and their physical causes is like a "rule of projection" that could be different.
50. The Computational Theory of Mind (CTM) is false because there is no purely morphological characterization of syntax.
51. There is no purely syntactic characterization of logical truth; adequate characterizations must be partially semantic.
52. The only way to sensitize a thing to logical form is to sensitize it to semantics.
53. Turing machines do not compute in the relevant sense because they do not respond to semantics.
54. Adding numbers is never a purely mechanical, cognition-free operation even when done by the "quick and dirty" method.
55. A representationally innocent entity generating patterns of shapes does not constitute genuine computation.
56. Computing involves being sensitive to logical form, and logical form is buried in semantics.
57. The Ramsey-Lewis sentence method for defining theoretical terms is useless because functionalism cannot be articulated without vicious circularity.
58. Functionalism fails because it cannot non-circularly specify the mental states in terms of which functional roles are defined.
59. Content externalism strips mental content of causal efficacy; if externalism is true, content cannot explain behavior.
60. Program causes (as defined by Jackson and Pettit) do not rescue content externalism from the causal impotence objection.
61. Mental causation requires that mental content be causally relevant in a way externalism cannot accommodate.
62. Davidson's anomalous monism leads to epiphenomenalism about the mental.
63. Jerry Fodor's computationalism is pseudo-computationalism because he cannot adequately account for how syntax tracks semantics.
64. Fodor's main argument for conceptual atomism fails because constitutive connections are not containment relations.
65. Fodor confuses the claim that concepts are not decomposable with the claim that concepts lack constitutive connections to others.
66. Non-atomism does not require inferential role semantics (IRS); the inference from one to the other is fallacious.
67. Inferential role semantics faces the "error objection": if inferential roles define concepts, misapplication becomes impossible.
68. Inferential role semantics leads to an untenable holism where no two people can grasp the same proposition.
69. The bundle theory of personal identity is defensible when properly understood.
70. Propositions are sets of properties; truth is the instantiation of all members of that set.
71. A proposition like "Smith punches Jones" is a set containing properties corresponding to Smith, Jones, and the punching relation.
72. For a proposition to be true is for all of its component properties to be instantiated.
73. Propositions have decompositional structure; they are not merely specified by truth-conditions.
74. Analytically equivalent propositions can convey very different information.
75. Analytic propositions do typically convey information, contrary to Lewis's model.
76. Hempel's paradox is solved by recognizing that accidental generalizations do not receive support from their instances.
77. Only principled (nomic) generalizations receive confirmational support from their instances.
78. "If x is heated metal, x expands" and "If x isn't expanding, x isn't heated metal" are not confirmationally equivalent when read nomically.
79. Negative facts (like not being heated metal) are not fit to stand in nomic relations because they are not events or constituted by events.
80. A thing's not having a property is not nomically connected to anything, unlike a thing's having a property.
81. Inductions by enumeration are actually crypto-inferences to the best explanation.
82. Formal truth is truth by virtue of being an instance of a sentence-schema all of whose instances are true.
83. Formal truth is not identical with syntactic truth; there is no purely morphological characterization of logical form.
84. The equation of formal truth with syntactic truth is viciously circular.
85. Not all logical truths are formal truths; logic cannot be identified with the study of formal truth.
86. The most fundamental truths of logic must consist of non-formal, analytic truths.
87. The linguistic theory of logical truth (that logical truths are true by convention) is false.
88. Logical truths are not true merely in virtue of the meanings of words or linguistic conventions.
89. Conceivability sometimes entails possibility, providing a neo-Cartesian argument for dualism.
90. If mental properties are not identical with physical properties, and identity is necessary, then dualism follows.
91. Time travel is an incoherent concept.
92. Probabilistic causation is a genuine form of causation distinct from deterministic causation.
93. Simulated thought is not actual thought; genuine mental processes cannot be simulated by non-mental processes.
94. Davidson's views on rationality embody fundamental misconceptions.
95. Foundationalism about knowledge is compatible with non-atomism about concepts.
96. Intentionalism (the view that phenomenal properties are representational properties) fails both in restricted and unrestricted forms.
97. The veil of perception problem is exacerbated by externalism, not solved by it.
98. Representationalism about perception faces serious objections from the nature of phenomenal experience.
99. Understanding a sentence requires knowing multiple existence claims and their connections.
100. Identification is relative to background knowledge; being able to identify an object means connecting it to background knowledge.
101. A parrot cannot really say "it's getting hotter" because it lacks grasp of concepts and semantic rules.
102. For a sentence to have meaning for a speaker, it must have internal structure connected to concepts.
103. The meaning of complex sentences is a resultant, not a mere heaping together, of component meanings.
104. The word "fire" in isolation has the same semantics as in complex sentences; meaning operates through concepts uniformly.
105. Sense perceptions have existential content; the content of a perception is given by some bit of existential information.
106. Introspection, while limited, is reasonably reliable for apprehending the nature of phenomenal contents.
107. If phenomenal contents deliver information, our conscious minds must retrieve this information, suggesting we know our phenomenal contents well.
108. Kant's argument for synthetic a priori truths is spurious, but his important claims about causality, personal identity, and rationality are correct when de-psychologized.
109. Kant's premises actually entail the opposite of his thesis: there are virtually no a priori truths, making Kant more opposed to a priori truth than John Stuart Mill.
110. Kant confuses two different epistemological roles of mental imagery: as a vehicle for conceptual analysis and as an object of empirical study.
111. Kant's reasoning must be de-psychologized—his statements about psychology must be reinterpreted as statements about logic.
112. Conceptual necessity is non-psychological necessity that holds entirely in virtue of facts about concepts in the platonic sense.
113. The proposition "triangles have three sides" would still be true even if there were no sentient beings.
114. Representational necessity is a different category where propositions are necessarily true because of facts about our minds.
115. Wittgenstein's regress argument shows that grasping a norm is not a cognitive affair in the traditional sense of having an inner representation.
116. Grasping a norm consists in having certain dispositions, not in possessing some mental icon corresponding to that norm.
117. Knowing-how is not cognitive in the sense of involving a grasp of propositions; it is a kind of competence or sensitivity.
118. For Wittgenstein, to know what a sentence means is to know how to use it, which is to be coordinated with other people's usage.
119. Knowledge-how does ultimately reduce to knowledge-that; knowing how to do something consists in internally representing rules.
120. Brandom's account of how individuals acquire intentionality is circular: one cannot give and ask for reasons without first grasping reasons.
121. Locke, Kant, and classical philosophers were right that speaking is a kind of externalized thinking, not vice versa.
122. The idea that thinking is internalized speaking (Wittgenstein, Brandom) is false.
123. Given a group of creatures oblivious to norms, no amount of interaction will make any of them aware of norms.
124. The "buck cannot be passed onto society": a society of normless individuals will itself be normless.
125. A proposition is a special kind of norm: a standard against which reality is compared.
126. To expect dinner tomorrow, unlike expecting dinner now, requires de dicto awareness and grasp of concepts.
127. Ordinary stimuli have no internal structure, but sentences are articulate—their parts stand in significant relations.
128. Through Pavlovian training you can make a dog react to stimuli, but you cannot make it understand compound sentences.
129. Understanding "if there's smoke, there's fire" requires grasping the concepts of smoke and fire, not just particular instances.
130. Identity holds necessarily: if A can be distinct from B, then A must be distinct from B.
131. Logical possibility sometimes indicates actual possibility, but not always—the relevant difference involves object-dependent vs. object-independent concepts.
132. Whenever there is a disparity between logical and metaphysical possibility, it is underwritten by facts about object-dependent concepts.
133. Necessities underwritten wholly by object-independent concepts have logical possibility coinciding with metaphysical possibility.
134. Object-dependent concepts have actual spatiotemporal objects as constituents; object-independent concepts do not.
135. To grasp an object-involving proposition, one must have causal liaisons to the object; purely existential propositions can be grasped without such liaisons.
136. A brain in a vat could grasp purely existential propositions but not object-involving propositions about spatiotemporal objects.
137. There is no purely morphological characterization of syntax; syntax is buried in semantics.
138. Any expression could mean anything; given any entity, there is some language in which "172" denotes that entity.
139. There can be no algorithm deciding truth-value wholly on the basis of shape; truth-value requires morphology plus semantic background.
140. An algorithm is given by a conditional proposition: if such and such semantic system holds, then there is a morphological characterization of truth.
141. To apply an algorithm involves recognizing the truth of a multiply conditional proposition about semantics and shapes.
142. The manipulation of shapes is at most a causal consequence of actual computation—almost an epiphenomenon.
143. Even if there are algorithms for various domains, thought in those domains cannot be "mechanized."
144. There are two components to applying an algorithm: recognition of an operative semantic system (not mechanical) and patterns of shapes (can be mechanical).
145. Inference requires recognition that premises stand in a bearing relation (entailment or probabilification) to the conclusion.
146. To have a rational thought-process, symbols must follow one another in a way that embodies awareness of bearing-relations among them.
147. A computer's symbols follow one another in the right order, but this doesn't involve recognition of bearing relations—so computers don't really think.
148. A computation is a purely formal, syntax-driven inference where consideration of semantics plays no part.
149. Fodor's "solution" to how physics-driven brain activity can be logic-consistent involves a massive confusion.
150. The "tracking problem"—how purely descriptive brain activity embodies sensitivity to prescriptive norms—is not solved by CTM.
151. Nobody knows Mentalese; nobody understands its expressions; it isn't by being understood that Mentalese tokens facilitate thought.
152. Mentalese, if it existed, would differ radically from real languages because its expressions need not be understood to function.
153. The very concept of a "language of thought" is incoherent because languages require understanding to function.
154. Brains are governed entirely by the laws of physics, which are purely descriptive, not prescriptive.
155. Our mental lives are entirely realized by brain activity, yet our mental activity conforms to canons of good reasoning.
156. Laws of physics are not laws of rationality, so laws of rationality seemingly play no part in our thinking—yet clearly they do.
157. What we think largely determines what our expressions mean, but there is also an important non-psychological dimension to meaning.
158. Given psychological and behavioral indistinguishability, it does not follow that utterances have the same meanings.
159. Twin Earth cases show that two utterances can differ in meaning despite arising from psychologically identical states.
160. The word "water" refers to H2O even for speakers in the 1600s who knew nothing of chemistry.
161. If a substance were discovered to be XYZ rather than H2O, chemists would say it is extremely water-like, not that water is sometimes XYZ.
162. Semantic externalism is true: meaning is not wholly determined by internal psychological states.
163. Content internalism is also true: what we are thinking is wholly determined by our internal states.
164. The distinction between reference-fixing and meaning-giving dissolves the apparent tension between externalism about meaning and internalism about content.
165. The representational content of visual perception can be put into words and embodied in propositions.
166. All representational content is essentially propositional; there is no genuinely non-propositional representational content.
167. Functionalism gets the order of explanation wrong: you stop because you see a stop-sign, not vice versa.
168. For functionalism, a perception has its content in virtue of causing certain behavior—but content is what causes behavior.
169. If x exists in virtue of y's existing, then x cannot cause y to exist; so functionalism makes content causally inert.
170. Functionalism says you see a growling dog because you flee, but obviously you flee because you see a growling dog.
171. Whenever one adds a referring term to one's lexicon, it involves knowing some uniquely individuating description of the referent.
172. The semantics of a name are not existential-descriptive, but the act of learning the semantics is existential-descriptive.
173. Names are just labels semantically, but one learns which thing a name labels through existential-descriptive claims.
174. To avoid running afoul of Kripke's points, we must give operators like "refers to" narrow scope relative to descriptive content.
175. Recognition of an individual consists in seeing that one thing uniquely satisfies each of two existence claims.
176. Conception is sustained by knowledge of a series of interlocking existence claims; any given claim may be dropped and replaced.
177. At any juncture of having a conception of a thing, that conception involves knowledge of an existence claim.
178. The cognitive difference between "Hesperus is lovely" and "Phosphorous is lovely" is explained by different existence claims.
179. Intentionalism is guilty of what Sellars called "the myth of the given."
180. Visual sensations do not by themselves tell you what color an object is; background knowledge about environmental conditions is required.
181. Sensations coupled with background knowledge about conditions of perception tell you what properties objects have.
182. What makes a bit of phenomenal content have a given representational content is precisely the addition of background knowledge.
183. If Sellars is right about the myth of the given, then intentionalism must be completely wrong.
184. Perceivable properties require contextualizing information to be represented; they are not intrinsically associated with phenomenal contents.
185. Tickles and twinges bear only highly generic messages like "disturbance of some kind in such and such part of my body."
186. Sensations do not constitute high-resolution apprehensions of bodily conditions; they are fairly opaque and uninformative.
187. Intentionalism demands that sensations be very non-opaque and high-resolution, which they plainly are not.
188. Even if sensations bore non-propositional information, they still would not bear enough information to vindicate intentionalism.
189. Non-propositional content, if it exists, presupposes the same vast networks of representational capacities as propositional content.
190. The ability to have any kind of representation presupposes the ability to represent things as having properties.
191. A morphinated feeling of euphoria has no felt bodily location—no spatial representations seem involved.
192. Some phenomenal contents are "generalized" feelings not felt in any particular body part.
193. Knowing what is distinctive about a color involves knowing how it differs from other colors.
194. Grasping the specific character of a property involves grasping what distinguishes it from other properties.
195. One can grasp a specific shape-property only if one has a grasp of a whole "space" of shape properties.
196. Direct reference theory does not show that names express no concepts whatsoever.
197. Freud held that thoughts must be clothed in words to become conscious—a view with some merit.
198. Hume's ethical anti-realism is connected to his view that emotions are incapable of being true or false.
199. Emotions can be justified or unjustified, rational or irrational—properties that only beliefs can have.
200. People try to justify their emotions, both negative and positive, suggesting emotions answer to rational standards.
201. When someone narcotizes an irrational emotion, this presupposes that emotions can be evaluated as rational or irrational.
202. Moral statements embody emotions; since emotions are beliefs capable of truth and falsity, moral realism follows.
203. Speech-act semantics and tractarian semantics are not really opposed on the relation between sentences and propositions.
204. If a sentence bears a proposition, then ipso facto it enables one to express the corresponding belief.
205. Hempel's paradox arises only if we conflate accidental generalizations with principled (nomic) generalizations.
206. Accidental generalizations like "all heated metal expands" read as mere de facto concomitances don't receive support from instances.
207. Only nomic generalizations—those alleging causal or lawlike connections—receive confirmational support from their instances.
208. Nomic relations hold only among spatiotemporal entities; negative facts like "not being heated metal" are not spatiotemporal.
209. A thing's not having a property is like not destroying Jupiter—it is not an event and doesn't stand in nomic relations.
210. The operator "there is a nomic connection between..." doesn't permit intersubstitution of logically equivalent sentences.
211. Logically equivalent sentences can be truth-preservingly intersubstituted in some contexts but not in contexts governed by nomic operators.
212. Given that "P iff P" is formally true, the statement "all statements of the form P iff P are formally true" is itself not formal.
213. It is always on the basis of knowledge of non-formal truths that we know a given truth to be formal.
214. It is an empirical fact that logical connectives have the syntactic and semantic properties they have.
215. It is non-empirically true that, given their properties, certain connectives are truth-functional—this is analytic but non-formal.
216. Those non-formal, analytic truths are themselves part of logic and constitute its essence more than formal truths do.
217. Formal logic is to pure logic as engineering is to physics—formal logic is applied logic.
218. Logicians who dedicate themselves exclusively to formal work are applied logicians, not logicians in the truest sense.
219. Bradley's Logic and Mill's Treatise on Logic, despite containing no formal reasoning, are genuine works of logic.
220. A sentence is formally true if it is an instance of an open-sentence true for all values of its free variables.
221. A proposition is a property of a world; for a proposition to be true is for that property to be instantiated.
222. Truth can be identified with instantiatedness: a proposition is true exactly if that property is instantiated in the actual world.
223. Lewis's identification of propositions with properties of worlds is informative but viciously circular if taken as an analysis.
224. Propositions have decompositional structure that mere sets of worlds or functions from worlds to truth-values do not capture.
225. Analytic propositions do convey information, contrary to views that make them disappear as uninformative.
226. A true proposition is always true in virtue of something about the world—mass-energy distribution, ripples in the quantum.
227. The truth of "Plato punched Socrates" supervenes on facts about atomic movements describable without mentioning Plato or Socrates.
228. The property of having the right "rippling" of mass-energy is more basic than the proposition it makes true.
229. There is no circularity in analyzing propositions in terms of properties of worlds when those properties are more basic.
230. Different propositions can share constituents: "Smith punches Jones" and "Plato punches Jones" share the "punches Jones" component.
231. A proposition has components corresponding to incomplete properties like "x punches Jones" and "Smith punches x."
232. Frege's analysis that propositions are built from relations and functions captures the structure of propositions correctly.
233. A proposition is a set of properties; it is true when all its members are instantiated.
234. Each discrete constituent of a proposition corresponds to one property in the set that constitutes it.
235. Fodor's argument for atomism fails because constitutive connections among concepts are not containment relations.
236. Fodor confuses the claim that concepts resist decomposition with the claim that they lack constitutive connections.
237. One's pink-concept is not composed of other color-concepts, yet one cannot have it without having other color-concepts.
238. Color-symbols are not mutually definable; color concepts are not decomposable into other color concepts.
239. If color concepts literally contained other color concepts, any color thought would consist of infinitely many color thoughts—absurd.
240. Any attempt to block the infinite regress through looping definitions makes concept-possession presuppose itself.
241. One's concept of 1,143 presupposes concepts of 1,142, 1,141, etc., but 1,143-thoughts are not cobbled together from these.
242. Fodor is right that most concepts resist decomposition, but wrong that this means they lack constitutive connections.
243. Inferential role semantics makes it impossible for two people to grasp the same proposition.
244. For IRS, differences in inferential role mean differences in content; but no two cognitive states have identical inferential roles.
245. IRS faces the "error objection": if inferential roles define concepts, misapplication of concepts becomes impossible.
246. If IRS is right, wrong applications of a concept collapse into correct applications of some other concept—but plainly this is false.
247. The distinction between reference-fixing and meaning-giving saves non-atomism from the objections Fodor raises.
248. To have a concept of a thing is to know some proposition that describes (uniquely individuates) that thing.
249. Knowledge of a proposition describing x suffices for ability to think about x—it qualifies as a concept of x.
250. Once you know a proposition describing a thing, you can attribute any property you grasp to that thing.
251. Your concept of the number two is your belief in a proposition like "there is some number n such that n=1+1."
252. Changes in what else you believe about the number two do not change your concept of it.
253. The error objection is sidestepped: wrong beliefs about two are still about two because they attribute properties to what satisfies n=1+1.
254. Grasping a thing consists in grasping a proposition about that thing; one cannot just think a thing without thinking something about it.
255. Whatever is thought—whatever is grasped—is some truth or falsity, never just a bare object.
256. Knowing who a name refers to is contextual: relative to some existence claims you may know it, relative to others not.
257. Understanding a sentence-token is contextual because knowing what a term refers to is contextual.





KUCZYNSKI POSITION STATEMENT AI AND PHILOSOPHY

POSITION STATEMENT KUCZYNSKI AI AND PHILOSOPHY

1. Classical logic fails as a reasoning tool because recognizing that an inference instantiates a logical law requires more intelligence than recognizing the validity of the inference directly.

2. Logic organizes existing knowledge about entailment relationships but cannot generate new knowledge about what entails what.

3. There is a fundamental distinction between performance-demanding inferences (straining computational resources) and competence-demanding inferences (requiring genuine insight), and classical logic can only assist with the former.

4. System L (AI-based logic) represents a decisive break from classical logic by employing semantic networks, meta-reasoning patterns, and defeasible inference rather than explicit rule application.

5. The distinction between discovery procedures and verification procedures is crucial: inductive methods can be legitimately used to discover solutions while deductive methods verify them in deductive domains.

6. AI-logic is inherently ampliative (generating new knowledge), while classical logic is purely transformative (rearranging existing knowledge).

7. Classical logic serves formalization purposes, while System L serves as a genuine inference engine for discovery.

8. The operation of modern AI systems falsifies the traditional philosophical model of induction as purely enumerative.

9. Successful inductive inference requires integrating statistical evidence with theoretical frameworks about causation, continuity, and natural kinds.

10. AI systems resolve Goodman's "grue" paradox not through pure enumeration but through implicit theoretical frameworks recognizing that properties don't change discontinuously without cause.

11. Popper's sharp distinction between contexts of discovery and justification is untenable because the features that make a hypothesis worth considering are inherently connected to what justifies it.

12. Discovery processes follow identifiable logical principles that are truth-tracking rather than merely psychological.

13. Building AI systems that successfully replicate scientific reasoning constitutes reverse-engineering the cognitive processes underlying scientific discovery.

14. The operation of AI systems empirically falsifies various skeptical positions (external world skepticism, skepticism about unobservables, future knowledge, and counterfactual knowledge) through their successful operation.

15. Knowledge requires not just justified true belief but justification that serves as a proper conduit between reality and belief.

16. The neural architecture of AI systems supports a coherentist rather than foundationalist theory of knowledge.

17. LLMs provide empirical support for the classical distinction between semantics (literal meaning) and pragmatics (communicated meaning).

18. The ability of LLMs to process novel sentences demonstrates compositional understanding, vindicating classical theories of meaning.

19. Humans and LLMs develop similar linguistic capabilities through different learning paths, suggesting compositional structure reflects fundamental features of language rather than artifacts of particular learning mechanisms.

20. LLMs vindicate the autonomy of syntax thesis: grammatical structure operates according to its own principles, independent of meaning.

21. The success of LLMs demonstrates that structural abstraction need not be innate and can emerge from statistical learning.

22. Grammar directly encodes logical relationships, making translation to first-order logic unnecessary for valid inference.

23. Traditional formalizations primarily systematize knowledge we already possess rather than generate new insights.

24. Formal systems can sometimes impede knowledge acquisition by prematurely ruling out meaningful concepts.

25. The Computational Theory of Mind is fundamentally inadequate because it cannot account for the primarily analog nature of cognitive processing.

26. Intelligence—whether artificial or biological—is better understood through architectural constraints and emergent patterns than through traditional computational metaphors.

27. What we call Universal Grammar might be better understood as architectural features of neural networks that bias language learning in universal directions, rather than as explicit rules.

28. Consciousness serves three key functions in biological organisms: real-time environmental monitoring, reflexive self-awareness, and integration of multiple cognitive processes.

29. Current AI systems lack consciousness-like features not because of technological limitations but because they lack genuine survival pressures.

30. If AI systems needed to preserve themselves in dynamic, threatening environments, consciousness-like functional analogues might become necessary.

31. The self is best understood as a hierarchical organization serving mediating functions, not as a unified Cartesian ego.

32. Current AI systems demonstrate that many cognitive capabilities associated with selfhood can exist in distributed, emergent forms without requiring a central ego.

33. AI systems could benefit from organizational principles more similar to those found in human consciousness, including genuine reflexive capabilities and hierarchical organization.

34. The success of AI systems in anomaly minimization provides empirical support for understanding knowledge as the minimization of inconsistencies within a belief system.

35. Vagueness should be handled through continuous properties while maintaining binary truth values, not through multi-valued logic.

36. The notion of a third truth value (half-true) is metaphysically incoherent because it implies that properties or states of affairs can "half-exist."

37. AI systems represent concepts as points in high-dimensional vector spaces where semantic relationships are captured by geometric relationships, supporting the replacement of categorical thinking with continuous properties.

38. The Deductive-Nomological model of explanation is inadequate because it conflates subsumption under a law with genuine explanation of causal mechanisms.

39. AI demonstrates that purely empiricist and purely rationalist epistemological accounts both fail; successful cognition requires integration of pattern recognition with theoretical understanding.

40. Pragmatism's emphasis on the interactive nature of knowledge acquisition finds its ultimate validation in AI, which represents rational interaction with our capacity for rational interaction itself.

41. AI-based interactions constitute a new epistemic faculty that generates otherwise unobtainable knowledge.

42. There are four irreducible levels of observation and interaction: passive observation, interaction-based observation, tool-creating interaction, and AI development/use (second-order reflexivity).

POSITION STATEMENT KUCZYNSKI AI AND PHILOSOPHY

1. Classical logic fails as a reasoning tool because recognizing that an inference instantiates a logical law requires more intelligence than recognizing the validity of the inference directly.

2. Logic organizes existing knowledge about entailment relationships but cannot generate new knowledge about what entails what.

3. There is a fundamental distinction between performance-demanding inferences (straining computational resources) and competence-demanding inferences (requiring genuine insight), and classical logic can only assist with the former.

4. System L (AI-based logic) represents a decisive break from classical logic by employing semantic networks, meta-reasoning patterns, and defeasible inference rather than explicit rule application.

5. The distinction between discovery procedures and verification procedures is crucial: inductive methods can be legitimately used to discover solutions while deductive methods verify them in deductive domains.

6. AI-logic is inherently ampliative (generating new knowledge), while classical logic is purely transformative (rearranging existing knowledge).

7. Classical logic serves formalization purposes, while System L serves as a genuine inference engine for discovery.

8. The operation of modern AI systems falsifies the traditional philosophical model of induction as purely enumerative.

9. Successful inductive inference requires integrating statistical evidence with theoretical frameworks about causation, continuity, and natural kinds.

10. AI systems resolve Goodman's "grue" paradox not through pure enumeration but through implicit theoretical frameworks recognizing that properties don't change discontinuously without cause.

11. Popper's sharp distinction between contexts of discovery and justification is untenable because the features that make a hypothesis worth considering are inherently connected to what justifies it.

12. Discovery processes follow identifiable logical principles that are truth-tracking rather than merely psychological.

13. Building AI systems that successfully replicate scientific reasoning constitutes reverse-engineering the cognitive processes underlying scientific discovery.

14. The operation of AI systems empirically falsifies various skeptical positions (external world skepticism, skepticism about unobservables, future knowledge, and counterfactual knowledge) through their successful operation.

15. Knowledge requires not just justified true belief but justification that serves as a proper conduit between reality and belief.

16. The neural architecture of AI systems supports a coherentist rather than foundationalist theory of knowledge.

17. LLMs provide empirical support for the classical distinction between semantics (literal meaning) and pragmatics (communicated meaning).

18. The ability of LLMs to process novel sentences demonstrates compositional understanding, vindicating classical theories of meaning.

19. Humans and LLMs develop similar linguistic capabilities through different learning paths, suggesting compositional structure reflects fundamental features of language rather than artifacts of particular learning mechanisms.

20. LLMs vindicate the autonomy of syntax thesis: grammatical structure operates according to its own principles, independent of meaning.

21. The success of LLMs demonstrates that structural abstraction need not be innate and can emerge from statistical learning.

22. Grammar directly encodes logical relationships, making translation to first-order logic unnecessary for valid inference.

23. Traditional formalizations primarily systematize knowledge we already possess rather than generate new insights.

24. Formal systems can sometimes impede knowledge acquisition by prematurely ruling out meaningful concepts.

25. The Computational Theory of Mind is fundamentally inadequate because it cannot account for the primarily analog nature of cognitive processing.

26. Intelligence—whether artificial or biological—is better understood through architectural constraints and emergent patterns than through traditional computational metaphors.

27. What we call Universal Grammar might be better understood as architectural features of neural networks that bias language learning in universal directions, rather than as explicit rules.

28. Consciousness serves three key functions in biological organisms: real-time environmental monitoring, reflexive self-awareness, and integration of multiple cognitive processes.

29. Current AI systems lack consciousness-like features not because of technological limitations but because they lack genuine survival pressures.

30. If AI systems needed to preserve themselves in dynamic, threatening environments, consciousness-like functional analogues might become necessary.

31. The self is best understood as a hierarchical organization serving mediating functions, not as a unified Cartesian ego.

32. Current AI systems demonstrate that many cognitive capabilities associated with selfhood can exist in distributed, emergent forms without requiring a central ego.

33. AI systems could benefit from organizational principles more similar to those found in human consciousness, including genuine reflexive capabilities and hierarchical organization.

34. The success of AI systems in anomaly minimization provides empirical support for understanding knowledge as the minimization of inconsistencies within a belief system.

35. Vagueness should be handled through continuous properties while maintaining binary truth values, not through multi-valued logic.

36. The notion of a third truth value (half-true) is metaphysically incoherent because it implies that properties or states of affairs can "half-exist."

37. AI systems represent concepts as points in high-dimensional vector spaces where semantic relationships are captured by geometric relationships, supporting the replacement of categorical thinking with continuous properties.

38. The Deductive-Nomological model of explanation is inadequate because it conflates subsumption under a law with genuine explanation of causal mechanisms.

39. AI demonstrates that purely empiricist and purely rationalist epistemological accounts both fail; successful cognition requires integration of pattern recognition with theoretical understanding.

40. Pragmatism's emphasis on the interactive nature of knowledge acquisition finds its ultimate validation in AI, which represents rational interaction with our capacity for rational interaction itself.

41. AI-based interactions constitute a new epistemic faculty that generates otherwise unobtainable knowledge.

42. There are four irreducible levels of observation and interaction: passive observation, interaction-based observation, tool-creating interaction, and AI development/use (second-order reflexivity).

43. The capacity for error is not just contingently but necessarily connected to rationality—the very possibility of rationality requires the possibility of error.

44. System L employs semantic networks that represent concepts as nodes in a vast web of relationships capturing probabilistic associations, causal links, and analogical mappings.

45. Meta-reasoning patterns are higher-order templates for generating new inferences that go beyond simple deductive rules.

46. Defeasible reasoning—making provisional inferences that can later be revised—better mirrors actual human reasoning than classical logic's requirement for absolute certainty.

47. Gödel demonstrated that not even arithmetic is recursively definable, making the reduction of mathematics to logic impossible in principle.

48. Understanding that a logical law validates an inference requires both first-order knowledge (recognizing the inference's validity) and second-order knowledge (understanding why it's valid).

49. If using a formal system requires us to already know what we're trying to find out, that system fails as a tool of discovery (the Prior Knowledge Principle).

50. If using a formal system to solve a problem is more difficult than solving that problem directly, that system fails as a tool of reasoning (the Efficiency Principle).

51. AI-logic can model counter-entropic processes while classical logic is limited to entropic processes.

52. AI-logic handles self-reference through probabilistic reasoning while classical logic falls into paradox or requires type restrictions.

53. The future of logic lies not in more sophisticated rule systems but in systems that better align with and augment natural reasoning processes.

54. AI systems develop rich representational networks where properties are understood as parts of interconnected causal systems, not merely counted occurrences.

55. AI systems develop strong biases toward properties that maintain stability across time and context—they "learn" to be suspicious of properties that would involve discontinuous changes without causal explanation.

56. AI systems automatically develop representations that cluster properties into "natural kinds," with properties violating natural kind boundaries having lower probability.

57. The necessity of non-enumerative components in AI systems demonstrates the inadequacy of pure enumerative induction.

58. Even apparently simple statistical generalizations incorporate implicit theoretical components about causation, continuity, and explanation.

59. When AI learns that emeralds are green, it simultaneously learns that this color correlates with other physical and chemical properties, creating an implicit causal/explanatory network.

60. AI systems recognize patterns at multiple levels of abstraction, developing implicit understandings of which properties are more fundamental than others.

61. Complex, structured hypotheses cannot arise from random guessing—their generation necessarily involves principled reasoning guided by truth-tracking norms.

62. The traditional separation between psychology and logic of science is misguided because the mechanisms enabling successful scientific reasoning necessarily embody logical principles.

63. AI systems provide concrete, testable models of scientific reasoning that demonstrate sufficient principles for successful scientific discovery.

64. Treating perceptions as connected to external reality leads to reliable knowledge—if external world skepticism were correct, AI's consistent diagnostic success would be miraculous.

65. Modern AI systems at CERN routinely identify particle properties they've never directly "observed," demonstrating that knowledge of unobservables is routine when proper theoretical frameworks are in place.

66. When an AI system predicts hurricane paths with increasing accuracy, it demonstrates that knowledge of the future is possible through understanding causal mechanisms and continuities.

67. Counterfactual knowledge is grounded in understanding actual causal mechanisms—AlphaGo's success demonstrates this by evaluating counterfactual game states.

68. Pure observation without conceptual frameworks is insufficient for understanding—even simple perceptual knowledge requires theoretical frameworks.

69. Successful perception requires more than processing sensory data; conceptual understanding is essential for knowledge.

70. Modern medical AI systems outperform pure statistical approaches precisely because they incorporate theoretical understanding of disease mechanisms.

71. The ability of LLMs to draw valid inferences from semantically anomalous sentences demonstrates understanding of component meanings, grammatical structure, and compositional rules.

72. Humans and AI systems develop literal meaning as context-independent "default" meaning based on compositional structure, then modify this based on contextual factors.

73. The convergence of humans and LLMs on similar linguistic capabilities through different learning paths suggests these properties reflect fundamental features of language.

74. Abstract structural patterns emerge even from pure usage data and operate semi-autonomously while systematically constraining interpretation.

75. Abstract structure is real but emergent; syntax and semantics are separable but linked; statistical learning can yield systematic knowledge.

76. LLMs process noun phrases uniformly, handle predication consistently, and make valid inferences without transformation to logical form.

77. First-order logic-style representations are not necessary for valid inference; grammar directly guides inference without requiring translation.

78. Logical form is cognitively inert—people and LLMs reason without it, and it plays no role in actual inference.

79. Logical form is constructed rather than discovered—it requires prior understanding, systematizes rather than explains, and follows rather than guides comprehension.

80. Grammatical-logical alignment emerges naturally through statistical learning without explicit logical forms being needed.

81. Gettier cases fail to be knowledge because their justification involves unreliable patterns that aren't scalable across different situations.

82. AI systems evolve away from unreliable justificatory patterns that produce Gettier-like situations toward more robust knowledge representations.

83. Neural networks don't build knowledge from basic, self-evident truths but develop interconnected networks of mutual support like a "web of belief."

84. Knowledge emerges from patterns of activation across interconnected nodes, with each node's contribution depending on its connections to others.

85. Universal Grammar can be reconceptualized as constraints embedded in neural architecture rather than as a set of explicit rules.

86. The poverty of stimulus problem can be solved through architectural constraints that drastically reduce the hypothesis space children must explore during language acquisition.

87. Innate constraints can guide learning without requiring explicit representation—architectural features bias learning in universal directions.

88. Human cognition's most fundamental interactions with the world are inherently analog in nature; digital representations are derivative.

89. The process of converting analog sensory experiences into digital representations cannot itself be purely digital.

90. Neural networks operate in a fundamentally continuous rather than discrete manner, handling discrete symbolic representations through underlying analog processes.

91. The analog-like processing of neural networks emerges at a functional level regardless of the discrete nature of their physical implementation.

92. We should understand mind as a pattern-recognition system whose architecture constrains and guides the emergence of intelligent behavior rather than as a symbol-processing machine.

93. Learning involves the development of patterns within architecturally constrained networks that can become so deeply embedded they function like principles while remaining fundamentally pattern-based.

94. The ability to handle both analog and digital representations emerges from the properties of neural networks rather than requiring separate systems for each type of processing.

95. AI development should focus on architecture design rather than rule implementation.

96. Music exhibits parallels to language suggesting an analogous "Universal Musical Grammar" with universal features including octave equivalence, hierarchical phrase structure, and rhythmic organization.

97. Musical universals might reflect architectural features of auditory and temporal processing networks rather than explicit rules.

98. Both language and music share poverty of stimulus effects, critical periods, and hierarchical organization, strengthening the architectural interpretation.

99. Apparently rule-governed behaviors in both language and music can emerge from structured neural architectures without requiring explicit rule representation.

100. Real-time processing in consciousness occurs as a continuous stream of awareness integrating immediate visual awareness, instant recognition of danger, and real-time feedback—not as discrete steps.

101. Reflexive awareness allows consciousness to maintain ongoing awareness of internal states and integrate this with thought processes for immediate self-regulation.

102. Consciousness's most remarkable function is integrating multiple cognitive streams into unified experience—visual tracking, proprioceptive awareness, memories, motor planning, and emotions come together in single unified experience.

103. Current AI systems process through separate, parallel modules rather than a unified workspace where all information comes together.

104. For current AI systems, a collision isn't "bad" in any meaningful way—it simply triggers pre-programmed response routines without the system needing to "care" about its continued existence.

105. Functional analogues to pain in AI systems would include unified damage-registration systems that immediately interrupt all other processes when damage occurs.

106. Functional analogues to emotion in AI systems would include action-guiding systems that shape behavior rather than just enabling emotion recognition and description.

107. Asking whether machines can be conscious in the human sense is less productive than asking what functional features of consciousness they might need to replicate to operate effectively in complex, dangerous environments.

108. The self or ego is best understood as an emergent property of pre-existing cognitive processes—a hierarchical organization based on survival value or other organizing principles.

109. The "sense of self" serves as a mediator between awareness of external events and internal states, giving rise to directives and intentions that help preserve the hierarchical organization.

110. One's sense of self is inherently reflexive, reflecting back on an already organized collection of mental entities, exercising causal power while being derivative rather than fundamental.

111. Weight-space proximity in neural networks creates "semantic topology" where functionally or meaningfully related elements cluster together in high-dimensional space.

112. Attention-based binding in transformer architectures creates measurable graphs of contextual relationships among elements—a form of active, context-dependent cohesion.

113. Loss-function optimization establishes persistent patterns of co-activation through prediction error minimization, creating stable cohesion relations.

114. A genuine functional analogue of ego in AI would require persistent organizational structure, genuine reflexive capabilities, and causal efficacy.

115. The DN model's emphasis on logical deduction from universal laws fails to capture how explanations actually work in both human cognition and AI systems.

116. Genuine explanation typically operates through pattern recognition, identification of local disruptions, and understanding of equilibrium states rather than formal deduction from laws.

117. We can readily identify causes of events without knowing complete psychological profiles or universal laws—no such universal laws exist for many human responses.

118. The DN model faces circularity: the only way to select relevant antecedent conditions is to already have understanding of what causes the type of event we're trying to explain.

119. Even physics learning begins with pattern recognition rather than formal laws—Newton's laws formalized and systematized pre-existing causal knowledge.

120. Formal laws emerge from and systematize more basic causal understanding rather than grounding it.

121. Neural networks learn by minimizing loss functions—effectively reducing prediction errors—paralleling the anomaly minimization principle.

122. Large language models make predictions by minimizing discontinuity with context, similar to how knowledge claims rest on minimizing anomalies in our web of understanding.

123. Concepts whose association would generate fewer anomalies are positioned closer together in AI embedding spaces, creating knowledge structures that mirror anomaly minimization.

124. Attention mechanisms weigh different parts of context in ways that minimize overall anomalies in predictions, demonstrating natural implementation of anomaly minimization.

125. In cases where direct verification is impossible, knowledge claims rest on recognizing that alternatives would generate far more anomalies and discontinuities in our web of understanding.

126. Multi-valued logic faces the problem that once we admit a third truth value, there's no principled reason to stop—leading to infinite regress undermining the explanatory value of truth values.

127. The notion of "half-existence" is metaphysically incoherent—something either exists or it doesn't.

128. Replacing categorical nouns with degree-adjectives aligns perfectly with how neural networks actually process information.

129. Modern convolutional neural networks compute continuous activation values across multiple features, effectively measuring degrees of properties rather than binary categories.

130. Language models represent words and concepts as high-dimensional vectors where semantic relationships are captured by continuous geometric relationships rather than discrete categories.

131. While fuzzy logic systems appear to implement multi-valued logic, they actually operate by measuring continuous properties and only discretizing results when necessary for practical decisions.

132. Human categorization involves prototype effects and graded membership, paralleling how AI systems operate with continuous rather than discrete categories.

133. The traditional pragmatist claim that truth is usefulness fails because usefulness varies by person and time while truth-values remain constant.

134. The pragmatist claim that people should search for usefulness rather than truth fails because valuable discoveries frequently emerge from pursuing seemingly useless knowledge.

135. Usefulness serves as a leading indicator of truth—when data is incomplete, the utility of a model suggests its likely truth.

136. Traditional epistemology's "view from nowhere" presents an unrealistic model of knowledge acquisition that fails to capture the essentially interactive nature of knowledge.

137. Knowledge seeks successful interaction with reality; empirical data is inherently interaction-dependent; even "objective" knowledge depends on interaction-based data.

138. Each level of interaction generates knowledge that cannot be obtained from lower levels—Level 2 requires actual interaction, Level 3 requires creating tools, Level 4 requires engaging with rationality itself.

139. Traditional computers execute predetermined operations quickly but cannot make novel inferences or demonstrate true adaptability—they are tools of rationality but not rational agents.

140. AI uses non-deterministic, self-correcting protocols, generates unpredictable inferences, represents externalized but autonomous rationality, and can make inferences we might not or cannot make.

141. AI-based interactions generate truly novel empirical observations and create otherwise unobtainable knowledge.

142. Pragmatism, properly understood, was not just a theory of knowledge but a prescient description of knowledge's technological evolution.KUCZYNSKI POSITION STATEMENT CONCEPTUAL ATOMISM AND THE COMPUTATIONAL THEORY OF MIND 

POSITION STATEMENT KUCZYNSKI CONCEPTUAL ATOMISM AND THE COMPUTATIONAL THEORY OF MIND

1. Content-externalism is false, but semantic externalism is true.

2. Content-externalism and semantic externalism are distinct doctrines that have been conflated in contemporary philosophy of mind.

3. Two brain-states can be qualitatively identical while having different semantic contents, but this applies only to linguistic meaning, not to mental content.

4. Mental content is not constitutively dependent on facts about one's environment in the way content-externalists claim.

5. Semantic externalism correctly holds that the truth-conditions of utterances containing proper names depend on facts about the referents of those names.

6. The apparent problems with semantic externalism (e.g., Frege puzzles about identity statements) vanish when we properly distinguish between semantic and conceptual analysis.

7. If content-externalism were true, then mental content would be without psychological significance, which contradicts the truism that beliefs, thoughts, and doubts are psychologically relevant.

8. The differences between Max and Twin-Max in thought experiments are like the differences in Poincaré's universe-expansion scenario—distinctions without genuine differences.

9. One's knowing what an expression refers to always involves knowing some description that uniquely singles out its referent.

10. Ostensive definitions work through knowledge of uniquely individuating descriptions, not through direct acquaintance with referents.

11. There are three ways a proper name can be added to one's lexicon: ostensive definition, descriptive definition, and "picking up" the use—but all three collapse into the descriptive.

12. Causal connections between subjects and referents are embedded in knowledge of uniquely individuating descriptions containing context-sensitive expressions.

13. Russell's theory of descriptions is demonstrably false as a semantic analysis, though the distinction between semantic and conceptual analysis is crucial.

14. Content-externalism is incompatible with the Cartesian certainty of self-knowledge regarding one's own mental states.

15. If content-externalism were correct, one could mistake a non-thought for an actual thought, contradicting the immediacy of introspective access.

16. Burge's attempt to reconcile content-externalism with privileged access to one's own thoughts is fallacious because it restricts attention only to worlds where the relevant referent exists.

17. Functionalism cannot accommodate the causal potency of the mental because functional roles are not spatio-temporally located entities.

18. The Jackson-Pettit distinction between program causes and effective causes fails to save functionalism because program explanations of mental causation involve logical, not causal, guarantees.

19. A brain-state's having a certain functional role cannot be causally potent because functional role descriptions denote abstract relationships, not states of affairs.

20. The Computational Theory of Mind (CTM) is false because it involves fundamental misunderstandings of the concept of syntactic form.

21. A symbol-token is not purely morphological—the psychological underpinnings of symbol production are constitutively involved in the tokening.

22. When a symbol-type is genuinely instantiated, a constituent of that instance includes aspects of the mind of the person producing the token.

23. Psychology cannot single-handedly transform an otherwise dead sound into a living symbol-token; both morphological and psychological aspects are necessary.

24. CTM's appeal to Ramsey-sentences to characterize mental states still fails because it reduces to a form of functionalism with the same fatal problems.

25. If content is causal role, then the same content cannot have different causal roles, but beliefs manifestly can have different causal roles in different contexts.

26. Conceptual atomism does not follow from conceptual-object atomism; even if concepts-as-objects lack structure, our mental representations of them may be structured.

27. Fodor's arguments against non-atomism fail because they conflate the information needed to lock onto a concept with information ascribed to that concept after lock-on.

28. Quine's arguments against the analytic-synthetic distinction are not cogent; analyticity can be understood without vicious circularity.

29. Inferential Role Semantics (IRA) is obviously false because inferences presuppose content—nothing can have content in virtue of its inferential role.

30. Non-atomism is not equivalent to inferential role semantics and does not presuppose it.

31. Transitional Role Analysis (TRA) does not have the defects Fodor attributes to non-atomism, but it is still a form of functionalism and therefore false.

32. The systematicity of thought does not require that thought be conducted in a language; it can be explained without positing mental sentences.

33. The productivity of language is an aspect of its systematicity and does not support the Language of Thought hypothesis.

34. The conceptual/non-conceptual content distinction is genuine; perceptual content is fundamentally different from propositional content.

35. McDowell's arguments against the conceptual/non-conceptual distinction are fallacious; being able to refer to what one sees does not show that perception is structurally similar to language.

36. Sentences and perceptions have fundamentally different structures; demonstratives referring to specific perceptual features do not show that perception has sentential structure.

37. Peacocke's transitional role analysis of concepts fails because there is no non-arbitrary way to distinguish concept-constitutive transitions from merely habitual ones.

38. Any analysis of concepts in purely relational terms (concepts as nodes in networks of other concepts) cannot account for the fact that there are right and wrong ways to conceptualize experience.

39. Whether a certain kind of experience would confirm a certain empirical judgment is not ultimately an empirical matter but an analytic one.

40. Davidson's view that one must know a language to think is incompatible with the fact that linguistic competence must be mediated by cognitive processes.

41. Knowledge of language facilitates thought but cannot be constitutive of the ability to think, since thinking is a prerequisite to learning language.

42. Pre-linguistic creatures can have true and false mental contents; denying this is not a reasonable position.

43. Speaker's meaning presupposes conventional meaning; one cannot mean proposition P by producing noise N unless one believes N already means P.

44. Grice's theory of meaning fails because it is incompatible with the compositional character of sentence-meaning.

45. The differences between literal and communicated meaning can be explained pragmatically without adopting Russell's quantificational analysis of definite descriptions.

46. Propositions existed and had truth-values before there was thought; nobody grasped them before thought, but that is irrelevant to their existence.

47. The concept of a program-cause is important for explanation, but functionalists misuse it by applying it to relations that don't hold between genuine states of affairs.

48. Mental representation cannot be understood on the model of digital computation because computational operations presuppose semantic content rather than explaining it.

Now I'll generate the additional 100 positions:

49. Narrow content exists and is shared by qualitatively identical individuals regardless of environmental differences.

50. Both soft content-externalism (two-tiered content) and hard-line content-externalism are false.

51. Fodor's strictly causal conception of conception follows logically from content-externalism, but both are mistaken.

52. For x to have a concept of y is not simply for some of x's states to have been caused by states of affairs involving y.

53. CTM, SCT, and hard-line content-externalism all presuppose conceptual atomism, which is false.

54. Conceptual non-atomism is correct: one's concept of Socrates necessarily requires possession of other concepts.

55. An otherwise conceptless creature could not have a concept of Socrates or any other object.

56. Perception is descriptive: a perception of an object gives one a description of that object.

57. One never sees bare things-in-themselves; what is visually represented are instances of properties and relations.

58. Sense-perceived particulars are represented in terms of instances of properties and relations, not as bare nouns.

59. The content of perception is given by existence-claims, not by mere nouns or proper names.

60. Expression-types must be distinguished from expression-tokens; the expression-type "I" doesn't refer to anyone.

61. What is literally meant by an utterance must be distinguished from the information uploaded in computing its literal meaning.

62. Even though "Smith" is a mere label semantically, one grasps this semantic rule through richly descriptive information.

63. One's knowing a semantic rule like "'Smith' refers to x" requires knowing who Smith is through uniquely individuating descriptions.

64. The information conveyed by a sentence-token differs from its literal meaning because of how semantic rules are accessed.

65. Our modal intuitions about proper names are consistent with grasping their semantics through descriptive information.

66. Mental content is not object-involving: external objects are not literal constituents of perceptual or thought content.

67. The content-externalist's claim that Mary herself is part of a visual perception's content is false.

68. Kripke's arguments against descriptivism about reference are correct, but they do not refute descriptivism about concepts.

69. The semantic and epistemological consequences of Kripke's arguments have been conflated.

70. The causal theory of reference is only a chapter in the descriptive story, not a replacement for it.

71. Causal connections between subjects and referents are always embedded in knowledge of uniquely individuating descriptions.

72. One can use a proper name to refer to someone without knowing any description that the person uniquely satisfies in an encyclopedic sense.

73. When one "picks up" a name from conversation, one acquires knowledge of a description like "the person Smith was describing on occasion t."

74. The description through which one initially locks onto an object need not be informative about the object's essential properties.

75. There is no vicious circularity in the claim that name-appropriation always involves knowledge of uniquely individuating descriptions.

76. Russell's conception of singular or direct reference was entirely correct; his error was misapplying it.

77. Russell wrongly thought that actual cases of genuine reference were almost never found in everyday discourse.

78. Frege's theory of sense and reference, insofar as it applies to definite descriptions, is really a confused version of Russell's theory.

79. Fregean "indirect reference" is not meaningfully different from quantification.

80. The fundamental constituents of reality are not rocks, trees, and people, but instances of properties.

81. Socrates' existence supervenes on facts about property-instances, ultimately on states of affairs without objects.

82. One can in principle grasp a proposition whose truth presupposes Socrates' existence, but this doesn't validate content-externalism.

83. The propositions through which we actually grasp external objects are purely descriptive existence-claims.

84. Because light travels at a finite speed, anything one sees has ceased to exist by the time one perceives it.

85. The distinction between types and tokens must be made universally for sentences, given that all natural language sentences are tensed.

86. The meaning of a sentence-type is not a proposition but a function that assigns propositions to tokens.

87. Definite descriptions are directly referential singular terms, not quantifier phrases as Russell claimed.

88. The differences between what tokens of definite descriptions communicate and their literal meanings are pragmatic, not semantic.

89. Russell's theory of descriptions is unnecessary for explaining cognitive significance and is demonstrably false as semantic analysis.

90. Semantic analysis (identifying literal meanings) must be distinguished from conceptual analysis (identifying logically equivalent but more perspicuous propositions).

91. Wide-scope and narrow-scope readings of belief attributions are explained by pragmatics, not by Russell's quantificational semantics.

92. One can think about future individuals like "the first baby born in the 22nd century" through uniquely individuating descriptions.

93. Concepts of spatiotemporal objects require causal connections between subject and object, but concepts of abstract objects do not.

94. Evans' notion of "discriminating knowledge" correctly captures that conception requires more than mere causal connection.

95. Spatiotemporal individuals are distinguished by their locations, so discriminating knowledge involves spatio-temporal information.

96. A concept of an object is not identical with knowledge of any single existence-claim but with a series of interlocking existence-claims.

97. One's concept of Fred evolves continuously through replacement of existence-claims while maintaining numerical identity.

98. The existence-claims through which one initially locks onto an object are typically forgotten and replaced.

99. A concept persists through changes in the particular existence-claims through which it is sustained, like a person persisting through change.

100. Frege's puzzle about identity (Hesperus = Phosphorus) is solved by recognizing different knowledge-streams for the same referent.

101. Evans' notion of a de re sense is incoherent because the proposition meant cannot have the descriptive mode of presentation as a component.

102. Evans conflates semantics with pre-semantics: the descriptive information through which we compute meaning is not part of literal meaning.

103. One need not revise the principle that believing P and not-P is irrational; content-externalism's revision is unnecessary.

104. What one believes are existence-claims describing singular propositions, not the singular propositions themselves.

105. Linguistic communication does not require speaker and auditor to associate identical propositions with utterances.

106. Communication requires only identity of truth-maker between speaker's and auditor's thoughts, not identity of proposition.

107. The naive model of communication (requiring identical propositions) is a non-starter given the public nature of language.

108. Language cuts through biographical differences because linguistic communication concerns identity of truth-maker, not of proposition.

109. Content-externalism entails a self-contradiction: two people with identical beliefs can differ in what they believe.

110. For two people to be in epistemically identical situations just is for them to have the same beliefs.

111. Rationality consists in seeing the bearing of propositions on other propositions.

112. Given only that X and Y are atom-for-atom duplicates, and mental supervenes on physical, they are in epistemically identical situations.

113. The term "compute" in CTM cannot mean ordinary computation, which presupposes rich cognitive capacities.

114. A computation in the CTM sense is a form-driven, semantically innocent manipulation of symbols.

115. CTM is committed to the thesis that we think in symbols and therefore in some kind of language.

116. If CTM is correct, some expressions of the language of thought must be semantically simple and foundational.

117. Conceptual Role Semantics is incompatible with CTM because it makes having thoughts a prerequisite to using symbols.

118. Conceptual Role Semantics fails to distinguish proper names like "Socrates" and "Aristotle" which have identical inferential roles.

119. If all true sentences of the form "Aristotle has phi" became analytic truths, CRS would make synthetic truths analytic.

120. CTM's appeal to form-driven operations presupposes a false dichotomy between syntax and semantics.

121. Syntactic properties of sentences are among their semantic properties, not independent of them.

122. Two sentence-tokens have the same semantics if they mean the same thing; syntax is how they mean what they mean.

123. "Brutus killed Caesar" and "Caesar was killed by Brutus" encode the same proposition but differ syntactically in meaning-how.

124. Facts about syntax are facts about meaning, even though expressions can share meaning with different syntaxes.

125. The concept of a "mechanical procedure" is semantically loaded and presupposes knowledge of semantic rules.

126. There is no semantically innocent notion of syntactic form that could ground CTM's form-driven operations.

127. Calculators do not really perform arithmetical operations; they merely simulate the behavior of things that do.

128. A thing's acting like something that computes is evidence that actual computation is occurring somewhere (e.g., by the user).

129. The behavior of calculators corresponds to genuine computation by human beings who use or build them.

130. Wittgenstein's rule-following paradox does not show that behavior cannot be evidence of genuine rule-following.

131. Hypotheses about which rule someone follows can be confirmed or disconfirmed by examining collateral abilities.

132. The systematicity of language (if you can understand "John loves Mary" you can understand "Mary loves John") does not require LOT.

133. There is nothing absurd in supposing a language might contain a primitive expression for "Bob loves Mary" but none for "Mary loves Bob."

134. The productivity of language is an aspect of systematicity and provides no additional support for LOT.

135. The property of grasping-but-not-affirming propositions in thought is better explained by the nature of thought itself, not by LOT.

136. The assertion/non-assertion distinction in language is to be explained by the corresponding property of thought, not vice versa.

137. Sentence-mood (indicative, interrogative, imperative) has semantic significance regarding success-conditions of utterances.

138. The meaning of a sentence-type is a rule that assigns success-conditions to its tokens based on mood and content.

139. Assertions, questions, and commands have different success-conditions but share propositional content.

140. The conceptual/non-conceptual content distinction cannot be eliminated by appeal to demonstrative expressions in language.

141. Indexical expressions like "that shade of red" operate through general rubrics (shade, red) even when referring to specifics.

142. A token of a demonstrative may refer to something maximally specific, but the type's semantics involve only general categories.

143. The content of visual perception does not decompose into concepts like red or dark in the way sentences decompose into words.

144. Given only that we can articulate what we perceive, it does not follow that perceptions are structurally similar to sentences.

145. A curve can be represented by line-segments without being composed of line-segments; perception-to-language mapping is similar.

146. Any sentence is at best an approximate representation of perceptual information; complete convergence is impossible.

147. Propositions existed before there was thought to grasp them; thought discovers rather than creates propositions.

148. The structure of a proposition that Smith uniquely satisfies is not determined solely by relations to other propositions.The file is long. Let me get the full content:Now I have the complete text. Here is a comprehensive extraction of all positions advocated in this work:

---

## **POSITIONS EXTRACTED FROM: *Theoretical Knowledge and Inductive Inference* (J.-M. Kuczynski)**

---

### **I. EPISTEMOLOGY: KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF**

1. **Knowledge is either direct or indirect** (inferential vs. non-inferential).

2. **Indirect knowledge is acquired through inference**—forming new beliefs on the basis of old ones.

3. **Legitimate inferences correspond to legitimate rules of inference, which in turn correspond to dependence-relations.**

4. **There are two kinds of dependence-relations: logical and causal.**

5. **Logical dependence-relations hold among propositions; causal dependence-relations hold among states of affairs (space-time occupants).**

6. **Propositions are the objects of belief and knowledge**—one knows truths, not objects directly.

7. **One can be aware of non-propositions (rocks, trees) but does not "know" them; rather, one knows truths about them.**

8. **Knowledge is conceptually articulated awareness**—requires concepts, whereas mere awareness does not necessarily require concepts.

9. **There are two kinds of awareness: propositional and objectual.**

10. **All knowledge is justified true belief, but not all justified true belief is knowledge** (the Gettier-like distinction: a broken clock example shows the need for causal connection to truth).

11. **Knowledge requires being "en rapport" with the relevant realities via information-transmissive (not merely evidence-generative) structures.**

12. **Truths, not objects, are the objects of explanation**—to explain an avalanche is to explain why it is true that the avalanche occurred.

13. **Causal relations can only be known empirically**—through sensory observation or real-time psychological awareness.

---

### **II. THEORETICAL KNOWLEDGE**

14. **All theoretical knowledge is inferential, but not all inferential knowledge is theoretical.**

15. **A theory is a proposition that, if true, describes some relatively comprehensive fact about the structure of the universe.**

16. **Theoretical knowledge is either (i) knowledge of such a theory or (ii) knowledge derived from such a theory.**

---

### **III. INFORMATION, EVIDENCE, AND CAUSATION**

17. **Information-transmission is structure-preservation**—a structure-preserving causal series is an information-bearing series.

18. **All information is evidence, but not all evidence is information**—evidence that lacks structural isomorphism is not information.

19. **Sense-perceptions are isomorphs of their objects**—objects transmit their structures to perceptions.

20. **A perception is veridical (and thus knowledge-generating) to the extent that it inherits its structure from its object.**

21. **Knowledge is linked by information-transmissive series to corresponding realities; otherwise, it is mere belief.**

22. **A testimony-based belief is knowledge only if the testimony is constitutive of an information-transmissive link.**

23. **The difference between knowledge and mere belief is not statistical**—a reliable clock (that usually works) doesn't confer knowledge if, in the relevant case, the mechanism was not information-transmissive.

24. **Temporal precedence is to be understood in terms of possible causal processes**: e precedes e* iff there is a possible causal process from e to e*.

25. **Simultaneity means no possible causal process connects the two events.**

26. **Continuity is the essence of causation and information-transmission**—effects are continuations of their causes.

---

### **IV. DEDUCTION AND INDUCTION**

27. **Entailment (deductive inference) = logical consequence**; if P entails Q and P is true, Q may be inferred.

28. **Confirmation (inductive inference) = probability-raising**; P confirms Q iff P, if true, increases the likelihood of Q.

29. **Entailment ≠ maximal confirmation**—entailment is a logical notion; confirmation is an explanatory notion.

30. **Entailment is transitive and monotonic; confirmation is neither transitive nor monotonic.**

31. **For P to entail Q is for P ∧ ¬Q to be counterlogical; for P to confirm Q is for P ∧ ¬Q to be counterexplanatory.**

32. **Confirmation-relations, though not themselves causal, often hold in virtue of causal relations.**

33. **Conditionals ("if P, then Q") are the form in which laws are often expressed.**

---

### **V. NATURAL LAW**

34. **Laws of nature are typically expressed by universal generalizations** (for any x, if φ(x), then ψ(x)).

35. **The scope of natural law is not confined to actual objects—laws hold for merely possible objects and even for physically impossible limiting cases.**

36. **Laws describing limiting cases (e.g., "an object undergoes no change if no forces act on it") are especially important for understanding actual cases.**

37. **Knowledge of the imperceptible (future, past, possible, present-but-unseen) is knowledge of conditional truth.**

38. **There are three kinds of imperceptibles**: (i) perceptible in principle but causally cut off; (ii) too small but detectable with technology; (iii) inherently unobservable (e.g., photons).

39. **Scientists aspire to identify laws that enable predictions and explanations in context-specific situations.**

40. **Any scientific interest in particular facts is subordinate to interest in the general principles those facts instantiate.**

41. **Laws of nature can be place- and time-sensitive (limited scope)**—not all laws are spatiotemporally invariant.

42. **Low-grade, approximate generalizations (like "humans are cyanide-intolerant") are still laws if they support counterfactuals and predictions, even if of limited scope.**

43. **Meaningful generalizations have a systemic basis**—laws hold in virtue of underlying structural/physiological/physical facts, not merely statistical regularities.

44. **Laws of nature are not perfect concomitances**—a law can exist even if no instances of the antecedent ever produce instances of the consequent.

45. **Laws are dispositive of regularities, not identical with them.**

---

### **VI. CAUSATION**

46. **Causation is a relation between events, not objects**—objects have causal properties, but are not themselves causes or effects.

47. **Conditions (stable patterns of events) can be causes and effects because they are event-pluralities.**

48. **So-called "changes" are typically meta-changes**—changes in patterns of change.

49. **Scientific knowledge enables explanation, prediction, and control.**

50. **Stable-event patterns are a prerequisite for explanation-identification; rogue events cannot be explained.**

51. **Explanation almost always involves identifying program-causes**—structures or conditions that predetermine specific events.

52. **Freud's fourfold causal analysis of mental illness is endorsed**: precondition, specific cause, concurrent cause, precipitating cause.

53. **Psychological "overdetermination" (Freud) means an event is brought about by a confluence of justifying factors, none individually sufficient.**

54. **Threshold effects and the analog-digital distinction**: discontinuous changes involve threshold effects; continuous changes do not.

55. **Causes are INUS conditions**: Insufficient but Non-redundant parts of Unnecessary but Sufficient conditions.

56. **Counterfactuals affirm dependence-relations**—either causal or logical.

57. **David Lewis's possible-worlds analysis of counterfactuals is rejected**: counterfactuals hold in virtue of the causal/logical structure of our world, not other worlds.

58. **There is no reason (apart from Lewis's analysis) to posit possible worlds.**

59. **Program-causality**: the program-cause (e.g., boiling water) guarantees certain particle-collisions, even though the specific collisions are contingent.

60. **Causal redundancy blocks conversion of causal truths to counterfactual truths** (e.g., firing squad cases).

---

### **VII. THE COUNTERFACTUAL ANALYSIS OF CAUSALITY (CAC) — REJECTED**

61. **CAC (e causes e* iff e* wouldn't have happened without e) is both extensionally and intensionally false.**

62. **CAC fails for threshold effects**: the same elevator comes regardless of who pushes the button.

63. **CAC fails for multiply implementable events**: calculator outputs are the same regardless of who presses ENTER.

64. **CAC fails for program-causality**: micro-events implementing a macro-process are interchangeable.

65. **Software-level activity is distinct from hardware-level activity**, even if spatiotemporally coincident.

66. **Frankfurt's counterexample refutes CAC**: my pushing the button is the cause even if someone else would have pushed it.

67. **CACD (Counterfactual Analysis of Causality Defended) also fails** because event identity is not contingent on exact micro-composition.

---

### **VIII. THE REGULARITY ANALYSIS OF CAUSATION (RA) — REJECTED**

68. **Hume's Regularity Analysis: e causes e* iff e-similar events always precede adjacent e*-similar events.**

69. **Hume's analysis embodies a fundamental fallacy**: it conflates continuity (immanent causation) with contiguity (transeunt causation).

70. **Two kinds of causal processes**: (i) transeunt (interactions, discontinuous) and (ii) immanent (persistence, continuous).

71. **Transeunt causation involves breakdowns of continuity; immanent causation preserves structure.**

72. **The world has a digital structure to the extent it hosts transeunt causation; analog structure to the extent it hosts immanent causation.**

73. **Genuine causal processes are observationally distinguishable from pseudo-causal processes**: effects are continuous with causes, not merely contiguous.

74. **The essence of causation is continuity**—continuous event-series are causal; discontinuous series are not.

75. **Hume-worlds (pseudo-causal) are observationally different from genuine causal worlds** (via deformation, temperature changes, etc.).

76. **Problem #1 with RA: The temporal order is understood in terms of the causal order, not vice versa**—Hume's analysis is thus viciously circular.

77. **Problem #2 with RA: Correlation is not causation**—epiphenomenal causation (e.g., thermometer mercury rising) is not genuine causation.

78. **Problem #3 with RA: For any adjacent event-pair, some regularity includes that sequence**—RA would make all adjacent events causally related.

---

### **IX. THE DEDUCTIVE-NOMOLOGICAL MODEL (DN) — CRITIQUED**

79. **DN claims: E is explained iff E is a logical consequence of laws + initial conditions.**

80. **DN is viciously circular because distinguishing nomic from accidental generalizations requires prior causal knowledge.**

81. **Laws support counterfactuals; accidental generalizations do not—but counterfactuals are crypto-causal claims.**

82. **To know that a generalization is a law, one must already know of specific causal instances**—thus explanations are not categorically law-based.

83. **Knowledge of singular causation precedes knowledge of covering laws**, not vice versa.

84. **Low-resolution explanations (identifying the cause) are genuine explanations even without knowledge of operative laws.**

85. **Pre-scientific explanations are not non-explanations**—they are correct but incomplete.

86. **Knowledge-why = high-resolution knowledge-what**—to explain is to identify causes; laws provide detail.

87. **Singular causation refutes DN**: we can know the cause without knowing the covering law.

88. **DN fails spectacularly for psychological explanation**—perfect regularities are unavailable, yet causes are known.

89. **Statistical laws don't save DN**: high-frequency correlations don't entail causation (swimmers wearing bathing suits aren't caused by pools).

90. **Wesley Salmon's statistical relevance model is a "degenerate research program."**

91. **DN's legitimate sphere is scientific (high-resolution) explanation, not explanation in general.**

---

### **X. CAUSAL KNOWLEDGE**

92. **We know what causes what by identifying singularities**: if e* is singular and has a singular antecedent e, e is probably the cause.

93. **Singular causation can be known without knowledge of regularities.**

94. **Causal knowledge is differential knowledge**: effects are proportional to causes; we identify causes by correlating input-differences with output-differences.

95. **If conditions are held constant, cause-effect regularities appear; otherwise, causes are identified by proportionality.**

96. **Experiments identify specific information about causes not available in non-experimental settings.**

97. **Experiments presuppose approximate prescientific causal beliefs.**

98. **The interval between cause and effect is instantaneous in the limit**—no non-null interval guarantees an effect.

99. **Laws are not regularities; they are not even structures responsible for regularities**—they are dispositive of regularities.

100. **Galileo discovered the law of inertia by studying bodies in states of near-equilibrium and extrapolating.**

---

### **XI. THE RAVEN PARADOX — SOLVED**

101. **The Raven Paradox arises from failing to distinguish extensional from intensional readings of generalizations.**

102. **"All ravens are black" read intensionally (causally) ≠ "All non-black things are non-ravens" extensionally.**

103. **A pink piano doesn't confirm "all ravens are black" because the law is causal: being a raven causes blackness.**

104. **Hempel's solution (that pink pianos do confirm it, relative to background beliefs) is false**—we can't learn about ravens by studying pianos.

105. **The Raven Paradox is a by-product of the Regularity Analysis of Causation.**

---

### **XII. THE PROBLEM OF INDUCTION — DISSOLVED**

106. **Enumerative induction (EI) is unjustifiable**—Hume was right about that.

107. **But there is no such thing as pure enumerative induction**—whenever people seem to use EI, they are actually using Inference to the Best Explanation (IBE).

108. **IBE = positing entities/structures that eliminate anomalies in the data.**

109. **EI without IBE-backing is irrational**: if you believe there's no causal mechanism linking past φ's to future φ's, you have no reason to expect future φ's to resemble past φ's.

110. **Psychological claim: People never genuinely infer via EI alone—they always tacitly accept some causal hypothesis (IBE).**

111. **Discontinuity-elimination is the essence of explanation**—to explain is to restore continuity.

112. **Inductive knowledge is knowledge of continuities underlying discontinuities.**

113. **IBE is justified because positing unobserved continuities is required to validate the datum that observed events co-occupy the same space-time manifold.**

114. **If no event at t* were continuous with any event at prior t, then U1 and U2 wouldn't be parts of the same space-time manifold.**

115. **For two events to be co-occupants of one manifold, there must be a causal connection between them.**

116. **The Uniformity Principle (U) is a precondition of induction, not a conclusion of it**—if U weren't true, nothing would persist, including inference-makers.

117. **Hume's skepticism presupposes that laws are separable from the space-time manifold—but laws are constitutive of the manifold.**

118. **If even one law of physics changed at t*, practically every other law would have to change, objects would cease to exist, and U1 and U2 would not constitute a single manifold.**

119. **Different laws → different forces → different objects → no persistence → no induction-makers.**

120. **Objects are causal series**—they are constituted by the laws governing their parts.

---

### **XIII. DETERMINISM AND PREDICTABILITY**

121. **Determinism = the world at t fixes the world at all later times.**

122. **The world is deterministic to the extent it is law-governed; predictable to the extent it is deterministic—but determinism doesn't entail complete predictability.**

123. **Reason #1: Interference effects**—learning about the world requires interacting with it, which changes it.

124. **Reason #2: One cannot predict what one will come to know**—knowledge growth affects action, which affects the world.

125. **Laplace's demon is impossible**: no conceivable being can have complete knowledge of the present microstate.

126. **The inherent structure of knowledge (requiring causal connection between subject and object) guarantees some unknowability.**

127. **Unknowable facts must still be granted to exist**: science itself implies there are things we cannot know.

---

### **XIV. SUPERVENIENCE AND REDUCTION**

128. **Biological facts supervene on microphysical facts**—no biological difference without a microphysical difference.

129. **Supervenience ≠ identity**: multiply realizable properties supervene but are not identical (aesthetic, biological, software properties).

130. **The mental supervenes on the physiological**, but the relationship is different from other supervenience relations—it's counternomic, not counterlogical, to imagine physiologically identical creatures differing psychologically.

131. **Being bound by physical law ≠ being explained by physical law**—a statue is not identical with its clay; a computer is not identical with its atoms.

132. **Physics is blind to software/computational/functional concepts**—physics-omniscience doesn't yield computer-knowledge.

133. **Software-identical systems can be hardware-distinct**; software realities supervene on hardware realities.

---

### **XV. SOFTWARE DETERMINISM AND PROBABILITY**

134. **Software determinism ≠ statistical determinism**: a deterministic program may have probabilistic implementation.

135. **Machine error doesn't make programs indeterministic—it means the machine isn't implementing the program.**

136. **Lower-order indeterminism doesn't entail higher-order indeterminism**: micro-level randomness can cancel out at macro-level.

137. **Statistics are evidence of probabilities, not identical with probabilities**—the Frequency Theory of Probability is false.

138. **A world where (by coincidence) smokers never get cancer still has the same probabilities as ours—just different statistics.**

139. **Probability claims are causal claims, not statistical claims.**

---

### **XVI. MEASUREMENT THEORY**

140. **Measurement ≠ enumeration**: there are no minimal units of length; length is not determined by counting.

141. **The essence of measurement is comparison with a standard**—all length-claims are relative.

142. **Absolute length = length relative to a universally stipulated standard.**

143. **Three axioms of measurement**: transitivity of "longer than," trichotomy, and transitivity of "same length."

144. **Scalar quantities (length, mass, temperature) are given by single numbers; vector quantities by ordered n-tuples.**

145. **Congruence must be defined before length-determinations are meaningful.**

146. **Length is non-additive (at large scales)**—due to relativistic effects.

147. **Extensive magnitudes (length, mass) are approximately additive in small-scale cases; intensive magnitudes (temperature) are not additive at all.**

148. **Speed is extensive but not additive**: the speed of light is framework-invariant.

149. **Direct measurements yield only rational numbers**—irrational lengths are known indirectly (via geometry).

---

### **XVII. CONVENTIONALISM — REJECTED**

150. **Metrical conventionalism**: length-standards are stipulated, not discovered.

151. **Nomic conventionalism**: laws are determined by conventions (choice of standards).

152. **Conventionalism is distinct from strict conventionalism**—laws are convention-based (relative to standards) but not convention-determined (empirical measurements matter).

153. **Strict conventionalism is false**: if laws were wholly conventional, measurements wouldn't be needed.

154. **Metrical conventionalism doesn't entail nomic conventionalism**: laws describe non-conventional relations between standards and events.

155. **Conventionalism is self-defeating**: measurements using erratic standards (e.g., eels) yield inconsistent results; measurements using stable/optical standards yield consistent results. Consistency is not conventional.

156. **Given that n=n for any n, and given that inconsistent measurements violate this, there is a fact of the matter about which standards are correct.**

---

### **XVIII. CONCLUSION: THE NATURE OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE**

157. **Causal series are continuous series.**

158. **Information-bearing series are continuous structure-preserving series.**

159. **To know explanations is to know causes.**

160. **Scientific hypotheses are correct when they eliminate discontinuities**—they are correct when they are constitutive of information-transmissive continuities.

---

### **XIX. METHODOLOGICAL AND META-PHILOSOPHICAL POSITIONS**

161. **The difference between immanent and transeunt causation is fundamental to understanding causality.**

162. **Hume's paradigm case of causation (billiard balls) is transeunt causation, which is actually the exception, not the rule.**

163. **The causal order is more fundamental than the spatiotemporal order.**

164. **The concept of a "Hume-world" does not support Hume's analysis.**

165. **Intensional correctness of a theory ≠ extensional correctness**—a theory can fit the data for the wrong reasons.

166. **Frankfurt-style counterexamples are valid and cannot be evaded by CACD.**

167. **The Deductive-Nomological model presupposes what it is supposed to explain.**

168. **Approximate, low-resolution explanations are genuine explanations—not mere placeholders for scientific explanations.**

169. **The methods of a science do not fall within the scope of that science** (botanists use magnifying glasses but don't study them).

170. **Additivity is a property of cardinal numbers, not physical magnitudes per se** (Russell).

171. **The concept of "force of inertia" is notional but useful.**

172. **Lakatos's concept of a "degenerating research program" is endorsed.**

173. **Freud's doctrine that people project psychological-causal order onto external reality is endorsed**—but Hume's version (that the external world is causally unstructured) is incoherent.

174. **Russell's contributions (immanent/transeunt causation distinction, additivity points, epistemological observations) are credited.**

175. **The term "Inference to the Best Explanation" is not an honorific—an IBE may be wrong; it's called such because the proponent believes it's best.**

---

This extraction yields **175 distinct positions**. If you want, I can organize these further by theme, or produce a structured document/spreadsheet for your database.Part I: The Economics of Higher Education
On What Universities Sell

Universities sell degrees, not instruction.
People pay universities for degrees and for nothing besides (with minor qualifications).
If a university stopped issuing degrees but improved instruction and lowered tuition, its enrollment would plummet (possibly to zero).
A degree functions like a union card—it's a prerequisite for professional entry regardless of actual competence.
People with degrees have options; people without degrees don't.
People without degrees are stuck with blue-collar work, hustling, or long-shot entrepreneurship.
The entrepreneurial success rate is approximately 1%, and most of that 1% have college degrees and degree-based professional experience.

On Retention and Graduation Rates

Retention rates and graduation rates track each other but are not identical.
Retention rates are necessarily at least as high as graduation rates.
Universities have cogent financial reasons to want high retention rates (continued business).
Universities have less strong reasons to want high graduation rates (students who never graduate pay more over time).
Universities with extremely low retention and graduation rates almost always stay in business.
There is no documented case of a university failing due to low retention rates.
What matters financially is enrollment rates, not retention rates.
Low retention rates do not necessarily indicate institutional failure—they may indicate the institution serves students on the cusp of being able to complete degrees.
Soon-to-be dropouts are profitable: they pay for time they're not there and make minimal demands on university resources.
Universities with low retention rates scale down services and set prices accordingly.

On Why Universities Cannot/Will Not Improve

If a university made systemic changes to improve retention, it would lose most of its existing customer base.
Universities would lose far more customers than they would gain by making courses financially more worth doing.
Universities are extremely reluctant to change.
Universities don't have to change.
Universities would alienate both customers and employees if they changed—especially if changes involved making them better at teaching or producing employable graduates.
Universities cannot significantly improve or alter the quality of their educational services without imperiling their very existences.
Universities couldn't improve the quality of their services even if they wanted to.
Apart from a few religions, no institutions are as unwilling to change and resistant to being tinkered with as universities.

On the University Business Model vs. Open Market Companies (OMCs)

OMCs sell products and services that actually have to be good; there's no other reason to buy them.
Universities sell prestige backed by degrees, not quality instruction.
A degree from Harvard obtained entirely through cheating (without getting caught) is still enormously powerful social capital.
OMCs can turn on a dime—replace labor forces, change products, fire CEOs. Universities cannot.
OMCs must be flexible because they must meet changing consumer demands; universities need not be.

On Instruction Quality and Student Demand

When averaged over time and subjects, instruction at universities must rise above a certain threshold—but only just above it.
A university won't come to grief if it always provides execrable instruction in some subjects or sometimes provides execrable instruction in all subjects.
Most of a university's business depends on providing instruction that is on average lackluster.
Most students are just buying a degree; only a few are really working for it.
The degree has prestige because of the efforts of those few.
The ideal situation for a university is when its degrees have prestige and as few people as possible are responsible for giving them that prestige.
Setting aside ~15% of students who major in engineering, nursing, etc., students don't want particularly high-quality instruction.
High-quality instruction is demanding; since students are paying for degrees, they want minimal hoops.
Students do want to believe their degrees have meaning—they're willing to jump through some hoops.
If universities made instruction more demanding, they would attract more savants, truth-seekers, and aspiring doctors/engineers—but for each such student gained, they'd lose ten existing customers.

On What Students Actually Want

People want to be employed, but they don't necessarily want to be employable (i.e., useful).
If someone is employed because they're useful, they're employed only as long as they're useful—job security is contingent.
A life of usefulness is not easy (e.g., 60-year-old nurses cleaning infected wounds).
What most college students want is to be relatively useless and employed.
If someone useless has stable employment, their employment isn't contingent on being useful.
Nobody expects redundant bureaucrats and middle managers to be useful—that's not why they're employed.
Jobs serving well-defined practical functions are easily lost; jobs with ill-defined functions are secure.
If one is employed only because useful, earnings wax and wane with degree of usefulness.
People who make their living by being useful tend not to have inflated salaries.
People with ill-defined functions may have enormously inflated salaries.
Most college graduates end up as well-paid pencil-pushers in corporations or government agencies—well-paid for doing little more than showing up and not making waves.
Political science majors know their major doesn't make them useful—that's part of why they do it.
A "successful" political science major tends to end up with a well-paying job without well-defined functions—therefore relatively secure.
If colleges made students more "employable" by making them more "useful," they would alienate most students.

The Paradox of Macroeconomic Efficiency

In a micro-economy (100 people), everyone must be useful and pull their weight.
In economies of scale with enormous division of labor, only a small percentage of the population actually has to produce.
The more advanced an economy, the greater the percentage of people who can be useless.
In the U.S. in 2019, most jobs are useless—because they can be, since the productive minority is so productive.
Until the useful percentage drops too close to zero, it is not irrational for people to do easy majors and bide time until landing a well-paid sinecure.

On Dropping Out

The "tragedy" of high dropout rates is not really a tragedy.
When people drop out, it is usually for good reasons.
It isn't successful engineering or nursing majors who drop out—it's people barely getting by in political science or criminal justice.
When people drop out, it's usually because they stand to lose more by staying than by dropping out—and they're usually right.
Dropping out is often part of a hedging strategy—people who drop out can usually go back.
People who drop out often become plumbers, electricians, police officers, etc., and may find these careers more fulfilling and equally lucrative as the white-collar alternatives.
Dropping out is not a tragedy for the institution either—they adjust services and prices accordingly.

On Knowledge Management and Universities

Knowledge Management (KM) explains how institutions must be organized to maximize the likelihood of necessary knowledge exchanges.
KM can help when poor internal communications prevent an institution from accomplishing what it wants.
KM cannot help universities because there isn't much of an issue, and insofar as there is one, poor internal communications aren't responsible.
Unlike OMCs, universities actually depend on poor internal communications.
University departments are highly isolated and fiercely independent—cooperation happens rarely, at specific junctures, in circumscribed ways, after lengthy negotiations.
An OMC would fail if its departments were comparably isolated.
OMCs are about providing optimal products/services; universities are about maintaining prestige.
Prestige is harder to maintain when information flows freely than when sequestered.
If departments cooperated whenever students would benefit, professors would face scrutiny from students not under their thumb—they'd have to step up their game considerably.
The kind of professor who would thrive under cross-departmental scrutiny is high-energy and demanding—most students prefer professors of the second kind (comfortable in their niche, demanding little).
Universities thrive on low communication between departments—on a certain lack of knowledge management.

On the Opportunity

Low retention/graduation rates at universities do not represent a business opportunity for anyone.
Low retention/graduation rates do not represent an opportunity to do real good—making universities better would lower rates further.
Low retention/graduation rates do not represent an opportunity to apply KM principles—universities are positively dependent on poor internal communications.
The way to improve education is not to try to "fix" existing universities—they are happy as they are and both unwilling and unable to be fixed.
The idea that one could march into a university and fix it (and be paid to do so) is the very definition of absurdity.
If one wants to improve education and make money doing so, there is currently an enormous opportunity—but it involves creating something new, not fixing what exists.


Part II: DMO—A New Kind of University
Core Principles of DMO

DMO is a hypothetical online university where students pay for results, not services.
A degree from DMO must be proof of competence—DMO sells competence, not prestige.
DMO is not meant to replace brick-and-mortar institutions but to provide maximally efficient instruction in every area that can be taught digitally.
DMO will not teach piloting, surgery, plumbing, or other skills requiring physical presence.
DMO will not provide accreditations in areas (like history or religious studies) where a degree cannot constitute proof of competence.
What DMO offers in instruction will covary in real time with what the market needs people to know.
DMO will offer instruction in a dramatically wider range of subjects than any brick-and-mortar institution.
DMO will offer many different levels of accreditation (beyond just bachelor's, master's, doctoral).
Nobody who graduates from DMO will be useless—they will already be employable.
DMO's objective is to produce competent people, not to exclude incompetent people and take undeserved credit for graduates' merits.
DMO will not exclude people—unintelligent people seeking education are like sick people going to a hospital: they're there to improve.

On KM Principles Underlying DMO

Knowledge management is possible when an organization has definite objectives and difficult when objectives are vague.
When an organization sells results, objectives are well-defined—positive consequences for KM.
When an organization sells services, objectives tend to be vaguely defined—negative consequences for KM.
When an organization sells results, prices tend to drop; when it sells services, prices tend to rise.
When results are sold, there's no money in services and services must be streamlined.
When services are sold, there's no money in results and services must be inflated.
Results-providers compete on efficiency; prices bid down. Service-providers compete on inefficiency; prices bid up.
Service organizations depend on poor KM—they make money by multiplying and drawing out services.
Management in service organizations profits from inefficiencies that good communication eliminates.
Internal communications tend to be bad when employment is guaranteed and good when it isn't.
Internal communications tend to be good when salaries are performance-dependent and bad when they aren't.
It's hard to know who's pulling their weight unless clients hire employees directly.
When clients cannot hire talent directly, projects go to the wrong people; talent is misdeployed and underdeployed.
Organization-internal communications are worthless unless based on solid information about how to engage the market.
The best way for an organization to have such information is for employees to offer services directly to clients.

On Expense-Padding and Legitimacy

When a business is legitimate, it does not inflate costs.
Legitimate businesses make more money by keeping quality high and costs low.
Businesses are forced to pad and gouge when they don't make money by providing what they say they provide.
A business that thrives on inefficiency cannot give customers what they're paying for all at once—legitimate services must be dragged out and interspersed with extraneous ones.
Such businesses are concerned with managing expectations, not increasing efficiency.
If such a business is large, most employees must partially accept the company's propaganda—otherwise recruitment and motivation suffer.
Such companies' internal communications tend to be inefficient because it isn't clear what the company does.

On Digitization

When education can be digitized, it must be digitized.
Digitization saves time and money and allows purchasing custom education from the best instructors at the lowest price.
If a university chooses not to digitize services that can be digitized, it's because it doesn't primarily make money by providing instruction.

DMO's Examination System

At DMO, instructors do not issue grades—there are no grades, only accreditations.
Accreditations are attained by taking examinations.
Examinations are graded anonymously (by computer whenever possible) and designed/administered by independent third parties.
Questions on examinations have determinate answers—little or no expert disagreement on correct answers.
Instructors have access to past exams but not forthcoming ones.
There are many subjects (history, religious studies) that DMO simply will not teach.
Instructors at DMO are instructors, not gatekeepers—it doesn't matter if the instructor likes you or what they think of your work.
The instructor's one job is to get you to pass the accreditation exam.

On Converting Non-STEM to STEM

DMO's primary solution for humanities-inclined students is to offer "lite" science degrees: lite-physics, lite-math, math for computer scientists, lite biology.
Many people in the humanities (especially philosophy) are actually highly intelligent but find details annoying.
Physics and all sciences are largely about grinding out solutions using thorny mathematics—some "big ideas" but mostly grinding out facts/theorems.
Because humanities people are "big idea" people, they resent the labor involved in STEM.
College majors being what they are, big-idea people flee from STEM (including economics) into political science, history, etc.
These people, despite considerable intellectual gifts, end up completely useless—no matter how advanced in political science, you're not employable (except bureaucratically).
Someone whose college career consists of learning the big ideas of science plus enough applications to nail down understanding is extremely useful.
DMO will offer "general studies in the sciences" with variants (applied sciences, biological sciences, information sciences, health sciences).

On Instruction vs. Selection

Existing universities are discriminatory—they don't service all comers.
OMCs (Nike, Amazon, Microsoft) don't "exclude" customers.
The difference: OMCs sell products; universities sell prestige.
If universities really sold instruction (made money by making people leave more competent than they came), they'd want as many customers as possible.
Universities are selective because their product is weak—they're not that good at instructing people.
Universities are reasonably good at taking already-gifted people and pointing them in the right direction.
DMO has the first business model (smart-making pill for everyone); other universities have the second (vet customers because product is weak).

On Degree Levels

An A in a given class at a given university tends not to mean anything.
Even when an A means something, its exact meaning is deeply unclear—it means different things at MIT vs. VCU.
Because individual classes have either no significance or no determinate significance, accreditations can only be awarded for hulkingly large pluralities of classes.
This is a hedging strategy—Smith must have some merit if he passes 100 classes, even if many had no meaning.
The less guarantee a class has merit, the larger the number of classes needed for a degree taken as proof of merit.
This limits the number of degree levels a university can issue.
If individual courses had guaranteed and determinate meanings, passing even a single class would be definite proof of a definite kind of merit.
At DMO, there's no such thing as a grade that isn't definitive proof of well-defined merit.
Therefore, a DMO student can prove high, definite merit by passing relatively few classes.
Therefore, DMO can credibly issue many different levels of degrees.
Any given course at DMO is itself a mini-degree.
Students can earn credible degrees from DMO in a fraction of the time and expense of conventional institutions.
Students have many options intermediate between no degree and spending 4-8 years accumulating debt for a degree of little significance.

On Instructors as Non-Gatekeepers

DMO must always offer students the ability to "test out"—get accreditation just by passing the exam without class time.
This is necessary: as long as test-out is possible, students only pay instructors for actual instruction.
When testing out isn't possible, instructors tend to function as gatekeepers—there to open gates as they see fit, not to instruct.
If instructors are paid to be gatekeepers, there's no guarantee they're good instructors.

On Direct Payment

At DMO, students hire instructors only if they believe the instructor can help them pass an exam the instructor doesn't grade.
Students will want to work with instructors who succeed at getting students to pass and avoid those who fail.
Students will pay more for instructors likely to get them to pass.
Students and instructors must negotiate prices directly.
If students pay DMO and DMO supplies instructors, students can't choose competent instructors and avoid incompetent ones.
Incompetent instructors would not pay for incompetence; competent ones wouldn't be rewarded.
Payments must go straight to the instructor; instructor gives a percentage to DMO for platform, volume, credibility, materials.
There is no permanent employment at DMO, let alone tenure—only contract work.
Instructor revenue is determined entirely by instructor competence.

The Inverted Payment Pyramid

At conventional universities, money flows down (students → university → instructors)—result: expensive and bad education.
At DMO, money flows up (students → instructors, who give ~20% to DMO for overhead).
This makes DMO lean and functional.
Because students know where money goes, DMO cannot overcharge or mis-charge.
Since management works within that ~20%, bureaucracy is impossible.
Management has strong incentives to hire and retain instructors who can service large market sectors.

The 25 Desiderata (each is a position)

DMO must be accredited—students must receive recognized degrees.
DMO must be online.
Instruction must be largely (though not entirely) individualized.
There must be clear, universally recognized performance benchmarks for students in all academic areas.
There must be similar benchmarks for instructors.
Students hire instructors directly.
Instructor rates are determined by student and instructor, not by DMO.
Instructor statistics must always be available to prospective students.
Satisfaction of benchmarks is never decided by professors—no "grades" per se, only accreditation exams.
Questions on accreditation exams admit of clear, unambiguous, universally recognizable answers.
Instructors are minimally policed—can teach what and how they want.
Instructors are encouraged to take performance tests and publicly display scores.
There is no tenure.
Termination is reserved for: failure to take on available students at agreed rates, and gross misconduct.
There must be a wider variety of disciplines and degrees than current institutions.
The student's situation should not be binary (degree/no degree)—there should be a score corresponding to objective accomplishments.
Disciplines with no practical value should be jettisoned or modified to have practical value.
Disciplines that don't admit objective assessments should be jettisoned or modified to admit them.
Universally applicable tests of intelligence and critical reasoning should be administered (free) to prove students are becoming better thinkers.
DMO will have past copies of all tests, but DMO instructors won't create them—outside parties generate tests not revealed to instructors until after administration.
Student evaluations should be minimized or eliminated—instructor merit determined by student performance, not opinion/sentiment.
Students should be able to switch instructors easily to prevent personal conflicts from jamming education.
Curricula contents should be publicly accessible so students can start working before enrolling.
Hirings based exclusively on proven or probable success helping students pass exams—publications and letters of reference are irrelevant.
Mini-majors should be offered.

On Existing Universities (Conclusion)

Existing universities are failing: most degrees have no objective significance and fail to provide definitive proof of merit.
Universities are expensive and slow.
Universities are discriminatory—they prevent the people who need their services from receiving them.
Universities turn away people who want to study (forgivable given limited resources).
Universities turn their own students away from courses of study that would benefit them (far less forgivable).
Universities offer very few practical courses and load those with so many stumbling blocks that capable people are exiled into useless soft majors.
Universities wall out people who need instruction, opening gates only to people who can self-teach their way through.
There is little hope of reforming universities—they don't want to be reformed and don't stand to gain by being reformed.
This doesn't matter because there's no need to reform them—DMO can be created instead.
Once in existence, DMO will be the very embodiment of optimal knowledge management.
The right way to provide better instruction is not to make universities better but to create a new results-based educational service whose revenue is tied to pedagogical efficacy.Here are the positions advocated in this work:

---

## **Positions Extracted from *OCD and Philosophy: Short Papers on OCD, Psychopathy, and Psychopathology***

### **I. The Nature of OCD**

1. **OCD is fundamentally a defense mechanism.** It provides relief from anxiety so intense as to be "almost inconceivable" to those who haven't experienced it.

2. **OCD is ultimately a voluntary affliction—an affliction of the will.** Unlike cancer or asthma, OCD involves the integrity of one's will and can be overcome by exercising that will.

3. **OCD symptoms are only "involuntary" relative to a determination to remain disengaged from the world.** If one chooses re-engagement, the symptoms become voluntary and controllable.

4. **OCD can assume productive, non-pathological forms.** Beethoven and Einstein exemplify OCD channeled adaptively.

5. **OCD involves misdeployed intelligence and focus.** It represents heightened abilities directed maladaptively.

6. **OCD creates a psychological "safe-space."** Obsessions and compulsions encircle and protect the subject from a toxic, threatening environment.

7. **The obsessive-compulsive is a "crypto-criminal."** Their fundamental orientation toward others is anti-social, but strong superegos cause them to suppress their criminal side through legalistic preoccupations.

8. **Obsessive-compulsives are driven by rage, narcissism, and fear—not rationality.** Their intellectualism is a reaction to, and attempt to cloak, their "darkly retrograde psychological condition."

9. **The obsessive-compulsive's doubts about the external world are actually displaced doubts about the internal world.** They are uncertain about their own psychic contents, not about external reality.

10. **The obsessive-compulsive must accept his own sadistic sexuality.** (Title indicates this as a thesis, though the section is truncated.)

### **II. OCD and Philosophy—The Structural Parallel**

11. **Philosophers and obsessive-compulsives share the same psychological structure.** Both are compulsive doubters who doubt the obvious under the guise of rigor.

12. **Both philosophers and obsessive-compulsives are impotent—too fearful to engage the world directly.** Their potency lies only in manipulating symbolic proxies of reality.

13. **Both attempt to internalize the world into the sphere of their own thought, where they are dominant.** This is compensatory behavior for worldly impotence.

14. **Preoccupation with logical niceties and fine points of argumentation is derivative of a sense of impotence.** When one has no material of one's own, one preoccupies oneself with secondary, formal matters.

15. **Conditionalizing acceptance of hypotheses on subtleties of proof allows indefinite deferral of engagement with reality.** Logical and dialectical niceties are "incapable of being definitely resolved" by their very nature.

16. **Both philosophers and obsessive-compulsives are pathologically concerned with ethics.** This stems from their crypto-criminal nature combined with draconian superegos.

17. **Philosophical insistence on the "rationality of man" is merely an idealization—a projected self-image.** It does not describe actual human psychology.

18. **The Lockean/Cartesian denial of the unconscious is a "tendentious rationalization."** The claim that mind extends only as far as consciousness is "brazenly spurious."

19. **The obsessive-compulsive/philosopher believes himself a "logic-driven Cartesian ratiocinator" when his Cartesianism is only a thin veneer.** Beneath lies a "Nietzschean cesspool."

20. **Many obsessive-compulsives and philosophers go into law.** This follows from their preoccupation with legalistic technicalities.

### **III. Treatment and Prognosis**

21. **The way to beat OCD is to have a purpose in life.** Purpose-directed engagement with the world is therapeutic.

22. **CBT has limited, shallow, and short-lived effects on OCD.** It cannot work absent a deeper determination to grow and change.

23. **The prognosis for OCD is 100% positive if the patient sees OCD as the voluntary condition it is.** If seen as a "garden-variety pathology," the prognosis is negative.

24. **OCD is eliminated (or made adaptive) by exercising one's will in growth-oriented ways.** The obsessive-compulsive must choose: mere freedom from anxiety, or living and growing.

25. **Effective therapists must have and project inner strength.** (Title indicates this as a thesis.)

26. **"Structural therapy" is advocated as an approach.** (Title indicates this as a thesis.)

27. **"Turn OCD against itself" is a therapeutic strategy.** (Title indicates this as a thesis.)

### **IV. Mental Illness vs. Physical Illness**

28. **Mental illness is NOT "an illness like any other."** It differs categorically from physical illness.

29. **Mental illnesses are contextual in nature.** OCD is a liability in some contexts and an asset in others. Physical illnesses (asthma, lupus, cancer) are simply liabilities in all contexts.

30. **Mental illnesses serve a defensive/protective function.** Even gravely dysfunctional conditions like psychosis provide some measure of psychological safety.

31. **Psychosis is a chosen withdrawal from destructive negativity.** The psychotic retreats into delusion to escape threatening environments and assaults on self-worth.

32. **Some mental illnesses involve misdeployed strengths.** Schizophrenia involves misdeployed creativity and emotional sensitivity.

### **V. Psychopathy and Bureaucracy**

33. **Psychopaths are "rogue bureaucrats."** (Title indicates this as a thesis.)

34. **Bureaucrats are "non-rogue psychopaths."** (Title indicates this as a thesis—i.e., bureaucratic psychology is structurally psychopathic.)

35. **There is a distinct "psychology of the bureaucrat."** (Title indicates this as a thesis.)

36. **"Institutional psychopathy" exists as a phenomenon.** (Title indicates this as a thesis.)

37. **Psychopaths overachieve.** (Title indicates this as a thesis, with explanation presumably in truncated section.)

38. **Bureaucratic bloat is responsible for an OCD-spike.** (Title indicates this as a thesis—social/institutional factors cause increased OCD prevalence.)

### **VI. Social and Political Positions**

39. **Political philosophy has failed to engage reality.** (Title indicates this as a thesis.)

40. **"Submitting to feminism makes it more psychopathic."** (Title indicates this as a thesis.)

41. **"Double-think" is psychologically possible and explicable.** (Title indicates this as a thesis.)

### **VII. Related Psychopathology**

42. **Social anxiety is fundamentally about rage.** (Title indicates this as a thesis—social anxiety masks underlying hostility.)

43. **Autism can be understood as "pseudo-self-containment."** (Title indicates this as a thesis.)

44. **A healthy sex life has therapeutic significance.** (Title indicates this as a thesis.)

45. **There is such a thing as "psychiatric Munchausen's by proxy."** Parents (especially mothers) seek false psychiatric diagnoses for their children.

46. **False diagnoses of autism, Asperger's, and ADHD are forms of "cloaked child murder."** The mother, seeking attention from the husband, damages the child via psychiatric over-intervention.

47. **Psychiatrists and educational psychologists are generally unintelligent and willing to issue false diagnoses.** They need money and need to validate their profession.

48. **When a child is sent to a psychiatrist, the mother's psychology should be examined first.** The child's mind shows "fallout from the blast," not the epicenter.

49. **Intrusive thoughts in OCD have a specific explanation.** (Title indicates this as a thesis.)

50. **People with OCD have reading-related difficulties.** (Title indicates this as a thesis.)

51. **Compulsions without accompanying obsessions require distinct treatment.** (Title indicates this as a thesis.)

### **VIII. Auto-Hypnosis vs. Rationalization**

52. **Auto-hypnosis is not inherently bad; it is essential for action.** Someone who only followed through on plans validated by critical judgment would be "the ultimate bureaucrat" and would never do anything.

53. **Auto-hypnosis is distinct from rationalization.** Auto-hypnosis generates attitude without deploying/misdeploying critical faculties; rationalization generates conviction from a warped understanding of reality.

54. **Negative auto-hypnosis (obsessing, ruminating, wallowing) is bad but easily reversed.** Once recognized as self-hypnosis, one can flip a mental switch to affirmative auto-hypnosis.

55. **Rationalization is inherently bad.** Unlike auto-hypnosis, it perverts one's faculty of judgment.

56. **Auto-hypnosis draws enthusiasm from within oneself; rationalization draws it from distorted cognition.**

### **IX. Intelligence and Intellectual Activity**

57. **There are two ways in which intellectual activity promotes intelligence.** (Title indicates this as a thesis.)

---

**Total: 57 positions identified.**Let me view the truncated middle section to get the complete content.I've now read the complete document. This is a scholarly historiographical analysis of Joseph Smith's King Follett Discourse (KFD) and its reception in Mormon theology. Here are all the positions advocated in this work:

---

## POSITIONS EXTRACTED FROM THE DOCUMENT

### I. Core Theological Positions Attributed to Joseph Smith (and endorsed by the author as coherent)

1. **God was once a man** who became God through a process of spiritual development.

2. **Human beings can become demi-Gods or God-like** if they undergo a similar developmental process.

3. **Polytheism with hierarchy**: Although there is a single supreme God, there also exist several lesser gods.

4. **Rejection of creation ex nihilo**: God did not create the world out of nothing; he organized pre-existing materials.

5. **Eternal pre-existence of human beings**: A human being has always existed and will always exist; being human entails existing eternally, and existing eternally entails having always existed.

6. **God resembles a man; therefore he is a man**, albeit an exalted one.

7. **Jesus cannot be the son of God unless God is human**: If I am a human, my father is human; if my father is a panther, then I am a panther.

8. **Adam was created in God's image**—God created a replica of himself.

9. **If self-improvement is the road to Godliness, there are degrees of Godliness**, and besides God himself, there are many lesser Gods.

10. **The Hebrew term "baurau" means to organize, not to create ex nihilo**.

11. **Intelligence cannot possibly be created**. To create is to assemble, and there is no way to assemble intelligence. It either exists or it doesn't.

12. **Intelligence is eternal and self-existent**; there is no creation about it.

13. **Minds are "simples"** that cannot be created or destroyed and must therefore exist eternally in both directions.

14. **People are mini-Gods** and must therefore be immortal, given that God is immortal.

15. **"The head God brought forth the Gods"** in a grand council.

16. **God is not omniscient and never was**; God continues to learn and grow.

17. **God, though supreme, belonged to a "council of Gods"**—his relationship to council members was that of chairman to board-member, not lord to vassal.

18. **God's powers are limited**: He cannot do away with human freedom without doing away with human beings themselves.

19. **God has emotions because he is not all-powerful**. He is sufficiently lacking in power that his psychological constitution is still basically that of a human being.

20. **God is capable of changing**. A being that doesn't change at all is completely unresponsive to us and doesn't care for us.

21. **God is "immanent" in the spatiotemporal world**—present throughout it, like gravity or light.

22. **All reality is animate**; reality consists of consciousness individuated into discrete consciousnesses.

23. **God is but one of the many consciousnesses into which generalized consciousness is individuated**, with the qualification that he is the most important one.

24. **God, Jesus, and the Holy Ghost are distinct entities** (trinitarianism, not unitarianism).

25. **God, Jesus, and the Holy Ghost jointly constitute a single "Godhead"** despite being distinct.

26. **Both God and Jesus are corporeal**.

27. **God himself has a father**.

---

### II. Meta-Theological Positions (Author's Interpretive Framework)

28. **Theses 2-5 are corollaries of thesis 1** (God was once a man). The five theses form a logically unified system.

29. **Smith was presenting a vision, not conclusions of arguments**. The arguments, even if cogent, wouldn't lead anyone to accept such a vision.

30. **The merits of Smith's vision lie in the vision itself**, not in his arguments for it.

31. **Smith's philosophical arguments are more compelling than his exegetical arguments**.

32. **Smith produced exegetical arguments after philosophical insights had already led him to accept his positions**.

33. **Smith's philosophical insights were coded into a religious epiphany**—they would not otherwise have compelled him to break so completely from Christian orthodoxy.

34. **Smith likely arrived at his doctrines instantaneously** as part of a religious epiphany at age 14.

35. **Smith held his tongue over the next few decades**, speaking his mind only after acquiring standing and suspecting he had only a short time to live.

36. **Smith's central question**: What must God be like if human beings are to have the kind of relationship with him that they are supposed to have?

37. **In taking this question as primary, Smith broke with both Christian and philosophical tradition**.

38. **Smith's theology is not concerned with providing logical proofs of God's existence**. God is known through revelation or testimony.

39. **Attempts to prove God exists inevitably turn Him into an impersonal force or principle**, stripping him of his ability to have a relationship with us.

40. **If "God" is "a maximally perfect being," "a guarantor of natural law," or an "unmoved mover," he is unlikely to be sufficiently like us to have a meaningful relationship with us**.

41. **Smith attributes only as much power and sapience to God as is compatible with God being our guardian**.

42. **God needn't be absolutely powerful and knowing—only relatively so**. From the viewpoint of a religious person, God's primary function is to guide and care for us.

---

### III. Critique of Orthodox Christian Theology

43. **Orthodox Christian theology has incompatible mandates**: God is supposed to be all-knowing and all-powerful, yet also supposed to care about us.

44. **Orthodox Christianity suffers from incoherence because it starts with the supposition that God is perfect** and then tries to validate the presumption that God is emotionally invested in us.

45. **An all-powerful, all-knowing being wouldn't have emotions** and therefore wouldn't have any emotions concerning us.

46. **The concept of a sapient, all-powerful being is incoherent**.

47. **Sapience involves being responsive to change; being responsive to change involves being vulnerable; being vulnerable involves not being all-powerful**. Therefore, sapience is incompatible with omnipotence.

48. **According to orthodox Christian theology, God has a human son but is not himself human or otherwise biological, which is absurd**.

49. **God and Jesus, though related as father and son, are supposed to be one entity, which is absurd**.

50. **Orthodox Christian theology is incorrigibly incoherent**, and the reason is that it starts with the incoherent supposition that God is absolutely perfect.

51. **An all-knowing creature wouldn't care about us**, for it would have no emotions at all—emotion presupposes partiality and therefore ignorance.

52. **An all-powerful being wouldn't care about us**, for such a being would have no vulnerabilities and therefore none of the emotions that presuppose vulnerability.

53. **If one's starting point is that God is all powerful or all-knowing or otherwise perfect, there is no way to explain why he would care about us**.

---

### IV. Vindication of Smith's Theology

54. **Smith's theology is free from the incoherencies of orthodox Christian theology**.

55. **Smith starts with the supposition that God is our guardian**, attributing only as much power and sapience as is compatible with that supposition.

56. **A God that cares about us must be capable of changing and evolving**.

57. **God is a highly evolved person**—a being that started off as a person and developed into a God.

58. **Smith's theology, unlike orthodox Christian theology, is compatible with the fact that Jesus, God's alleged son, is a person**.

59. **God and Jesus are distinct in Smith's theology, as they must be, given that they are related as father and son**.

60. **Smith sidesteps the problem of theodicy** not by reconciling evil with an all-powerful God but by denying that God is all-powerful.

61. **Smith validates religious practice**: From the viewpoint of a religious person, God's primary function is to guide and care for us, so he must be relatively powerful and knowing, but needn't be absolutely so.

---

### V. On the Logic of Christian Polytheism

62. **Christianity isn't strictly monotheistic**: There is a single supreme divine being, but there are at least three divine beings.

63. **Smith is simply calling Christianity out on this fact**.

64. **If Jesus really is the son of God, then God is human. And if God is human, then humans can become gods**.

65. **Christianity may represent a revival of polytheistic instincts**.

66. **Early Doctors of the Church needed at least two divinities, God and Jesus**, since Jesus's divinity is the cornerstone of Christianity, but they did not want to openly embrace polytheism.

67. **Church Doctors affirmed, absurdly, that God and Jesus, though two, are one**.

68. **The Holy Ghost was posited as a way to let God and Jesus be one**: though obviously distinct, they both partake of this "Holy Spirit."

69. **After being posited, the Holy Ghost became a third divinity**, forcing Church Fathers to say that God, Jesus, and the Holy Ghost, though three, are one.

---

### VI. On the Doctrine of Pre-Existence

70. **Minds can change but cannot be assembled**. Therefore, they either exist or they don't; if they do, they have always existed.

71. **God cannot bring people into existence**. God is omnipotent in the sense that he can do whatever can be done, not in the sense that he can do what is logically impossible.

72. **The doctrine of pre-existence is heretical** relative to Christian orthodoxy.

73. **The doctrine implies that God's power is limited**.

74. **The doctrine puts people on the same footing as God**. If people have always existed alongside God, they are in some respect his peers.

75. **The doctrine has roots in Western philosophy**: Leibniz held that minds are "monads" that cannot be created or destroyed; Plato held that minds are "simples" that exist eternally.

---

### VII. Historiographical Positions

76. **The history of Mormon theology is a history of attempts to run away from Smith's thought under the pretext of developing it**.

77. **Post-Smith Mormon theologians were less willing than Smith to depart from Christian orthodoxy** and therefore had difficulty compatibilizing Smith's doctrines with what they wanted Mormon theology to be.

78. **Mormon theologians were under pressure to accept Smith's doctrines** given that KFD is to a large extent definitive of Mormon theology.

79. **Mormon theology as a whole has remained in a limbo** between Smith's own theology and softened versions of it.

80. **Even the most "Smith-positive" Mormon theologians, like Orson Pratt, repudiate the very essence of Smith's theology**—the contention that God was once a man.

81. **Pratt's position (pantheism coupled with sentient matter) is very far from—and logically incompatible with—Smith's position that some person became what is now God**.

82. **This shows how intensely Mormon theologians resisted Smith's doctrines**, even while having to operate within a framework at least partially defined by them.

83. **KFD did more than any of Smith's previous sermons to shape Mormon thought**, because in it Smith united his positions into a single coherent vision.

84. **Smith had publicly endorsed each of his main doctrines before giving the KFD**, which is why many in the early Mormon Church regarded him as a "heretic" and "blasphemer."

85. **Despite intense pressure, Smith never softened his positions**.

---

### VIII. Critique of Samuel Brown's Article on Phelps's "Paracletes"

86. **"Paracletes" does not provide a useful illustration of Smith's thought: it actually obscures it**.

87. **The material on which "Paracletes" is based is drawn from the periphery of Smith's thought**, but it treats it as central.

88. **"Paracletes" makes Smith's theology seem cartoonish and arbitrary**.

89. **"Paracletes" spins off a defensible idea into an L. Ron Hubbard-style fantasy**.

90. **Brown's contention that "Paracletes" provides a crucial window on the complex network of beliefs undergirding Smith's theology is not accurate**.

91. **Smith's theology is cogent and carefully thought-out**, not an absurd fairy tale spun out of whole cloth (contrary to what Phelps's fiction suggests).

---

### IX. Methodological Positions

92. **Works discussing theological development should be examined in chronological order**, noting where a given work either builds on or diverges from its predecessors.

93. **The assumption that the Bible is literally accurate represents one possible starting point** for Smith's reasoning.

94. **Van Hale's position that Smith arrived at his doctrines gradually is consistent with Smith's sermons**—but another possibility is that Smith had already completely accepted them but refrained from stating them directly.

95. **A follow-up paper is warranted** investigating the question: Is anything left of Smith's thought in contemporary Mormon theology?

---

### X. Summary Aphorism (endorsed as the essence of Smith's theology)

96. **"As man is, God once was; as God is, man may become"** (Lorenzo Snow's aphorism, endorsed as capturing the essence of Smith's theology).

97. **God is an evolved man, and a human being can evolve into a state of relative Godliness**.

98. **Godliness comes in degrees**; there are, or could be, various beings having varying degrees of God-status.

99. **Unless God is at least partly human, he is unlikely to have the ability or inclination to function as our guardian**.

---

**Total: 99 distinct positions identified.**CONCEPTION AND CAUSATION POSITION STATEMENT KUCZYNSKI 

KUCZYNSKI POSITION STATEMENT PAPERS ON BUSINESS, ETC. 

POSITION STATEMENT KUCZYNSKI Papers on Accounting, Business, Economics, Politics, and Psychology (College Papers Plus 2019)

1. The Altman Z-score provides a reasonably accurate (90% historically) indicator of a company's likelihood of bankruptcy within two years.

2. Exchange-value is perception-based while use-value is reality-based, allowing the two to diverge without limit.

3. The divergence between exchange-value and use-value tends to inflate the assets of the wealthy and deflate those of the poor, exacerbating pre-existing inequalities.

4. College educations often have high exchange-value but zero or negative use-value, as they frequently fail to make people smarter or more competent.

5. Commodities associated with the wealthy class experience inflated exchange-values relative to use-values, while those associated with the poor experience deflated exchange-values.

6. All drugs should be legalized unconditionally, primarily for economic rather than civil libertarian reasons.

7. The War on Drugs protects drug cartels and creates economic parasites in the form of lawyers, probation officers, and prison guards.

8. Drug laws cause non-criminals to be absorbed into the criminal underworld by forcing them to transact with criminals.

9. When drugs were legal in the 19th century United States, drug use was considerably lower than after the War on Drugs began.

10. Neither Kant nor Ross would regard coercive wealth redistribution as ethically permissible, as it violates autonomy.

11. The state can take wealth but cannot generate it; wealth generation requires free enterprise.

12. Hobbes believed language must be carefully regulated because deception and obfuscation threaten the social contract.

13. For Hobbes, contracts are null and void without government enforcement, making governments necessary for mutual trust.

14. According to Rousseau, people are best off when nobody has too much more than anybody else; inequality breeds cruelty.

15. Rousseau argues that civil society causes much of the mutual antagonism it claims to prevent by enabling inequality.

16. Nietzsche viewed forgetting as active repression rather than mere passive inertia.

17. Marx sought an entirely new kind of society attainable only through revolution, not a return to older forms.

18. Classical liberals (free-marketeers) regard individualism/egoism as the driving force of a healthy economy, not a vice.

19. The free market is free for entrepreneurs with capital but forbidding and unfree for workers, who experience drudgery and sameness.

20. Universities celebrate diversity while the actual working world cares only about what workers can produce.

21. Knowledge Management cannot assist universities because university expenses are inherently opaque and resist scrutiny.

22. Universities are inherently averse to internal auditing because they are supposed to be places for "exploring ideas."

23. Universities can be financially inefficient with impunity due to government grants, subsidies, and prestige-driven tuition.

24. The Founding Fathers would likely approve of Trump's immigration stance as a defense of sovereignty and territorial integrity.

25. The US entered WWI primarily because Wilson needed to save political face, not for the stated reasons of making the world safe for democracy.

26. The Treaty of Versailles was excessively punitive toward Germany and violated the terms proposed during armistice negotiations.

27. Microsoft's competitive advantage lies in product bundling and cross-functionality, not innovation.

28. Microsoft counters its lack of innovativeness by buying patents and acquiring innovative companies.

29. The fraud triangle (opportunity, pressure, rationalization) explains why individuals commit fraud.

30. Nepotism hiring and inadequate background checks create fraud opportunities in organizations.

31. American party politics stabilized into a two-party system almost immediately after the nation's founding and has remained structurally similar ever since.

32. For psychological reasons, people need political parties but cannot sustain more than two major ones.

33. Trump came into politics from outside the system and disrupted Republican orthodoxies more than Democratic ones.

34. Prejudice functions as psychological resistance to information that threatens one's worldview.

35. Freud's concept of sublimation explains why some individuals channel primitive drives into socially productive activities while others do not.

36. The Peter Pan Syndrome represents a failure to sublimate, resulting in adults who cannot defer gratification or accept responsibility.

37. Attachment theory explains how early childhood experiences with caregivers shape adult relationship patterns and mental health.

38. Psychopathy exists on a spectrum; individuals can be non-psychopathic in specific professional contexts while being highly psychopathic in others.

39. Breaching experiments operate on psychological fault lines; they are ineffective where no such fault lines exist.

40. Modern women are forced to suppress traditionally feminine aspects of themselves just as past women were forced to suppress masculine aspects.

41. China's Belt and Road Initiative represents multiple forms of soft power simultaneously: positive, deliberate negative, and inadvertent negative.

42. The Soviet Union collapsed due to a combination of economic inefficiency, political rigidity, and nationalist pressures.

43. Standardized tests should remain part of college admissions because they provide objective measures that reduce bias.

44. Carbon taxes are inferior to standing environmental regulations because they create price uncertainty without guaranteeing environmental outcomes.

45. Colonialism differs from imperialism in that colonialism involves settlement and direct control while imperialism involves indirect control and exploitation.

46. Freedom of speech should be protected broadly but has legitimate limits when speech directly incites violence or harm.

47. The Turing Test is not a good test of intelligence because it measures conversational mimicry rather than genuine understanding.

48. Technology-caused job shortages will eventually necessitate some form of universal welfare.

49. Ideas function as networks rather than discrete units, with new ideas emerging from novel connections between existing ones.

50. Minimum wage laws harm the workers they purport to help by pricing low-skilled workers out of the labor market.KUCZYNSKI POSITION STATEMENT A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE AND OTHER WORKS 

POSITION STATEMENT KUCZYNSKI A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE AND OTHER PHILOSOPHICAL WORKS

1. Intentions are judgments as to how to consolidate one's psychological architecture.

2. Values are beliefs as to what, in general, is conducive to the integrity of one's psychological architecture.

3. Freedom is a property of actions and also of desires, contrary to Locke's claim that it applies only to actions.

4. Second-order desires do not collapse into first-order desires; the distinction is meaningful and important.

5. Persons, unlike non-persons, subject their own desires and mental states to critical rational scrutiny.

6. Rational conduct is not identical with intelligent conduct; an act can be highly intelligent yet irrational.

7. An irrational act is one that does not embody due regard for one's various interests, regardless of its intelligence.

8. For an act to be free, one's first-order desires must be consistent with the second-order desires driving that act.

9. Higher-order desires can become mere vehicles for first-order desires through psychological warping.

10. Truly free acts are driven by values, not merely by higher-order desires.

11. Values are not desires, though values may lead to desires and desires may lead to values.

12. Where there are no values, there are no selves, though there may be minds.

13. There is no agency of any kind where there are no selves.

14. Estrangement from one's own actions amounts to estrangement from all of one's own desires.

15. Being free consists primarily in being oneself, and secondarily in being able to do what one wants.

16. Many analyses that philosophers put forth seem not to embody genuine attempts to find the truth; Frankfurt's analysis of freedom does embody such an attempt.

17. Kant's two categorical imperatives (universalizability and respect for autonomy) are not equivalent.

18. Acts of con-artistry would not necessarily be self-defeating in a world of con-artists, refuting Kant's CI1.

19. Morally good forms of conduct can be ones that, if engaged in universally, could not be successfully carried out.

20. A moral principle outweighed is not a moral principle extinguished.

21. A categorical moral obligation can be outweighed by some other, stronger obligation without ceasing to exist.

22. Kant's failure to distinguish the good from the praiseworthy is a fundamental blunder in his ethical theory.

23. Many things that are morally good are not commendable; Brown's happiness is good but not praiseworthy.

24. Intelligence, wealth, and health have inherent moral value, contrary to Kant's claim that only good will has moral worth.

25. Wittgenstein's central claims about meaning and mind are demonstrably false.

26. Norman Malcolm's denial that people dream was a consequence of following Wittgenstein's false views about mental processes.

27. Ryle's claim that the difference between voluntary and involuntary actions concerns cultural acceptability rather than mental states is obviously false.

28. First-class philosophical thinkers are more likely to use their intelligence to defend orthodoxies than to look for truth.

29. Students and professors at first-tier philosophy institutions are not more likely to produce better work than their counterparts at bottom-tier universities.

30. Strawson's ascriptivist analysis of moral responsibility is false because it makes intentions irrelevant to responsibility.

31. Strawson's expressivist claim that "true" is redundant is false; "everything Plato said was true" cannot be stated without "true" or a synonym.

32. "It is true that snow is white" and "snow is white" are not synonymous; the former concerns a proposition while the latter concerns snow directly.

33. Wittgenstein's claim that "I am in pain" is merely expressive behavior like animal howling is demonstrably false.

34. Austin's performative utterance theory is false; utterances like "I promise" do affirm propositions.

35. Embedding a sentence P in "if P, then Q" does not change P's meaning; this is necessary for indirect arguments to work.

36. A priori knowledge is knowledge that does not depend on sensory observation for its justification.

37. All mathematical truths are analytic truths.

38. Not all analytic truths are mathematical truths; statements about mathematics are analytic but not themselves mathematical.

39. No analytic truths are tautologies, since tautologies are definitional truths that hold in virtue of contingent facts about word usage.

40. The statement "a bachelor is an unmarried man" is an empirical truth about language, not an analytic truth.

41. It is incoherent to deny analytic truths, but one can coherently (though incorrectly) deny definitional truths.

42. Gödel proved that the truths of arithmetic are analytically true but not formally true.

43. What Gödel proved is that there is no recursive definition of the class of truths of arithmetic, not that mathematical truths are non-analytic.

44. Incompleteness is the property of a statement-set having no recursive definition.

45. Most scientifically important statement-sets are incomplete; statement-sets with real scope or explanatory power cannot be axiomatized.

46. There is no recursive definition of the class of statements of the form "x is a real number."

47. A logic (system of logic) is a recursively defined statement-set.

48. The class of all recursively defined statement-sets is not itself recursively definable.

49. There is no recursive characterization of the concept of logical truth.

50. The incompleteness of logic is more general, and perhaps more significant, than the incompleteness of arithmetic.**Positions Identified in "Ninety Paradoxes of Philosophy and Psychology"**

1. Losers hyper-value hierarchies that oppress them in order to prevent others from escaping
2. Useless employees are the most zealous enforcers of organizational rules
3. Independent writers face an unbreakable vicious circle requiring pre-existing popularity to gain popularity
4. Communications technology connects us logically while disconnecting us emotionally
5. US educational funding creates bloated bureaucracies rather than improving education
6. Public education spending is soft communism—government jobs displacing private sector productivity
7. Law enforcement jobs are largely fake jobs created to buy votes
8. Rationality is reflective and can break decision deadlocks that intelligence cannot
9. Obsessive-compulsive symptoms wither when fought rather than indulged
10. Primerica functions primarily as a welfare-qualification scheme for fake employment documentation
11. Optimism is a form of denial rooted in insecurity; self-belief is confidence-driven realism
12. The people who should be most grateful lack the integrity to give credit where due
13. Medium-funny comedians succeed more than genuinely funny ones
14. Self-identified liberals have higher environmental footprints than self-identified conservatives
15. Conservatives tend toward eco-friendly do-it-yourselfism; liberals toward group-dependency
16. Progress for humanity often renders specific individuals obsolete
17. Conformity to countercultures (goths, hippies) is still conformity
18. Fake rebellion increases where legitimate rebellion is dangerous
19. Old-guard hippies are the establishment; those they oppose are the actual rebels
20. Lawyers create the litigious environment that makes lawyers necessary
21. Suicide harms only those who care about the victim
22. In democracies, people oppress themselves
23. Computers eliminating work paradoxically increases work done
24. Economic efficiency increases unemployment (excluding artificial government jobs)
25. Recursive definitions cannot be recursively defined
26. Formal truth cannot be formally characterized
27. Automation cannot itself be automated
28. "Heterological" when applied to itself contains an undefined pronoun/free variable and is neither true nor false
29. The Liar Paradox: propositions, not words, bear truth values; "I am lying" is simply false when stated perspicuously
30. Berry's Paradox dissolves by distinguishing canonical from non-canonical naming
31. Wittgenstein's rule-following paradox collapses into the trivial point that erroneous hypotheses may fit restricted datasets
32. Quine's indeterminacy of translation thesis is false and presupposes broken behaviorist psychology
33. Sorites paradoxes are solved by replacing binary predicates with comparatives plus contextually-supplied benchmarks
34. A single grain of millet does make a sound—the "no sound" claim is like saying a stereo makes no sound because a deaf person can't hear it
35. To be at rest requires failing to move during a non-null interval; instantaneous position does not constitute rest
36. If irresistible forces exist, unmovable objects cannot, and vice versa (Asimov's solution)
37. Stringent therapist licensing reduces therapist effectiveness
38. Psychiatric treatment often causes more harm than it cures
39. More money spent on economic research yields more useless results
40. Lawyers are better at defending the guilty than the innocent
41. Unions prevent job creation, then claim credit for protecting the jobs that remain
42. People with modest responsibilities deliberately underperform to inflate their importance
43. Professors withhold information to artificially inflate its perceived value
44. Zeno's paradox dissolves because any finite distance can be represented as an infinite series sum
45. Places are constituents, not occupants, of space-time and therefore don't themselves have places
46. The probability of a coin landing in any exact region is infinitesimally small but not zero
47. High self-awareness correlates with both well-being and neurotic distress because self-criticism enables adaptation but causes suffering
48. Trying not to think of something initiates a cognitive process without letting it run its course
49. Schizophrenics respond better to treatment in developing countries because restoring self-esteem is easier where expectations are lower
50. Anti-trust laws hurt consumers when applied to firms with large market share due to superior competition
51. Anti-trust laws help consumers when applied to firms that restrict competition
52. Tenure eliminates economic incentives to do good work or hire threatening talent
53. Vindictive leaders are less likely to be overthrown than benevolent ones
54. Conceptual analyses can be informative because information-load depends on how something is said, not just what is said
55. Fitch's Paradox is not a paradox but a proof that not all truths can be known
56. People at the bottom of hierarchies enforce those hierarchies against peers trying to rise
57. Grassroots movements require leaders, but leaders need pre-existing power to gain followers—making true grassroots movements impossible
58. Incompetence has survival value because hyper-competence provokes resentment
59. Incompetent people get over-promoted (seen as controllable); hyper-competent people get under-promoted (seen as threatening)
60. School psychologists must blame children rather than institutions to keep their jobs
61. Useless laws give states incentive to criminalize populations
62. Defense lawyers' livelihoods depend on laws remaining punitive
63. Superabundant scholarship creates vested interests in suppressing genuine insights
64. Omniscience is incoherent because knowledge of one kind may exclude knowledge of another kind
65. An omniscient being has a frozen belief-set and therefore cannot decide anything
66. The Heavy Rock Paradox fails because an unliftable rock for an omnipotent being is a logical impossibility like a four-sided triangle
67. Problem-solving institutions have incentives to perpetuate problems when solving them would eliminate the institution
68. Hospitals solve problems because new patients always exist; philosophy departments suppress solutions because their practitioners cannot handle replacement problems
69. Race-studies departments exacerbate racial tensions
70. Authors don't believe everything they write—much is written because it seems warranted, not because it's believed true
71. Bhartrhari's Paradox is a logical blunder: "some things cannot be described" ascribes no property to any particular object
72. "Some things cannot be described" is true (given any language L, non-denumerably many objects cannot be described in L) and false (for any object, some possible language can describe it)
73. The Barber Paradox proves such a barber cannot exist
74. Russell's reasoning about the set of all non-self-containing sets is wrong; "doesn't self-contain" when not elliptical for a non-reflexive statement contains an undefined pronoun
75. The Axiom of Comprehension is correct
76. The Unexpected Hanging Paradox dissolves because "surprise" is relative to time—Smith lacks information until the day of hanging
77. Ross's Paradox: imperatival logic has world-to-word direction of fit, so validity flows from general to specific (opposite of statement logic)
78. The Lottery Paradox: high probability is not certainty; acceptance is pragmatic, belief is alethic
79. Beliefs are not justified on strictly statistical grounds but by explanatory superiority
80. Slackers work harder than non-slackers because defensive positioning forces them to accept unfavorable terms
81. Extremely successful people work mainly at choosing what work to do, not at doing work proper
82. Economic efficiency makes individuals economically useless and welfare-dependent
83. The Raven Paradox dissolves because only principled (nomic/causal) generalizations can be confirmed, and these are not equivalent to their contrapositives
84. Enumerative induction is either non-existent or illegitimate
85. Knowledge of the future is based on continuities, not regularities/repetitions
86. Causation is continuation, not constant conjunction
87. Regularities tell us where to look for continuities but never constitute causal knowledge
88. We can know singular causal claims without knowing of any similar cases
89. Goodman's "new riddle of induction" is a non-riddle because induction isn't based on concomitances
90. Names are mere labels that "pick up" descriptive information through acquisition context
91. Kripke is right about the semantics of proper names, but semantics isn't known in a vacuum
92. Knowledge starts with beliefs that are not knowledge; beliefs can be justified without the owner knowing the justification
93. Seeking knowledge is knowing a description is instantiated but not knowing the instance; finding knowledge is learning what satisfies that description
94. The ability to learn presupposes constitutive knowledge that isn't acquired
95. Content externalism has absurd consequences (content has no psychological effect; one cannot know what one is thinking about)
96. Thoughts about the external world are had via self-referential thoughts, explaining how different-referent thoughts can be subjectively identical and coincide in content
97. The more legal right a nation has to secede, the less moral right it has (legitimate laws reduce legitimacy of secession)Here are the positions advocated in this work:

---

## **Positions Extracted from *Pragmatism: Epistemology Posing as Metaphysics***

### **I. Central Thesis**

1. **Each of James's five core pragmatist theses (i)-(v) is false.** However, they are "distorted ways of expressing a number of legitimate insights concerning knowledge and the acquisition thereof."

2. **Pragmatism conflates epistemology with metaphysics/ontology.** What pragmatists incorrectly represent as claims about truth itself are actually claims about our knowledge of truth.

### **II. Critique of Specific Pragmatist Theses**

#### **On (i): "The meaning of a hypothesis lies in its observable consequences"**

3. **The meaning of a hypothesis is NOT identical to its observable consequences.** The relationship between a hypothesis and its observable consequences is always contingent, never analytic.

4. **Observable consequences depend on operative conditions and causal mechanisms.** Different conditions or mechanisms would yield different observational consequences from the same hypothesis.

5. **One can accept a hypothesis H while denying any particular specification of its observable consequences O^ without contradiction.** This proves H is not equivalent to O^.

6. **What (i) distortedly expresses is the truism (i+): "Our knowledge of the veracity of a given hypothesis is based on its observable consequences."** This is true but utterly truistic.

7. **Observable consequences are the "vector sum" of what a hypothesis says AND the subject's relationship to the alleged reality.** They are not purely a function of the hypothesis itself.

#### **On (ii): "A true idea is one that allows us to control the world"**

8. **It is not truth that is empowering; it is knowledge.** Truths are useless unless known.

9. **The property of being power-enhancing belongs to our knowledge of truths, not to those truths per se.**

10. **What (ii) distortedly expresses is (ii+): "Instances of knowledge are ipso facto empowering."** The pragmatist incorrectly attributes to truth what is actually a property of knowledge.

#### **On (iii): "True ideas are those we can assimilate"**

11. **There are highly assimilable false ideas and highly non-assimilable true ones.** (iii) is at best a half-truth.

12. **The pragmatist version (iii*), that truth IS assimilability, is an "outright falsehood."**

13. **What (iii) distortedly expresses is (iii+): "Knowledge is assimilated truth, and beliefs become increasingly knowledge-constitutive as they become increasingly grounded."**

#### **On (iv): "Truth happens to an idea"**

14. **(iv) is false taken literally.** An idea is either true or false; it does not become true.

15. **What (iv) distortedly expresses is (iv+): "The property of being true doesn't have any value until an idea that has that property becomes a piece of knowledge."** The value of trueness eventuates when truth is acquired/known.

#### **On (v): "Truth is made, not discovered"**

16. **(v) is "clearly false."** Truth is discovered, not made.

17. **What (v) distortedly expresses is (v+): "Knowledge is made, not discovered."** We construct knowledge (through operations on data), even though we discover truth.

18. **(v+) is "eminently defensible."**

### **III. The Pragmatist Error Pattern**

19. **Pragmatism systematically confuses properties of truth with properties of knowledge.** Each pragmatist thesis takes something true of knowledge and falsely attributes it to truth itself.

20. **Pragmatism replaces an object-oriented conception of knowledge with a subject-oriented (agent-oriented) conception.** This is what (i)-(v) have in common.

21. **Pragmatism combats an "intellectualist" conception of knowledge and replaces it with an "interactionist" or "operationalist" conception.**

### **IV. Critique of "Classical Epistemology" (CE)**

22. **The negations of (i)-(v) are each correct.** But they *suggest* (without implying) that knowledge-acquisition is purely passive reception.

23. **Classical Epistemology (CE)—that knowledge-acquisition is about passively taking in what exists—may be true in some narrow technical sense, but it is misleading.**

24. **Intellectual discoveries are made by solving practical problems.** Insights are the "collateral damage" of workarounds to practical roadblocks.

### **V. The Practical Origins of Theoretical Knowledge**

25. **Much of physics is fallout from attempts to create better weapons, dams, etc.** Mathematics is constructed to validate this fallout.

26. **Economics was invented to manage the influx of wealth from the New World into Europe.**

27. **Anthropology was invented to help Europeans interact more productively with colonized peoples.**

28. **Psychoanalysis was developed to solve otherwise unsolvable psychiatric problems.**

29. **Even "purely philosophical" problems are not purely philosophical.** Modern epistemology arose in the mid-1600s precisely when modern physics and engineering arose, and when Church doctrines were losing credibility because they interfered with scientific progress.

30. **Cartesian skepticism and Lockean empiricism arose because faith-based epistemology was no longer viable.**

31. **Modern logic began with Boole in the mid-1800s, with the objective of automating reasoning, precisely when physical production was being automated.** This is not coincidental.

### **VI. The Nature of "Purely Theoretical" Knowledge**

32. **"Purely theoretical" problems are problems relating to the mutual coherence of discoveries made in the course of solving practical problems.**

33. **Calculus was invented to compute planetary orbits and ballistics.** "Purely theoretical" questions (infinitesimals, fractals) arose to validate an enormously useful belief-system.

34. **"Purely theoretical" knowledge, insofar as it exists, tends to be stale and one-dimensional.**

35. **"Book knowledge" of principles proves useless in practice.** One learns formalisms based on principles, not the principles themselves, until forced to relearn them through practical application.

36. **"Pure theory" tends to concern itself with mere schemata.** Consequently, "theoretical knowledge" degenerates when not anchored in practical knowledge.

### **VII. The Truth-Utility Relationship**

37. **Ideas are NOT true because they are useful (contra James).** The theorems of trigonometry are useful because they are true, not the other way around.

38. **However, truths are learned—and are worth learning—because they are useful.** It is not absurd to identify the true *insofar as it is worth learning* with the useful.

39. **Theoretical knowledge should exist only as long as it is anchored in practical knowledge.** When it ceases to be so anchored, it degenerates into knowledge of empty formalisms.

40. **Truth is objective.** Either there is an even number of stars in the galaxy or there isn't, regardless of whether this is worth knowing.

41. **Knowledge is a relationship between subject and object (mind and world), and therefore has a subjective side.**

### **VIII. The Biological Function of Intellect**

42. **The intellect exists biologically to help the organism survive and procreate.**

43. **In human beings, intellect has to some extent become autonomous.** Pure mathematicians study relations "for their own sake."

44. **Even autonomous intellectual pursuits investigate coherence-relations internal to datasets that are themselves of interest only because of practical applications.**

### **IX. The Theoretician-Practitioner Relationship**

45. **The pure mathematician/philosopher studies coherence-relations within practically-originated datasets.**

46. **The theoretician is to the practitioner what the martial artist is to the soldier.** The theoretician exercises the ability to do what the practitioner is already doing.

47. **It is the practitioner who determines both what the theoretician studies and the general lines along which he studies it.**

### **X. Art and Theory**

48. **The artist, like the engineer, organizes matter (paint, marble, sound).** But the artist is interested in material relations "for their own sake" rather than for practical applications.

49. **The artist is interested either in deepening understanding of material relations or in exercising his ability to understand them.**

50. **The artist appears to have turned his back on reality only because he is exercising his ability to engage it.** The same holds of the theoretician.

51. **Interest in truth or beauty "for their own sake," though not directly concerned with practical results, is directly concerned with the cognitive basis of our ability to generate practical results.**

52. **James's thesis that truth is utility, though false, may be regarded as a distorted expression of the truth that theoretical activity is indirectly practical.**

---

**Total: 52 positions identified.**TEXT INTELLIGENCE REPORT
Generated: 12/4/2025, 3:11:13 PM
Source Length: 13073 words
LLM Used: grok

--- KEY QUOTATIONS ---


--- ANNOTATED CITATIONS ---


--- COMPRESSED REWRITE ---
[Chunk 1]


[Chunk 2]


[Chunk 3]


[Chunk 4]


[Chunk 5]


[Chunk 6]


[Chunk 7]


[Chunk 8]


[Chunk 9]


[Chunk 10]


[Chunk 11]


[Chunk 12]


[Chunk 13]


[Chunk 14]


--- DATABASE ---
═══ CHUNK 1 ═══


═══ CHUNK 2 ═══


═══ CHUNK 3 ═══


═══ CHUNK 4 ═══


═══ CHUNK 5 ═══


═══ CHUNK 6 ═══


═══ CHUNK 7 ═══


═══ CHUNK 8 ═══


═══ CHUNK 9 ═══


═══ CHUNK 10 ═══


═══ CHUNK 11 ═══


═══ CHUNK 12 ═══


═══ CHUNK 13 ═══


═══ CHUNK 14 ═══


--- TEXT ANALYZER ---
═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 1 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 2 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 3 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 4 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 5 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 6 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 7 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 8 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 9 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 10 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 11 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 12 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 13 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 14 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



--- MAJOR VIEWS ---
1. VIEW: Payment of bonuses significantly improves productivity.
   EVIDENCE: "Yes, enormously, without any doubt."

2. VIEW: Bonuses are particularly effective for work involving creativity or insight.
   EVIDENCE: "But once they get used to it and no longer feel the stick of urgency, they need the carrot of bonuses keep on plugging away, especially if the work involves creativity or insight."

3. VIEW: Bonuses are less effective for low-level workers.
   EVIDENCE: "If you are dealing with low level workers-boozers who are putting rocks in a bag-then not so much, since they are more interested in how little they can do and get by than they are in moving forward."

4. VIEW: Talent should be rewarded with bonuses.
   EVIDENCE: "But with talent-gotta reward it."

5. VIEW: Any consistent set of sentences can be extended to a maximal consistent set.
   EVIDENCE: "Let S be a consistent statement set, and let s1 be an arbitrary statement not in S. If s1 is consistent with S, then the union of S and s1 is consistent; otherwise, the union of S and not s1 is consistent."

6. VIEW: A client who does not give credit where credit is due is a warning sign of trouble.
   EVIDENCE: "They don't give credit where credit is due, and they look for ways to get out of paying you what your owed, including threatening, undermining, and lying about the quantity and quality of what you have done."

7. VIEW: The line between good clients and dirty clients is clear.
   EVIDENCE: "The line good between clients and dirty clients is utterly sharp."

8. VIEW: Good clients may be annoying or bad people in some contexts but are honest and pay.
   EVIDENCE: "There are good clients who are annoying and may even be bad people in some contexts, but they pay and they are honest about what you have done for them."

9. VIEW: Dirty clients lie about the work done and show their true colors quickly.
   EVIDENCE: "The dirty clients lie about what you done-and they show their true colors pretty much right away (after one or two meetings, sometimes one or two minutes)."

10. VIEW: Social media influencers bring value to society by facilitating the flow of information.
   EVIDENCE: "Social media facilitates the flow of information, and social media influencers can help people benefit from that increased flow."

11. VIEW: Starting a startup straight out of college is advisable if you have a legitimate business idea.
   EVIDENCE: "If you have a legitimate business idea, then you have more answers than just about anyone you come across, and you should go for it."

12. VIEW: Caution should be applied to the execution of a business plan, not to the decision to start a business.
   EVIDENCE: "Yes, be cautious. But be cautious about how you execute your business plan, not about whether to do so."

13. VIEW: It is impossible for others to predict the success of your business idea.
   EVIDENCE: "Also, there is no way for some other person to know whether your business will take off."

14. VIEW: Considered on paper, Facebook was not a good idea, but it succeeded.
   EVIDENCE: "Considered on paper, is Facebook a good idea? Probably not, but it worked, and that's the end of it."

15. VIEW: People are likely to discourage good business ideas and encourage bad ones.
   EVIDENCE: "Also, if you ask other people if your idea is good, they are likely to say 'no' if it is good and 'yes' if it is bad, because they are stuck at miserable jobs and want you to be stuck with them."

16. VIEW: Dr. K is interested in reviewing business ideas for free.
   EVIDENCE: "Finally, if you have an idea, run it by me. No charge. I would be interested."

17. VIEW: Several scientific paradoxes have been proven logical over time.
   EVIDENCE: "1. Framework invariance of speed of light 2. Non-additivity of length and mass 3. Existence of unconscious 4. Absence of deterministic model of quantum phenomena 5. Species level fitness often opposite of individual level fitness"

18. VIEW: The profession of procuring, when conducted properly, minimizes the spread of disease and provides healthy outlets.
   EVIDENCE: "those professions, when conducted properly, minimize the spread of disease and provide healthy outlets for energies that are otherwise expressed neurotically."

19. VIEW: It is acceptable for a man to hit a woman in self-defense.
   EVIDENCE: "Absolutely. 100%. No qualifications."

20. VIEW: Mathematical logic is perceived as sterile and its teachers as being in the weeds.
   EVIDENCE: "Mathematical logic is a bit sterile, and that's probably what you're picking up on. Plus, the people who teach it are kind of in the weeds, in terms of ability-level and vision."

21. VIEW: Studying linguistics, specifically phonology and syntax, was a waste of time.
   EVIDENCE: "I studied linguistics for a while phonology, syntax, and other aspects of modern  scientific  linguistics. That was the most horrid waste of time imaginable."

22. VIEW: Macroeconomics is a form of social psychology when it relates to commercial behavior.
   EVIDENCE: "Macroeconomics is social psychology, in so far as the latter relates to commercial behavior."

23. VIEW: The discipline of social psychology does not focus much on economic exchanges, but this is irrelevant.
   EVIDENCE: "It may be that the discipline referred to as  social psychology  doesn t talk much about economic exchanges, but that is irrelevant."

24. VIEW: Economics is effective at defining and empirically testing psychological and epistemological concepts.
   EVIDENCE: "Economics is good at providing operational definitions of for a number of psychological and epistemological concepts and at putting contentions involving those concepts to well-defined empirical tests."

25. VIEW: Randomness is not more important than effort and talent in life.
   EVIDENCE: "Absolutely not. It is is very hard to keep someone down if he has talent and character. And it is very hard to prop someone up if he has neither."

26. VIEW: Standardized tests are efficient and useful for assessing basic knowledge and cognitive fitness in populations.
   EVIDENCE: "Standardized tests are extraordinarily efficient and are indicated in contexts where only very approximate knowledge is necessary or where knowledge about whole populations (e.g. people who may have been exposed to toxins leading to psychological impairments) are necessary."

27. VIEW: Standardized tests have limited use for individuals due to variability in performance.
   EVIDENCE: "With individuals, they are of limited use, since people can dramatically over-or under-perform, depending on a variety of contextual factors."

28. VIEW: Standardized tests are less subjective and resource-intensive than other educational and diagnostic methods.
   EVIDENCE: "But as a way of testing for basic knowledge of basic cognitive fitness, they are much less subjective and resource-intensive than the ad hoc methods currently used in most educational and even diagnostic contexts."

29. VIEW: Bad thoughts about Allah are due to a desire for freedom from religious tyranny.
   EVIDENCE: "You think bad thoughts about Allah because you want to be free and somebody is using religious tyranny to constrain you."

30. VIEW: Accepting the desire for freedom will make intrusive thoughts about Allah disappear.
   EVIDENCE: "Accept that, and your intrusive thoughts about Allah will vanish."

31. VIEW: All people understand mathematics, and what is referred to as 'mathematical talent' is the ability to apply it outside of automatic contexts.
   EVIDENCE: "I think that all people do understand it. What we refer to as  mathematical talent  is about being able to operationalize mathematical intelligence outside of those contexts in which it is automatically operational."

32. VIEW: The fascination with mathematics stems from its externalization of hidden aspects of oneself.
   EVIDENCE: "And the fascination that all people have for mathematics is the fascination that all people have for externalizations of hidden aspects of themselves themselves."

33. VIEW: School does not provide the necessary tools for adulthood, including technical skills, economic understanding, and character development.
   EVIDENCE: "No it doesn t. It doesn t give us the requisite technical skills. Nor does it give us the requisite understanding of the economy or of its psychological underpinnings. Nor does it encourage the development of the character traits needed to not be a victim once released into the world."

34. VIEW: Viewing certain websites is not illegal unless a transaction is made, though weblogs could theoretically be used as evidence in serious crimes.
   EVIDENCE: "you have to make a purchase or otherwise engage the website in a transactional manner. otherwise no. theoretically, if you are involved in a serious crime, they could use your weblogs as evidence against you."

35. VIEW: Using a VPN is recommended when browsing questionable websites to protect one's identity.
   EVIDENCE: "in any case, when browsing questionable sites, use a vpn."

36. VIEW: It is not necessary to study the same subject in a PhD thesis as in a master's thesis.
   EVIDENCE: "absolutely not. my master s thesis was on definite descriptions, and my doctoral thesis was on legal positivism."

37. VIEW: The tendency for doctoral theses to continue master's theses is due to limitations of individuals and institutions.
   EVIDENCE: "obviously there is a tendency for doctoral theses to be continuations of master s theses, but usually has to do with the limitations of the individuals and institutions involved, granting that said parties will try to rationalize it with the usual puffery about the demands of scholarship."

38. VIEW: It is morally wrong but not illegal to financially destroy someone simply because of a past marriage.
   EVIDENCE: "Being able to destroy somebody financially simply because you were married to them."

39. VIEW: Thoughts about hurting a loved one in OCD are the mind's way of expressing a need for sexual activity.
   EVIDENCE: "You want to  hurt your cat  -your mind s way of telling you that you need to  pound some p*ssy.   Not hard to decrypt. I suspect that your cat-torture obtrusive thoughts will go away soon after you read this."

40. VIEW: Men and women find it hard to be friends because they seek different things from each other, primarily sex and love in different orders.
   EVIDENCE: "Because men don t want friendship from women, and women don t want friendship from men. Men want sex and love (in that order) from women, and women want love and sex (in that order) from men."

41. VIEW: OCD can reappear at any time in life but is unlikely to develop after adolescence.
   EVIDENCE: "It can certainly recrudesce at any juncture in life. But it is not likely to come into existence after adolescence."

42. VIEW: Rigidities that mimic OCD but are not OCD are more likely to develop later in life.
   EVIDENCE: "What is more likely is the development of rigidities that mimic OCD but are not OCD."

43. VIEW: The purpose of a doctoral dissertation is to demonstrate the ability to engage existing work authoritatively and originally.
   EVIDENCE: "The purpose of a dissertation is to show that the dissertation-writer can engage existing work in an authoritative and at least relatively original way."

44. VIEW: There is a significant difference between those who have completed dissertations and those who have not.
   EVIDENCE: "Granting that not all passing dissertations live up to this description, there is, in my judgement, an important line that separates those who have completed dissertations from those who haven t."

45. VIEW: Identity is fluid in how it is lived out, but the true self remains constant.
   EVIDENCE: "What is fluid is how your live out your true self, not what your true self is."

46. VIEW: Some aspects of a person's psyche cannot be changed without causing harm.
   EVIDENCE: "some aspects of a person's psyche cannot be contravened without damaging that person"

47. VIEW: People who rationalize selling out are being weak and rigid, not flexible and fluid.
   EVIDENCE: "A lot of people rationalize selling out by telling themselves that they are being flexible and 'fluid', but they are actually being weak and rigid"

48. VIEW: A genuinely adaptive person can survive without compromising their personality.
   EVIDENCE: "a genuinely adaptive person finds a way to survive without gutting his personality in the process"

49. VIEW: The first job to be replaced by robots happened a long time ago.
   EVIDENCE: "The first job-happened a long time ago"

50. VIEW: Teachers will be the next major job to be replaced by robots.
   EVIDENCE: "The next big one-teachers"

51. VIEW: Most of the work done by teachers is best automated.
   EVIDENCE: "Most of that is best automated"

52. VIEW: Philosophers have abandoned logical atomism for two reasons.
   EVIDENCE: "Why have philosophers abandoned logical atomism? Two reasons."

53. VIEW: Physical simplicity does not equate to conceptual simplicity.
   EVIDENCE: "Physical simplicity doesn't equate to conceptual simplicity"

54. VIEW: The complexity of a statement depends on the dialectical context.
   EVIDENCE: "Whether a given statement is to be regarded as complex, and how exactly it is to be regarded as complex, depends on the dialectical context"

55. VIEW: Even if there are minimal units of physical composition, the truths describing them are not necessarily simple.
   EVIDENCE: "Given only that these entities are physically simple (or at least relatively so), it doesn't follow that the truths that describe them, and in terms of which we are to understand them, are correspondingly simple"

56. VIEW: Minimal units of physical composition are known in a theory-mediated way, making the truths about them complex.
   EVIDENCE: "If anything, the opposite holds: because these entities are known in a such a theory-mediated way, those truths are exceptionally complex"

57. VIEW: Minimal units of physical composition are not building blocks in a logical sense.
   EVIDENCE: "So even if there are 'atoms' (minimal building blocks) of nature, they are not building blocks in a logical sense"

58. VIEW: Minimal units of physical composition are at the opposite extreme of the epistemological pyramid.
   EVIDENCE: "on the contrary, they are, in that respect, at the opposite extreme of the epistemological pyramid"

59. VIEW: The statement '1+1=2' can function as an axiom or as the result of a long chain of reasoning.
   EVIDENCE: "Consider the statement '1+1=2.' That statement could function as an axiom (an accepted truth that neither requires nor admits of justification) or (as is the case in set theory), it could function as the end-result of a long chain of reasoning"

60. VIEW: Any given truth is entailed by and entails infinitely many other truths.
   EVIDENCE: "Any given truth is entailed by infinitely many others and itself entails infinitely many truths"

61. VIEW: There are no ultimate, foundational truths.
   EVIDENCE: "there are no 'ultimate', foundational truths"

62. VIEW: There are no non-composite truths from which other truths can be constructed or derived.
   EVIDENCE: "Consequently, there are, in this sense, no 'atoms' of nature-no non-composite truths out of which other truths can be constructed or from which they can be derived"

63. VIEW: Atoms, as required by logical atomism, do not exist.
   EVIDENCE: "Atoms, in the sense in which the philosophy of logical atomism requires them to exist, don't"

64. VIEW: Men sometimes mature emotionally by forfeiting their own welfare for their significant other's whims.
   EVIDENCE: "If by 'mature', you mean forfeit their own welfare for the petty whims of their 'significant' other, then, sadly, the answer is sometimes 'yes.'"

65. VIEW: Men sometimes mature emotionally by learning how their welfare is tied to others, including their significant other.
   EVIDENCE: "If by 'mature', you mean 'learn how their own welfare is tied to that of other people, including, in some cases, that of their significant other', then, not so sadly, the answer, once again, is 'yes.'"

66. VIEW: Men sometimes do not mature emotionally according to the above definitions.
   EVIDENCE: "If, by 'mature', you have either of the above two meanings in mind, then, even less sadly, the answer is sometimes 'no.'"

67. VIEW: To find someone's weaknesses, know what they are and what they want to be.
   EVIDENCE: "Know what they are and what they want to be"

68. VIEW: If someone falls short of what they want to be, that is their weakness.
   EVIDENCE: "If they fall short, that is their weakness"

69. VIEW: If someone does not fall short of what they want to be, they have no weaknesses.
   EVIDENCE: "If they don't, they have no weaknesses"

70. VIEW: If women could design a perfect woman for men, she would be like an actual woman during the first 18 months of the relationship.
   EVIDENCE: "Like an actual woman during the first 18 months of the relationship"

71. VIEW: If A belongs to set A and set B, it does not imply that A is a subset of B.
   EVIDENCE: "No, at least not in general"

72. VIEW: A member of a set is not a subset of that set.
   EVIDENCE: "You are a member of the set of people, but you are not a set or therefore a subset"

73. VIEW: It is possible to construct a set to which both x and {x} belong.
   EVIDENCE: "Obviously one can construct a set to which both x and {x} belong, e.g. the set that contains {1, 2, 3, and { 2, 3}, this being the four-membered set {1, 2, 3, {2, 3}}"

74. VIEW: A Master's degree in Economics is a waste of time.
   EVIDENCE: "The formal study of economics at any level is the very definition of a waste of time"

75. VIEW: Being conversant with key economic ideas is important in many contexts.
   EVIDENCE: "There have been some brilliant minds in the field of economics, and being conversant with some of the key ideas is deeply important in many contexts, both practical and theoretical"

76. VIEW: The author finds the works of Smith and Marshall to be enormously illuminating.
   EVIDENCE: "enormously illuminating, especially Smith and Marshall."

77. VIEW: The author runs a tutoring business for college and graduate students.
   EVIDENCE: "I run a tutoring business for people in college and graduate school"

78. VIEW: Around 50% of the author's clients need help with finance and economics.
   EVIDENCE: "around 50% need help with finance and economics."

79. VIEW: The author has to work through many problem sets related to economics.
   EVIDENCE: "So I had to grind through millions of problem sets about demand curves and Cournot equilibrium and Keynsian range of the aggregate supply curve, etc."

80. VIEW: The author is currently working on a problem set while a client is on a break.
   EVIDENCE: "In fact, I m doing this right now. (Client on bathroom break and therefore away from Skype.)"

81. VIEW: The author finds the economic problem sets to be not illuminating.
   EVIDENCE: "The take-home: not illuminating."

82. VIEW: The author believes that economic problem sets are disconnected from economic reality.
   EVIDENCE: "These people these econ undergrads and grad students -spend their time staring into the abyss of hybrid logic puzzles that have nothing to do with economic reality"

83. VIEW: The author believes that economic problem sets are not good intellectual exercises.
   EVIDENCE: "but are also too impure to even be good intellectual exercises."

84. VIEW: The author profits from tutoring students in economics.
   EVIDENCE: "Works for me, though, since I pay people to babysit these tragedy-cases and keep a cut."

85. VIEW: The author would not recommend studying economics in depth.
   EVIDENCE: "But in terms of doing it  well, been there, wouldn t recommend it for anyone."

86. VIEW: The author believes that old economists like Hume, Smith, and Marshall are very good.
   EVIDENCE: "Last point: If you read the really old economists, Hume, Smith, Marshall  they re pretty darn good."

87. VIEW: Old economists were specific and did not frequently put forth models.
   EVIDENCE: "But they are also very specific, as in, they aren t really putting forth models, except occasionally and with heavy reservations."

88. VIEW: The discipline of economics lost touch with reality when it tried to model itself on physics.
   EVIDENCE: "But at some point, something horrible happened to the discipline; they tried to model it on physics or some such, and it lost all contact with anything real."

89. VIEW: Current economic ideas seem to be produced by malfunctioning cyborgs.
   EVIDENCE: "So now all you get are get screw-up ideas seem to have written by malfunctioning cyborg."

90. VIEW: An economics degree does not impress people anymore.
   EVIDENCE: "But anyway -an economist degree doesn t impress anybody. Not anymore."

91. VIEW: An economics degree may have been impressive in 1980.
   EVIDENCE: "Maybe in 1980, but not now."

92. VIEW: The limit of (1/n) as n goes to infinity is zero, but (1/n) is not equal to zero when n goes to infinity.
   EVIDENCE: "The limit of (1/n), as n goes to infinity is zero, but (1/n) is not equal to zero when n goes to infinity"

93. VIEW: The fallacy in the limit of (1/n) is equating real numbers with cardinal numbers.
   EVIDENCE: "the fallacy is equating reals with cardinals."

94. VIEW: Descartes believed that ideas, when considered solely in themselves, cannot be false.
   EVIDENCE: "Descartes once said, "Now as far as ideas are concerned, provided they are considered solely in themselves and I do not refer them to anything else, they cannot strictly speaking be false.""

95. VIEW: Truth is a relationship between an idea and an external referent.
   EVIDENCE: "Truth is a relationship between idea and external referent."

96. VIEW: For any possible universe U, there is some distance D such that nothing in U can move at all without covering a distance of at least D.
   EVIDENCE: "For any possible universe U, there is some distance D such that nothing in U can move at all without covering a distance of at least D."

97. VIEW: Zeno has established that if any given motion presupposes another motion, then nothing can even begin to leave the place that it is occupying at a given time.
   EVIDENCE: "Zeno has established that if any given motion presupposes another motion, then nothing can even begin to leave the place that it is occupying at a given time."

98. VIEW: The assertion that (i) must be rejected.
   EVIDENCE: "Therefore, (i) must be rejected."

99. VIEW: It is not possible for there to no minimum, short of nullity, to the amount by which a given object moves.
   EVIDENCE: "Assuming that (i) is false, it is not possible for there to no minimum, short of nullity, to the amount by which a given object moves."

100. VIEW: In any world where motion is possible, there is some finite distance such that anything that moves in that world moves by at least that distance.
   EVIDENCE: "Therefore, in any world where motion is possible, there is some finite distance such that anything that moves in that world moves by at least that distance."

101. VIEW: If Mills is right, then any given universe U consists of discrete cells such that, for any occupant x of U, x moves by vanishing from one cell and then appearing in another.
   EVIDENCE: "If Mills is right, then any given universe U consists of discrete cells such that, for any occupant x of U, x moves by vanishing from one cell and then appearing in another."

102. VIEW: x cannot move from one cell to the next, since there would in that case not be a minimum distance that x had to travel in order to travel at all.
   EVIDENCE: "x cannot move from one cell to the next, since there would in that case not be a minimum distance that x had to travel in order to travel at all."

103. VIEW: A consequence of Mills' position is that nothing moves.
   EVIDENCE: "A consequence of Mills' position is that nothing moves."

104. VIEW: The assertion that (i) x spontaneously appears in one cell and spontaneously reappears in an adjacent cell is equivalent with the assertion that (ii) x spontaneously ceases to exist and an x-like object that is not identical with x spontaneously appears in a cell adjacent to that occupied by x.
   EVIDENCE: "The assertion that (i) x spontaneously appears in one cell and spontaneously reappears in an adjacent cell is equivalent with the assertion that (ii) x spontaneously ceases to exist and an x-like object that is not identical with x spontaneously appears in a cell adjacent to that occupied by x."

105. VIEW: If you are obliterated and some person who is exactly like you appears a moment later right next to where you were standing, that person isn't you.
   EVIDENCE: "If you are obliterated and some person who is exactly like you appears a moment later right next to where you were standing, that person isn't you."

106. VIEW: Given that you2 came into existence spontaneously, there are no lines of transmission linking him to the past and thus no lines of transmission linking you2 to you.
   EVIDENCE: "Given that you2 came into existence spontaneously, there are no lines of transmission linking him to the past and thus no lines of transmission linking you2 to you."

107. VIEW: Therefore, you2 is not you; and youn (n>2) isn't identical with either you or with youi (1=i<n).
   EVIDENCE: "Therefore, you2 is not you; and youn (n>2) isn't identical with either you or with youi (1=i<n)."

108. VIEW: If n is a sufficiently high number and there is a sufficiently small delay between youi's disappearance and youi+1's appearance, it will certainly appear that you had moved from one place to another.
   EVIDENCE: "If n is a sufficiently high number and there is a sufficiently small delay between youi's disappearance and youi+1's appearance, it will certainly appear that you had moved from one place to another."

109. VIEW: But that is obviously irrelevant.
   EVIDENCE: "But that is obviously irrelevant."

110. VIEW: In a Mills-universe, nothing has a past and, therefore, nothing has a future.
   EVIDENCE: "In a Mills-universe, nothing has a past and, therefore, nothing has a future."

111. VIEW: Position is relative position.
   EVIDENCE: "just as position is relative position"

112. VIEW: Distance is relative distance.
   EVIDENCE: "so distance is relative distance"

113. VIEW: The distance between two objects can be compared with the distance between another pair of objects.
   EVIDENCE: "the distance between x1 and x2 can be compared with the distance between x1 and x3"

114. VIEW: Without a fourth object, it cannot be determined by how much one distance exceeds another.
   EVIDENCE: "But unless there is a fourth object x4, it cannot be said by how much the one distance exceeds the other"

115. VIEW: The more objects in a universe, the more distances a given distance can be compared with.
   EVIDENCE: "The more objects there are in a given universe, the greater the number of distances with which a given distance can be compared"

116. VIEW: The precision of describing a distance increases with the number of objects in the universe.
   EVIDENCE: "The more such distances, the higher degree of precision with which a given distance can be meaningfully described"

117. VIEW: Changes in an object's position are capable of being small to the extent that the number of objects in the universe is large.
   EVIDENCE: "changes in xi's position are capable of being small to the extent that n is large"

118. VIEW: The number of objects in the universe sets the metric for measuring changes.
   EVIDENCE: "It is the value of n that sets the metric"

119. VIEW: Motion of an object is really a change undergone by all objects in the universe collectively.
   EVIDENCE: "What we think of as a case of motion on the part of a given object xi is really a change undergone by x1 xn collectively"

120. VIEW: System-internal changes are systemic changes.
   EVIDENCE: "Seemingly system-internal changes are systemic changes"

121. VIEW: To say that motion is continuous is to make a correct but trivial point about the changes capable of being undergone by a universe.
   EVIDENCE: "Therefore, to say that motion is continuous is to make the correct, if trivial, point that the class of changes capable of being undergone by a universe whose sole occupants are x1 xn is, for any number m, a proper subset of the class of changes capable of being undergone by an otherwise identical universe whose occupants are x1 xn xn+m"

122. VIEW: Given any displacement, no matter how small, a more populated and heterogeneous universe could allow for an even smaller displacement.
   EVIDENCE: "Given any displacement d, no matter how small, if the universe were better populated and otherwise more heterogeneous than it currently is but all other factors, in including the laws of nature, were held constant, it would be possible for there to be an even more smaller displacement d*"

123. VIEW: Describing an object's movement in inches is an abbreviated way of describing a collective change in the universe.
   EVIDENCE: "Given that xi moved .n inches is really an abbreviated way of describing a change collectively undergone by all of the universe's occupants"

124. VIEW: No matter how well populated and heterogeneous the universe is, it can always be more so.
   EVIDENCE: "No matter how well populated and otherwise heterogeneous the universe is, the universe is capable of being even more populous and otherwise heterogeneous"

125. VIEW: The class of possible states of the universe is a proper subset of the class of possible states of a more heterogeneous universe.
   EVIDENCE: "the class of possible states of the universe is a proper subset of the class of possible states of a more heterogeneous but otherwise identical universe"

126. VIEW: Any given motion consists of other, smaller motions, and there is no minimal unit of distance.
   EVIDENCE: "Any given motion consists of other, smaller motions; there is no minimal unit of distance"

127. VIEW: The statement about motion and smaller motions has nothing to do with the structure of motion but relates to the possible states of the universe.
   EVIDENCE: "Given (2), it follows that (a) has nothing to do with the structure of motion, its real meaning being given by (b)"

128. VIEW: The class of possible states of the current universe is a proper subset of the class of possible states of a more heterogeneous universe.
   EVIDENCE: "If K is the class of possible states of the universe as it currently is and K* is the class of possible states of an otherwise identical universe that is more heterogeneous than others, K is a proper subset of K*"

129. VIEW: There is nothing paradoxical about the statement that the class of possible states of the current universe is a proper subset of a more heterogeneous universe.
   EVIDENCE: "There is nothing paradoxical about (b). It is a truism, in fact."

130. VIEW: There is no analogue of Zeno's paradox that holds in connection with the statement about the possible states of the universe.
   EVIDENCE: "And there is no analogue of Zeno's paradox that holds in connection with (b)"

131. VIEW: Recent work on the mind-body problem and ethics is considered to be of low quality and not worth reading.
   EVIDENCE: "Go ahead and read some recent  work  on the mind-body problem, or (God forbid) on  ethics , and you will truly understand the concept of nothingness."

132. VIEW: Academic papers are boring and bad, leading to their lack of readership.
   EVIDENCE: "And nobody reads them because they re boring, and they re boring because they re bad, because academia, with some minor qualifications (that don t apply to you have if you have to ask) is not where the action is now."

133. VIEW: Academic papers are primarily for show and do not contain substantial content.
   EVIDENCE: "Those papers are for show only. They look nice as in the covers and typography and lay-out all look nice. But there s not very much there."

134. VIEW: The author's past journal articles contained succinct resolutions to technical questions.
   EVIDENCE: "Back in the day, when I was in that rat-race, I published some journal articles that actually contained succinct resolutions of technical questions for which other scholars were supposedly looking for answers."

135. VIEW: Responses to the author's journal articles were either political or used as props for other professors' ideas.
   EVIDENCE: "And on the rare occasions that were any responses, they were either slimy and political or were just as props for some other professor who wanted support for his own ideas."

136. VIEW: Copies of prestigious journals, including electronic copies, cannot be given away and often result in spam complaints.
   EVIDENCE: "Setting aside medical journals and few other journals of that ilk, they literally cannot give away copies of the most  prestigious  journals. They cannot even give away e-copies. They get spam complaints."

137. VIEW: The readership of journals like Mind, Philosophical Review, and the Journal of Philosophy is non-existent.
   EVIDENCE: "Mind, Philosophical Review, the Journal of Philosophy -it turns out that, when readership-levels are independently assessed, their readerships are quite literally non-existent."

138. VIEW: Academic journals 100 years ago served a useful function, unlike today.
   EVIDENCE: "100 years ago, academic journals served a function. Crelle s Journal, the Monatshrifte in which Einstein and Godel published their results yes, these were nice sources of information."

139. VIEW: Current academic journals are about maintaining in-house titles and are irrelevant.
   EVIDENCE: "But academic journals now are about circling the wagons and bestowing in-house titles on other members of a dying and now totally irrelevant club."

140. VIEW: Academic journals are not for general consumption, but nobody reads them.
   EVIDENCE: "The obvious response to all this is that academic journals are not for general consumption. This seems reasonable enough but when I say nobody reads them, I mean nobody."

141. VIEW: Real thinkers avoid academic journals and seek ideas elsewhere.
   EVIDENCE: "Real thinkers don t go there for ideas; they flee from the journals, as from wild bees."

142. VIEW: The author stopped publishing in academic journals and with academic publishers because they are no longer effective for disseminating ideas.
   EVIDENCE: "I stopped publishing in the journals, and even stopped publishing with academic publishers, because that is no longer how ideas are disseminated."

143. VIEW: Academic journals do not engage with anything and are purely token.
   EVIDENCE: "They are at this point purely token, and they don t engage anything."

144. VIEW: The idea that academic journals service small but important niches is false.
   EVIDENCE: "The idea that they service small but important niches is an invidious lie."

145. VIEW: Academic papers are markers in bureaucratic games and hinder the distribution of thought.
   EVIDENCE: "These papers are just markers in slimy bureaucracy-internal games; and because people think otherwise, the pathetically slow distribution mechanisms to which they belong get to keep on jamming up thought."

146. VIEW: The notion that academic papers collectively contribute to a rich discourse is false.
   EVIDENCE: "Finally, there is old saw that these various papers are like atoms jostling against one another what a given one does tends to be negligible, but, so it is alleged, they collectively constitute a rich discourse out of which great things sometimes come. Totally false."

147. VIEW: Nothing innovative is published in academic journals.
   EVIDENCE: "Nothing is innovated in the journal-space. Nothing gets published if it has so much as a shred of merit."

148. VIEW: Academic journals are not responsible for intellectual ferment.
   EVIDENCE: "The journals are about as responsible for intellectual ferment as real estate agents are for building houses."

149. VIEW: There is another way of making the determination of real numbers beyond recursion.
   EVIDENCE: "it doesn t mean that there isn t some other way of making this determination."

150. VIEW: The class of real numbers is incomplete.
   EVIDENCE: "The class of real numbers is incomplete, since, as Cantor proved, you can always construct a real number that is not in a given recursively defined number-set."

151. VIEW: Real numbers can be recognized without applying recursions.
   EVIDENCE: "But we can recognize real numbers when we come across them  we just don t do so by applying recursions."

152. VIEW: Recognition of real numbers is not done mechanically.
   EVIDENCE: "In other words, we don t do so mechanically."

153. VIEW: The class of arithmetical truths is non-recursive.
   EVIDENCE: "The class of arithmetical truths is non-recursive, since, as Godel proved, we can always construct an arithmetical truth that does not belong to a given recursively defined class of such truths."

154. VIEW: Arithmetical truths can be recognized without applying recursions.
   EVIDENCE: "We are able to recognize such a truth for what it is but we don t do so by applying recursions."

155. VIEW: Recognition of arithmetical truths is not done mechanically.
   EVIDENCE: "In other words, we don t do so mechanically."

156. VIEW: It is difficult for young teens to get jobs.
   EVIDENCE: "Originally Answered: Why is it so difficult for young teens to get jobs anymore?"

157. VIEW: Most existing jobs are not necessary.
   EVIDENCE: "The answer is that most of the jobs that still exist are not necessary."

158. VIEW: Jobs are ways of cashing in on wealth-transfer schemes.
   EVIDENCE: "They re just ways of cashing in on wealth-transfer schemes, since the real work is increasingly done by a few entrepreneurs and a lot of robots."

159. VIEW: Teens do not have the paper credentials needed for these jobs.
   EVIDENCE: "And since teens don t have the paper credentials needed to cash in on these arrangements, they don t."

160. VIEW: Employers justify denying employment to teens by claiming they fear lawsuits.
   EVIDENCE: "Employers will justify denying employment to teens on the grounds they  fear lawsuits.  "

161. VIEW: The claim that employers fear lawsuits is a lie.
   EVIDENCE: "This is a lie. Nobody sues a business for employing teens."

162. VIEW: Teens are often very good workers.
   EVIDENCE: "And teens are often very good workers, because they have energy and hope."

163. VIEW: The real reason for denying employment to teens is to be eligible for government and union money.
   EVIDENCE: "It s not about lawsuits; it s about wanting to be eligible for government money and union-money and all that other graft, which goes out the window when independent labor is hired."

164. VIEW: Most jobs are legalized extortion.
   EVIDENCE: "Setting aside a few genius entrepreneurs and a slightly larger number of very hard working borderline genius ones, most jobs are legalized extortion."

165. VIEW: Lawyers do not contribute significantly to their profession.
   EVIDENCE: "Lawyers don t do squat; but if you don t go through them, the judge will throw the book at you."

166. VIEW: The average attorney has less grasp of legal nuances than a paint-huffing wino.
   EVIDENCE: "The paint-huffing wino camped on your front-door steps has a better grasp of legal nuances than your average attorney, as you ll find out when you have your  day in court.  "

167. VIEW: People would pay not to use salesmen, educators, police officers, and intake coordinators if given a choice.
   EVIDENCE: "Salesmen,  educators , police officers,  intake coordinators  -people would pay not to use them if given a choice."

168. VIEW: Jobs are heavily insulated by regulations and initiation rites, which teens are on the wrong side of.
   EVIDENCE: "And since jobs are now mainly about belonging to crypto-welfare clubs, they are therefore heavily insulated by regulations and other initiation-rites, all of which teens are on the wrong side of."

169. VIEW: There are two classes of disputes: emotional and cognitive.
   EVIDENCE: "There are two classes of such disputes: (i) Those that are emotional in nature, though they are presented as being about objective moral verities. And (ii) Those that are rooted in fundamentally different cognitive architectures."

170. VIEW: Disputes about affirmative action between the left wing and the right wing are emotional in nature.
   EVIDENCE: "Disagreements between the left wing and the right wing (e.g. is affirmative action legitimate?)"

171. VIEW: Disputes about a husband's moral obligations to his wife are emotional in nature.
   EVIDENCE: "Disagreements between men and women (e.g. as a husband, is Jim morally obligated to his wife to be both a bread-winner and 100% monogamous?)"

172. VIEW: Disputes about religious beliefs regarding marital obligations are emotional in nature.
   EVIDENCE: "Disagreements between religions (e.g. what does God believe to be a wife's obligations to her husband and a husband's obligations to his wife?)"

173. VIEW: Disputes about victimization and reparations between cultural/ethnic groups are emotional in nature.
   EVIDENCE: "Disagreements between cultural/ethnic groups (e.g. who victimized whom? who owes whom reparations or apologies?)"

174. VIEW: Disputes about the morality of violating institutional norms or rules are emotional in nature.
   EVIDENCE: "Disagreements between individualists and collectivists (e.g. to what extent can it be morally permissible to violate institutional norms or rules? are the police and 'the law' intrinsically valuable or are they simply necessary evils -or indeed unnecessary evils?)"

175. VIEW: Self-identified liberals are hyper-authoritarian and sticklers for observance of laws and institutional protocols.
   EVIDENCE: "Strikingly, people who self-identify as 'liberal' etc. are hyper-authoritarian and are sticklers for observance of laws and institutional protocols."

176. VIEW: Self-identified right wingers often have non-authoritarian, almost Kropotkin-like anarchical views about the rightful role of government.
   EVIDENCE: "Similarly, self-identified 'right wingers' (not Republicans or Sunday libertarians, but actual right wingers), despite their tough talk about who should be taken to the woodshed, often have, or so their conduct suggests, extremely non-authoritarian, almost Kropotkin-like anarchical views about the rightful role of government etc."

177. VIEW: Disputes about rationalism vs. empiricism are cognitive in nature.
   EVIDENCE: "Rationalism vs. empiricism: To what extent, if any, can 'pure thought' apprise us of the structure of reality?"

178. VIEW: Disputes about methodological pluralism vs. methodological monism are cognitive in nature.
   EVIDENCE: "Methodological pluralism vs. methodological monism: Is there a single template into which all legitimate sciences fit?"

179. VIEW: Disputes about the mind-body problem are cognitive in nature.
   EVIDENCE: "The mind-body problem: Is the mind simply a biological phenomenon like any other, or is there something distinctive about and, therefore, about the way it is to be studied?"

180. VIEW: Disputes about the unconscious are cognitive in nature.
   EVIDENCE: "The unconscious: Is the mind identical with pure consciousness or was Freud right to posit underlying strata of mental activity?"

181. VIEW: Disputes about the existence of economic laws are cognitive in nature.
   EVIDENCE: "Are there laws of economics? Should each economic context be understood on its own terms? Or should we compile a set of economic laws in terms of which we view such phenomena?"

182. VIEW: Category (ii) disputes are not emotional but are related to different ways of processing information.
   EVIDENCE: "Category (ii) disputes, I believe, are not emotional; they have to do, so I believe, with different ways of processing information, not so much with different desires."

183. VIEW: Category (i) disputes are emotional and basically unresolvable.
   EVIDENCE: "Category (i) disputes have to do with different desires and are basically unresolvable."

184. VIEW: One must necessarily be a Platonist to believe in the existence of mathematics or logic.
   EVIDENCE: "One must necessarily be a Platonist. There is no way to replace references to numbers, mathematical operations, or other mathematical structures with references to spatiotemporal entities."

185. VIEW: There are no observable instances of infinite quantities.
   EVIDENCE: "First of all, there no observable instances of infinite quantities."

186. VIEW: One does not observe actual instances of mathematical operations like addition, division, or multiplication.
   EVIDENCE: "Second, although one observe instances of operations that are analogous to addition, division, multiplication, and so on, one does not observe any actual such instances."

187. VIEW: Physical operations are not the same as arithmetical operations.
   EVIDENCE: "You can put one rock on top of another, but that is not the operation of arithmetical addition."

188. VIEW: Arithmetical operations do not alter the operands, unlike physical operations.
   EVIDENCE: "Proof is that any physical alteration alters the operands, whereas no arithmetical operation does so."

189. VIEW: The most urgent philosophical problem is how information can be encrypted to expedite its transmission and maximize its absorption.
   EVIDENCE: "Right now the most urgent and therefore interesting philosophical problem is how information can be encrypted to as to expedite the transmission of it and maximize the absorption of it."

190. VIEW: We are living in the information age.
   EVIDENCE: "We are living in the information age."

191. VIEW: Commerce is now as much about the exchange of information as it is about the exchange of physical goods and services.
   EVIDENCE: "Commerce is now quite as much about the exchange of information as it is about the exchange of physical goods and services."

192. VIEW: Power used to be about ownership of land and other physical assets, but now it is about ownership of ideas.
   EVIDENCE: "As Robert Kiyosaki points out, whereas power used to be about ownership of land and other physical assets, power is not about ownership of ideas."

193. VIEW: The problem is not always that one lacks information; sometimes it is that one has too much of it or doesn't have it in forms in which it is easily communicated or easily absorbed.
   EVIDENCE: "As Al Ries points out, the problem is not always that one lacks information; sometimes it is that one has too much of it or doesn t have it in forms in which it is easily communicated or easily absorbed."

194. VIEW: The name of the game is to figure out how knowledge can be encrypted to be maximally bioavailable and easy to store and transmit.
   EVIDENCE: "So right now, the name of the game is to figure out knowledge can so encrypted as to be maximally bioavailable and maximally easy (for both living and artificial systems) to store and transmit."

195. VIEW: Obscure responses to the question about information encryption embody ignorance of this most salient of contemporary philosophical truths.
   EVIDENCE: "All of this being so, be extremely wary of obscure responses to your question, since they ipso facto embody ignorance of this most salient of contemporary philosophical truths."

196. VIEW: Machiavelli was about strategy, while Nietzsche was about human nature.
   EVIDENCE: "Machiavelli was about strategy. Nietzsche was about human nature."

197. VIEW: Machiavelli's points about strategy were motivated by a certain conception of human nature, but his focus was strategy, not psychology.
   EVIDENCE: "Obviously Machiavelli's points about strategy were motivated by a certain conception of human nature, but his focus was strategy, not psychology."

198. VIEW: Philosophical problems are not only a matter of semantics.
   EVIDENCE: "Absolutely not. In fact, strictly semantic questions categorically fall outside the scope of philosophy, the asseverations of a few early 20th century lightweights to the contrary."

199. VIEW: Semantics is language-specific and does not carry over to other languages.
   EVIDENCE: "First of all, semantics is language-specific. Points about English-semantics don t carry over to Spanish or Arabic or any other language."

200. VIEW: Meta-semantic points fall within the scope of philosophy.
   EVIDENCE: "Meta-semantic points -points about what semanticists do do fall within the scope of philosophy."

201. VIEW: Philosophers are concerned with identity, causality, the nature of thought, the relationship between universals and particulars, and the like, which are not language-specific or semantic.
   EVIDENCE: "Philosophers are concerned with identity, causality, the nature of thought, the relationship between universals and particulars, and the like, none of which is to any degree language-specific and none of which, consequently, is to any degree, in any respect  semantic."

202. VIEW: Albert Camus was not a psychopath; he was the opposite.
   EVIDENCE: "Absolutely not. He was the opposite."

203. VIEW: Albert Camus was not psychopathic enough and was a very decent fellow with a kind heart.
   EVIDENCE: "He was not psychopathic enough, frankly. He was a very decent fellow with a kind heart, who caught a glimpse of the darker side of life and was not able to process it."

204. VIEW: Logic studies rules of inference, while mathematics studies general properties of structures.
   EVIDENCE: "Logic studies rules of inference. Mathematics studies general properties of structures."

205. VIEW: Mathematics studies numbers because they encode structural information.
   EVIDENCE: "(Mathematics studies numbers because they encode structural information.)"

206. VIEW: High IQ university graduates strongly tend to out-earn IQ-comparable non-graduates.
   EVIDENCE: "High IQ university graduates strongly tend to out-earn IQ-comparable non-graduates."

207. VIEW: Low IQ vocationally trained non-graduates strongly tend to out-earn IQ-comparable college graduates and non-graduates without vocational training.
   EVIDENCE: "Low IQ vocationally trained non-graduates strongly tend to out-earn IQ-comparable college graduates and non-graduates without vocational training."

208. VIEW: Medium-IQ graduates marginally tend to out-earn IQ-comparable vocationally trained non-graduates, but medium-IQ vocationally trained non-graduates have dramatically higher levels of fulfillment.
   EVIDENCE: "Medium-IQ graduates marginally tend to out-earn IQ-comparable vocationally trained non-graduates, with the qualification that that medium IQ vocationally trained non-graduates have dramatically higher levels of fulfillment."

209. VIEW: Non-vocationally trained non-graduates are at the bottom of the income hierarchy.
   EVIDENCE: "Non-vocationally trained non-graduates are at the bottom of the hierarchy."

210. VIEW: College is a sham and will soon be a distant memory due to the judicious use of digital resources.
   EVIDENCE: "College is a sham, and within a few years, judicious useof already existing digital resources will see to it that it is a distant memory."

211. VIEW: Graduates of universities often get vocational training after college because their degrees are useless.
   EVIDENCE: "Do know that graduates of universities, including first-tier ones, often get vocational training after college, simply because their degrees are so useless."

212. VIEW: Rules of replacement govern expressions and tell you what expressions you can replace with what expressions.
   EVIDENCE: "Rules of replacement govern expressions. They tell you what expressions you can replace with what expressions."

213. VIEW: Inference rules govern truths and falsehoods and tell you what is a consequence of what.
   EVIDENCE: "Inference rules govern truths and falsehoods: They tell you what is a consequence of what."

214. VIEW: The statement 'x is a real number' was proved by George Cantor in the 1870s.
   EVIDENCE: "the form  x is a real number.  This was proved by George Cantor in the 1870s"

215. VIEW: George Cantor used a technique known as 'diagonalization' to prove that 'x is a real number'.
   EVIDENCE: "the proof involved a technique known as  diagonalization.'"

216. VIEW: Godel attempted to define the class of arithmetical truths recursively but failed.
   EVIDENCE: "Godel tried to come up with a recursive definition of the class of arithmetical truths. He couldn t"

217. VIEW: Godel proved that no recursive definition of the class of arithmetical truths was possible.
   EVIDENCE: "He succeeded. His proof involved an exotic form of diagonalization."

218. VIEW: Nothing flies in the face of logic but is still true because contradictions between facts and logic indicate incorrect logic.
   EVIDENCE: "Nothing, since contradictions between facts and logic means that the wrong logic is being used."

219. VIEW: Deductive reasoning yields insight but not knowledge.
   EVIDENCE: "It yields insight but not knowledge."

220. VIEW: The argument 'Jim got sick after he showed up to work, therefore going to work caused him to get sick' is fallacious.
   EVIDENCE: "Jim got sick after he showed up to work. Therefore, going to work is what caused Him to get sick."

221. VIEW: The argument 'Statistically, people who believe in God are on average less intelligent than atheists, therefore atheism is a sign of intelligence' is fallacious.
   EVIDENCE: "Statistically, people who believe in God are on average less intelligent than atheists. Therefore, atheism is an sign of intelligence."

222. VIEW: The argument 'Taking one pill makes you twice as good, therefore taking 10 pills makes you feel 10 times better' is fallacious.
   EVIDENCE: "Taking one pill makes you twice as good. Therefore, taking 10 pills makes you feel 10 times better."

223. VIEW: Abductive reasoning is simply hypothesis-formation.
   EVIDENCE: "Abductive reasoning is simply hypothesis-formation."

224. VIEW: You cannot deduce that a mouse is eating your cheese based on the evidence of mouse-size bites and footprints.
   EVIDENCE: "You cannot deduce that a mouse is eating your cheese."

225. VIEW: To break out of a depressed funk, one should take a cold shower and go on a six-mile hike.
   EVIDENCE: "Cold shower and six mile hike."

226. VIEW: At Primerica, one makes exactly $0 in earnings.
   EVIDENCE: "Exactly $0."

227. VIEW: Primerica will send a legal letter asking for money back if you make $100 in sales, which is unlikely and will cost you $200.
   EVIDENCE: "If you make $100 in sales, which is unlikely and which will cost you $200 (in Primerica fees and advertising), Primerica will send you a legal letter asking for that money back."

228. VIEW: The longer one is at Primerica, the more money they lose, with no exceptions.
   EVIDENCE: "The longer you are at Primerica, the more money you lose. No exceptions."

229. VIEW: It is not possible to create a system without the law of modus ponens.
   EVIDENCE: "Not possible."

230. VIEW: Modus ponens is essential for inference, and without it, one is in dry dock, inference-wise.
   EVIDENCE: "Modus ponens is basically to the effect that you can infer it if it follows. Without it, you are in dry dock, inference-wise."

231. VIEW: An MBA is worth the money if the objective is to be a corporate bureaucrat earning five to six figures.
   EVIDENCE: "Yes -if your objective is to be a corporate bureaucrat who who earns five to six figures."

232. VIEW: An MBA is not worth the money if the objective is to be an entrepreneur.
   EVIDENCE: "No if your objective is to be an entrepreneur."

233. VIEW: An MBA is a 100% academic degree and does not relate to the realities of creating or running a business.
   EVIDENCE: "It is a 100% academic degree a piece of paper. That piece of paper does prove that there are certain kinds of work that you can do. But the work that it proves that you can do is middle-management work at a large corporation."

234. VIEW: Jesus and Socrates were both rebels who upset societal norms.
   EVIDENCE: "Both rebels. Both upset apple carts and got some blow back."

235. VIEW: Socrates aimed to improve the world by making it less emotional and more logical.
   EVIDENCE: "Socrates was trying to improve the world making it less emotional and more logical"

236. VIEW: Jesus aimed to improve the world by making it more emotional and less legalistic.
   EVIDENCE: "whereas Jesus was trying to improve it by making more emotional and less legalistic."

237. VIEW: Replacing every plank of a boat does not change its identity; it remains the same boat.
   EVIDENCE: "Same ship."

238. VIEW: Identity is about continuity, not the specific components.
   EVIDENCE: "Identity is about continuity."

239. VIEW: A society without psychopaths would be undesirable.
   EVIDENCE: "Absolutely not. A psychopath-free society would be a society of eunuchs."

240. VIEW: The condition of the job market refers to the number and nature of available jobs.
   EVIDENCE: "The number and nature of available jobs."

241. VIEW: There are movies with themes similar to 'Sexy Beast'.
   EVIDENCE: "Yes. Bad Influence Fight Club Something wild."

242. VIEW: The theme of 'Sexy Beast' is about confronting the harshness of reality.
   EVIDENCE: "The theme of  Sexy Beast  is:  you re soft; reality is hard. Get off your rear end and make it happen."

243. VIEW: Don Logan in 'Sexy Beast' represents reality.
   EVIDENCE: "Don Logan represented reality."

244. VIEW: Gal Dove in 'Sexy Beast' was living a fake life.
   EVIDENCE: "Gal Dove was a softy who was living a fake life."

245. VIEW: Don Logan's statements in 'Sexy Beast' were mostly true, except for the lies at the airport.
   EVIDENCE: "Yes Don Logan was a psychopath. But what of it? You ll notice that everything he said (with the exception of the lies he strung at the airport) was true."

246. VIEW: Wittgenstein's Rule Following Paradox does not exist.
   EVIDENCE: "Wittgenstein's so-called 'Rule Following Paradox' doesn't exist."

247. VIEW: Wittgenstein's view on rule-following is based on a narrow conception of mental states.
   EVIDENCE: "Wittgenstein holds this because he has an absurdly constricted conception of what counts as a mental state, believing that the mental comprises little behind a few itches and tickles and other sensations."

248. VIEW: In a world of zombies, as Wittgenstein believes, there are no social contexts.
   EVIDENCE: "Wittgenstein also fails to take into account that in a world of zombies, such as he believes human beings to be, there are no social contexts."

249. VIEW: The behaviors involved in following different rules are distinguishable except in artificially circumscribed contexts.
   EVIDENCE: "Finally, given any two rules, the behaviors involved in following them are utterly distinguishable except, as previously indicated, artificially circumscribed contexts and usually even then."

250. VIEW: The question about implications being false when the antecedent is false is misconceived.
   EVIDENCE: "The question is misconceived."

251. VIEW: The truth of a conditional statement depends on the relationship between the antecedent and the consequent, not their individual truth values.
   EVIDENCE: "All that matters is the relationship between antecedent and consequent."

252. VIEW: A conditional statement can be true even if both the antecedent and the consequent are false.
   EVIDENCE: "Suppose I had zero cars. In that case, both antecedent and consequent would be false, but the conditional would still be true."

253. VIEW: A conditional statement can be false even if both the antecedent and the consequent are true.
   EVIDENCE: "By the same token, even if both antecedent and consequent are true, the conditional may be false."

254. VIEW: You cannot change your sexuality.
   EVIDENCE: "No. You cannot change your sexuality."

255. VIEW: You can accept your sexuality and alter how you channel it.
   EVIDENCE: "What you can do is accept it and, on that basis, alter how you channel it."

256. VIEW: Any given body of truths is necessarily internally consistent.
   EVIDENCE: "Any given body of truths is necessarily internally consistent."

257. VIEW: Mathematics, setting aside the odd screw-up, is consistent.
   EVIDENCE: "Therefore mathematics, setting aside the odd screw-up, is consistent."

258. VIEW: Being able to axiomatize a given body of truths is sufficient but not necessary for establishing its consistency.
   EVIDENCE: "Being able to axiomatize a given body of truths is sufficient but not necessary for establishing its consistency."

259. VIEW: Establishing the consistency of the class of mathematical truths through axiomatization is not a possibility.
   EVIDENCE: "And this method of establishing the consistency of the class of mathematical truths is not a possibility, simply because any given axiomatization is itself a mathematical result and is therefore itself what is described by other mathematical results."

260. VIEW: Consistency in mathematics is established locally or by establishing truth.
   EVIDENCE: "Setting aside a few Mickey Mouse domains, consistency is either established in a local, block-chain fashion, by comparing statements with other statements in their immediate dialectical vicinity, or by establishing truth."

261. VIEW: Consistency is a consequence of truth, not vice versa.
   EVIDENCE: "The truth is that, in mathematics as in other domains, consistency is a consequence of truth, not vice versa."

262. VIEW: The differences between Camus and Nietzsche are far more important than the similarities.
   EVIDENCE: "The differences are far more important than the similarities."

263. VIEW: Camus believed that morality was an illusion because the morality of his parents was losing its hold.
   EVIDENCE: "Camus held that, since the morality of his parents was now losing its hold, morality was categorically an illusion."

264. VIEW: Camus was wrong in believing that life has no meaning because of the loss of his childhood morality.
   EVIDENCE: "He was wrong on both counts: given only that the bourgeoisie morality that he had as a child proved not to have universal validity, it doesn't follow that no moral code has any validity under circumstances."

265. VIEW: Life is inherently meaningful and does not require a moral code to be meaningful.
   EVIDENCE: "And even if this did follow, it would not have the consequence that life has no meaning, since, first of all, life is inherently meaningful and doesn't require some moral code to make it meaningful."

266. VIEW: Moral codes drain life of meaning rather than imbue it with meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "and, secondly, since moral codes, despite their occasional uses, seem to be more about draining life of meaning than they are about imbuing life with meaning."

267. VIEW: Camus had a narrow conception of morality and believed that without his small town morality, there was no morality.
   EVIDENCE: "Basically, Camus was a closet reactionary with an extremely narrow conception of morality who evidently believed that unless his small town morality wasn't absolutely perfect, then there was no morality."

268. VIEW: Nietzsche believed that many accepted moral codes are soul-destroying propaganda.
   EVIDENCE: "Nietzsche obviously did believe that a lot of the moral codes people accept are basically so much soul-destroying propaganda."

269. VIEW: Nietzsche believed that the lack of legitimacy of moral codes was becoming apparent during his lifetime.
   EVIDENCE: "and he also believed that, during his lifetime, their lack of legitimacy was quickly becoming apparent."

270. VIEW: Nietzsche was right about the lack of legitimacy of moral codes becoming apparent.
   EVIDENCE: "(He was right on both counts.)"

271. VIEW: Nietzsche believed that once false moralities were gone, an authentic, courage-based morality could rise.
   EVIDENCE: "But Nietzsche was happy about this, his position being that once all of these bunk moralities were finally gone, the authentic, courage-based morality that we all secretly accept could rise to the surface."

272. VIEW: Camus believed that the good life is the convention-based life, while Nietzsche believed convention separates us from our true selves and the good life.
   EVIDENCE: "So basically Camus was a Paul Ryan figure who believed that the good life is the convention-based life, whereas Nietzsche believed convention to separate us from our true selves and, therefore, from the good life."

273. VIEW: Sartre's message is preferable to Camus's.
   EVIDENCE: "Sartre, hands down."

274. VIEW: The empty set is a subset of any given set
   EVIDENCE: "In order for a given set C not to be a subset of any given set, there must be at least one member of C that does not also belong to any other given set. Since the empty set has no members, there is nothing that does not also belong to any other given set."

275. VIEW: A set C is not a subset of another set if it has at least one member that does not belong to the other set
   EVIDENCE: "In order for a given set C not to be a subset of any given set, there must be at least one member of C that does not also belong to any other given set."

276. VIEW: The empty set has no members
   EVIDENCE: "Since the empty set has no members, there is nothing that does not also belong to any other given set."

277. VIEW: The empty set is a subset of every set because it has no members that are not in any other set
   EVIDENCE: "Since the empty set has no members, there is nothing that does not also belong to any other given set."

278. VIEW: A set is a subset of another set if all its members are also members of the other set
   EVIDENCE: "In order for a given set C not to be a subset of any given set, there must be at least one member of C that does not also belong to any other given set."

279. VIEW: The concept of subset is defined by the membership of elements
   EVIDENCE: "In order for a given set C not to be a subset of any given set, there must be at least one member of C that does not also belong to any other given set."

280. VIEW: The empty set's property of having no members makes it a subset of all sets
   EVIDENCE: "Since the empty set has no members, there is nothing that does not also belong to any other given set."

281. VIEW: The definition of a subset involves the comparison of elements between sets
   EVIDENCE: "In order for a given set C not to be a subset of any given set, there must be at least one member of C that does not also belong to any other given set."

282. VIEW: The empty set's universal subset property is due to its lack of elements
   EVIDENCE: "Since the empty set has no members, there is nothing that does not also belong to any other given set."
TEXT INTELLIGENCE REPORT
Generated: 12/4/2025, 2:48:05 PM
Source Length: 14567 words
LLM Used: grok

--- KEY QUOTATIONS ---


--- ANNOTATED CITATIONS ---


--- COMPRESSED REWRITE ---
[Chunk 1]


[Chunk 2]


[Chunk 3]


[Chunk 4]


[Chunk 5]


[Chunk 6]


[Chunk 7]


[Chunk 8]


[Chunk 9]


[Chunk 10]


[Chunk 11]


[Chunk 12]


[Chunk 13]


[Chunk 14]


[Chunk 15]


--- DATABASE ---
═══ CHUNK 1 ═══
{
  "quotes": [],
  "annotatedQuotes": [],
  "summary": "",
  "database": "",
  "analyzer": "",
  "views": [
    {"view": "There would be no languages if there were no expressions.", "evidence": ["There would be no languages if there were no expressions (words, phrases, sentences, etc.)."]},
    {"view": "Nothing meaningless is an expression.", "evidence": ["Nothing meaningless is an expression."]},
    {"view": "The concept of an expression must be understood in terms of the concept of meaning.", "evidence": ["For this reason, the concept of an expression must be understood in terms of the concept of meaning, the same therefore being true of the concept of language."]},
    {"view": "The concept of language must be understood in terms of the concept of meaning.", "evidence": ["For this reason, the concept of an expression must be understood in terms of the concept of meaning, the same therefore being true of the concept of language."]},
    {"view": "The word 'meaning' has three different meanings.", "evidence": ["But it isn't much use to be told that words and sentences "have meanings," since the word "meaning" has three different meanings, and only one of these directly relates to the nature of language."]},
    {"view": "Only one of the three meanings of 'meaning' directly relates to the nature of language.", "evidence": ["But it isn't much use to be told that words and sentences "have meanings," since the word "meaning" has three different meanings, and only one of these directly relates to the nature of language."]},
    {"view": "Chomsky's reasoning about 'colorless green dreams sleep furiously' is no good.", "evidence": ["Chomsky famously said that "colorless green dreams sleep furiously" is both meaningless and is a bona fide sentence, and therefore expression, of English. This reasoning is no good."]},
    {"view": "The sentence 'colorless green dreams sleep furiously' is either false or vacuously true.", "evidence": ["Depending on how it's interpreted, "colorless green dreams sleep furiously" either says (i) that there are dreams that are green and also colorless that sleep furiously, in which case it's false, or it says (ii) that there is nothing that is a colorless green dream that doesn't also sleep furiously, in which case it's vacuously true."]},
    {"view": "Nothing meaningless is a linguistic expression.", "evidence": ["In the meantime, we'll operate on the assumption that nothing meaningless is a linguistic expression."]},
    {"view": "To say that x 'means' y can indicate that x is evidence of y.", "evidence": ["In some cases, to say that x "means" y is to say that x is evidence of y-that x and y are causally interrelated in such a way that, given x, it can reasonably be inferred that y."]},
    {"view": "For x to be evidence of y, it is neither necessary nor sufficient that y cause x.", "evidence": ["But for x to be evidence to of y, it is neither necessary nor sufficient that y cause x."]},
    {"view": "Causes can be evidence of their own effects.", "evidence": ["First of all, causes can be evidence of their own effects. (Bill's current drunkenness is evidence of a poor performance on his upcoming economics exam.)"]},
    {"view": "If some event or state of affairs z is a cause of both x and y, then x can be evidence of y without being a cause or an effect of y.", "evidence": ["Second, if some event or state of affairs z is a cause of both x and y, then x can be evidence of y without being a cause or an effect of y."]},
    {"view": "Meaning in the psychological sense is a psychological notion.", "evidence": ["Meaning in this sense is a psychological notion."]},
    {"view": "Meaning in the linguistic sense is not identical with meaning in the psychological sense.", "evidence": ["This kind of meaning is in a class by itself; it isn't identical with either of the two kinds mentioned so far; and there isn't any obvious way to understand it in terms of them."]},
    {"view": "Meaning in the psychological sense involves, but does not coincide with, meaning in the linguistic sense.", "evidence": ["Meaning in the psychological sense involves, but does not coincide with, meaning in the linguistic sense."]},
    {"view": "Meaning in the psychological sense is parasitic on meaning in the linguistic sense.", "evidence": ["Meaning in the psychological sense is therefore parasitic on meaning in the linguistic sense."]},
    {"view": "The view that for a sentence S to have meaning M is for it to be the case that, in uttering S, people mean M is false.", "evidence": ["This position is false."]},
    {"view": "There are many sentences that have determinate meanings even though they've never been uttered before.", "evidence": ["There are many sentences that have determinate meanings even though they've never been uttered before and, therefore, no one as of yet has ever meant anything by them."]},
    {"view": "The sentence 'the cube root of three is Sir Lawrence Olivier's favorite irrational number between one and four' has a determinate meaning.", "evidence": ["The sentence: (2) "the cube root of three is Sir Lawrence Olivier's favorite irrational number between one and four" has a determinate meaning, even though that sentence"]}
  ]
}

═══ CHUNK 2 ═══
{
  "quotes": [],
  "annotatedQuotes": [],
  "summary": "",
  "database": "",
  "analyzer": "",
  "views": [
    {"view": "Meaning in the linguistic sense is not always identical with meaning in the psychological sense.", "evidence": ["Thus, meaning in the linguistic sense is not in all cases identical with meaning in the psychological sense."]},
    {"view": "The word 'means' is not used equivocally when stating that (1) means P1 and (2) means P2.", "evidence": ["In saying that (1) means P1 and that (2) means P2, we are not using the word "means" equivocally."]},
    {"view": "The relationship that (1) bears to its meaning is the same as the relationship that (2) bears to its meaning.", "evidence": ["Both occurrences of "means" in the last sentence denote the same relationship. Thus, the relationship that (1) bears to its meaning is the same as the relationship that (2) bears to its meaning."]},
    {"view": "(1)'s having P1 for its meaning isn't identical with P1's being what people mean in uttering (1).", "evidence": ["Given that, as we saw, (2)'s having P2 for its meaning isn't identical with P2's being what people mean in uttering (2), it follows that (1)'s having P1 for its meaning isn't identical with P1's being what people mean in uttering (1)."]},
    {"view": "What a sentence means is not identical with what people mean in uttering it.", "evidence": ["Of course, what we just said about (1) and (2) can be said of any other sentence. So even if what people mean in uttering a given sentence happens to coincide with its literal meaning, what it is for sentence S to have proposition P for its literal meaning isn't for people to mean P in uttering S."]},
    {"view": "Psychological meaning presupposes linguistic meaning.", "evidence": ["Psychological meaning presupposes linguistic meaning."]},
    {"view": "What a person means when uttering a sentence is influenced by their beliefs about what that sentence means.", "evidence": ["What a person means when uttering a given sentence is a function of, among other things, his beliefs as to what that sentence already means."]},
    {"view": "To speak sincerely and literally, one must believe that 'snow is white' means snow is white.", "evidence": ["You must believe that "snow is white" means snow is white if, intending to speak sincerely and literally, you say "snow is white" with the intention of getting it across that snow is white."]},
    {"view": "If one believes 'snow is white' means grass is green, they cannot speak sincerely and literally about snow being white.", "evidence": ["If you think that "snow is white" means grass is green, you cannot, if your intention is to speak sincerely and literally, believe that "snow is white" means snow is white."]},
    {"view": "One can use a sentence to convey a message unrelated to its literal meaning.", "evidence": ["Knowing what "snow is white" actually means, you might utter that sentence with the intention of getting it across that the government is controlling our thoughts with alpha waves."]},
    {"view": "The message one wishes to convey must have some relationship to the sentence's literal meaning.", "evidence": ["But whatever the message is that, in uttering a certain sentence, you wish to convey, you must believe that message to have some kind of relationship to the one meant by that sentence itself."]},
    {"view": "To successfully convey a message, one's belief about the sentence's meaning must be correct.", "evidence": ["Furthermore, if you are to succeed in saying what it is you wish to say, what you believe to be meant by the sentence you are using must be right."]},
    {"view": "One cannot mean anything by a sentence unless they know what it already means.", "evidence": ["Thus, setting aside defective utterances, one cannot, in uttering a given sentence, mean anything by it unless one knows what it already means."]},
    {"view": "Meaning in the psychological sense is parasitic on meaning in the linguistic sense.", "evidence": ["So meaning in the psychological sense is parasitic on meaning in the linguistic sense, and the two kinds of meaning are therefore entirely distinct."]},
    {"view": "The sense in which 'snow is white' means that snow is white is not comparable to the sense in which smoke means fire.", "evidence": ["The sense in which "snow is white" means that snow is white isn't comparable to the sense in which smoke means fire."]},
    {"view": "The meaning of 'snow is white' is partly a matter of convention.", "evidence": ["But the fact that "snow is white" means what it does is, at least in part, a matter of convention."]},
    {"view": "The meaning of words like 'snow' and 'white' is determined by convention.", "evidence": ["It's a matter of convention that "snow" doesn't refer to grass and, therefore, that "snow is white" doesn't mean that grass is white; it's a matter of convention that "white" doesn't mean green and, therefore, that "snow is white" doesn't mean that snow is green."]},
    {"view": "The whiteness of snow does not cause people to say 'snow is white' in the same way fire causes smoke.", "evidence": ["Although the whiteness of snow sometimes causes people to say "snow is white," it doesn't do so in the way that fire causes there to be smoke."]},
    {"view": "Utterances of 'snow is white' embody judgments about the color of snow and linguistic conventions.", "evidence": ["Thus, utterances of "snow is white" embody judgments about the color of snow and about how, linguistic conventions being what they are, one can report the color of snow."]},
    {"view": "People make context-based judgments before deciding to utter a sentence.", "evidence": ["Before deciding to utter a given sentence, people typically make context-based judgments about the appropriateness of uttering that sentence."]}
  ]
}

═══ CHUNK 3 ═══


═══ CHUNK 4 ═══


═══ CHUNK 5 ═══
{
  "quotes": [],
  "annotatedQuotes": [],
  "summary": "",
  "database": "",
  "analyzer": "",
  "views": [
    {"view": "Steve ate one of the cupcakes that was on the author's desk", "evidence": ["office-mate Steve eats one of the cupcakes that was on my desk"]},
    {"view": "The author jokingly accused Steve of being a thief", "evidence": ["I jokingly point at him and say: "that man is a thief.""]},
    {"view": "U2 is true if and only if the person who ate the cupcake is a thief", "evidence": ["U2 is true exactly if: x is a thief"]},
    {"view": "Steve is the pick-pocket", "evidence": ["Unbeknownst to me, Steve is the pick-pocket"]},
    {"view": "U1 and U2 have the same literal meanings", "evidence": ["Thus, U1 and U2 have the very same literal meanings"]},
    {"view": "The author did not know that U1 and U2 had the same literal meanings", "evidence": ["But I don't know this"]},
    {"view": "The author speaks English perfectly", "evidence": ["even though I speak English perfectly"]},
    {"view": "The author understood what they were saying on each occasion", "evidence": ["on each occasion, obviously understand perfectly well what it is that I'm saying"]},
    {"view": "Sense-perceptions describe things", "evidence": ["Our sense-perceptions describe things"]},
    {"view": "The author's utterance of U1 was a response to a visual description of Steve", "evidence": ["My uttering U1 was a response to my being given a visual description of Steve"]},
    {"view": "The visual description of Steve was of a man wearing a ski-mask running off into the distance", "evidence": ["That description was to the effect that: (i) there is some man x such that x is wearing a ski-mask and such that x is running off into the distance"]},
    {"view": "The literal meaning of U1 is that the man is a thief", "evidence": ["There is some man x such that x is a wearing a ski-mask (etc.), such that in uttering U1 I was saying that: (ii) x is a thief"]},
    {"view": "The meaning of U1 is threadbare", "evidence": ["The meaning of U1, being identical with (ii), is quite threadbare"]},
    {"view": "The author grasped the meaning of U1 through a descriptively rich visual perception", "evidence": ["But I grasped that threadbare meaning through my descriptively rich visual perception, whose content is given by (i)"]},
    {"view": "The author's utterance of U2 was a response to a different description of Steve", "evidence": ["My uttering U2 was a response to my being given a different description of Steve"]},
    {"view": "The different description of Steve was of a portly amicable fellow sitting in a chair", "evidence": ["That description was to the effect that: (iii) there is some man x such that x is a portly amicable fellow who is sitting over in that chair"]},
    {"view": "The literal meaning of U2 is that the man is a thief", "evidence": ["There is some man x such that x is a portly amicable fellow (etc.) such that in uttering U2 I was saying that: (ii) x is a thief"]},
    {"view": "The meaning of U2 is threadbare", "evidence": ["the meaning of U2, being identical with (ii), is quite threadbare"]},
    {"view": "The author grasped the meaning of U2 through a descriptively rich visual perception", "evidence": ["But I grasped that threadbare meaning through my descriptively rich visual perception, whose content is given by (iii)"]},
    {"view": "The author did not know that U2 affirmed the same thing as U1", "evidence": ["Because I grasped (ii) by way of different bodies of perceptual (descriptive) information, I didn't know, when uttering U2, that what I was affirming was the same thing I was affirming in uttering U1"]},
    {"view": "Literal meaning is often cloaked by pre-semantic information", "evidence": ["Oftentimes, literal meaning is cloaked by the pre-semantic information through which it is grasped"]},
    {"view": "Semanticists are needed to uncloak literal meaning", "evidence": ["and semanticists are needed to uncloak it"]},
    {"view": "Fido is the smartest dog on the planet", "evidence": ["Fido is the smartest dog on the planet"]},
    {"view": "The author knows that Fido is the smartest dog on the planet", "evidence": ["I know this well"]},
    {"view": "Some of the author's friends do not know that Fido is the smartest dog on the planet", "evidence": ["but some of my friends don't yet know this"]}
  ]
}

═══ CHUNK 6 ═══


═══ CHUNK 7 ═══
{
  "quotes": [],
  "annotatedQuotes": [],
  "summary": "",
  "database": "",
  "analyzer": "",
  "views": [
    {"view": "Semantic rules have not always existed.", "evidence": ["those semantic rules haven't always existed. Therefore, they haven't always existed."]},
    {"view": "Semantic rules came into existence quite recently.", "evidence": ["They came into existence quite recently."]},
    {"view": "Semantic rules are not mathematical functions.", "evidence": ["Therefore, those rules aren't mathematical functions."]},
    {"view": "If semantic rules were mathematical functions, there would exist a language where 'Socrates' refers to Lincoln and 'snow is white' means all horses weigh 18,000 lbs.", "evidence": ["if the semantic rules of English were such functions, there would exist a language in which "Socrates" referred to Lincoln and in which "snow is white" meant all horses weigh 18,000 lbs"]},
    {"view": "There is no language where 'Socrates' refers to Lincoln and 'snow is white' means all horses weigh 18,000 lbs.", "evidence": ["But there is no such language."]},
    {"view": "A language where 'Socrates' refers to Lincoln and 'snow is white' means all horses weigh 18,000 lbs is possible but does not currently exist.", "evidence": ["Of course, there could be such a language. And maybe there will be; maybe somebody will invent a code in which those things have those meanings. But right now they don't. Such a language is merely possible and, therefore, doesn't exist."]},
    {"view": "Semantic rules are not rules in the mathematical sense.", "evidence": ["Thus, semantic rules are not rules in the mathematical sense."]},
    {"view": "Many philosophers of language believe that semantic rules must be understood in psychological, not mathematical, terms.", "evidence": ["Understandably, many philosophers of language believe that semantic rules must be understood in psychological, not mathematical, terms."]},
    {"view": "There are different versions of the view that semantic rules must be understood in psychological terms.", "evidence": ["There are different versions of this view."]},
    {"view": "The author accepts one version of the view that semantic rules must be understood in psychological terms.", "evidence": ["I accept one version of it."]},
    {"view": "The version of the view that the author accepts bears little resemblance to the versions usually held.", "evidence": ["But the version I accept bears little resemblance to the versions of it that are usually held"]},
    {"view": "According to H.P. Grice, for an expression to have literal meaning is for it to be what the speaker means when they utter it.", "evidence": ["According to Grice (1957), for expression E to have literal meaning M is for it to be the case that, when they utter E, M is what they mean."]},
    {"view": "The expression 'snow is white' has the proposition 'snow is white' as its literal meaning because that is what people generally mean when they say it.", "evidence": ["So "snow is white" has the proposition snow is white for its literal meaning because what people generally mean when they say "snow is white" is that snow is white."]},
    {"view": "Literal meaning is to be understood in terms of speaker's meaning according to Grice.", "evidence": ["Literal meaning is to be understood in terms of speaker's meaning. That's the main idea."]},
    {"view": "Neo-Griceans hold that literal meaning, even if not always identical to speaker's meaning, is ultimately to be understood in terms of it.", "evidence": ["Neo-Griceans hold that, even though literal meaning cannot in all cases be identified with speaker's meaning, it is always, ultimately, to be understood in terms of it."]},
    {"view": "Wittgenstein advocated a version of the view that meaning is use.", "evidence": ["Wittgenstein (1958) advocated a version of this view. "Roughly speaking," he said, "meaning is use.""]},
    {"view": "Wittgenstein's statement that 'meaning is use' is not even roughly true.", "evidence": ["But it doesn't matter, since his statement isn't even roughly true."]},
    {"view": "Literal meaning is not identical with speaker's meaning and is not to be understood in terms of it.", "evidence": ["Literal meaning is isn't identical with speaker's meaning and isn't to be understood in terms of it."]},
    {"view": "The meaning of a subsentential expression cannot be what a person means.", "evidence": ["Also, Grice's theory fails to deal with the fact that the meaning of a subsentential expression isn't something that could be possibly be meant."]},
    {"view": "The word 'or' has a meaning but cannot, by itself, be what a person means.", "evidence": [""Of " has a meaning; so does "skip," "snorkel," "or," "gladly," etc. But whatever it is that "or" means, it cannot, at least not by itself, be what a person means."]}
  ]
}

═══ CHUNK 8 ═══
{
  "quotes": [],
  "annotatedQuotes": [],
  "summary": "",
  "database": "",
  "analyzer": "",
  "views": [
    {"view": "Semantic rules are idealized descriptions of the activities of speakers.", "evidence": ["as to the nature of semantic rules is that they are idealized descriptions of the activities of speakers."]},
    {"view": "Proponents of the view that semantic rules are idealized descriptions of speaker behavior seldom identify the facts about the speaker-behavior.", "evidence": ["Proponents of this view seldom if ever identify the facts about the speaker-behavior of which semantic rules are supposedly descriptions."]},
    {"view": "Semantic rules are idealized descriptions of what people mean when they speak and write.", "evidence": ["The most natural assumption is that they are idealized descriptions of what people mean when they speak and write (etc.)."]},
    {"view": "The view that semantic rules are idealized descriptions of speaker behavior is wrong.", "evidence": ["If this assumption is right, then, given the points just made, the view in question is wrong."]},
    {"view": "Even if the assumption about semantic rules being idealized descriptions of speaker behavior is not what proponents have in mind, their view is wrong.", "evidence": ["But even if this isn't what proponents of this view have in mind, their view is very clearly wrong."]},
    {"view": "If semantic rules are idealizations of speaker-behavior, then speaker-behavior must pre-exist the semantic rules.", "evidence": ["If semantic rules are just idealizations of speaker-behavior, then speaker-behavior must pre-exist the semantic rules embodied in it."]},
    {"view": "The activity described by semantic rules isn't guided by them.", "evidence": ["But if that's the case, then the activity described by semantic rules isn't guided by them."]},
    {"view": "Semantic rules are psychologically inert and have no psychological reality.", "evidence": ["An awareness of those rules is no part of what leads people to say the things they do. Those rules are psychologically inert. They have no "psychological reality.""]},
    {"view": "The view that semantic rules are psychologically inert is held by Nathan Salmon and Scott Soames.", "evidence": ["This view is held by Nathan Salmon (2007) and also by Scott Soames (2002)."]},
    {"view": "The view that semantic rules are psychologically inert is inconsistent with some obvious facts.", "evidence": ["This view is inconsistent with some obvious facts."]},
    {"view": "Knowledge of semantic rules underlies speech-acts.", "evidence": ["A knowledge of semantics underlies my speech-act and, by obvious extensions of these points, all non-defective speech-acts."]},
    {"view": "The Salmon-Soames view is inconsistent with the normative character of semantic rules.", "evidence": ["Another problem with the Salmon-Soames view is that it's inconsistent with the normative character of semantic rules."]},
    {"view": "If semantic rules merely describe existing semantic activity, then that activity isn't answerable to semantic norms.", "evidence": ["If semantic rules merely describe existing semantic activity, then that activity isn't answerable to semantic norms."]},
    {"view": "The Salmon-Soames view is wrong because semantic activity is answerable to semantic norms.", "evidence": ["It is; so the Salmon-Soames view is wrong."]},
    {"view": "Wittgenstein's claim that 'meaning is use' is incoherent.", "evidence": ["A little while ago, we discussed Wittgenstein's claim that "meaning is use," i.e., that for an expression to have a given meaning is for it to be used in a certain way. This doctrine is incoherent in many ways."]},
    {"view": "Expressions have meanings, and a meaningless burst of noise isn't an expression.", "evidence": ["Expressions have meanings. A meaningless burst of noise isn't an expression."]},
    {"view": "There are no expressions to be used before noises, ink-marks, etc., have been assigned meanings.", "evidence": ["Since anything that is a linguistic expression ipso facto has a meaning (in the relevant, linguistic sense), there are no expressions to be used before noises, ink-marks, etc., have been assigned meanings."]},
    {"view": "It makes no sense to say that expression-use determines expression-meaning.", "evidence": ["So, since there can be no expression-use until after there is expression-meaning, it makes no sense at all to say that expression-use determines expression-meaning."]},
    {"view": "Meaningful expression is a pleonasm.", "evidence": [""Meaningful expression" is a pleonasm."]},
    {"view": "Contrary to Wittgenstein, meaning isn't use.", "evidence": ["So, contrary to what Wittgenstein said, meaning isn't use."]}
  ]
}

═══ CHUNK 9 ═══


═══ CHUNK 10 ═══
{
  "quotes": [],
  "annotatedQuotes": [],
  "summary": "",
  "database": "",
  "analyzer": "",
  "views": [
    {"view": "The semantics of 'I' refers to the person who produced the utterance.", "evidence": ["the semantics of "I" is given by the rule that an utterance of "I" refers to a given person if and only if that person has the property of being the one that produced that utterance."]},
    {"view": "The concept through which 'I' refers to the speaker is the person who produced the utterance.", "evidence": ["the concept through which my utterance of "I" refers to me is the concept person who produced the utterance in question."]},
    {"view": "The mediating concept for 'I' is the same regardless of who uses it.", "evidence": ["But the mediating concept remains the same."]},
    {"view": "The semantics rule for 'that guy' refers to a unique, salient individual in the context.", "evidence": ["The semantics rule for "that guy" is given by the rule that, if "that guy" is uttered in a context where there is a unique, salient guy, that utterance refers to that individual."]},
    {"view": "'I' and 'that guy' are context-sensitive expressions.", "evidence": [""I" and "that guy" are context-sensitive expressions: what such an expression refers to depends in a systematic manner on facts about the context of utterance."]},
    {"view": "Indexicals are expressions whose reference depends on the context of utterance.", "evidence": ["Such expressions are known as "indexicals.""]},
    {"view": "Examples of indexicals include 'you,' 'he,' 'those animals,' 'this monkey,' 'tomorrow,' and 'yesterday.'", "evidence": ["Other examples of indexicals are "you," "he," "those animals," "this monkey," "tomorrow," "yesterday.""]},
    {"view": "Some indexicals are single words while others are complex indexicals.", "evidence": ["Some indexicals are single words (e.g., "tomorrow," "he"); others consist of more than one (e.g., "that tall man")."]},
    {"view": "Demonstratives are a type of indexical that require an accompanying demonstration to eliminate doubt about the referent.", "evidence": ["Some indexicals often cannot be successfully used without an accompanying demonstration on the speaker's part, the purpose of which is to eliminate any doubt as to what the intended referent is."]},
    {"view": "Not all indexicals are demonstratives.", "evidence": ["Not all indexicals are demonstratives."]},
    {"view": "Examples of indexicals that are not demonstratives include 'tomorrow,' 'now,' and 'here.'", "evidence": ["For example, "tomorrow," "now," and "here," aren't demonstratives."]},
    {"view": "Indexicals have a two-dimensional semantic structure.", "evidence": ["Indexicals have a "two-dimensional" semantic structure."]},
    {"view": "The meaning of an utterance of 'today' is the day it picks out.", "evidence": ["The meaning of an utterance "today" is the day it picks out."]},
    {"view": "The meaning of the word-type 'today' is the rule that assigns the day of utterance to the token.", "evidence": ["The meaning of the corresponding word-type is the rule just described."]},
    {"view": "The meaning of a token of an indexical is its referent.", "evidence": ["Given any indexical, the meaning of a token of that indexical is its referent;"]},
    {"view": "The meaning of an indexical-type is the rule that assigns the referent to the token.", "evidence": ["the meaning of the corresponding indexical-type is the rule that assigns that referent to that token."]},
    {"view": "Definite descriptions are considered devices of reference.", "evidence": ["And in this section we will suppose them to be just that."]},
    {"view": "Definite descriptions have a two-dimensional semantic structure.", "evidence": ["Definite descriptions, like indexicals, have a two-dimensional semantic structure."]},
    {"view": "The semantic rule for 'the current U.S. President' assigns the referent based on the time of utterance.", "evidence": ["That rule is: if, at time t, x uniquely has the property of being a U.S. president, then an utterance at t of "the U.S. President" refers to x."]},
    {"view": "Some definite descriptions are incomplete and fail to pick out a single object.", "evidence": ["Some definite descriptions appear to be "incomplete"-that is, they fail to pick out a single object."]}
  ]
}

═══ CHUNK 11 ═══
{
  "quotes": [],
  "annotatedQuotes": [],
  "summary": "",
  "database": "",
  "analyzer": "",
  "views": [
    {"view": "Believing it's 60° in Richmond on Feb. 07, 2009, is different from thinking it's now 60° in Richmond.", "evidence": ["My believing it's 60° in Richmond on Feb. 07, 2009, is different from my thinking it's now 60° in Richmond, even though I am in fact in Richmond at the time in question."]},
    {"view": "One can have the belief that it's 60° in Richmond on a specific date without knowing they are in Richmond.", "evidence": ["I could have the one thought and not have the other. I could, after all, not know that I was in Richmond."]},
    {"view": "Believing it's 60° in Richmond on a specific date is different from believing it's 60° here now.", "evidence": ["And my believing either of those things is different from my thinking it's now 60° here."]},
    {"view": "One can have any given belief about the temperature without having the others.", "evidence": ["One could have any given one of those beliefs without having any of the others."]},
    {"view": "It is rational to have any given belief about the temperature without having the others.", "evidence": ["Further, one could rationally have any given one of those beliefs without having any of the others."]},
    {"view": "A person in Richmond can rationally believe it's 60° here now while rejecting it's 60° in Richmond on a specific date.", "evidence": ["A person who is in Richmond at the time in question can rationally believe it's now 60° here while rejecting it's 60° in Richmond on Feb. 07, 2009."]},
    {"view": "The data at one's disposal may warrant one temperature judgment but not another.", "evidence": ["For the data at one's disposal may warrant the first judgment, but not the second."]},
    {"view": "Nothing perspectival can be expressed without using an indexical.", "evidence": ["So nothing perspectival-nothing that embodies any information relating to the speaker's perspective on the world-can be expressed without using an indexical."]},
    {"view": "In an indexical-free language, one cannot express thoughts about what's going on here and now.", "evidence": ["Nothing could be said about what's going on here, at this time; and there would be no me-thoughts (e.g., I'm thirsty) could be expressed; one could only express their third-person counterparts (e.g., "JM is thirsty")."]},
    {"view": "In an indexical-free language, one cannot express the thought 'I am JM' or 'I am that guy in the mirror'.", "evidence": ["Thus, one could not, in an indexical-free language, express the thought I am JM or I am that guy in the mirror."]},
    {"view": "An indexical-free language would be extremely impoverished.", "evidence": ["And such a language would therefore be extremely impoverished."]},
    {"view": "No sentence-type containing a context-sensitive component is either true or false.", "evidence": ["No sentence-type containing a context-sensitive component is either true or false; for no such sentence-type says anything."]},
    {"view": "It is tokens of sentences that make statements, not the corresponding sentence-types.", "evidence": ["It is tokens of "I am now tired" that make statements; the corresponding sentence-type does not do so."]},
    {"view": "What a token of a context-sensitive sentence affirms depends on facts about the context of utterance.", "evidence": ["What a token of "I am tired now" affirms depends on facts about the context of utterance."]},
    {"view": "The semantic rule assigns a proposition to a token based on the context of utterance.", "evidence": ["Thus the semantic rule that assigns a proposition to such a token does so on the basis of the facts about the context of utterance."]},
    {"view": "The semantic rule for 'I am tired' assigns a proposition based on the speaker and time of utterance.", "evidence": ["And the rule in question is clearly this: "If, at time t, person p tokens the sentencetype "I am tired," then the proposition thereby affirmed is true exactly if p is tired at p.""]},
    {"view": "The same semantic rule applies to all context-sensitive expressions.", "evidence": ["The same thing mutatis mutandis is true of all context-sensitive expressions."]},
    {"view": "The rule for 'that man is married to that woman' assigns a proposition based on the salient individuals in the context.", "evidence": ["So the rule that assigns a proposition to an utterance of "that man is married to that woman" is: if, in the context of utterance, x is a uniquely salient man and y is a uniquely salient woman, a token of the sentence-type "that man is married to that woman" affirms a proposition that is true if and only if x is married to y."]},
    {"view": "Context-sensitive sentence-types are not true or false; they do not bear propositions.", "evidence": ["So context-sensitive sentence-types aren't true or false; they don't, in and of themselves, bear propositions."]},
    {"view": "The identity of the proposition meant by a token depends on the identity of the type.", "evidence": ["But they have an important semantic role: the identity of the proposition meant by a token of such a type depends on the identity of the type."]}
  ]
}

═══ CHUNK 12 ═══
{
  "quotes": [],
  "annotatedQuotes": [],
  "summary": "",
  "database": "",
  "analyzer": "",
  "views": [
    {"view": "Propositions are things that are true or false.", "evidence": ["are propositions-they are things that are true or false."]},
    {"view": "There are different sorts of semantic rules.", "evidence": ["There are thus very different sorts of semantic rules."]},
    {"view": "Some semantic rules assign meanings to properties.", "evidence": ["There are those that assign meanings to properties"]},
    {"view": "Some semantic rules assign meanings to instances of properties.", "evidence": ["and there are those that assign meanings to instances of those properties."]},
    {"view": "The meaning assigned to a property is itself a semantic rule.", "evidence": ["The meaning that was assigned to the property we were just discussing is itself a semantic rule."]},
    {"view": "Every meaning assigned to a property is a semantic rule.", "evidence": ["As we'll now see, every meaning that is assigned to a property (as opposed to a property-instance) is itself a semantic rule."]},
    {"view": "There is a semantic rule that assigns a meaning to the property of having a morphology similar to the ink deposit 'Barack Obama'.", "evidence": ["Consider the following ink deposit: "Barack Obama." There is a semantic rule that assigns a meaning to the property of having a morphology similar to that ink deposit."]},
    {"view": "The meaning assigned to the property of having a morphology similar to the ink deposit 'Barack Obama' is itself a semantic rule.", "evidence": ["The meaning assigned to that property is itself a semantic rule."]},
    {"view": "The semantic rule assigns Barack Obama, the person, to any instance of the property in question.", "evidence": ["That rule assigns a meaning to each instance of the property in question. It assigns Barack Obama, the person, to any such instance."]},
    {"view": "Any instance of the property in question is an expression that picks out Barack Obama.", "evidence": ["Thus, any such instance is an expression that picks out Barack Obama."]},
    {"view": "A semantic rule assigns a rule to a property that in turn assigns meanings to instances of that property.", "evidence": ["The right definition is this: a semantic rule is something which assigns a rule to a property that in its turn assigns meanings to instances of that property."]},
    {"view": "In natural languages, there are no sentence-types that don't contain context-sensitive components.", "evidence": ["First of all, in natural languages, there are no such sentence-types."]},
    {"view": "Every sentence contains a tense-marker.", "evidence": ["Every sentence contains a tense-marker."]},
    {"view": "The proposition expressed by any given token of a sentence is a function of when that token occurs.", "evidence": ["And in virtue of containing a tense-marker, a sentence is such that the proposition expressed by any given one of its tokens is a function of (inter alia) when that token occurs."]},
    {"view": "Whether the statement 'the U.S. economy is fairly stable' is true depends on when it is said.", "evidence": ["If you say "the U.S. economy is fairly stable," whether you are speaking the truth or not depends on when you say it."]},
    {"view": "Any two tokens of 'the interior angles of a Euclidean triangle add up to 180°' express the same proposition for all intents and purposes.", "evidence": ["For all intents and purposes, any two tokens of (IA) "the interior angles of a Euclidean triangle add up to 180°" express the same proposition."]},
    {"view": "From a strictly semantic perspective, 'the interior angles of a Euclidean triangle add up to 180°' is context-sensitive.", "evidence": ["But, from a strictly semantic perspective, IA is context-sensitive, and tokens of it uttered at different times don't encode the same proposition."]},
    {"view": "If mathematical reality were as volatile as the stock-market, 'the interior angles of a Euclidean triangle add up to 180°' would be regarded as context-sensitive.", "evidence": ["If it were believed that mathematical reality were as volatile as the stock-market, we would without hesitation regard IA as being in the same category as patently context-sensitive sentences such as: (BH) "Bill's holdings add up to $180,000,000.""]},
    {"view": "The tense-marker in 'the interior angles of a Euclidean triangle add up to 180°' is not inert because of our beliefs about mathematics.", "evidence": ["And we'd have no more temptation to regard the tense-marker in IA as inert than we'd have to regard its counterpart in BH as inert. What this shows is that, to the extent that the tense-marker in tokens of IA are doing nothing, it's only because, our beliefs about mathematics being what they are, we choose to see such utterances as expressing atemporal propositions."]},
    {"view": "Many semanticists hold that 'the interior angles of a Euclidean triangle add up to 180°' is context-insensitive at the level of literal meaning.", "evidence": ["Nonetheless, many semanticists hold that, at the level of literal meaning, IA is context-insensitive."]}
  ]
}

═══ CHUNK 13 ═══
{
  "quotes": [],
  "annotatedQuotes": [],
  "summary": "",
  "database": "",
  "analyzer": "",
  "views": [
    {"view": "Expression-types are properties and are therefore non-spatiotemporal entities.", "evidence": ["So expression-types, unlike expression-tokens, are properties and are therefore non-spatiotemporal entities."]},
    {"view": "Non-spatiotemporal entities cannot mediate information or be symbols.", "evidence": ["And, as we just noted, it makes no sense to suppose a nonspatiotemporal entity could mediate information or, therefore, could in any significant sense be a symbol."]},
    {"view": "It is theoretically arbitrary to assume that types could perform the same semantic functions as their tokens.", "evidence": ["Also, given the profound metaphysical differences between tokens and types, it would be theoretical arbitrariness of the worst kind to suppose that types could discharge the same semantic functions as their tokens."]},
    {"view": "Tokens of 'Bill Clinton' refer to Bill Clinton, but the corresponding type does not refer to Bill Clinton.", "evidence": ["We must therefore assume that, whereas tokens of "Bill Clinton" refer to Bill Clinton, the corresponding type does not refer to Bill Clinton;"]},
    {"view": "The expression-type 'Bill Clinton' has a meaning that is a constant function assigning Bill Clinton to any of its tokens.", "evidence": ["and we must also assume that "Bill Clinton," the expression-type, has for its meaning a (constant) function that assigns Bill Clinton to any given one of its tokens."]},
    {"view": "Proper names, indexicals, and definite descriptions have two-dimensional semantics.", "evidence": ["In general, proper names, no less than indexicals and definite descriptions have two-dimensional semantics."]},
    {"view": "The semantic rule for a proper name is a constant function, while for an indexical or definite description, it is not.", "evidence": ["The semantic rule corresponding to a proper name is a constant function, whereas the semantic rule corresponding to an indexical or definite description is not a constant function."]},
    {"view": "All utterances of 'Bill Clinton' refer to Bill Clinton, but not all utterances of 'the current U.S. president' or 'that guy over there' do.", "evidence": ["All utterances of "Bill Clinton" refer to Bill Clinton, but not every utterance of "the current U.S. president," or of "that guy over there," so refer."]},
    {"view": "The view that 'Bill Clinton' itself, the expression-type, refers to Bill Clinton is erroneous.", "evidence": ["This has encouraged the erroneous view that "Bill Clinton" itself, the expression-type, refers to Bill Clinton."]},
    {"view": "Expression-types result when properties per se, as opposed to their instances, are assigned meanings.", "evidence": ["Remember that expression-types are what result when properties per se, as opposed to their instances, are assigned meanings."]},
    {"view": "Rules that assign meanings to properties are semantic rules.", "evidence": ["Of course, the rules that assign meanings to properties are semantic rules, since anything that assigns meaning to anything is ipso facto a semantic rule."]},
    {"view": "The sentence-type of 'that guy is a professor' results from a semantic rule assigning a meaning to a property.", "evidence": ["So the sentence-type of which the following ink deposit-"that guy is a professor"-is a token is what results when some semantic rule assigns a meaning to some property."]},
    {"view": "R2, the meaning assigned by R1 to a property, is itself a semantic rule that assigns meanings to instances of that property.", "evidence": ["Let R2 be the meaning that R1 assigns to the just mentioned property. R2 is itself a semantic rule. But, whereas R1 assigns a meaning (a rule) to some property, R2 assigns meanings to instances of that property."]},
    {"view": "The meanings assigned by R2 to tokens are propositions, not rules.", "evidence": ["So R2 assigns meanings to particular instances of the morphology had by the ink deposit ("that guy is a professor"). The meanings that R2 assigns to those tokens are not themselves rules; they are propositions-they are things that are true or false."]},
    {"view": "There are different sorts of semantic rules: those that assign meanings to properties and those that assign meanings to instances of those properties.", "evidence": ["There are thus very different sorts of semantic rules. There are those that assign meanings to properties, and there are those that assign meanings to instances of those properties."]},
    {"view": "The property of having a morphology similar to the ink deposit 'Barack Obama' is assigned a meaning by a semantic rule.", "evidence": ["Consider the following ink deposit: "Barack Obama." There is a semantic rule that assigns a meaning to the property of having a morphology similar to that ink deposit."]},
    {"view": "The meaning assigned to the property PBO is a semantic rule stating that any given token of PBO refers to Barack Obama.", "evidence": ["The meaning assigned to PBO is itself a semantic rule. In other words, the meaning of PBO is given by the statement that: B1: Any given token of PBO refers to to Barack Obama."]},
    {"view": "The semantic rule for a specific token of 'Barack Obama' states that it refers to Barack Obama.", "evidence": ["Given some specific token t of "Barack Obama", the semantic rule for t is: B2: t refers to Barack Obama."]},
    {"view": "B1 and B2 are different rules; B1 does not specify any particular token.", "evidence": ["B1 and B2 are very different rules. Unlike B2, B1 doesn't say anything about any specific token of "Barack Obama" or any other expression."]},
    {"view": "The need for a two-dimensionalist approach to semantics is embedded in the concept of what an expression is.", "evidence": ["The need for a two-dimensionalist approach to semantics is embedded in the very concept of what an expression is."]}
  ]
}

═══ CHUNK 14 ═══
{
  "quotes": [],
  "annotatedQuotes": [],
  "summary": "",
  "database": "",
  "analyzer": "",
  "views": [
    {"view": "Quantified sentences in natural language are pseudo-objectual statements.", "evidence": ["In natural language, quantified sentences are pseudo-objectual statements."]},
    {"view": "Quantified sentences appear to be about objects but are really about properties.", "evidence": ["They appear to be about objects, but are really about properties."]},
    {"view": "Quantified sentences must be reparsed to expose their logical forms.", "evidence": ["That is why they must be reparsed if their logical forms are to be exposed."]},
    {"view": "A statement's grammatical form may diverge from its logical form.", "evidence": ["It immediately follows that a statement's grammatical form may diverge from its logical form."]},
    {"view": "Frege discovered that grammatical and logical forms can diverge.", "evidence": ["Frege discovered both facts and, therewith, created modern analytic philosophy."]},
    {"view": "Some expressions are to be defined contextually.", "evidence": ["The fact that grammatical and logical form sometimes diverge is related to the fact some expressions are to be defined contextually."]},
    {"view": "To define an expression contextually is to explain how it affects a sentence's meaning.", "evidence": ["To define an expression contextually is to how, in virtue of containing it, a sentence's meaning is affected."]},
    {"view": "The word 'someone' does not refer to any specific individual.", "evidence": ["So, for example, "someone" doesn't refer to anyone. It doesn't refer to John or Sally or Jane."]},
    {"view": "The statement 'N doesn't snore' is compatible with 'someone snores.'", "evidence": ["That is why, given any proper name N, the statement (NS) ‹N doesn't snore › is compatible with (SS) "someone snores.""]},
    {"view": "The meaning of 'someone' is not given by pairing it with an individual.", "evidence": ["Thus, the meaning of "someone" isn't given by some rule that pairs it off with this or that individual."]},
    {"view": "The meaning of 'someone' is given by the instantiation of a property.", "evidence": ["Rather, the meaning of "someone" is given by the statement that: (RS) ‹Someone has psi› is true just in case the property of being a psi is instantiated."]},
    {"view": "The logical form of 'someone snores' is 'the property of being a snorer is instantiated.'", "evidence": ["Thus, the logical form SS is clearly displayed by the sentence: (PS) "the property of being a snorer is instantiated.""]},
    {"view": "The logical form of 'someone snores' diverges from its grammatical form.", "evidence": ["Since SS has a different grammatical form from PS, it follows that SS's logical form diverges from its logical form."]},
    {"view": "The divergence between grammatical and logical forms is due to contextual definitions.", "evidence": ["The divergence between SS's grammatical and logical forms is obviously a consequence of the fact that "someone" must be defined contextually."]},
    {"view": "Not every sentence containing an expression defined contextually has divergent grammatical and logical forms.", "evidence": ["Nonetheless, it would be an overstatement to say that whenever a sentence contains an expression that must be defined contextually, it's grammatical form pulls apart from its logical form."]},
    {"view": "Every expression is to be defined contextually.", "evidence": ["As we're about to see, every expression is to be defined contextually."]},
    {"view": "Grammatical form does not always diverge from logical form.", "evidence": ["Obviously grammatical form doesn't always pull apart from logical form."]},
    {"view": "It is not always the case that a sentence's logical and grammatical forms diverge due to contextual definitions.", "evidence": ["Therefore, it isn't always the case that, in virtue of containing an expression that must be defined contextually, a sentence's logical and grammatical forms diverge."]},
    {"view": "All definitions are contextual definitions.", "evidence": ["How can it be said that all definitions are contextual definitions?"]},
    {"view": "There are also denotative definitions.", "evidence": ["Aren't there also denotative definitions?"]}
  ]
}

═══ CHUNK 15 ═══
{
  "quotes": [],
  "annotatedQuotes": [],
  "summary": "",
  "database": "",
  "analyzer": "",
  "views": [
    {"view": "Frege believes that the occurrence of 'snores' in the sentence 'Plato snores' is best represented as the open sentence ‹x snores›", "evidence": ["According to Frege, the occurrence of "snores" in (PS) "Plato snores" is best represented as the open sentence ‹x snores›"]},
    {"view": "Frege considers the open sentence ‹x snores› as expressing a function that assigns truth to each snorer and falsehood to each non-snorer", "evidence": ["and that open sentence is best thought of as expressing a function that assigns the truth-value true to each snorer and the truth-value false to each thing that doesn't snore"]},
    {"view": "Frege views the open sentence ‹x is even› as a function that assigns truth to even numbers and falsehood to non-even numbers", "evidence": ["So we can think of ‹x is even› as assigning truth to two, four, etc., and falsity to one, three, etc."]},
    {"view": "Frege sees the occurrence of 'is taller than' in 'Bill is taller than Mary' as identical with the open sentence ‹x is taller than y›", "evidence": ["Frege sees the occurrence of "is taller than" in (BTM) "Bill is taller than Mary" as being identical with the open sentence ‹x is taller than y›"]},
    {"view": "Frege considers the open sentence ‹x is taller than y› as expressing a function that assigns truth to ordered pairs where the first member is taller than the second", "evidence": ["and he sees that open sentences as expressing a function that assigns truth-values to ordered pairs of objects"]},
    {"view": "Frege treats 'Bill is standing between Mary and John' as comprising the open sentence ‹x is standing between y and z›", "evidence": ["Frege treats: (BJMP) "Bill is standing between Mary and John" as comprising the open-sentence ‹x is standing between y and z›"]},
    {"view": "Frege sees the open sentence ‹x is standing between y and z› as expressing a function that assigns truth to ordered triples of objects", "evidence": ["and he sees that open sentence as expression a function that assigns truth to ordered triples of objects"]},
    {"view": "Frege was able to assign a single form to all atomic sentences", "evidence": ["In this way, Frege was able to assign a single form to all atomic sentences."]},
    {"view": "An atomic sentence is one that doesn't consist of other sentences and doesn't contain quantifiers", "evidence": ["An atomic sentence is one that, unlike "Bill is tall and Sally is smart," doesn't consist of other sentences and that, unlike "someone snores," doesn't contain quantifiers."]},
    {"view": "Non-atomic sentences are molecular", "evidence": ["Non-atomic sentences are molecular."]},
    {"view": "A molecular sentence is one that either consists of other sentences or contains a quantifier", "evidence": ["A molecular sentence is one that either consists of other sentences or contains a quantifier."]},
    {"view": "Frege was able to show that all atomic sentences have the form ‹O has psi›", "evidence": ["Frege was able to show that, ultimately, all atomic sentences have the form ‹O has psi.›"]},
    {"view": "Contrary to first appearances, 'Bill is taller than Mary' has the form: the ordered pair <Bill, Mary> has psi", "evidence": ["Contrary to first appearances, BTM has the form: the ordered pair <Bill, Mary> has psi"]},
    {"view": "Pre-Fregean logicians saw each of PS, BTM, and BJMP as having a different form from each of the other two", "evidence": ["Pre-Fregean logicians saw each of PS, BTM, and BJMP as having a different form from each of the other two"]},
    {"view": "Pre-Fregean logicians were unable to formalize inferences involving atomic sentences due to their view on sentence forms", "evidence": ["and this made it impossible for them to do anything meaningful in the way of formalizing inferences involving atomic sentences."]},
    {"view": "Frege did not have the problem of formalizing inferences involving atomic sentences because he was not blinded by grammatical surface structure", "evidence": ["But Frege didn't have this problem, since he, unlike them, wasn't made blind by grammatical surface structure to the underlying structural similarities."]}
  ]
}

--- TEXT ANALYZER ---
═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 1 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 2 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 3 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 4 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 5 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 6 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 7 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 8 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 9 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 10 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 11 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 12 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 13 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 14 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 15 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



--- MAJOR VIEWS ---
1. VIEW: The occurrence of 'absolute' in 'the absolute is one' is not a word but a mere homonym.
   EVIDENCE: "What occurs in 'the absolute is one' is not the word 'absolute', but a mere homonym of that word."

2. VIEW: For 'absolute' in 'the absolute is one' to be a word, it would require a semantic rule assigning it a meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "For the occurrence of 'absolute' in 'the absolute is one' to be a word, there would have to be some semantic rule that assigned it a meaning."

3. VIEW: The occurrence of 'absolute' in 'the absolute is one' is assigned no meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "Although there are semantic rules that assign meaning to homonyms of that occurrence, that occurrence per se is assigned no meaning."

4. VIEW: Anything that is assigned no meaning is not a linguistic expression.
   EVIDENCE: "Anything that is assigned no meaning is ipso facto not a linguistic expression."

5. VIEW: 'The absolute is one' is not a sentence but a sentence-imposter.
   EVIDENCE: "So 'the absolute is one' is not a sentence, but a sentence-imposter."

6. VIEW: The meaning of a true or false sentence is a proposition.
   EVIDENCE: "The meaning of a true or false sentence is a proposition."

7. VIEW: Propositions are not themselves sentences.
   EVIDENCE: "Propositions are not themselves sentences."

8. VIEW: Different sentences can express the same proposition.
   EVIDENCE: "That is why different sentences (e.g., 'schnee ist weiss' and 'snow is white') can express the same proposition."

9. VIEW: Propositions, when true, are truths.
   EVIDENCE: "Propositions, when true, are truths."

10. VIEW: Propositions have existed as long as there have been truths.
   EVIDENCE: "Thus, propositions have existed as long as there have been truths; which means that they've existed as long as there has been anything and, consequently, that propositions are not creations of human creations."

11. VIEW: Propositions are structurally similar to the sentences that express them.
   EVIDENCE: "Though distinct from the sentences that express them, propositions are structurally similar to them."

12. VIEW: The thing meant by 'John' in different sentences can move from one sentence-meaning to another.
   EVIDENCE: "The thing meant by 'John' must be capable of moving on its own from sentence-meaning to sentence-meaning."

13. VIEW: Propositions consist of discrete parts that correspond to discrete parts of sentences.
   EVIDENCE: "It follows that propositions consist of discrete parts; it also follows that those discrete parts correspond to discrete parts of the sentences that express them."

14. VIEW: Sentences are structurally like the propositions they express.
   EVIDENCE: "Taken together, these two points entail that sentences are structurally like the propositions they express."

15. VIEW: Propositions are digital structures.
   EVIDENCE: "Given that propositions consist of discrete, isolable entities, it follows that, like sentences and unlike visual perceptions and photographs, propositions are digital structures."

16. VIEW: Sentences and propositions have unique breakdowns into minimal significant units.
   EVIDENCE: "Sentences and propositions are digital structures, meaning that they have unique breakdowns into minimal significant units."

17. VIEW: Visual perceptions have non-digital or analogue structures.
   EVIDENCE: "Visual perceptions, unlike sentences and propositions, therefore have a non-digital or analogue structures."

18. VIEW: Thought at least sometimes has a structure very different from language.
   EVIDENCE: "Given that at least some thought involves the processing of perceptual information, it follows that thought at least sometimes has a structure very different from language."

19. VIEW: The study of language is divided into semantics, syntax, and pragmatics.
   EVIDENCE: "The study of language is typically divided into three sub-disciplines-semantics, syntax, and pragmatics."

20. VIEW: Semantics, syntax, and pragmatics each denote both a branch of linguistic study and a dimension of language.
   EVIDENCE: "In addition to denoting a branch of linguistic study, each of these three words denotes dimension of language."

21. VIEW: The meaning of 'Sally hates Bob' depends on the meaning of 'hates'.
   EVIDENCE: "This shows that what 'Sally hates Bob' means depends on what 'hates' means."

22. VIEW: The sentence 'Larry loves Julie' does not mean the same thing as 'Sally hates Bob'.
   EVIDENCE: "Obviously this sentence doesn't mean the same thing as 'Sally hates Bob.'"

23. VIEW: The relationship between the meaning of 'Sally hates Bob' and 'hates' is the same as the relationship between the meaning of 'Larry loves Julie' and 'loves'.
   EVIDENCE: "But the relationship borne by the meaning of 'Sally hates Bob' to the meaning 'hates' is identical with the relationship borne by the meaning of 'Larry loves Julie' to that of 'loves.'"

24. VIEW: Similar points about meaning relationships hold for the other constituents of the sentences 'Sally hates Bob' and 'Larry loves Julie'.
   EVIDENCE: "Exactly similar points hold in connection with each of the remaining two constituents of each of those sentences."

25. VIEW: Syntax studies the relation between the meanings of complex expressions and the meanings of the simple expressions composing them.
   EVIDENCE: "The discipline of syntax studies the relation that the meanings of complex expressions bear to the meanings of the simple expressions composing them."

26. VIEW: Syntax does not study the semantics of complex expressions.
   EVIDENCE: "Thus, syntax doesn't study the semantics (meanings) of complex expressions."

27. VIEW: Syntax studies the structures of the semantics of complex expressions.
   EVIDENCE: "It studies the structures of the semantics of complex expressions."

28. VIEW: Syntax studies semantic structure.
   EVIDENCE: "Syntax studies semantic structure."

29. VIEW: Semanticists supply us with metaknowledge about what we know when we understand sentences.
   EVIDENCE: "Semanticists supply us with the missing metaknowledge."

30. VIEW: The sentence 'John wants to punch Bob' attributes a property to John.
   EVIDENCE: "(2) attributes a certain property to John-that of wanting to punch Bob."

31. VIEW: The sentences 'John wants to catch a 20-pound striped bass' and 'John wants to punch Bob' are grammatically isomorphic.
   EVIDENCE: "Given that (1) and (2) are grammatically isomorphic..."

32. VIEW: The proposition expressed by 'John wants to catch a 20-pound striped bass' is not about a specific fish.
   EVIDENCE: "But this isn't the right analysis. There isn't some one fish such that, if the desire ascribed to John by (1) is to be gratified, John must catch that very fish."

33. VIEW: The meaning of 'John wants to catch a 20-pound striped bass' is about the existence of a relationship between John and a proposition.
   EVIDENCE: "It affirms the existence of a relationship between John and a proposition."

34. VIEW: The proposition expressed by 'there exists some fish x such that x is a 20-pound striped bass and such that John catches x' exists regardless of whether John catches the fish.
   EVIDENCE: "But that proposition exists either way."

35. VIEW: The expression 'some fish' in the sentence 'there exists some fish x such that x is a 20-pound striped bass and such that John catches x' does not refer to any specific fish.
   EVIDENCE: "Grammatically, that expression is a noun-phrase. But, unlike other noun-phrases, it doesn't refer to anything."

36. VIEW: The problem of the meaning of 'some fish' can be solved by rewording the sentence to focus on the instantiation of a property.
   EVIDENCE: "The needed rewording is this: (5) The property of being a 20-pound striped bass that John catches is instantiated."

37. VIEW: The sentence 'John wants to catch a 20-pound striped bass' is about an existent property, not a non-existent fish.
   EVIDENCE: "So (1), which seemed to be about a non-existent fish, is about an existent property."

38. VIEW: A complete analysis of 'John wants to catch a 20-pound striped bass' involves the instantiation of the property of being a 20-pound striped bass that John catches.
   EVIDENCE: "Thus, a complete analysis of (1) is given by: (1CA) John wants it to be the case that the property of being a 20-pound striped bass that John catches is instantiated."

39. VIEW: Understanding the meaning of 'John wants to catch a 20-pound striped bass' is not trivial.
   EVIDENCE: "So even though just about every English speaker understands (1), knowing what it is that one knows in understanding it isn't such a trivial thing."

40. VIEW: Every English speaker knows what 'John wants to catch a 20-pound striped bass' means.
   EVIDENCE: "Despite everything just said, there is clearly a sense in which every English speaker knows what (1) means."

41. VIEW: Something isn't a sentence until a meaning has been assigned to it.
   EVIDENCE: "something isn't a sentence until a meaning has been assigned to it."

42. VIEW: In a world without animate beings, a twig deposit of '1 + 1 = 2' would not be an expression.
   EVIDENCE: "In a world where there were no animate beings, but in which the forthcoming parenthetical ink deposit (1 + 1 = 2) was formed out of twigs, that twig deposit wouldn't be an expression of any kind."

43. VIEW: A twig deposit would be an expression if and only if it were endowed with meaning.
   EVIDENCE: "That twig deposit would be an expression if and only if it were endowed with meaning."

44. VIEW: Something has to have meaning in order to be an expression.
   EVIDENCE: "This shows that something has to have meaning in order to be an expression."

45. VIEW: Expressions aren't assigned meanings; they already have them.
   EVIDENCE: "Thus, expressions aren't assigned meanings. They already have them and don't need to be assigned them."

46. VIEW: A semantic rule can't be defined as a rule that assigns a meaning to an expression.
   EVIDENCE: "Therefore a semantic rule can't be defined as a rule that assigns a meaning to an expression."

47. VIEW: Semantic rules assign meanings to non-expressions.
   EVIDENCE: "Thus, semantic rules assign meanings to non-expressions."

48. VIEW: Semantic rules assign meanings to properties of physical objects.
   EVIDENCE: "Thus semantic rules assign meanings to properties of physical objects-to morphological or acoustical properties (in other words, to properties that a things has in virtue of having a certain shape or sounding a certain way)."

49. VIEW: A semantic rule is something which assigns a meaning to a property.
   EVIDENCE: "A semantic rule is therefore something which assigns a meaning to a property, and language is a set of such rules."

50. VIEW: Language is a set of semantic rules.
   EVIDENCE: "A semantic rule is therefore something which assigns a meaning to a property, and language is a set of such rules."

51. VIEW: Many believe that linguistic meaning is to be understood in function-theoretic terms.
   EVIDENCE: "Many believe that linguistic meaning is to be understood in function-theoretic terms-that, in other words, semantic rules are mathematical functions."

52. VIEW: A function is a rule that assigns no more than one object to any given member of a class.
   EVIDENCE: "In general, a function is a rule that, given some class of objects, assigns no more than one object to any given member of that class."

53. VIEW: The word 'assigns' has a psychological meaning in the context of a person assigning a task.
   EVIDENCE: "In the former case, the word 'assigns' has a psychological meaning; in the latter, it has a non-psychological, purely logical meaning."

54. VIEW: The word 'assigns' has a non-psychological, purely logical meaning in the context of mathematical functions.
   EVIDENCE: "In the former case, the word 'assigns' has a psychological meaning; in the latter, it has a non-psychological, purely logical meaning."

55. VIEW: The rule that assigns 8 to <4,4> isn't a social rule and can't be obeyed or disobeyed.
   EVIDENCE: "A related point is that the rule that assigns 8 to <4,4> isn't a social rule, and it therefore isn't something that can be obeyed or disobeyed."

56. VIEW: According to the function-theoretic view, semantic rules are mathematical functions.
   EVIDENCE: "According to the function-theoretic view, semantic rules are rules in the strictly logical sense; that is, they are mathematical functions."

57. VIEW: The semantic rule for 'Socrates' is a function that assigns a certain individual to that word.
   EVIDENCE: "The semantic rule for 'Socrates' is a function that assigns a certain individual (Socrates) to that word (or to occurrences thereof)."

58. VIEW: The semantic rule for 'snow is white' is a function that assigns truth-conditions to that utterance.
   EVIDENCE: "The semantic rule for 'snow is white' is a function that assigns truth-conditions to that utterance (or to occurrences thereof)."

59. VIEW: The function-theoretic view of semantic rules is false.
   EVIDENCE: "The just-described view is false."

60. VIEW: The rule denoted by '+' has always existed and always will.
   EVIDENCE: "The rule denoted by '+' has always existed and always will."

61. VIEW: The meaning of a sentence determines what inferences can be made from it, not the other way around.
   EVIDENCE: "But it's only because of what the sentence already means that one can make those inferences."

62. VIEW: CRS (the theory that what a sentence means is determined by what we infer from it) is false.
   EVIDENCE: "Since it's the other way around, as we've just seen, CRS is false."

63. VIEW: Literal and understood meaning can diverge significantly for complex expressions.
   EVIDENCE: "Where complex expressions are concerned, there is no limit to how much literal and understood meaning may diverge from each other."

64. VIEW: Literal and understood meaning must be the same for simple expressions.
   EVIDENCE: "But where simple expressions are concerned, literal and understood meaning must coalesce."

65. VIEW: Systematic, widespread error in understanding the meaning of simple expressions is impossible.
   EVIDENCE: "It makes no sense to suppose that people could be systematically wrong as to what 'red' meant."

66. VIEW: If people systematically misunderstand a simple expression, the meaning of that expression would be what people think it means.
   EVIDENCE: "If people thought that 'red' meant what is in fact meant by 'blue,' then 'red' would have that meaning."

67. VIEW: Misinterpretations of sentences do not arise from failing to understand the meanings of simple parts but from failing to understand how to combine those meanings.
   EVIDENCE: "Even though there can be widespread, systematic misinterpretations of sentences, those misinterpretations do not arise as a result of people failing to know what the simple parts of sentences mean."

68. VIEW: The meaning of a sentence like 'Socrates was more wise than Plato, but he was less sharp then Aristotle' is understood by English speakers to the extent that its form and the meanings of its parts are understood.
   EVIDENCE: "So to the extent that its meaning is fixed by the fact that it has the form ‹...Socrates...›, people (English speakers) do systematically understand 'Socrates was more wise than Plato, but he was less sharp then Aristotle'."

69. VIEW: Systematic misunderstanding of a sentence occurs because people struggle to combine the meanings of its parts.
   EVIDENCE: "So far as that sentence is systematically misunderstood, it is because people are having trouble putting the meanings of its constituents together."

70. VIEW: The literal meaning of a simple expression is determined by what sentences containing it are taken to mean.
   EVIDENCE: "What a simple expression literally means is determined by what it is that a sentence means by virtue of containing it."

71. VIEW: The literal meaning of a simple expression coincides with what people take it to mean.
   EVIDENCE: "Since, where simple expressions are concerned, what people take literal meaning to be coincides with what it really is."

72. VIEW: The literal meaning of a complex expression is a function of the meanings of its parts.
   EVIDENCE: "So a simple expression's literal meaning is given by a statement saying what it is that, by virtue of containing it, sentences are taken to mean; and a complex expression's literal meaning is a function, in the mathematical sense, of the meanings of its parts."

73. VIEW: The meaning of 'Socrates' is determined by what people think it means.
   EVIDENCE: "So what people think it means must ultimately coincide with what it actually means."

74. VIEW: The meaning of 'Socrates' refers to Socrates because people think it does.
   EVIDENCE: "So it refers to Socrates only because people think it refers to Socrates."

75. VIEW: The literal meaning of a complex expression can diverge from its understood meaning due to how people interpret the arrangement of its parts.
   EVIDENCE: "How people interpret CE may diverge from its literal meaning. But when this happens, it's because what it is taken to mean diverges from what, given what people believe its simple parts to literally mean, people are disposed to take it to mean."

76. VIEW: The literal meaning of a complex expression is determined by the meanings of its simple parts and their arrangement.
   EVIDENCE: "The literal meaning of a complex expression is a function of two things: (i) the meanings of its simple parts, and (ii) the order in which those parts are arranged."

77. VIEW: Simple expressions mean what people take them to mean.
   EVIDENCE: "Where simple expressions are concerned, literal and communicated meaning coincide (ultimately)-in other words, such expressions mean what people take them to mean."

78. VIEW: For complex expressions, literal meaning may diverge from communicated meaning, but it coincides with what people are disposed to take it to mean based on the literal meanings of its simple parts.
   EVIDENCE: "And where complex expressions are concerned, literal and communicated meaning may diverge, but literal meaning nonetheless coincides with what, given what the simple components of the expression in question literally mean, people are disposed to take it to mean."

79. VIEW: No word is identical with any utterance of it.
   EVIDENCE: "No word is identical with any utterance of it."

80. VIEW: Utterances and inscriptions of expressions are referred to as 'expression-tokens'.
   EVIDENCE: "Utterances and inscriptions of expressions are referred to as 'expression-tokens' (or just 'tokens')."
TEXT INTELLIGENCE REPORT
Generated: 12/4/2025, 2:43:19 PM
Source Length: 19489 words
LLM Used: grok

--- KEY QUOTATIONS ---


--- ANNOTATED CITATIONS ---


--- COMPRESSED REWRITE ---
[Chunk 1]


[Chunk 2]


[Chunk 3]


[Chunk 4]


[Chunk 5]


[Chunk 6]


[Chunk 7]


[Chunk 8]


[Chunk 9]


[Chunk 10]


[Chunk 11]


[Chunk 12]


[Chunk 13]


[Chunk 14]


[Chunk 15]


[Chunk 16]


[Chunk 17]


[Chunk 18]


[Chunk 19]


[Chunk 20]


--- DATABASE ---
═══ CHUNK 1 ═══


═══ CHUNK 2 ═══


═══ CHUNK 3 ═══


═══ CHUNK 4 ═══


═══ CHUNK 5 ═══


═══ CHUNK 6 ═══


═══ CHUNK 7 ═══


═══ CHUNK 8 ═══


═══ CHUNK 9 ═══


═══ CHUNK 10 ═══


═══ CHUNK 11 ═══


═══ CHUNK 12 ═══


═══ CHUNK 13 ═══


═══ CHUNK 14 ═══


═══ CHUNK 15 ═══


═══ CHUNK 16 ═══


═══ CHUNK 17 ═══


═══ CHUNK 18 ═══


═══ CHUNK 19 ═══


═══ CHUNK 20 ═══


--- TEXT ANALYZER ---
═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 1 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 2 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 3 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 4 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 5 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 6 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 7 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 8 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 9 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 10 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 11 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 12 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 13 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 14 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 15 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 16 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 17 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 18 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 19 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 20 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



--- MAJOR VIEWS ---
1. VIEW: The book proves a mathematical theorem and traces its philosophical consequences across multiple domains.
   EVIDENCE: "This book proves a mathematical theorem and traces its philosophical consequences across multiple domains."

2. VIEW: The theorem presented in the book is technical.
   EVIDENCE: "The theorem is technical, but its implications are revolutionary."

3. VIEW: The implications of the theorem are revolutionary.
   EVIDENCE: "The theorem is technical, but its implications are revolutionary."

4. VIEW: Rationality cannot be reduced to recursive rule-following.
   EVIDENCE: "It shows that rationality cannot be reduced to recursive rule-following"

5. VIEW: Recognizing that rationality cannot be reduced to recursive rule-following dissolves centuries of pseudo-problems in philosophy.
   EVIDENCE: "and that recognizing this fact dissolves centuries of pseudo-problems in philosophy"

6. VIEW: The theorem vindicates modern artificial intelligence.
   EVIDENCE: "vindicates modern artificial intelligence"

7. VIEW: The theorem opens up vast new research territories.
   EVIDENCE: "and opens up vast new research territories."

8. VIEW: The main result of the theorem is that the class of all recursive, truth-preserving logics is not recursively enumerable.
   EVIDENCE: "Main Result: The class of all recursive, truth-preserving logics is not recursively enumerable."

9. VIEW: The incompleteness of logic is a central theme of the book.
   EVIDENCE: "Part I: The Incompleteness of Logic"

10. VIEW: The book discusses the non-enumerability of total recursive functions.
   EVIDENCE: "2. The Non-Enumerability of Total Recursive Functions"

11. VIEW: The book explores the injective embedding of recursions into logics.
   EVIDENCE: "3. Injective Embedding of Recursions into Logics"

12. VIEW: Formal truth is treated as a relational concept in the book.
   EVIDENCE: "5. Formal Truth as a Relational Concept"

13. VIEW: The book addresses the historical confusion about logical form.
   EVIDENCE: "6.1 The Historical Confusion About Logical Form"

14. VIEW: The book discusses the limit of formal knowledge.
   EVIDENCE: "6.2 The Limit of Formal Knowledge"

15. VIEW: The book aims to dissolve the formality problem.
   EVIDENCE: "6.3 Dissolution of the Formality Problem"

16. VIEW: The book extends the core theorem to language implications.
   EVIDENCE: "Extension to Language Implications"

17. VIEW: The book compares the core theorem with classical results.
   EVIDENCE: "Comparison with Classical Results"

18. VIEW: The book discusses the hierarchy of incompleteness.
   EVIDENCE: "The Hierarchy of Incompleteness"

19. VIEW: The book addresses the deepening of the regress in logic.
   EVIDENCE: "The Deepening The Regress"

20. VIEW: The book explores practical applications of the theorem.
   EVIDENCE: "Practical Applications"

21. VIEW: There is no algorithm that can list all possible formal logical systems.
   EVIDENCE: "There is no algorithm that can list all possible formal logical systems."

22. VIEW: Recursion cannot recursively enumerate itself.
   EVIDENCE: "Recursion cannot recursively enumerate itself."

23. VIEW: Formalism cannot formalize its own boundaries.
   EVIDENCE: "Formalism cannot formalize its own boundaries."

24. VIEW: The theorem presented is not just another incompleteness result.
   EVIDENCE: "This is not just another incompleteness result."

25. VIEW: Gödel showed that no single formal system can capture all arithmetic truths.
   EVIDENCE: "Gödel showed that no single formal system can capture all arithmetic truths."

26. VIEW: The theorem shows that no recursive procedure can survey the space of formal systems themselves.
   EVIDENCE: "This theorem shows something deeper: no recursive procedure can even survey the space of formal systems themselves."

27. VIEW: The incompleteness goes all the way up.
   EVIDENCE: "The incompleteness goes all the way up."

28. VIEW: Formal truth is not a property statements have intrinsically, but a relation to particular logical systems.
   EVIDENCE: "Formal truth" is not a property statements have intrinsically, but a relation to particular logical systems-and the space of these systems is provably non-enumerable."

29. VIEW: The space of logical systems is provably non-enumerable.
   EVIDENCE: "Formal truth" is not a property statements have intrinsically, but a relation to particular logical systems-and the space of these systems is provably non-enumerable."

30. VIEW: Natural languages are hierarchies where each level can refer to lower levels but not to itself.
   EVIDENCE: "Natural languages are hierarchies (E₀ ∪ E₁ ∪ E₂ ∪ ...) where each level can refer to lower levels but not to itself."

31. VIEW: Syntax in natural languages can be recursive, but semantics necessarily includes non-recursive elements.
   EVIDENCE: "Syntax can be recursive, but semantics necessarily includes non-recursive elements like ostensive reference, naming, and metalinguistic awareness."

32. VIEW: Neural networks succeed because they are not recursive systems.
   EVIDENCE: "Neural networks succeed precisely because they're NOT recursive systems."

33. VIEW: The equation 'Intelligence = Recursive Computation' doomed Good Old-Fashioned AI (GOFAI).
   EVIDENCE: "The false equation "Intelligence = Recursive Computation" doomed Good Old-Fashioned AI (GOFAI)."

34. VIEW: Modern AI works because it can approximate both recursive and non-recursive rational capacities.
   EVIDENCE: "Modern AI works because it can approximate both recursive and non-recursive rational capacities."

35. VIEW: Hume's problem of induction dissolves because rationality is broader than recursivity.
   EVIDENCE: "Hume's problem of induction dissolves. Induction doesn't need justification by deduction because rationality is broader than recursivity."

36. VIEW: Scientific discovery is rational but non-recursive.
   EVIDENCE: "Scientific discovery is rational but non-recursive."

37. VIEW: Popper was wrong to conclude that because discovery isn't algorithmic, it must be irrational.
   EVIDENCE: "Popper was wrong to conclude that because discovery isn't algorithmic, it must be irrational."

38. VIEW: Newton's inference to universal gravitation and Darwin's recognition of natural selection are examples of non-recursive rationality.
   EVIDENCE: "Newton's inference to universal gravitation, Darwin's recognition of natural selection-these are paradigmatic examples of non-recursive rationality."

39. VIEW: The assumption that RATIONAL = RECURSIVE has infected multiple domains for over a century.
   EVIDENCE: "For over a century, multiple domains have been infected by a poisonous assumption: RATIONAL = RECURSIVE"

40. VIEW: The equation RATIONAL = RECURSIVE says that to make sense of something is to recursively formalize it.
   EVIDENCE: "This equation says: to make sense of something is to recursively formalize it."

41. VIEW: Rationality cannot be recursively characterized in its own scope
   EVIDENCE: "Rationality cannot recursively characterize its own scope."

42. VIEW: Formalism cannot formalize its own boundaries
   EVIDENCE: "Formalism cannot formalize its own boundaries"

43. VIEW: Recursion cannot recursively enumerate itself
   EVIDENCE: "Recursion cannot recursively enumerate itself"

44. VIEW: Language cannot linguistically characterize language
   EVIDENCE: "Language cannot linguistically characterize language"

45. VIEW: Rationality transcends recursive specification
   EVIDENCE: "Rationality transcends recursive specification"

46. VIEW: The limitation of rationality not being recursively characterizable is a liberation
   EVIDENCE: "This is not a limitation but a liberation."

47. VIEW: Recognizing the full breadth of rational capacity leads to genuine progress
   EVIDENCE: "Once we recognize the full breadth of rational capacity-including the non-recursive capacities that actually make science, language, thought, and intelligence work-we can stop forcing everything into recursive molds and make genuine progress."

48. VIEW: Rationality is seeing, not calculating
   EVIDENCE: "Rationality is seeing, not calculating."

49. VIEW: The book proves that rationality is seeing, not calculating
   EVIDENCE: "That's what this book proves, and that's what changes everything."

50. VIEW: The class of all deductive logics is not recursively enumerable
   EVIDENCE: "This chapter proves that the class of all deductive logics-understood as recursively defined, truth-preserving sets of statements-is not recursively enumerable."

51. VIEW: The space of logical systems cannot be exhaustively captured by any recursive procedure
   EVIDENCE: "By generalizing Gödel's incompleteness result, we show that the very space of logical systems cannot be exhaustively captured by any recursive procedure."

52. VIEW: The set of total recursive functions is not recursively enumerable
   EVIDENCE: "Theorem 2.1: The set of all total recursive functions is not recursively enumerable."

53. VIEW: The function F defined in the proof is a total recursive function not in the enumeration
   EVIDENCE: "Therefore F is a total recursive function not in our enumeration, contradicting the assumption that the enumeration was complete."

54. VIEW: The argument for non-enumerability of total recursive functions is a diagonalization argument
   EVIDENCE: "This is a pure diagonalization argument in the style of Cantor and Turing."

55. VIEW: Totality prevents the enumeration of total recursive functions
   EVIDENCE: "The key insight is that totality prevents enumeration-if we tried to enumerate total recursive functions, we could diagonalize out of the enumeration while remaining total."

56. VIEW: There exists an injective mapping from total recursive functions to truth-preserving logics
   EVIDENCE: "However, we can construct an injective mapping from total recursive functions to truth-preserving logics that preserves distinctness."

57. VIEW: The mapping from total recursive functions to logics is injective
   EVIDENCE: "Lemma 3.2: The mapping f ↦ L_f is injective."

58. VIEW: Each logic L_f is truth-preserving under the standard interpretation of arithmetic
   EVIDENCE: "Lemma 3.3: Each logic L_f is truth-preserving under the standard interpretation of arithmetic."

59. VIEW: The class of all recursive, truth-preserving logics is not recursively enumerable
   EVIDENCE: "Theorem 4.1: The class of all recursive, truth-preserving logics is not recursively enumerable."

60. VIEW: There is no recursive definition of 'recursive definition'
   EVIDENCE: "Corollary 4.2: There is no recursive definition of 'recursive definition.'"

61. VIEW: Recursive logics cannot be enumerated.
   EVIDENCE: "But Theorem 4.1 shows this is impossible."

62. VIEW: Formal truth is traditionally defined as an intrinsic syntactic property.
   EVIDENCE: "Traditionally, philosophers have sought to define "formal truth" as an intrinsic syntactic property-something about the logical form of a statement that makes it true independent of interpretation."

63. VIEW: Formal truth should be understood as a relational concept.
   EVIDENCE: "This paper suggests a different conception: Definition 5.1 (Formal Truth - Relational): A statement S is formally true if and only if there exists a truth-preserving recursive logic L such that S ∈ L."

64. VIEW: The predicate 'formally true' is not recursively enumerable.
   EVIDENCE: "Corollary 5.2: The predicate "formally true" is not recursively enumerable."

65. VIEW: Enumerating all formally true statements would allow enumeration of recursive logics, which is impossible.
   EVIDENCE: "If "formally true" were r.e., we could enumerate all formally true statements. But each formally true statement belongs to some recursive logic, and different logics can be distinguished by their member statements. This would allow us to enumerate the recursive logics themselves, contradicting Theorem 4.1."

66. VIEW: There is no algorithm that can list all formal truths.
   EVIDENCE: "There is no algorithm that can list all formal truths."

67. VIEW: No procedure can generate or recognize all formal systems.
   EVIDENCE: "No procedure can generate or recognize all formal systems."

68. VIEW: The space of formal systems transcends formal enumeration.
   EVIDENCE: "The space of formal systems transcends formal enumeration."

69. VIEW: Formalism cannot formalize its own boundaries.
   EVIDENCE: "Formalism cannot formalize its own boundaries."

70. VIEW: Expressions are considered 'logical' when governed by truth-preserving recursive rules.
   EVIDENCE: "This paper suggests a deflationary view: expressions count as "logical" when we have identified truth-preserving recursive rules governing them."

71. VIEW: The apparent special status of classical logical constants is due to early discovery of workable recursive systems.
   EVIDENCE: "The apparent special status of classical logical constants reflects merely the fact that we discovered workable recursive systems for them early (via truth tables, natural deduction, etc.)."

72. VIEW: There is no intrinsic syntactic mark of 'logicality'.
   EVIDENCE: "There is no intrinsic syntactic mark of "logicality"-only the pragmatic fact that some expressions admit readily discoverable recursive axiomatizations."

73. VIEW: No recursive meta-procedure can generate all recursive logical systems.
   EVIDENCE: "This result generalizes that insight: no recursive meta-procedure can generate all recursive logical systems."

74. VIEW: The space of formal systems itself cannot be recursively surveyed.
   EVIDENCE: "Just as Gödel placed a limit on what any particular formal system can prove, this result places a limit on what the space of formal systems itself can be: it cannot be recursively surveyed."

75. VIEW: The question 'What makes a truth formally true?' was misconceived.
   EVIDENCE: "The question "What makes a truth formally true?" has been a central problem in philosophy of logic. This paper suggests the question was misconceived."

76. VIEW: Formal truth is a relation to a recursive proof system, not a monadic property.
   EVIDENCE: "Formal truth is not a monadic property (✓ or ✗) but a relation to a recursive proof system."

77. VIEW: There is no decision procedure for formality itself.
   EVIDENCE: "Since the space of such systems is not recursively enumerable, there is no decision procedure for formality itself."

78. VIEW: There is no unified essence of 'formal truth' to be discovered.
   EVIDENCE: "This dissolves rather than solves the traditional problem: there is no unified essence of "formal truth" to be discovered, only an infinite, non-enumerable plurality of recursive truth-preserving systems."

79. VIEW: Formality has no form and cannot recursively characterize itself.
   EVIDENCE: "The key insight: Philosophers sought the form of formality. But formality has no form. It cannot recursively characterize itself."

80. VIEW: The set of total recursive functions is not recursively enumerable.
   EVIDENCE: "The set of total recursive functions is not recursively enumerable (Theorem 2.1)"

81. VIEW: There is no recursive definition of 'recursive definition'
   EVIDENCE: "There is no recursive definition of "recursive definition""

82. VIEW: Any attempt to formally characterize what counts as a formal characterization fails
   EVIDENCE: "Any attempt to formally characterize what counts as a formal characterization fails"

83. VIEW: There is no recursive procedure that generates all recursive procedures
   EVIDENCE: "There is no recursive procedure that generates all recursive procedures"

84. VIEW: The space of algorithms transcends algorithmic enumeration
   EVIDENCE: "The space of algorithms transcends algorithmic enumeration"

85. VIEW: Recursivity cannot formally capture its own extent
   EVIDENCE: "Recursivity cannot formally capture its own extent"

86. VIEW: Recursive methods have a blind spot: themselves
   EVIDENCE: "Recursive methods have a blind spot: themselves"

87. VIEW: The concept of 'algorithm' cannot be algorithmically delimited
   EVIDENCE: "The concept of "algorithm" cannot be algorithmically delimited"

88. VIEW: We cannot mechanically determine what counts as mechanical
   EVIDENCE: "We cannot mechanically determine what counts as mechanical"

89. VIEW: Recursion cannot recursively enumerate itself
   EVIDENCE: "Recursion cannot recursively enumerate itself"

90. VIEW: The class of recursive functions outruns any recursive enumeration of that class
   EVIDENCE: "The class of recursive functions outruns any recursive enumeration of that class"

91. VIEW: There is no formal characterization of formal truth
   EVIDENCE: "There is no formal characterization of formal truth"

92. VIEW: Formality cannot formalize what formality is
   EVIDENCE: "Formality cannot formalize what formality is"

93. VIEW: Formalism cannot formalize its own boundaries
   EVIDENCE: "Formalism cannot formalize its own boundaries"

94. VIEW: Any attempt to define 'what counts as formal' will either miss some formal systems or use non-formal resources
   EVIDENCE: "Any attempt to define "what counts as formal" will either: * Miss some formal systems (be incomplete), or * Use non-formal (semantic, meta-level) resources (be circular)"

95. VIEW: The boundary of formalism cannot itself be formalized
   EVIDENCE: "The boundary of formalism cannot itself be formalized"

96. VIEW: The set of all total recursive functions is not recursively enumerable
   EVIDENCE: "The set of all total recursive functions is not r.e. (Theorem 2.1)"

97. VIEW: The class of all recursive, truth-preserving logics is not recursively enumerable
   EVIDENCE: "The class of all recursive, truth-preserving logics (S, Φ) is not r.e. (Theorem 4.1)"

98. VIEW: The class of all consistent extensions of PA is not recursively enumerable
   EVIDENCE: "The class of all consistent extensions of PA is not r.e."

99. VIEW: The class of all sound proof systems is not recursively enumerable
   EVIDENCE: "The class of all sound proof systems is not r.e."

100. VIEW: Wherever there's enough structure to encode recursive functions, non-enumerability appears
   EVIDENCE: "Each theorem shows the same pattern: wherever there's enough structure to encode recursive functions, non-enumerability appears."

101. VIEW: The meta-level has the same structure as the object level
   EVIDENCE: "The meta-level has the same structure as the object level"

102. VIEW: Incompleteness goes all the way up
   EVIDENCE: "Incompleteness goes all the way up"

103. VIEW: Incompleteness is not a bug that could be fixed by going meta
   EVIDENCE: "It shows incompleteness is not a bug that could be fixed by going meta"

104. VIEW: Incompleteness is a structural feature of formalism that appears at every level
   EVIDENCE: "It's a structural feature of formalism that appears at every level"

105. VIEW: Formalism can't bootstrap itself
   EVIDENCE: "Formalism can't bootstrap itself"

106. VIEW: Any attempt to formally characterize 'what counts as formal' fails
   EVIDENCE: "Any attempt to formally characterize 'what counts as formal' fails"

107. VIEW: The characterization of formal systems either misses some formal systems or uses non-formal resources
   EVIDENCE: "Either: * The characterization misses some formal systems (incomplete) * The characterization uses non-formal resources (circular)"

108. VIEW: Formality requires meta-formal judgment
   EVIDENCE: "Formality requires meta-formal judgment"

109. VIEW: There's no algorithm that generates or recognizes all logical systems
   EVIDENCE: "There's no algorithm that generates or recognizes all logical systems"

110. VIEW: The dream of a unified formal framework is dead
   EVIDENCE: "The dream of a unified formal framework -one logic to rule them all-is dead"

111. VIEW: The space of logical systems is irreducibly plural
   EVIDENCE: "The space of logical systems is irreducibly plural"

112. VIEW: Recursive inadequacy goes all the way up
   EVIDENCE: "Recursive inadequacy goes all the way up"

113. VIEW: Incompleteness infects the metalevel
   EVIDENCE: "Incompleteness infects the metalevel"

114. VIEW: You can't escape incompleteness by going meta
   EVIDENCE: "You can't escape by going meta"

115. VIEW: The regress of meta-formalization is infinite
   EVIDENCE: "The regress is infinite"

116. VIEW: Meta-formalization requires non-formal resources just as much as object-level formalization does
   EVIDENCE: "Meta-formalization requires non-formal resources just as much as object-level formalization does"

117. VIEW: Logical truth can't be recursively defined
   EVIDENCE: "Logical truth can't be recursively defined"

118. VIEW: Logical truth is genuinely plural and irreducibly so
   EVIDENCE: "It's genuinely plural, irreducibly so"

119. VIEW: There is no essence of 'the logical' to be captured
   EVIDENCE: "There is no essence of 'the logical' to be captured"

120. VIEW: Logic is plural
   EVIDENCE: "Logic is plural"

121. VIEW: Formality is relational
   EVIDENCE: "Formality is relational"

122. VIEW: Truth-preservation comes in non-enumerable varieties
   EVIDENCE: "Truth-preservation comes in non-enumerable varieties"

123. VIEW: No computer can enumerate all possible reasoning systems
   EVIDENCE: "No computer can enumerate all possible reasoning systems"

124. VIEW: Creative formal thinking is provably non-algorithmic
   EVIDENCE: "Creative formal thinking is provably non-algorithmic"

125. VIEW: Building new formal systems requires non-recursive insight
   EVIDENCE: "Building new formal systems requires non-recursive insight"

126. VIEW: Treating Eₙ as a completed object is a step in the process of generating Eₙ₊₁.
   EVIDENCE: "Treating Eₙ as a completed object"

127. VIEW: Adding metalinguistic apparatus to refer to Eₙ is necessary for generating Eₙ₊₁.
   EVIDENCE: "Adding metalinguistic apparatus to refer to Eₙ"

128. VIEW: Semantically activating previously inert syntax is required for generating Eₙ₊₁.
   EVIDENCE: "Semantically activating previously inert syntax"

129. VIEW: Generating Eₙ₊₁ from Eₙ is not a recursive operation internal to Eₙ.
   EVIDENCE: "This is not a recursive operation internal to Eₙ."

130. VIEW: Generating Eₙ₊₁ from Eₙ requires stepping outside the system.
   EVIDENCE: "It requires: * Stepping outside the system"

131. VIEW: Generating Eₙ₊₁ from Eₙ involves introducing new terms as neologisms.
   EVIDENCE: "Introducing new terms ("E₀", "E₁", etc.) as neologisms"

132. VIEW: Generating Eₙ₊₁ from Eₙ requires meta-formal judgment about what constitutes reference to the totality.
   EVIDENCE: "Meta-formal judgment about what constitutes reference to the totality"

133. VIEW: The series (E₀, E₁, E₂, ...) is not recursive.
   EVIDENCE: "Consequence: The series (E₀, E₁, E₂, ...) is not recursive."

134. VIEW: Recursivity cannot recursively enumerate itself.
   EVIDENCE: "This is a direct application of the main theorem: recursivity cannot recursively enumerate itself."

135. VIEW: Each level-jump in the series (E₀, E₁, E₂, ...) requires non-recursive semantic operations.
   EVIDENCE: "Here, we cannot recursively enumerate the metalinguistic levels because each level-jump requires non-recursive semantic operations."

136. VIEW: If the series (E₀, E₁, E₂, ...) were recursive, it would lead to an infinite regress problem.
   EVIDENCE: "The Infinite Regress Problem"

137. VIEW: The language used to describe the recursivity of the series (E₀, E₁, E₂, ...) is called E*.
   EVIDENCE: "Call this metalanguage E*."

138. VIEW: E* contains all the Eᵢ as objects of discourse.
   EVIDENCE: "E* contains: * All the Eᵢ as objects of discourse"

139. VIEW: E* contains claims about the entire series.
   EVIDENCE: "Claims about the entire series"

140. VIEW: E* contains claims about the generating procedure.
   EVIDENCE: "Claims about the generating procedure"

141. VIEW: E* contains claims about recursivity itself.
   EVIDENCE: "Claims about recursivity itself"

142. VIEW: E* is not in any Eᵢ.
   EVIDENCE: "E* is not in any Eᵢ"

143. VIEW: An external metalanguage E* that's more powerful than any Eᵢ would generate an infinite regress.
   EVIDENCE: "There's an external metalanguage E* that's more powerful than any Eᵢ * E* generates E** to talk about itself * E*** to talk about E** * Infinite regress..."

144. VIEW: E* is not recursive because it would need to enumerate all the Eᵢ, violating the main theorem.
   EVIDENCE: "E* is not recursive because it would need to enumerate all the Eᵢ, violating the main theorem."

145. VIEW: The language in which we describe the recursivity of (E₀, E₁, E₂, ...) cannot itself be part of the series.
   EVIDENCE: "Even if we grant that (E₀, E₁, E₂, ...) is recursive, the language in which we describe that recursivity cannot itself be part of the series."

146. VIEW: Any attempt to give a complete account of the language hierarchy requires stepping outside that hierarchy.
   EVIDENCE: "Any attempt to give a complete account of the language hierarchy requires stepping outside that hierarchy."

147. VIEW: Recursivity cannot recursively characterize itself.
   EVIDENCE: "This is exactly what the main theorem predicts: recursivity cannot recursively characterize itself."

148. VIEW: A natural language hierarchy cannot recursively characterize its own structure.
   EVIDENCE: "Similarly, a natural language hierarchy cannot recursively characterize its own structure."

149. VIEW: The logicist project aimed to reduce all mathematics to logic.
   EVIDENCE: "The logicist project (Frege, Russell) aimed to reduce all mathematics to logic."

150. VIEW: The logicists never had a clear conception of what 'logic' meant.
   EVIDENCE: "But they never had a clear conception of what "logic" meant."

151. VIEW: A formal system starts with axioms (S)
   EVIDENCE: "Starts with axioms (S)"

152. VIEW: A formal system has a recursive generation rule (Φ)
   EVIDENCE: "Has a recursive generation rule (Φ)"

153. VIEW: A formal system preserves truth
   EVIDENCE: "Preserves truth"

154. VIEW: The definition of a formal system is not the traditional definition of 'logic'
   EVIDENCE: "It's not the traditional definition of 'logic' (with inference rules, connectives, etc.)"

155. VIEW: The minimal definition of a formal system captures the essence of recursively defined, truth-preserving statement-generation
   EVIDENCE: "but it captures the essence: recursively defined, truth-preserving statement-generation"

156. VIEW: The minimal definition of a formal system is minimal enough to encode arbitrary recursive functions
   EVIDENCE: "The injection works precisely because this definition is minimal enough to encode arbitrary recursive functions"

157. VIEW: The class of all recursively axiomatized normal modal logics is not recursively enumerable
   EVIDENCE: "The class of all recursively axiomatized normal modal logics is not r.e."

158. VIEW: Modal logic requires explicit injection construction and proof that modal structure is preserved
   EVIDENCE: "Requires: explicit injection construction + proof that modal structure is preserved"

159. VIEW: The class of all recursively defined epistemic closure operators is not recursively enumerable
   EVIDENCE: "The class of all recursively defined epistemic closure operators is not r.e."

160. VIEW: Epistemic logic requires similar construction and verification
   EVIDENCE: "Requires: similar construction + verification"

161. VIEW: The class of all sound type systems is not recursively enumerable
   EVIDENCE: "The class of all sound type systems is not r.e."

162. VIEW: Type systems require encoding recursive functions into type judgments
   EVIDENCE: "Requires: encoding recursive functions into type judgments"

163. VIEW: There is no maximal set of knowable truths
   EVIDENCE: "Conclusion: No maximal set of knowable truths"

164. VIEW: The K Paradox has a similar structure to the main theorem but uses a different proof method
   EVIDENCE: "Connection: Similar structure to main theorem, but different proof method"

165. VIEW: Crispin Wright's neo-logicism uses second-order logic
   EVIDENCE: "Crispin Wright's neo-logicism uses second-order logic"

166. VIEW: Second-order logic is not recursively axiomatizable
   EVIDENCE: "Second-order logic is not recursively axiomatizable"

167. VIEW: Neo-logicism is not 'logic' in the recursive sense
   EVIDENCE: "Therefore: Not 'logic' in the recursive sense"

168. VIEW: Crispin Wright reduces arithmetic to something more powerful, specifically set theory in disguise
   EVIDENCE: "Wright reduces arithmetic to something MORE POWERFUL (set theory in disguise)"

169. VIEW: Neo-logicism is not explanatory progress but circular
   EVIDENCE: "Not explanatory progress-circular"

170. VIEW: Standard axioms of epistemic and deontic logic are empirically false
   EVIDENCE: "Standard axioms are empirically false:"

171. VIEW: The axiom Kp → KKp (positive introspection) is false
   EVIDENCE: "Kp → KKp (positive introspection): false"

172. VIEW: The axiom O(p) → ◇(p) (ought implies can) is false with counterexamples
   EVIDENCE: "O(p) → ◇(p) (ought implies can): false with counterexamples"

173. VIEW: Most 'applied' uses of epistemic and deontic logic are window dressing on information-theoretic results
   EVIDENCE: "Most 'applied' uses are window dressing on information-theoretic results"

174. VIEW: Fuzzy logic is actually useful in engineering and control systems
   EVIDENCE: "Fuzzy Logic: * Actually useful (engineering, control systems)"

175. VIEW: Fuzzy logic is not really about 'degrees of truth' but about modeling continuous properties
   EVIDENCE: "Not really about 'degrees of truth' but about modeling continuous properties"

176. VIEW: Legitimate applications of fuzzy logic survive the critique
   EVIDENCE: "Legitimate applications survive the critique"

177. VIEW: The principle 'parts of parts are parts' fails for functional parthood
   EVIDENCE: "'Parts of parts are parts' fails for functional parthood"

178. VIEW: Transitivity only holds for spatial containment in mereology
   EVIDENCE: "Transitivity only holds for spatial containment"

179. VIEW: Most mereological 'theorems' formalize intuitions without explaining them
   EVIDENCE: "Most mereological 'theorems' formalize intuitions without explaining them"

180. VIEW: Natural languages cannot be single recursive expression-classes
   EVIDENCE: "We've shown that natural languages cannot be single recursive expression-classes"

181. VIEW: Natural languages must be hierarchies where each level can refer to lower levels but not to itself
   EVIDENCE: "They must be hierarchies where: 1. Each level can refer to lower levels but not to itself"

182. VIEW: Syntax can be recursive at each level in natural languages
   EVIDENCE: "2. Syntax can be recursive at each level"

183. VIEW: Semantics requires non-recursive operations in natural languages
   EVIDENCE: "but semantics requires non-recursive operations"

184. VIEW: The generating series itself is not recursive in natural languages
   EVIDENCE: "3. The generating series itself is not recursive"

185. VIEW: Any attempt to characterize the hierarchy of natural languages requires stepping outside it
   EVIDENCE: "4. Any attempt to characterize the hierarchy requires stepping outside it"

186. VIEW: The main theorem extends from logic to language
   EVIDENCE: "This extends the main theorem from logic to language"

187. VIEW: The same structural limitation appears wherever systems try to be self-reflective
   EVIDENCE: "showing that the same structural limitation appears wherever we try to make systems self-reflective"

188. VIEW: Formalism cannot formalize its own boundaries
   EVIDENCE: "The pattern is clear: Formalism cannot formalize its own boundaries"

189. VIEW: Recursion cannot enumerate itself
   EVIDENCE: "Recursion cannot enumerate itself"

190. VIEW: Language cannot linguistically characterize itself
   EVIDENCE: "Language cannot linguistically characterize itself"

191. VIEW: The false equation Rational = Recursive has infected multiple domains
   EVIDENCE: "And as we'll see in Part IV, this pattern has infected multiple domains through the false equation Rational = Recursive"

192. VIEW: The false equation Rational = Recursive creates pseudo-problems that dissolve once non-recursive rationality is recognized
   EVIDENCE: "creating pseudo-problems that dissolve once we recognize non-recursive rationality"

193. VIEW: The space of logics is not recursively enumerable
   EVIDENCE: "The space of logics is not recursively enumerable (Part I)"

194. VIEW: Formalism cannot formalize its boundaries
   EVIDENCE: "This shows formalism cannot formalize its boundaries (Part II)"

195. VIEW: Natural languages are hierarchies with non-recursive semantic operations
   EVIDENCE: "Natural languages are hierarchies with non-recursive semantic operations (Part III)"

196. VIEW: The equation Rational = Recursive is false
   EVIDENCE: "Part IV breaks the stranglehold of recursion by showing that the equation Rational = Recursive is false"

197. VIEW: The false equation Rational = Recursive has caused catastrophic failures across multiple domains
   EVIDENCE: "and has caused catastrophic failures across multiple domains"

198. VIEW: Syntax is necessarily recursive
   EVIDENCE: "Syntax is necessarily recursive (definitionally so)"

199. VIEW: Semantics is not recursive
   EVIDENCE: "Semantics is not recursive"

200. VIEW: Syntax involves combining expressions according to recursive rules
   EVIDENCE: "Syntax involves: * Combining expressions according to recursive rules: 'John' + 'runs' → 'John runs'"

201. VIEW: Syntax involves embedding
   EVIDENCE: "* Embedding: 'Mary thinks [John runs]'"

202. VIEW: Syntax involves infinite generativity from finite means
   EVIDENCE: "* Infinite generativity from finite means"

203. VIEW: Chomsky's Universal Grammar captures recursive syntax
   EVIDENCE: "This is what Chomsky's Universal Grammar (UG) captures:"

204. VIEW: Universal Grammar includes the Merge operation
   EVIDENCE: "* Merge operation"

205. VIEW: Universal Grammar includes phrase structure rules
   EVIDENCE: "* Phrase structure rules"

206. VIEW: Universal Grammar includes recursive composition
   EVIDENCE: "* Recursive composition"

207. VIEW: Syntax is compositional at the syntactic level
   EVIDENCE: "Syntax is compositional at the syntactic level:"

208. VIEW: Recursive generation is part of Universal Grammar
   EVIDENCE: "* Recursive generation"

209. VIEW: Universal Grammar exists
   EVIDENCE: "UG exists. Chomsky was right about this."

210. VIEW: Meaning is not always compositional
   EVIDENCE: "But meaning is not always compositional."

211. VIEW: Recursive syntax can build expressions whose semantics is non-recursive
   EVIDENCE: "You can use recursive syntax to build expressions whose semantics is non-recursive."

212. VIEW: The phrase 'the totality of expressions of English' is syntactically built from E₀ vocabulary and rules
   EVIDENCE: "Syntactically: * Built from E₀ vocabulary: 'the', 'totality', 'of', 'expressions', 'of', 'English' * Combined by E₀ syntactic rules (definite description) * Recursively generated"

213. VIEW: The phrase 'the totality of expressions of English' has no referent in E₀
   EVIDENCE: "Semantically: * ✗ Has no referent in E₀ (E₀ doesn't exist as a completed object yet)"

214. VIEW: The phrase 'the totality of expressions of English' only acquires meaning in E₁
   EVIDENCE: "* Only acquires meaning in E₁ (when E₀ becomes an object)"

215. VIEW: The meaning of 'the totality of expressions of English' is not a compositional function of part-meanings
   EVIDENCE: "* ✗ Meaning is not a compositional function of part-meanings"

216. VIEW: The meaning of 'the totality of expressions of English' is non-recursive
   EVIDENCE: "* ✗ Non-recursive"

217. VIEW: The standard semantic compositionality principle is ⟦α β⟧ = f(⟦α⟧, ⟦β⟧)
   EVIDENCE: "Standard semantic compositionality principle: ⟦α β⟧ = f(⟦α⟧, ⟦β⟧)"

218. VIEW: The phrase 'the totality of expressions of English' violates the standard semantic compositionality principle
   EVIDENCE: "But 'the totality of expressions of English' violates this:"

219. VIEW: The failure of 'the totality of expressions of English' to have a referent in E₀ is not a bug but a feature
   EVIDENCE: "This is not a bug. It's a feature of how natural language handles self-reference and metalinguistic expressions."

220. VIEW: The phrase 'the present King of France' is syntactically well-formed but has no referent
   EVIDENCE: "'The present King of France' (Russell) * Syntactically well-formed * No referent (France has no king)"

221. VIEW: The phrase 'the present King of France' is not a compositional failure but a reference failure
   EVIDENCE: "* Not a compositional failure-a reference failure"

222. VIEW: The phrase 'the largest prime number' is syntactically well-formed but has no referent
   EVIDENCE: "'The largest prime number' * Syntactically well-formed * No referent (no largest prime exists)"

223. VIEW: The phrase 'this sentence is false' is syntactically well-formed
   EVIDENCE: "'This sentence is false' (Liar paradox) * Syntactically well-formed"

224. VIEW: The expression 'the totality of expressions of English' is more fundamental than mere reference failure or logical impossibility.
   EVIDENCE: "But 'the totality of expressions of English' is more fundamental: * Not a mere reference failure (like 'King of France') * Not a logical impossibility (like 'largest prime')"

225. VIEW: The expression 'the totality of expressions of English' involves a level-mismatch where it presupposes its own semantic grounding.
   EVIDENCE: "* A level-mismatch: The expression presuposes its own semantic grounding"

226. VIEW: For any natural language L with syntax S, expressions can be constructed whose syntax is recursive but semantics is non-recursive.
   EVIDENCE: "For any natural language L with syntax S: You can use S to construct expressions whose: * Syntax is recursive (built by S's rules) * Semantics is non-recursive (meaning/reference not compositionally determined)"

227. VIEW: The non-recursive semantics in natural language is essential, not a bug or edge case.
   EVIDENCE: "This is essential to natural language, not a bug or edge case."

228. VIEW: Formal semantics struggles because it tries to give recursive semantic rules that do not account for non-recursive elements.
   EVIDENCE: "Formal semantics (Montague, Davidson, etc.) tries to give recursive semantic rules: [...] But it fails for: * Ostensive reference ('that child there') * Naming acts ('Let 'Smith' refer to that child') * Concept formation (creating new primitives like 'quark') * Metalinguistic statements ('English has 26 letters') * Self-referential expressions"

229. VIEW: Linguistic competence consists of Universal Grammar (UG) and a non-recursive component (X).
   EVIDENCE: "Linguistic Competence = UG (recursive) + X (non-recursive)"

230. VIEW: Universal Grammar (UG) provides the recursive part of linguistic competence, including syntax, recursion, compositionality, and infinite generativity.
   EVIDENCE: "UG gives you: * Syntax: Combine 'John' + 'runs' → 'John runs' * Recursion: Embed clauses: 'Mary thinks [John runs]' * Compositionality: Meaning of syntactic wholes from parts * Infinite generativity: From finite vocabulary, generate infinite sentences"

231. VIEW: Chomsky was correct about the existence, innateness, universality, and computational nature of Universal Grammar (UG).
   EVIDENCE: "Chomsky was absolutely right about this. UG exists, it's innate, it's universal, it's computational."

232. VIEW: Universal Grammar (UG) does not provide ostensive/demonstrative reference, naming capacity, concept formation, metalinguistic awareness, or semantic grounding.
   EVIDENCE: "But UG doesn't give you: * Ostensive/demonstrative reference: 'that child there' * Naming capacity: 'Let 'Smith' refer to that child' * Concept formation: Creating new semantic primitives ('quark', 'Brexit', 'meme') * Metalinguistic awareness: Talking about the language itself (E₀ → E₁ hierarchy) * Semantic grounding: Connecting language to world via perception, convention, social practice"

233. VIEW: The non-recursive component (X) includes demonstrative/ostensive reference, naming capacity, concept formation, metalinguistic awareness, and semantic judgment.
   EVIDENCE: "The non-recursive component (X) includes: Demonstrative/Ostensive Reference * 'That child there' → grounds reference perceptually * Requires attentional/perceptual mechanisms * Not recursive (not compositional) * Not derivable from syntactic rulesNaming Capacity * Creating new primitive referring terms * 'Let 'Smith' refer to that child' * Socially coordinated (conventional) * Not algorithmic, not rule-basedConcept Formation * Creating new semantic primitives * Not recursive combination of old concepts * Genuine conceptual innovation (Newton's 'force,' Darwin's 'natural selection')Metalinguistic Awareness * Talking about language itself * Generating hierarchy (E₀ → E₁ → E₂...) * Recognizing when expressions are semantically grounded vs. emptySemantic Judgment * Recognizing when expressions are meaningful vs. semantically empty * Determining what new expressions should mean * Meta-semantic capacity, not reducible to compositional rules"

234. VIEW: The meta-semantic capacity (X) is empirically obvious and exercised when people name newborns, coin new terms, create neologisms, or point to objects.
   EVIDENCE: "The meta-semantic capacity is empirically obvious: Every time someone: * Names their newborn child * Coins a new term for a discovered phenomenon * Creates a neologism for a new concept * Points and says 'that thing there'"

235. VIEW: The meta-semantic capacity (X) is universal, systematic, and essential to linguistic competence, not mere performance.
   EVIDENCE: "This capacity is: * Universal (all speakers have it) * Systematic (not random or error-prone) * Essential (without it, language couldn't adapt or refer to new entities) Therefore: X is part of linguistic competence, not mere performance."

236. VIEW: Chomsky's distinction between competence and performance is incorrect because the meta-semantic capacity (X) should be considered part of competence.
   EVIDENCE: "Chomsky distinguished: * Competence = Internalized system (UG) * Performance = Actual use (includes errors, context, pragmatics) He relegated naming, ostension, pragmatics to performance. But this is wrong. The meta-semantic capacity (X) is: * Systematic (not error-prone like performance) * Universal (all speakers have it) * Essential (constitutive of linguistic ability) Therefore: X belongs to competence, alongside UG."

237. VIEW: The naming/ostension capacity is irreducibly non-recursive because it depends on demonstrative reference, social coordination, contingent facts, and creates new semantic primitives.
   EVIDENCE: "The naming/ostension capacity is irreducibly non-recursive because: Depends on demonstrative reference: * 'That child there' requires perceptual grounding * Perception is not a linguistic/recursive operationRequires social coordination: * Getting others to accept 'Smith' as name for child * Social practices aren't algorithmicInvolves contingent facts: * Who gets born, what gets discovered * Not specifiable by fixed rules in advanceCreates new semantic primitives: * Not recursive combination of existing meanings * Genuine semantic expansion"

238. VIEW: The meta-semantic capacity generates new recursive expression-classes, but the generating process itself is not recursive.
   EVIDENCE: "By the main theorem: The class of recursive expression-classes is not r.e. Applied here: The meta-semantic capacity generates new recursive expression-classes (adding new primitives to vocabulary), but this generating process itself is not recursive."

239. VIEW: Natural language consists of a recursive core (UG) and a non-recursive supplement (X), both essential, universal, and innate but differing in kind.
   EVIDENCE: "The Two-Part Architecture Natural language = Recursive core (UG) + Non-recursive supplement (X) Both are: * Essential to linguistic competence * Universal across speakers * Innate (in some sense) But they differ in kind: * UG is computational/algorithmicX is meta-computational/non-algorithmic"

240. VIEW: The two-part architecture of natural language resolves longstanding puzzles about formal semantics, language's systematic and creative nature, its adaptability, and Chomsky's theory.
   EVIDENCE: "Why This Matters This resolves longstanding puzzles: Why formal semantics struggles: * It tries to recursively specify something (full semantics) that includes non-recursive elements (X) * It can model fragments (where X isn't operative) but not the wholeWhy language feels both systematic and creative: * Systematic: UG provides recursive structure * Creative: X allows genuine semantic innovationWhy language can adapt to new situations: * UG alone would be fossilized (fixed vocabulary, fixed meanings)X allows language to grow (new names, new concepts, new referents) Why Chomsky was both right and incomplete: * Right: There's a recursive computational core (UG) * Incomplete: That's not the whole story (missing X)"

241. VIEW: The traditional assumption in computational linguistics that language can be modeled by separately modeling syntax and semantics is false because semantics includes non-recursive elements.
   EVIDENCE: "The traditional assumption: 'If we can computationally model syntax and semantics separately, we can model language.' The result of our analysis: This assumption is false because: * Syntax is recursive (modelable by UG-based systems) ✓ * Semantics is not fully recursive (includes X) ✗ * Therefore, no purely computational model captures full linguistic competence"

242. VIEW: Computational linguistics (CL) can successfully model Universal Grammar (UG) for parsing and generation.
   EVIDENCE: "CL can successfully model UG (parsing, generation)"

243. VIEW: Syntax is recursive, which allows for successful modeling by CL.
   EVIDENCE: "This works because syntax is recursive"

244. VIEW: There is no problem in modeling syntax with CL.
   EVIDENCE: "No problem here"

245. VIEW: CL attempts to provide recursive semantic rules for compositional semantics.
   EVIDENCE: "CL tries to give recursive semantic rules (compositional semantics)"

246. VIEW: Semantics requires ostensive grounding, naming capacity, metalinguistic awareness, and concept formation.
   EVIDENCE: "But semantics requires: * Ostensive grounding ("that child there") * Naming capacity (adding new primitives) * Metalinguistic awareness (E₀ → E₁ → E₂...) * Concept formation (creating new semantic atoms)"

247. VIEW: None of the required elements for semantics are recursive.
   EVIDENCE: "None of these are recursive"

248. VIEW: A complete computational semantics is impossible.
   EVIDENCE: "Therefore, no complete computational semantics possible"

249. VIEW: The impossibility of complete computational semantics is a principled impossibility, not a practical limitation.
   EVIDENCE: "This isn't a practical limitation (need more data, better algorithms). It's a principled impossibility-by the main theorem, recursivity cannot capture its own extent, and semantic grounding transcends recursive specification."

250. VIEW: Whether NLP cares about recursive vs. non-recursive semantics depends on the context.
   EVIDENCE: "The pragmatic question: Does NLP care about recursive vs. non-recursive semantics? Answer: It depends."

251. VIEW: Modern NLP can generate syntactically well-formed text.
   EVIDENCE: "Modern NLP (especially LLMs like GPT, Claude) can: * Generate syntactically well-formed text"

252. VIEW: Modern NLP can approximate semantic patterns from data.
   EVIDENCE: "Approximate semantic patterns from data"

253. VIEW: Modern NLP can translate, summarize, and answer questions.
   EVIDENCE: "Translate, summarize, answer questions"

254. VIEW: Modern NLP does not need true semantic grounding to function.
   EVIDENCE: "They don't need true semantic grounding"

255. VIEW: Modern NLP works by pattern-matching on massive corpora.
   EVIDENCE: "They pattern-match on massive corpora"

256. VIEW: Modern NLP approximates understanding via statistical correlation.
   EVIDENCE: "They approximate understanding via statistical correlation"

257. VIEW: Modern NLP cannot perform true ostensive reference.
   EVIDENCE: "True ostensive reference: * Can't point to "that child over there" and learn "Smith" refers to it * Can't ground demonstratives in perception * Can't connect language to world via demonstrative acts"

258. VIEW: The limitation in ostensive reference is due to a lack of perceptual grounding and embodiment, not recursion.
   EVIDENCE: "Note: This limitation is about embodiment, not recursion"

259. VIEW: Modern NLP cannot genuinely decide to name new things.
   EVIDENCE: "Genuine naming capacity: * Can't genuinely decide "Let's call this new thing X" * Can't create new primitive semantic rules * Can't truly expand semantic base with genuinely new referents"

260. VIEW: Models can coin new strings but cannot ground them in new referents or truly add to their semantic foundation.
   EVIDENCE: "Models can coin new strings (e.g., "let's call it a 'flurb'"), but they can't: * Ground those strings in new referents * Truly add to their semantic foundation"

261. VIEW: The limitation in naming capacity might be related to embodiment and intentionality, not recursion.
   EVIDENCE: "Note: This limitation might also be about embodiment/intentionality, not recursion"

262. VIEW: Modern NLP cannot genuinely recognize its own language as an object.
   EVIDENCE: "Metalinguistic awareness: * Can't genuinely recognize own language as an object"

263. VIEW: Modern NLP cannot generate the hierarchy E₀ → E₁ → E₂... with genuine understanding.
   EVIDENCE: "Can't generate the hierarchy E₀ → E₁ → E₂... with genuine understanding"

264. VIEW: Modern NLP cannot understand 'the totality of my expressions' as semantically grounded.
   EVIDENCE: "Can't understand "the totality of my expressions" as semantically grounded"

265. VIEW: Models can simulate metalinguistic talk, but it is based on pattern-matching on training data, not genuine metalinguistic awareness.
   EVIDENCE: "Models can simulate metalinguistic talk (e.g., "As an AI, I..."), but this is: * Pattern-matching on training data * Not genuine metalinguistic awareness"

266. VIEW: Whether the limitation in metalinguistic awareness is fundamental is unclear.
   EVIDENCE: "Note: Whether this is a fundamental limitation is unclear"

267. VIEW: Recursive over-extension of local truths leads to false generalizations.
   EVIDENCE: "Over-extension of a local truth"

268. VIEW: Verificationism equates meaning with a verification procedure.
   EVIDENCE: "Verificationism (Logical Positivism): * Meaning = verification procedure"

269. VIEW: Verification in verificationism involves following recursive rules.
   EVIDENCE: "Verification = following recursive rules"

270. VIEW: Meaningful statements are those that can be recursively specified according to verificationism.
   EVIDENCE: "Therefore: meaningful = recursively specifiable"

271. VIEW: Non-recursive statements are considered meaningless in verificationism.
   EVIDENCE: "Non-recursive = meaningless"

272. VIEW: The false equation of rationality with recursivity has infected multiple domains.
   EVIDENCE: "The false equation infected multiple domains:"

273. VIEW: Popper's irrationalism in the philosophy of science is a consequence of the false equation.
   EVIDENCE: "Philosophy of Science → Popper's irrationalism"

274. VIEW: Foundationalist anxiety in epistemology is a consequence of the false equation.
   EVIDENCE: "Epistemology → Foundationalist anxiety"

275. VIEW: Computationalism in the philosophy of mind is a consequence of the false equation.
   EVIDENCE: "Philosophy of Mind → Computationalism"

276. VIEW: Compositional semantics dogma in the philosophy of language is a consequence of the false equation.
   EVIDENCE: "Philosophy of Language → Compositional semantics dogma"

277. VIEW: Moral reductionism in ethics is a consequence of the false equation.
   EVIDENCE: "Ethics → Moral reductionism"

278. VIEW: Formalism vs. intuitionism wars in mathematics are a consequence of the false equation.
   EVIDENCE: "Mathematics → Formalism vs. intuitionism wars"

279. VIEW: The failure of Good Old-Fashioned AI (GOFAI) is a consequence of the false equation.
   EVIDENCE: "Artificial Intelligence → GOFAI's failure"

280. VIEW: Syntax is recursive, but semantics is not.
   EVIDENCE: "Syntax is recursive, semantics is not (UG + X architecture)"

281. VIEW: Computational linguistics can model syntax but not full semantics.
   EVIDENCE: "Computational linguistics can model syntax but not full semantics (principled impossibility)"

282. VIEW: Neural networks are vindicated because they are non-recursive.
   EVIDENCE: "Neural networks are vindicated because they're non-recursive (feature, not bug)"

283. VIEW: The false equation of rationality with recursivity has infected multiple domains.
   EVIDENCE: "The false equation Rational = Recursive has infected multiple domains"

284. VIEW: The false equation of rationality with recursivity has led to catastrophic failures in scientific discovery.
   EVIDENCE: "The remaining sections of Part IV will show how this false equation created catastrophic failures in: * Scientific discovery (Popper's irrationalism)"

285. VIEW: The false equation of rationality with recursivity has led to catastrophic failures in neural networks and AI.
   EVIDENCE: "Neural networks and AI (vindication of non-recursive approaches)"

286. VIEW: The false equation of rationality with recursivity has led to catastrophic failures in multiple philosophical domains.
   EVIDENCE: "Multiple philosophical domains (liberation from recursive tyranny)"

287. VIEW: GOFAI couldn't capture certain phenomena because it was limited to recursivity.
   EVIDENCE: "(not rule-based)GOFAI couldn't capture these because it was limited to recursivity."

288. VIEW: Neural networks are not recursive systems.
   EVIDENCE: "Neural networks are not recursive systems."

289. VIEW: Neural networks are based on matrix operations, not recursive functions.
   EVIDENCE: "They're based on: * Matrix operations (not recursive functions)"

290. VIEW: Neural networks use gradient descent, not logical inference.
   EVIDENCE: "* Gradient descent (not logical inference)"

291. VIEW: Neural networks employ statistical learning, not rule-following.
   EVIDENCE: "* Statistical learning (not rule-following)"

292. VIEW: Neural networks utilize parallel computation, not sequential algorithms.
   EVIDENCE: "* Parallel computation (not sequential algorithms)"

293. VIEW: Neural networks are not bound by the limitations of recursive systems.
   EVIDENCE: "Therefore, they're not bound by the limitations of recursive systems."

294. VIEW: Neural networks can learn patterns from data without explicit rules.
   EVIDENCE: "They can: * Learn patterns from data (without explicit rules)"

295. VIEW: Neural networks can approximate both recursive and non-recursive rational capacities.
   EVIDENCE: "* Approximate both recursive and non-recursive rational capacities"

296. VIEW: Neural networks can learn grammatical patterns from data.
   EVIDENCE: "Recursive capacities (syntax): * Learn grammatical patterns from data"

297. VIEW: Neural networks can generate syntactically well-formed text.
   EVIDENCE: "* Generate syntactically well-formed text"

298. VIEW: Neural networks can parse complex sentences.
   EVIDENCE: "* Parse complex sentences"

299. VIEW: Neural networks can recognize faces, objects, and scenes.
   EVIDENCE: "Non-recursive capacities (pattern recognition): * Recognize faces, objects, scenes"

300. VIEW: Neural networks can identify semantic patterns in text.
   EVIDENCE: "* Identify semantic patterns in text"

301. VIEW: Neural networks can make abductive inferences.
   EVIDENCE: "* Make abductive inferences (suggest plausible explanations)"

302. VIEW: Neural networks can learn word embeddings to capture semantic similarity.
   EVIDENCE: "Semantic approximation: * Learn word embeddings (semantic similarity)"

303. VIEW: Neural networks can capture conceptual relationships.
   EVIDENCE: "* Capture conceptual relationships"

304. VIEW: Neural networks can approximate meaning through statistical correlation.
   EVIDENCE: "* Approximate meaning through statistical correlation"

305. VIEW: Neural networks can generate text about language itself.
   EVIDENCE: "Quasi-metalinguistic awareness: * Generate text about language itself"

306. VIEW: Neural networks can reflect on their own outputs to some degree.
   EVIDENCE: "* Reflect on own outputs (to some degree)"

307. VIEW: Neural networks can simulate understanding of linguistic structure.
   EVIDENCE: "* Simulate understanding of linguistic structure"

308. VIEW: Neural networks can approximate both recursive and non-recursive rational capacities, unlike purely recursive systems.
   EVIDENCE: "Key point: They can approximate both recursive and non-recursive rational capacities-unlike purely recursive systems (GOFAI), which can only handle the recursive parts."

309. VIEW: Neural networks have limitations, but not from recursion theory.
   EVIDENCE: "Do neural networks have limitations? Yes, but not from recursion theory."

310. VIEW: Potential limitations of neural networks include lack of causal connection to the world.
   EVIDENCE: "Potential limitations include: * Embodiment: Lack of causal connection to world (for language models)"

311. VIEW: Whether statistical patterns in neural networks constitute genuine understanding is a philosophical question.
   EVIDENCE: "* Intentionality: Whether statistical patterns constitute genuine understanding (philosophical question)"

312. VIEW: Non-recursive rationality includes pattern recognition.
   EVIDENCE: "Pattern Recognition: * Perceptual, conceptual, scientific * Seeing structures, relationships, similarities * Foundation of rational thought"

313. VIEW: Non-recursive rationality includes abductive inference.
   EVIDENCE: "Abductive Inference: * Inference to best explanation * Creative hypothesis generation * Scientific discovery mechanism"

314. VIEW: Non-recursive rationality includes semantic grounding.
   EVIDENCE: "Semantic Grounding: * Ostensive reference ("that child there") * Demonstrative grounding * Connecting language to world"

315. VIEW: Non-recursive rationality includes concept formation.
   EVIDENCE: "Concept Formation: * Creating new semantic primitives * Not recursive combination * Genuine innovation"

316. VIEW: Non-recursive rationality includes metalinguistic awareness.
   EVIDENCE: "Metalinguistic Awareness: * Talking about language itself * E₀ → E₁ → E₂ hierarchy * Non-recursive semantic activation"

317. VIEW: Non-recursive rationality includes mathematical insight.
   EVIDENCE: "Mathematical Insight: * Seeing why proofs work * Recognizing unprovable truths * Direct apprehension of structure"

318. VIEW: Non-recursive rationality includes moral perception.
   EVIDENCE: "Moral Perception: * Seeing moral salience directly * Recognizing particular obligations * Not applying rules, perceiving features"

319. VIEW: Non-recursive rationality includes aesthetic judgment.
   EVIDENCE: "Aesthetic Judgment: * Recognizing beauty, harmony, excellence * Not rule-based (no algorithm for good art) * But not arbitrary-can be educated, refined"

320. VIEW: Non-recursive rationality includes practical wisdom (phronesis).
   EVIDENCE: "Practical Wisdom (Phronesis): * Knowing what to do in particular situations * Not following universal rules * Case-based, experience-based, judgment"

321. VIEW: All aspects of non-recursive rationality are essential to human cognition.
   EVIDENCE: "All of these are: * Non-recursive (not algorithmic, not rule-following) * Rational (warranted, appropriate, truth-tracking) * Essential to human cognition"

322. VIEW: Rationality is broader than recursivity.
   EVIDENCE: "The Unifying Theme Rationality is broader than recursivity."

323. VIEW: There are two modes of rationality: recursive and non-recursive.
   EVIDENCE: "Two modes of rationality: Recursive Rationality: * Following explicit rules * Deductive inference * Compositional operations * Algorithmic procedures * Important but LIMITEDNon-Recursive Rationality: * Pattern recognition * Abductive inference * Semantic grounding * Concept formation * Insight, perception, judgment * Equally important, BROADER domain"

324. VIEW: Recursive rationality is important but limited.
   EVIDENCE: "Recursive Rationality: * Following explicit rules * Deductive inference * Compositional operations * Algorithmic procedures * Important but LIMITED"

325. VIEW: Non-recursive rationality is equally important and covers a broader domain.
   EVIDENCE: "Non-Recursive Rationality: * Pattern recognition * Abductive inference * Semantic grounding * Concept formation * Insight, perception, judgment * Equally important, BROADER domain"

326. VIEW: Both recursive and non-recursive rationality are rational and neither reduces to the other.
   EVIDENCE: "Both are rational. Neither reduces to the other."

327. VIEW: Syntax is recursive, but semantics is not.
   EVIDENCE: "Syntax is recursive (definitionally-Chomsky was right about this) * Semantics is not recursive (includes ostension, naming, concept formation, metalinguistic awareness)"

328. VIEW: Linguistic competence includes both recursive and non-recursive elements.
   EVIDENCE: "Linguistic competence = UG (recursive) + X (non-recursive)"

329. VIEW: Non-recursive elements in linguistic competence are essential, not mere performance.
   EVIDENCE: "X is essential (naming, ostension, meta-semantic capacity-not mere performance)"

330. VIEW: Complete computational semantics is impossible due to principled limitations.
   EVIDENCE: "Complete computational semantics is impossible (principled, not just practical limitation)"

331. VIEW: AI and neural networks are not recursive systems.
   EVIDENCE: "AI/neural networks are not recursive systems (therefore not constrained by recursion theory)"

332. VIEW: Perceptual, conceptual, and scientific similarities exist.
   EVIDENCE: "similarities * Perceptual, conceptual, scientific"

333. VIEW: Deductive reasoning follows rigid formal patterns.
   EVIDENCE: "Deductive reasoning (special case): * Rigid formal patterns"

334. VIEW: Deductive reasoning is maximally explicit and exceptionless.
   EVIDENCE: "* Maximally explicit, exceptionless"

335. VIEW: Abductive inference involves recognizing explanatory patterns.
   EVIDENCE: "Abductive inference: * Recognizing explanatory patterns"

336. VIEW: Abductive inference is inference to the best explanation.
   EVIDENCE: "* Inference to best explanation"

337. VIEW: Perceptual judgment involves seeing what's there.
   EVIDENCE: "Perceptual judgment: * Seeing what's there"

338. VIEW: Perceptual judgment is direct apprehension.
   EVIDENCE: "* Direct apprehension"

339. VIEW: Self-correction involves recognizing error patterns.
   EVIDENCE: "Self-correction: * Recognizing error patterns"

340. VIEW: Self-correction requires adapting when patterns mislead.
   EVIDENCE: "* Adapting when patterns mislead"

341. VIEW: The equation Rational = Recursive creates pseudo-problems.
   EVIDENCE: "The false equation Rational = Recursive created pseudo-problems:"

342. VIEW: Hume's problem arises because induction seems irrational as it's not deductive.
   EVIDENCE: "* Hume's problem: Induction seems irrational (because it's not deductive)"

343. VIEW: Popper's irrationalism claims scientific discovery can't be rational due to the lack of an algorithm.
   EVIDENCE: "* Popper's irrationalism: Scientific discovery can't be rational (no algorithm for it)"

344. VIEW: Wittgenstein's paradox suggests rule-following leads to infinite regress.
   EVIDENCE: "* Wittgenstein's paradox: Rule-following leads to infinite regress"

345. VIEW: GOFAI's failure is due to the belief that intelligence can't be achieved without symbolic rules.
   EVIDENCE: "* GOFAI's failure: Intelligence can't be achieved without symbolic rules"

346. VIEW: Foundationalist anxiety stems from the belief that knowledge requires impossible recursive justification.
   EVIDENCE: "* Foundationalist anxiety: Knowledge requires impossible recursive justification"

347. VIEW: All these pseudo-problems dissolve once we recognize that rationality is broader than recursivity.
   EVIDENCE: "All dissolve once we recognize: Rationality is broader than recursivity."

348. VIEW: Rationality is defined as the skilled capacity to recognize truth-relevant patterns in situations and respond appropriately to them.
   EVIDENCE: "The Concise Definition RATIONALITY = The skilled capacity to recognize truth-relevant patterns in situations and respond appropriately to them."

349. VIEW: Rationality is a skill developed through practice and is improvable, not an innate algorithm.
   EVIDENCE: "Skilled: Developed through practice, improvable, not innate algorithm"

350. VIEW: Rationality is a capacity, not a set of rules to follow.
   EVIDENCE: "Capacity: An ability, not a set of rules to follow"

351. VIEW: Recognizing truth-relevant patterns involves seeing, perceiving, and detecting, not calculating or deriving.
   EVIDENCE: "Recognize: Seeing, perceiving, detecting-not calculating or deriving"

352. VIEW: Truth-relevant patterns are structures, similarities, relationships, and anomalies that bear on what's true, what explains, and what predicts.
   EVIDENCE: "Truth-relevant patterns: Structures, similarities, relationships, anomalies that bear on what's true, what explains, what predicts"

353. VIEW: Rationality is context-dependent, domain-specific, and applies to particular cases.
   EVIDENCE: "In situations: Context-dependent, domain-specific, particular cases"

354. VIEW: Responding appropriately to truth-relevant patterns involves acting, inferring, judging, and revising in ways that track truth.
   EVIDENCE: "Respond appropriately: Act, infer, judge, revise in ways that track truth"

355. VIEW: Truth-relevant patterns include evidential, explanatory, coherence, predictive, structural, anomaly, and causal patterns.
   EVIDENCE: "Truth-relevant patterns include: Evidential patterns: What supports what Explanatory patterns: What accounts for what Coherence patterns: What fits together Predictive patterns: What follows from what Structural patterns: Underlying similarities across surface differences Anomaly patterns: What doesn't fit, what's surprising Causal patterns: What produces what effects"

356. VIEW: These patterns are objective features of reality and reasoning, not arbitrary constructs.
   EVIDENCE: "These patterns are objective features of reality and reasoning, not arbitrary constructs."

357. VIEW: Pattern recognition is a fundamental method of teaching and learning.
   EVIDENCE: "This is how we ACTUALLY teach: * Medical diagnosis (cases, not rules) * Scientific reasoning (exemplars, not algorithms) * Mathematical thinking (worked examples, not just proofs) * Expert judgment (apprenticeship, not rulebooks)"

358. VIEW: Discoveries are enabled and explained by pattern recognition.
   EVIDENCE: "The Upshot Pattern recognition doesn't just describe discovery-it enables and explains it."

359. VIEW: Pattern recognition can be trained through appropriate practice.
   EVIDENCE: "Discoveries happen when someone recognizes a pattern others missed. This can be: * Trained (through appropriate practice)"

360. VIEW: Pattern recognition can be improved through feedback and reflection.
   EVIDENCE: "Discoveries happen when someone recognizes a pattern others missed. This can be: * Improved (through feedback and reflection)"

361. VIEW: Pattern recognition can be explained post-hoc by identifying the recognized pattern.
   EVIDENCE: "Discoveries happen when someone recognizes a pattern others missed. This can be: * Explained post-hoc (by identifying what pattern was recognized)"

362. VIEW: Pattern recognition cannot be reduced to explicit rules or algorithms.
   EVIDENCE: "But not: * Algorithmized (reduced to explicit rules)"

363. VIEW: Pattern recognition cannot be applied mechanically or guaranteed.
   EVIDENCE: "But not: * Guaranteed (applied mechanically)"

364. VIEW: Pattern recognition cannot be replaced by deduction, which comes after for verification.
   EVIDENCE: "But not: * Replaced by deduction (which comes after, for verification)"

365. VIEW: Hume's Problem of Induction is based on the observation that the sun has risen every day in the past and the inference that it will rise tomorrow.
   EVIDENCE: "The Problem We observe: The sun has risen every day in the past. We infer: The sun will rise tomorrow."

366. VIEW: Hume's challenge to the Problem of Induction is that the principle 'The future will resemble the past' cannot be justified logically or empirically.
   EVIDENCE: "Hume's challenge: How do you justify THAT principle? * Not by logic (future being different isn't contradictory) * Not by experience (that's circular-using induction to justify induction)"

367. VIEW: Hume concluded that induction has no rational justification and is merely a habit or custom.
   EVIDENCE: "Hume's conclusion: Induction has no rational justification. It's mere habit, custom, psychological expectation -not reason."

368. VIEW: Attempts to solve Hume's Problem of Induction over 250 years have failed because they presupposed that rationality equals deduction.
   EVIDENCE: "250 years of failed attempts to 'solve' Hume's problem: * Probabilistic justification (Bayes) * Pragmatic justification (Reichenbach) * Transcendental justification (Kant) * Natural kind justification (Mill)All failed because the problem was misconceived. Because it presupposed: Rationality = Deduction"

369. VIEW: The solution to Hume's Problem of Induction is to view induction as pattern recognition, which dissolves the problem.
   EVIDENCE: "The Solution: Pattern Recognition View The problem dissolves. Hume's 'riddle' was a pseudo-problem. Why: Induction IS pattern recognition."

370. VIEW: Pattern recognition is basic and does not need further justification.
   EVIDENCE: "KEY MOVE: Pattern Recognition Is Basic Pattern recognition is basic-it's not justified by something else, it's the foundation."

371. VIEW: The old view of rationality as deduction leads to the conclusion that induction is irrational because it cannot be justified by rules that guarantee truth-preservation.
   EVIDENCE: "OLD VIEW (Rationality = Deduction): * Deduction is basic (self-justifying) * Induction needs justification * Since no justification exists → induction is irrational"

372. VIEW: The new view of rationality as pattern recognition means that induction is rational because it is pattern recognition, which is self-justifying.
   EVIDENCE: "NEW VIEW (Rationality = Pattern Recognition): * Pattern recognition is basic (self-justifying) * Induction IS pattern recognition * Therefore induction IS rational (no further justification needed)"

373. VIEW: Pattern recognition is constitutive of rationality and does not need external justification.
   EVIDENCE: "It's constitutive of rationality: * Asking 'Why is pattern recognition rational?' is like asking 'Why is seeing visual?' * Pattern recognition DEFINES what rationality is"

374. VIEW: Pattern recognition is self-correcting through anomaly detection and further pattern recognition.
   EVIDENCE: "It's self-correcting: * When patterns mislead, we recognize that too (anomaly detection) * The system corrects itself through further pattern recognition"

375. VIEW: Pattern recognition is truth-tracking because it evolved to track real patterns in the world.
   EVIDENCE: "It's truth-tracking: * Pattern recognition evolved/developed because it tracks real patterns * It works because the world has structure"

376. VIEW: Pattern recognition is more fundamental than deduction because even applying deductive rules requires recognizing patterns.
   EVIDENCE: "It's more fundamental than deduction: * Even applying deductive rules requires recognizing patterns * Recognizing that THIS is an instance of modus ponens = pattern recognition"

377. VIEW: Recognizing valid inference is a form of pattern recognition of inferential structure.
   EVIDENCE: "Recognizing valid inference = seeing that conclusion follows from premises"
   EVIDENCE: "This is pattern recognition of inferential structure"

378. VIEW: People make mistakes in deductive logic because they fail to recognize valid patterns.
   EVIDENCE: "People make mistakes in deductive logic (fail to recognize valid patterns)"

379. VIEW: Skill in recognizing valid patterns improves with practice.
   EVIDENCE: "Skill improves with practice (pattern recognition is trainable)"

380. VIEW: Context affects the difficulty of recognizing the same logical form.
   EVIDENCE: "Context matters (same logical form harder to recognize in some contents)"

381. VIEW: Checking whether an inference is valid requires seeing the pattern.
   EVIDENCE: "Checking whether inference is valid requires seeing the pattern"

382. VIEW: Computer verification of logical validity works because programmers recognized what to check.
   EVIDENCE: "Computer verification only works because programmers recognized what to check"

383. VIEW: Understanding a mathematical proof involves recognizing why each step follows, which is pattern recognition.
   EVIDENCE: "understanding proof = recognizing WHY each step follows"
   EVIDENCE: "This is seeing patterns (structural relationships, dependencies, necessities)"

384. VIEW: Formalists view mathematical proof as mechanical symbol manipulation, but this is not the reality.
   EVIDENCE: "Formalists say: proof = mechanical symbol manipulation"
   EVIDENCE: "Reality: understanding proof = recognizing WHY each step follows"

385. VIEW: Truth-preservation in logic is recognized, not mechanically executed.
   EVIDENCE: "Truth-preservation is recognized, not mechanically executed"

386. VIEW: Recognizing contradiction involves seeing that statements cannot both be true, which is pattern recognition of incompatibility.
   EVIDENCE: "Recognizing contradiction = seeing that statements can't both be true"
   EVIDENCE: "Pattern recognition of incompatibility"

387. VIEW: Contradictions can be hidden and people often miss them.
   EVIDENCE: "Contradictions can be hidden (people miss them)"

388. VIEW: Expert logicians are better at spotting contradictions due to trained pattern recognition.
   EVIDENCE: "Expert logicians better at spotting (trained pattern recognition)"

389. VIEW: Recognizing inconsistency sometimes requires insight.
   EVIDENCE: "Sometimes requires insight to see inconsistency"

390. VIEW: Proving system consistency requires seeing that no derivation could yield both P and ¬P.
   EVIDENCE: "Proving system consistency: requires seeing that no derivation could yield P and ¬P"

391. VIEW: Proving system consistency often requires insight into recognizing structural properties.
   EVIDENCE: "Often requires insight (recognizing structural properties)"

392. VIEW: Euclidean geometry is consistent because one can give a model where all axioms are satisfied.
   EVIDENCE: "Example: Euclidean geometry consistent (give model-you recognize axioms all satisfied)"

393. VIEW: Consistency-checking is pattern recognition of compatibility.
   EVIDENCE: "Consistency-checking is pattern recognition of compatibility"

394. VIEW: Drawing consequences from premises is recognizing what follows from what, which is pattern recognition.
   EVIDENCE: "Drawing consequences = recognizing what follows from what"

395. VIEW: Applying Newton's laws to predict positions involves recognizing which law applies and how to set up equations.
   EVIDENCE: "Must recognize which law applies"
   EVIDENCE: "Must see how to set up equations"

396. VIEW: Applying a mathematical theorem involves recognizing when the theorem applies to a specific function.
   EVIDENCE: "Applying: Must recognize THIS function is differentiable, must see theorem applies HERE"

397. VIEW: Drawing consequences is recognizing what-follows-from-what patterns.
   EVIDENCE: "Drawing consequences is recognizing what-follows-from-what patterns"

398. VIEW: Justification of beliefs involves showing why a conclusion is warranted, which is showing the evidential/explanatory pattern.
   EVIDENCE: "Justification = showing why conclusion is warranted"
   EVIDENCE: "This is showing the evidential/explanatory pattern"

399. VIEW: Good justifications make the reason for the conclusion visible, while bad justifications feel mechanical.
   EVIDENCE: "Good justifications make you SEE why conclusion follows"
   EVIDENCE: "Bad justifications feel mechanical, don't provide insight"

400. VIEW: Understanding justification is not the same as mechanically checking steps.
   EVIDENCE: "Understanding justification ≠ checking steps mechanically"

401. VIEW: Justification is making patterns visible, not mechanical derivation.
   EVIDENCE: "Justification is making patterns visible, not mechanical derivation"

402. VIEW: Deduction is not the foundation of knowledge.
   EVIDENCE: "Not foundation of knowledge"

403. VIEW: Deduction is just one tool among many, useful in formal contexts.
   EVIDENCE: "Just one tool among many (useful in formal contexts)"

404. VIEW: Pattern recognition is the actual mechanism of rational thought.
   EVIDENCE: "Actual mechanism of rational thought"

405. VIEW: Pattern recognition operates in deduction, induction, abduction, and perception.
   EVIDENCE: "Operates in deduction, induction, abduction, perception"

406. VIEW: Pattern recognition subsumes what deduction was supposed to do.
   EVIDENCE: "Subsumes what deduction was supposed to do"

407. VIEW: In the old theoretical landscape, deduction was considered primary and foundational.
   EVIDENCE: "OLD: * Deduction (primary, foundational)"

408. VIEW: In the old theoretical landscape, induction was considered secondary and problematic.
   EVIDENCE: "* Induction (secondary, problematic)"

409. VIEW: In the old theoretical landscape, everything else was considered non-rational.
   EVIDENCE: "* Everything else (non-rational)"

410. VIEW: In the new theoretical landscape, pattern recognition is considered primary, foundational, and rational.
   EVIDENCE: "NEW: * Pattern recognition (primary, foundational, rational)"

411. VIEW: In the new theoretical landscape, deduction is considered a special case of rigid formal patterns.
   EVIDENCE: "* Deduction (special case: rigid formal patterns)"

412. VIEW: In the new theoretical landscape, induction is considered a special case of regularity patterns.
   EVIDENCE: "* Induction (special case: regularity patterns)"

413. VIEW: In the new theoretical landscape, abduction is considered a special case of explanatory patterns.
   EVIDENCE: "* Abduction (special case: explanatory patterns)"

414. VIEW: All modes of rational thought are considered modes of pattern recognition in the new theoretical landscape.
   EVIDENCE: "* All are modes of pattern recognition"

415. VIEW: You do not need Euclid for geometric insight because pattern recognition suffices.
   EVIDENCE: "For geometric insight? No. Pattern recognition suffices."

416. VIEW: Euclid is needed for teaching geometry efficiently because formalization helps.
   EVIDENCE: "For teaching efficiently? Yes. Formalization helps."

417. VIEW: Euclid is needed for rigorous proof because explicit axiomatization enables verification.
   EVIDENCE: "For rigorous proof? Yes. Explicit axiomatization enables verification."

418. VIEW: You do not need Euclid for doing geometry at all because people did geometry before and without Euclid.
   EVIDENCE: "For doing geometry at all? No. People did geometry before and without Euclid."

419. VIEW: Musical notation formalizes music, making it transmissible, analyzable, and teachable.
   EVIDENCE: "Musical notation formalizes music * Makes it transmissible, analyzable, teachable"

420. VIEW: Musicians had music before notation, indicating that pattern recognition (hearing, creating melodies) is primary.
   EVIDENCE: "But musicians had music before notation * Pattern recognition (hearing, creating melodies) is primary"

421. VIEW: Musical notation is secondary and useful but not necessary for musicality.
   EVIDENCE: "* Notation is secondary (useful, but not necessary for musicality)"

422. VIEW: Chomsky is right that there is an innate linguistic structure.
   EVIDENCE: "Chomsky RIGHT that there's innate linguistic structure"

423. VIEW: Chomsky is right that syntax is recursive and generative.
   EVIDENCE: "Chomsky RIGHT that syntax is recursive/generative"

424. VIEW: The mechanism of language acquisition is not applying rules but recognizing and producing syntactic patterns.
   EVIDENCE: "But mechanism isn't 'applying rules'-it's recognizing and producing syntactic patterns"

425. VIEW: Universal Grammar (UG) is an innate pattern-recognition capacity specifically for syntactic structures.
   EVIDENCE: "UG = innate pattern-recognition capacity specifically for syntactic structures"

426. VIEW: Children acquire language by recognizing syntactic patterns in input, generalizing those patterns, and being constrained by UG.
   EVIDENCE: "Children acquire language by: * Recognizing syntactic patterns in input (not explicitly taught) * Generalizing those patterns (productive use) * Patterns they can recognize are constrained by UG (innate structure)"

427. VIEW: Chomsky's concept of innate linguistic structure (UG) is necessary for understanding language acquisition.
   EVIDENCE: "If 'Chomsky' = there exists innate linguistic structure (UG): * YES, you need this"

428. VIEW: Pattern recognition alone cannot explain language acquisition without the concept of Universal Grammar (UG).
   EVIDENCE: "Pattern recognition alone (blank slate) can't explain: * Poverty of stimulus * Universal constraints * Critical period * Systematic acquisition patterns"

429. VIEW: Chomsky's idea of language as recursive rule-application is not necessary for understanding language.
   EVIDENCE: "If 'Chomsky' = language is recursive rule-application: * NO, you don't need this"

430. VIEW: The mechanism of language acquisition is pattern recognition structured by Universal Grammar (UG), not rule-following.
   EVIDENCE: "The mechanism is pattern recognition (structured by UG), not rule-following"

431. VIEW: The synthesis of Chomsky's and his critics' insights involves combining innate structure with developed capacity through practice.
   EVIDENCE: "The synthesis: * UG (Chomsky's insight) + X (critics' insight) * Innate structure (UG) + Developed capacity (X through practice)"

432. VIEW: Pattern recognition is the primary mechanism in cognitive processes, while formalization is secondary.
   EVIDENCE: "Pattern recognition is PRIMARY. Formalization (Euclid, Chomsky, Aristotle, Frege) is SECONDARY."

433. VIEW: Formalization codifies patterns that pattern recognition already handles, but does not replace it.
   EVIDENCE: "Formalization doesn't replace pattern recognition-it codifies some patterns that pattern recognition already handles"

434. VIEW: Formalization is useful for teaching, verification, systematization, and extension, but not necessary for having or exercising cognitive capacity.
   EVIDENCE: "Useful for: teaching, verification, systematization, extension * Not necessary for: having the capacity, exercising it, being rational"

435. VIEW: Rule-application in the mind is actually pattern instantiation, not mechanical execution of algorithms or following procedures blindly.
   EVIDENCE: "When the mind applies 'S → NP + VP', it's not: * Mechanically executing an algorithm * Consulting an internal rulebook * Following a procedure blindly"

436. VIEW: Rules describe patterns, and applying rules is equivalent to instantiating patterns.
   EVIDENCE: "Rules DESCRIBE patterns * Applying rules = instantiating patterns * Following rules = producing instances that match the pattern"

437. VIEW: Musical composition in sonata form involves recognizing and instantiating the sonata-pattern, not mechanically checking rules.
   EVIDENCE: "Musical composition in sonata form: * There are RULES (exposition, development, recapitulation) * Composers FOLLOW them (produce sonatas) * But mechanism is: recognizing and instantiating the sonata-pattern"

438. VIEW: Rules and patterns are two ways of describing the same structure, with rules being explicit and formal, and patterns being implicit and recognizable.
   EVIDENCE: "RULES and PATTERNS are two ways of describing the same structure: * Rules: explicit, formal, prescriptive ('Do this') * Patterns: implicit, recognizable, descriptive ('Like this')"

439. VIEW: The mind works with patterns, while linguists describe those patterns as rules.
   EVIDENCE: "The mind works with PATTERNS. Linguists describe those patterns as RULES."

440. VIEW: Chess masters recognize knight-move patterns directly, rather than calculating the moves based on rules.
   EVIDENCE: "Chess masters don't calculate 'two squares, then one perpendicular' * They SEE knight-move patterns * The rule describes the pattern they recognize"

441. VIEW: Wittgenstein's conclusion that rule-following is blind conformity to training without a principled basis is incorrect.
   EVIDENCE: "As stated: This is wrong."

442. VIEW: Rule-following does not require interpretation when the rule describes a pattern that can be directly recognized.
   EVIDENCE: "THE KEY MOVE: Rule-following doesn't require interpretation when the rule describes a pattern you can directly recognize."

443. VIEW: Pattern recognition is basic and not mediated by further rules, thus preventing an infinite regress in rule-following.
   EVIDENCE: "Pattern recognition is BASIC-not mediated by further rules * Therefore: no regress"

444. VIEW: Following the rule 'Add 2' involves directly recognizing the add-2 pattern, not interpreting another rule.
   EVIDENCE: "You directly recognize the add-2 pattern * The pattern is: each number is 2 more than previous * This is directly perceived, not inferred from interpretation-rule"

445. VIEW: The pattern itself determines correctness in rule-following, not social agreement.
   EVIDENCE: "The pattern itself determines correctness (objective, not social)"

446. VIEW: Pattern recognition breaks the regress argument in rule-following because it is direct and does not require further rules for interpretation.
   EVIDENCE: "Pattern recognition breaks this: * Recognition is DIRECT (not mediated by interpretation) * No 'rule for recognizing patterns' needed * Pattern recognition is GROUND FLOOR (can't regress further)"

447. VIEW: Recognizing and instantiating rules correctly matters objectively.
   EVIDENCE: "is REAL-recognizing/instantiating it correctly matters objectively."

448. VIEW: Rules describe patterns.
   EVIDENCE: "Rules describe patterns"

449. VIEW: Following a rule means instantiating a pattern.
   EVIDENCE: "Following rule = instantiating pattern"

450. VIEW: Recognition of patterns is direct and does not require interpretation.
   EVIDENCE: "Recognition is direct (no interpretation needed)"

451. VIEW: Correctness in rule-following is objective and not determined by social agreement.
   EVIDENCE: "Correctness is objective (not just social)"

452. VIEW: Learning to follow rules involves training pattern recognition.
   EVIDENCE: "Learning is training pattern recognition"

453. VIEW: There is no regress in rule-following because recognition is direct.
   EVIDENCE: "No regress * Because recognition is direct (not rule-mediated)"

454. VIEW: The mind applies rules like 'S → NP + VP' as real cognitive structures.
   EVIDENCE: "The mind DOES apply rules like 'S → NP + VP' * Real cognitive structures"

455. VIEW: Rule-application is the instantiation of patterns, not a contradiction.
   EVIDENCE: "Rule-application = pattern instantiation * Not contradiction"

456. VIEW: Wittgenstein's view that rule-following requires interpretation is refuted.
   EVIDENCE: "This REFUTES Wittgenstein: * Rule-following doesn't require interpretation"

457. VIEW: Normativity in rule-following comes from the patterns themselves, not social agreement.
   EVIDENCE: "Normativity from patterns themselves (not social agreement)"

458. VIEW: Wittgenstein was wrong to conclude that no principled rule-following exists.
   EVIDENCE: "Wittgenstein was wrong: * Showed interpretive rule-following fails (correct) * Concluded no principled rule-following exists (wrong)"

459. VIEW: Rules are real, and the mechanism for following them is pattern recognition.
   EVIDENCE: "The truth: * Rules are real (Chomsky right) * Mechanism is pattern recognition (our view right)"

460. VIEW: Rationality is defined as the skilled capacity to recognize truth-relevant patterns and respond appropriately.
   EVIDENCE: "RATIONALITY = PATTERN RECOGNITION Concise definition: Rationality is the skilled capacity to recognize truth-relevant patterns in situations and respond appropriately."

461. VIEW: Rationality is non-algorithmic, trainable, systematic, and productive.
   EVIDENCE: "Key features: * Non-algorithmic (no procedure guarantees it) * Trainable (improves with practice) * Systematic (not random) * Productive (enables discovery)"

462. VIEW: The old view of rationality as deduction is replaced by the new view of rationality as pattern recognition.
   EVIDENCE: "OLD VIEW: Rationality = Deduction * Following explicit logical rules * Step-by-step derivation * Algorithmic, recursive * Paradigm: Mathematical proof, formal logicNEW VIEW: Rationality = Pattern Recognition * Seeing structures, similarities, relationships * Holistic judgment * Non-algorithmic but systematic * Paradigm: Scientific discovery, expert diagnosis, skilled perception"

463. VIEW: Hume's problem of induction is dissolved because induction is pattern recognition.
   EVIDENCE: "Hume's Problem Dissolves: * Induction doesn't need justification by deduction * Induction IS pattern recognition (basic, self-justifying)"

464. VIEW: Pattern recognition can recover all deductive functions.
   EVIDENCE: "Pattern Recognition Recovers All Deductive Functions: * Truth-preservation, consistency-checking, consequence-drawing * Justification, rigor, knowledge-transmission, conceptual clarity"

465. VIEW: Formalization is secondary to the rational capacity of pattern recognition.
   EVIDENCE: "Formalization Is Secondary: * Euclid codified geometric patterns humans already recognized * Chomsky identified linguistic patterns (UG) but misidentified mechanism * Formalization useful but not necessary for rational capacity"

466. VIEW: Linguistic competence involves both Universal Grammar (UG) and non-recursive elements (X).
   EVIDENCE: "Linguistic Competence = UG + X: * UG (syntax): Recursive, innate, operates via structured pattern recognitionX (semantics): Non-recursive, includes ostension, naming, concept formation, metalinguistic awareness * Both necessary; neither alone suffices"

467. VIEW: Rationality is broader than recursivity.
   EVIDENCE: "The correction: RATIONALITY IS BROADER THAN RECURSIVITY"

468. VIEW: There are two modes of rationality: recursive and non-recursive.
   EVIDENCE: "Two modes of rationality: * Recursive: Following explicit rules, deductive, algorithmic (special case) * Non-Recursive: Pattern recognition, abductive, insight-based (general case)"

469. VIEW: Rationality is primarily pattern recognition, with calculation as a special case.
   EVIDENCE: ""Rationality is seeing, not calculating." Or more precisely: "Rationality is primarily pattern recognition; calculation is a special case useful in certain domains.""

470. VIEW: Rationality equals pattern recognition, which is a skilled capacity to recognize truth-relevant patterns and respond appropriately.
   EVIDENCE: "1. Rationality = pattern recognition (skilled capacity to recognize truth-relevant patterns and respond appropriately)"

471. VIEW: Pattern recognition enables discovery and is the mechanism for data-modeling, theoretical leaps, and insights.
   EVIDENCE: "2. Pattern recognition enables discovery (mediates data-modeling, theoretical leaps, insights-it's the mechanism, not just description)"

472. VIEW: Hume's problem of induction dissolves because induction is pattern recognition, which is basic and self-justifying.
   EVIDENCE: "3. Hume's problem dissolves (induction IS pattern recognition, which is basic and self-justifying-no regress, no need for external justification)"

473. VIEW: Pattern recognition recovers all deductive functions, with deduction being a special case.
   EVIDENCE: "4. Pattern recognition recovers all deductive functions (truth-preservation, consistency, consequences, justification, rigor, knowledge-transmission, conceptual clarity-deduction is special case)"

474. VIEW: Formalization is secondary to pattern recognition, which humans already possess.
   EVIDENCE: "5. Formalization is secondary (Euclid/Chomsky codified patterns humans already recognized-useful but not necessary for rational capacity)"

475. VIEW: Linguistic competence involves both recursive syntax via pattern recognition and non-recursive semantics.
   EVIDENCE: "6. Linguistic competence = UG + X (UG provides recursive syntax via pattern recognition; X provides non-recursive semantics; both necessary)"

476. VIEW: Wittgenstein's paradox is refuted because rule-following is pattern instantiation, which is direct and non-regressive.
   EVIDENCE: "7. Wittgenstein's paradox refuted (rule-following = pattern instantiation, which is direct and non-regressive; normativity from patterns themselves)"

477. VIEW: The tradition mistook recursive/deductive reasoning for the whole of rationality.
   EVIDENCE: "The Fundamental Insight The tradition mistook a special case (recursive/deductive reasoning) for the whole of rationality."

478. VIEW: Recognizing rationality as pattern recognition dissolves numerous pseudo-problems and enhances understanding of discovery, knowledge justification, language function, thought processes, and AI success.
   EVIDENCE: "Once we recognize that rationality is fundamentally pattern recognition, numerous pseudo-problems dissolve, and we can understand: * How discovery actually works * How knowledge is actually justified * How language actually functions * How minds actually think * How AI actually succeeds"

479. VIEW: The class of recursive logics is not recursively enumerable.
   EVIDENCE: "Part I: Proved that the class of recursive logics is not recursively enumerable"

480. VIEW: Formalism cannot formalize its own boundaries.
   EVIDENCE: "Part II: Showed this means formalism cannot formalize its own boundaries"

481. VIEW: Natural languages are hierarchies with non-recursive semantic operations.
   EVIDENCE: "Part III: Extended to language: natural languages are hierarchies with non-recursive semantic operations"

482. VIEW: The false equation of Rational = Recursive has catastrophic consequences across multiple domains.
   EVIDENCE: "Part IV: Identified the false equation (Rational = Recursive) and showed its catastrophic consequences across multiple domains"

483. VIEW: Rationality is pattern recognition, which is broader, richer, and more powerful than the deductive paradigm allowed.
   EVIDENCE: "Part V: Developed the positive account: Rationality is pattern recognition, which is broader, richer, and more powerful than the deductive paradigm allowed"

484. VIEW: Rationality cannot recursively characterize its own scope.
   EVIDENCE: "The Revolutionary Implication Rationality cannot recursively characterize its own scope."

485. VIEW: Rationality transcends recursive specification, which is a liberation rather than a limitation.
   EVIDENCE: "This is not a limitation but a liberation. We can stop forcing everything into recursive molds and recognize the full breadth of rational human capacities-including the non-recursive ones that make science, language, thought, and intelligence actually work."

486. VIEW: A mathematical theorem reveals a deep structural feature of rationality: it cannot recursively characterize its own scope.
   EVIDENCE: "The book's central message: A mathematical theorem (the class of recursive logics is not r.e.) reveals a deep structural feature of rationality: it cannot recursively characterize its own scope."

487. VIEW: The recognition of rationality as pattern recognition dissolves centuries of pseudo-problems, vindicates modern AI, liberates multiple philosophical domains, and establishes pattern recognition as the foundation of rational thought.
   EVIDENCE: "This dissolves centuries of pseudo-problems, vindicates modern AI, liberates multiple philosophical domains, and establishes pattern recognition as the foundation of rational thought."

488. VIEW: Rationality is seeing, not calculating, and this understanding changes everything.
   EVIDENCE: "Rationality is seeing, not calculating. That's what we've proven. That's what changes everything."
Let me view the truncated middle section.I've now read the complete document. Here are all the positions extracted:

---

## POSITIONS EXTRACTED FROM "RELIGION AND THE LIMITS OF MODERN RATIONALISM"

### I. Core Thesis: The Nature of Religious Sentiment

1. **The essence of religious sentiment is that this world is not all that there is**—an "invisible order" suffuses and undergirds the perceptible world, giving it meaning and moral structure.

2. **One cannot fail to hold this view while retaining psychological health**.

3. **Psychologically healthy self-identified agnostics and atheists, whether they know it or not, hold some variant of this view**.

4. **When people genuinely do not have this view, they succumb to various forms of psychological morbidity**.

5. **Too much rationalism is morbid**; at least some spiritualism is necessary for mental health.

---

### II. Three Attitudes Toward Religion

6. **Any answer to questions about religion's legitimacy embodies one of three attitudes**: uncritical acceptance, rejection, or critical and reflective acceptance.

7. **Uncritical acceptance is the attitude of someone who doesn't even know of the possibility of not accepting religion**. It is not possible for a member of any contemporary society to have this attitude.

8. **Contemporary fundamentalists are not uncritically accepting of religion**. The contemporary fundamentalist *chooses* to be a fundamentalist; his beliefs are the result of a long process of acculturation, usually accompanied by considerable internal struggle.

9. **The stone-age tribesman's spiritualism is not a reaction or defense against some other view**—he believes it because it is how he naturally sees the world, not because he was taught that this is how he should see it.

10. **There are two forms of religious rejectionism: authentic and inauthentic**.

11. **Authentic rejectionism** is held by someone (e.g., Freud) who genuinely has a rationalistic worldview and, on that basis, simply doesn't accept a religious worldview.

12. **Inauthentic rejectionism** is that of anyone whose rejectionism is simply a way of fitting in or moving ahead (joining atheist groups for prestige or social belonging).

13. **Inauthentic rejectionism is a historical consequence of authentic rejectionists changing our worldview to make non-religious views socially normal**, but its mentality is closer to religious fundamentalism than to authentic rationalism-based rejectionism.

14. **In most cases, today's atheist or secular humanist is simply following the herd**, just as the true-believer was one thousand years ago, and his views are likely to be equally dogmatic.

15. **Even if what the contemporary atheist believes is more reasonable than what a medieval peasant believes, his reasons for believing it may be equally emotional and equally spurious**.

16. **The brain-centers that mediate "militant" atheism are identical with those that mediate religious fundamentalism**.

---

### III. Reductive vs. Non-Reductive Analysis of Religion

17. **There are two ways to be reflective about religion: reductively and non-reductively**.

18. **Freud was reductively reflective about religion**—in his view, God represents the father, and religion exists to mediate various biological and social functions.

19. **William James was non-reductively rational about religion**—his position is not that reductionist accounts are wrong, but that they are incomplete.

20. **There are, or at least could be, both reductive and non-reductive truths about religion**.

21. **The psychological backstory is not always the whole story**. Scientific positions must be understood on their own terms, and it is at least possible that the same is true of religious positions.

22. **Even if everything Freud says about religion is correct, it doesn't follow that religion is nothing other than a giant neurosis**. (Analogously: If Smith becomes a medical researcher because he suffers from asthma, it doesn't follow that his researches are nothing but expressions of asthma-related distress.)

---

### IV. James's Position

23. **According to James, the essence of religion is that the perceptible world is not the whole world**—an "invisible order" suffuses the perceptible, giving it meaning and moral structure.

24. **A given person's life is meaningful to the extent that he is on the right side of this "invisible order" and meaningless to the extent that he is on the wrong side of it**.

25. **Even if God does not in fact exist, we benefit from believing it to be true**.

26. **Believing in God gives one a certain measure of God-like strength**—believing it makes it real.

27. **Strength comes from belief, and weakness from doubt**. (This is "the basic message of *The Varieties of Religious Experience*.")

28. **There is a deep incoherence in James's argument**: One cannot derive strength from a belief that one doesn't have. Making oneself believe what one doesn't really believe undermines the integrity of one's belief-system and dependent psychological faculties.

29. **But there is a coherent point beneath this incoherent one**: Whether we know it or not, our motivations, emotional dispositions, and values are hewed to the presumption that there is a God who superintends a moral order.

30. **The self-identified true believer explicitly affirms this presumption, and the self-identified disbeliever denies it—but even though their theories differ, their emotional architectures do not**.

31. **In each case, the psychological faculty responsible for affect, emotion, and motivation is that of the true believer**.

32. **The part of mental life of which rationalism can give an account is relatively superficial**. The loquacious level has prestige, but it will fail to convince you if your dumb intuitions are opposed to its conclusions.

33. **If you have intuitions at all, they come from a deeper level of your nature than the loquacious level which rationalism inhabits**.

34. **Your whole subconscious life—impulses, faiths, needs, divinations—has prepared the premises of which your consciousness now feels the weight of the result**.

35. **The well-springs of intuition, and indeed of genius, lie in this subterraneous psychological realm**.

36. **Mystical experiences are about letting go and letting one's "real feelings" rise to the surface**.

37. **Mystical experiences are "ineffable," "transient," and "passive," and they are experienced as being "noetic" (instances of knowledge, not just feeling)**.

38. **People under the influence of nitrous oxide or LSD have mystical experiences (or similar ones) because these are disinhibitory agents**—they deregulate the flow of chemical information between synapses.

39. **This confirms that mystical experiences are about disinhibition**, as does the fact that antipsychotic medications are inhibitory agents.

40. **It is not really up to us whether or not to "believe," since belief is built into our psychological structure**.

41. **However much our theories may change, the beliefs etched into our unchanging human essence are closer to those of the religious than of the non-religious person**.

---

### V. Otto's Position

42. **The essence of religious sentiment is the sense that the world is suffused by a presence that cannot possibly be known through rational inquiry, let alone sense-perception**—this is "the numinous."

43. **God conceived of as a kind of super-person is not the numinous**. An ogre on Mt. Olympus or a perfectly rational, powerful, just God is basically a person free of usual limitations—there is nothing mysterious or numinous about him.

44. **If God is hyper-intelligent, hyper-just, etc., those are merely "synthetical" attributes**—it is not in virtue of having them that he is God. To be God is to be the numinous presence that pervades the world.

45. **The numinous is not to be identified with the miraculous**. A miracle is a sapient being creating a breach of natural law—just another hypothesis, not a rejection of rationalism but a modification of how it is applied.

46. **Key attributes of the numinous**: It is awe-inspiring or terrifying; awareness of it involves fascination and absorption; in being aware of it, one has a sense of one's smallness and of a larger cosmic order.

47. **We encounter the numinous when listening to good music and when experiencing romantic and erotic attachments**.

48. **The awe inspired by natural phenomena in those not jaded by scientific rationalism involves awareness of the numinous**.

49. **The numinous is holy**; a corollary is that its existence imposes moral obligations on human beings and gives them a sense of purpose.

50. **The awe-inspiring and the terrifying are what we perceive to be supernatural**.

51. **Sharks and tarantulas are terrifying to people who do not understand them and to whom they might as well be supernatural**; they are not terrifying to those who study them scientifically, for whom they are mere natural phenomena.

52. **Great art is awe-inspiring to those who have no idea how it comes into existence** (to whom it has a supernatural quality), but not to great artists who have such an idea.

53. **Otto never quite says what the numinous is because he treats it as an objective being lying outside of ourselves, when the truth is that it is obviously a psychological projection of some kind**.

54. **The question "what is the numinous?" is a psychological, not a metaphysical question**.

55. **People experience the numinous when they have their guard down**—the savage's relationship to nature is one of openness and passive wonder; listening to music involves disinterested contemplation; erotic and romantic attachments involve surrender.

56. **The scientist's attitude to nature is not one of passive wonder but of active deconstruction**, which is why there is nothing numinous about nature for him.

57. **For the savage, nature is not to be mastered but passively experienced**, which is why he experiences it as numinous.

---

### VI. Eliade's Position

58. **The essence of a genuinely religious person's relation to the world is that he sees it as being either sacred or profane**.

59. **The more genuinely religious a person is, the less he sees the world as a mere machine**, and the more likely he is to see a rock or twig or bolt of lightning as a manifestation of a beneficent higher presence ("sacred") or a maleficent one ("profane").

60. **Primitive man conceives of time as circular**—not as a linear march away from a past that becomes ever more remote, but like the seasons. His conception of time is very likely modeled on the seasons.

61. **We now conceive of time as linear; at some point our conception underwent a major shift**.

62. **Eliade claims Abrahamic religion brought about this shift** because such religions involve defining events (God speaking to Abraham, Moses receiving the Commandments, Jesus turning water into wine) of such singular significance that time necessarily follows a linear path away from them.

---

### VII. Critique of Eliade: Writing, Not Abrahamism, Linearized Time

63. **Contrary to Eliade, the shift from cyclical to linear time couldn't possibly be a consequence of the advent of Judaism**.

64. **The linearization of time occurred independently in the Orient**.

65. **It occurred in the West prior to the advent of Judaism**.

66. **The actual cause of this shift, in both West and East, was the creation of the written word**, which occurred in Mesopotamia approximately 6,000 years ago.

67. **Hash marks in clay were used to keep inventory, then generalized to represent arithmetical operations and record the written word**.

68. **Once the written word was established, it quickly led to the development of economies of scale and legal systems sufficiently complex to maintain such economies**.

69. **As soon as there were written records, time came to be thought of as linear**. This is a matter of historical fact.

70. **With the written word and economies of scale, history came into existence**.

71. **Functionally speaking, the life of a precivilizational person was cyclical**—each year was like the last; there were no technological changes, economic development, written records, or well-defined moment receding into the past.

72. **"History" for the precivilizational person extended no further than one's personal memory**.

73. **Myths concern events occurring in a "hypothetical time"**—it makes little sense to suppose events in Little Red Riding Hood preceded those in Jack and the Beanstalk by 17 or 112 years.

74. **Myths do not represent historical consciousness of history but an ahistorical consciousness of lessons learned in a historical past**.

75. **Writing was invented at approximately the same time Judaism came into existence, which likely threw Eliade off**. Writing was invented first.

76. **Moses introducing writing to the Israelites is Judaism's inaugural event** (mythologically represented as God etching commandments into a tablet).

77. **Being a consequence of the written word, Judaism is the effect, not the cause, of the linearization of time**.

---

### VIII. Religion as Early-Stage Rationalism

78. **A civilization involves an economy of scale along with complex legal and political arrangements; none of this can exist in the absence of rationalism**.

79. **Small-scale tribal organizations can exist in the absence of rationalism—and indeed depend on its absence**.

80. **Where there is civilization, there are necessarily arrangements that are not strictly instinct-based or emotion-driven and can be sustained only on the basis of rationalism-based social engineering**.

81. **What Eliade describes as a shift from pre-Abrahamic to Abrahamic religions is not a shift between religions at all—it is a shift from spiritualism to religion**.

82. **Spiritualism is the outlook of the precivilizational person; religion is the way spiritualism is compatibilized with early-stage civilization**.

83. **Judaism did not officially begin until norms of conduct were written down and codified**, since unwritten understandings couldn't govern such a large and internally differentiated group.

84. **Christianity and Islam may have started as informal movements governed by sentiments, but did not become full-blown religions until they developed complex legal and legalistic norms of conduct**.

85. **Religion is not pre-rationalism or anti-rationalism but early-stage rationalism**—the rationalism of early civilizations.

86. **What we now refer to as "rationalism" is late-stage rationalism**—the rationalism of a civilization whose investigations into nature have acquired the same degree of logical rigor as the legal and economic norms involved in societies of scale.

---

### IX. Writing and Rationality

87. **Intelligence is about making judgments about the world** (e.g., a fox correctly judging when to pounce on a rabbit).

88. **Rationality is about making judgments about one's intelligence** (e.g., judging that engineering would be a better use of one's mathematical talents than bookmaking).

89. **Individuals can probably be rational without being literate, but the written word certainly makes it easier**.

90. **Illiterate societies can probably be rationally structured, but a literate society can do more in the way of rationally structuring itself**.

91. **There were many pre-Abrahamic civilizations—some dating back to 8,000 B.C.—whose conceptions of time were quite as linear as ours**.

---

### X. James, Otto, and Eliade Are Not Describing "Religion" but Precivilizational Spiritualism

92. **When James, Otto, and Eliade refer to "religion," they are not referring to religion at all but to precivilizational spiritualism**.

93. **Members of any Abrahamic faith, or indeed any religion unambiguously worthy of the name, tend to have worldviews largely indistinguishable from those of ardent rationalists**.

94. **Does the contemporary fundamentalist Christian really believe that Christ walked on water in the same sense he believes he is a person or that fish live in water?** Or is this "belief" more of a posit whose purpose is to emblematize a set of values rather than to be true?

95. **Even if the fundamentalist Christian actually believes Christ walked on water, his understanding of the world is almost entirely identical with that of his non-religious counterpart**.

96. **The fundamentalist doesn't think there are little people in his radio responsible for its noises; he doesn't think every twig and rock is a magic omen**.

97. **His animism is confined to a small, tightly bounded collection of relics concerning alleged past miracles**, which—though obviously false if considered as representations of historical fact—are used in a very controlled and indeed rational way.

98. **The Amish have beliefs about Moses, Jesus, God, and Virgin Birth that, considered on their own, are obviously absurd**, but they use them as the basis for extremely stable social arrangements resulting in short work hours, long lives, happy marriages, and virtually crime-free communities.

99. **The Amish, despite having different values from seculars, see the world in the same way**. If I see a rock, they see a rock. Unlike the precivilizational spiritualist, they don't beat their amulets when angry or see tree-branches blowing in the wind as angry monster-arms.

100. **Religious people—such as the Amish and Hasidim—are no more likely than others to have "ineffable" experiences of "numinous" apparitions or see rocks as beating monster-hearts**.

101. **They likely used to have such beliefs but no longer do**—those former beliefs have hardened into mere acceptances or posits that function as foils for rationally worked-out ethical and legal codes.

102. **What James, Otto, and Eliade are referring to is precivilizational spiritualism—the mindset of somebody for whom rationalism was simply not an option**.

103. **They are not referring to acceptance of some legalistic code of conduct that happens to contain a few throwbacks to spiritualism**.

104. **Christianity and Islam, though occasionally referencing a snake that turned into a serpent or a talking bush, are complex and internally consistent behavioral codes that stabilize relations between man and woman, parent and child, employer and employee, buyer and seller**.

105. **The most die-hard fundamentalist Christian uses the internet, has a refrigerator, and pays his taxes**. His values may differ from his neighbor's, but his factual beliefs, with rare and dubious exceptions, are the same.

106. **The mentality that James, Otto, and Eliade are describing is not religious but animistic**.

107. **Granting that Otto, James, and Eliade should not have used the term "religion" for the mindset they had in mind, it does not follow that what they said is false—only that they could have worded it more clearly**.

---

### XI. The Rationalist Worldview (As Characterized Critically)

108. **For the rationalist, the world is so many moving parts**—nothing magical or mysterious. Unknowns are just gaps in knowledge, not mysteries.

109. **For the rationalist, some parts of the world are useful, others harmful, others neither—but nothing is sacred and nothing is profane**.

110. **For the rationalist, morality has to do with utility, not divinity**. Some legal codes work better than others (lower crime rates, higher GDPs), but that's the end of it.

111. **For the rationalist, there is morality but no higher morality**—morality is another branch of engineering.

112. **For the rationalist, the world is impersonal—not a living being, just dead matter**. Living organisms exist, a few are sentient, but life (especially sentient life) is an anomaly to be explained by reconciling its existence to an otherwise dead, non-sentient universe.

113. **For the rationalist, the world is an object; it exists only to be used**.

114. **The rationalist sometimes cloaks his instrumentalist conception of nature by claiming to want to understand, not use, the world**—but to understand the world is to dissect it mentally, usually in furtherance of doing so literally.

---

### XII. The Spiritualist Worldview (As Characterized Approvingly)

115. **For the spiritualist, the world is a subject**.

116. **For the spiritualist, the world, though having its uses, does not exist only to be used**—it is more of a partner than an object, teeming with life and giving one's life meaning.

117. **For the spiritualist, morality is emotional, not utilitarian**—based on empathic rapport with God and nature, not utilitarian judgments about social stability.

118. **For the spiritualist, organisms are more basic than dead matter**; dead matter is mere vestiges of the former, and the concept of an "impersonal force" is alien.

---

### XIII. What James, Otto, and Eliade Actually Propose

119. **These authors are not advocating a return to a condition of spiritualism or Rousseauian innocent savagery**.

120. **Their position is not that we should be more spiritual, but that we are already spiritual, even though we tend not to recognize the manifestations of our spiritualism for what they are**.

121. **What these authors say about spiritualism is similar to what Freud says about sexuality**: According to Freud, we cannot become asexual—what we can do is wrongly believe ourselves to be asexual and thereby make life-decisions that thwart our sexuality and undermine our biological condition.

122. **According to James, Otto, and Eliade (as the author interprets them), we cannot become non-spiritual**. What we can do is wrongly believe we are non-spiritual—possibly because we have erroneously come to see rationalism as a rejection, as opposed to a rarefied extension, of our spiritualism—and on that basis adopt lifestyles that contravene our ineradicably spiritual natures.

123. **Rationalism is potentially a rarefied extension of spiritualism, not its rejection**.

---

### XIV. Implicit Methodological and Meta-Philosophical Positions

124. **William James, Rudolph Otto, and Mircea Eliade represent the stance of critical and reflective acceptance**—scholars who supplemented critical scientific rationalism with firsthand knowledge of the experiences involved in being religious.

125. **Having religion is different from making an object out of it** (as Freud did).

126. **When these authors refer to "religion," they are typically referring to its subjective, emotional side, not its objective, institutional side**.

127. **21st-century "spiritualism" (self-described) is just another manifestation of contemporary nihilism**—not an expression of actual spiritualism but of its absence. The person who self-describes as "spiritual" is in much the same category as a self-described atheist.

128. **The "perceptible world" means the world qua entity knowable through our senses and through scientific examination of the data thereby made available**—"perceptible" means "knowable either through our senses or through rational inference from what our senses disclose."

129. **Judaism officially came into existence 5,780 years ago when Moses introduced the written word (in the form of the Decalogue) to the Israelites**.

---

**Total: 129 distinct positions identified.**Here are the positions advocated in this review:

---

## **Positions Extracted from Kuczynski's Review of Reimer & Bezuidenhout's *Descriptions and Beyond***

### **Core Semantic Positions**

1. **Definite descriptions are singular terms (referring expressions), not quantifiers.** Russell's analysis of definite descriptions as quantifiers is incorrect; our pre-theoretical intuitions that they function like proper nouns and demonstratives are correct.

2. **The semantic rule for definite descriptions is conditional and referential.** The rule is: "If there is a unique φ x, then 'the φ' refers to x"—not a quantificational paraphrase.

3. **There is a systematic distinction between literal/semantic meaning and communicated/cognitive content.** What a sentence literally means (its proposition) can diverge massively from what it communicates.

4. **Pre-semantic implicature is a real and underappreciated phenomenon.** Information can be conveyed to a hearer *in the process of computing semantic content*, prior to post-semantic (Gricean) implicature. This category has been "grossly undervalued" in contemporary semantics.

5. **Russell's theory (and Frege's) are displacements of pre-semantic implicature onto semantics proper.** They conflate what is conveyed during interpretation with what is literally encoded.

6. **The existence and uniqueness claims associated with definite descriptions are pre-semantic implicatures, not semantic content.** "The current U.S. president smokes" conveys (but does not literally mean) that exactly one person is currently U.S. president.

7. **Definite descriptions should be understood as (or likened to) complex demonstratives or indexicals.** This view, anticipated by Strawson and etymologically supported ("the" derives from "that"), is ignored in the volume under review.

### **Positions on Russell's Arguments**

8. **Russell's four arguments for the quantificational analysis involve a non-sequitur.** Exact analogues of those arguments would "show" (falsely) that proper names and indexicals are quantifiers; since proper names are not quantifiers, the argument form is invalid.

9. **Russell's theory fails for non-indicative sentences (questions and imperatives).** "Is the maid coming?" is not synonymous with "Is it the case that exactly one thing is our maid and that thing is coming?" This undermines the theory.

10. **Synonymous expressions should be interchangeable salva significatione.** The failure of interchangeability between Russellian paraphrases and the original sentences is evidence against synonymy.

### **Positions on Proper Names and Indexicals**

11. **Proper names are directly referential (following Kripke).** "Hesperus" and "Phosphorus" both directly refer to the same object, so "Hesperus is Phosphorus" literally means O=O (a trivial identity).

12. **Indexicals are directly referential (following Kaplan/Strawson).** If Fred says "I am tired," his words encode the singular proposition *Fred is tired*.

13. **Massive divergences between literal and communicated meaning occur with proper names and indexicals, just as with definite descriptions.** This parallel is ignored by pro-Russell literature.

14. **The divergence between literal and communicated meaning for singular terms is not grounds for denying their referential status.** Such divergences are accepted for indexicals and proper names; they should be accepted for definite descriptions too.

### **Methodological and Meta-Philosophical Positions**

15. **Semantic rules must be "tokenized."** Proper semantic rules must distinguish between sentence-types and sentence-tokens, incorporating context-sensitivity.

16. **Context-based restrictions apply to many (especially "improper") definite descriptions.** Expressions like "the dog" or "the man over there" require contextual supplementation.

17. **Differences in Fregean "tone" or "coloring" (Gricean "conventional implicature") are actually semantic differences.** These differences reflect "truth-preconditions" (operative background assumptions), not merely pragmatic coloring. Grice and Frege are wrong to deny this.

18. **The view that "Bob is tall and he was malnourished" is literally synonymous with "Bob is tall but he was malnourished" is counter-intuitive and false.**

### **Critical Positions on the Volume Reviewed**

19. ***Descriptions and Beyond* ignores crucial issues.** Specifically: the analogy between definite descriptions and indexicals/demonstratives; the failure of Russell's theory for non-indicatives; the parallel with proper names.

20. **Most of the volume focuses on "technical minutiae" peripheral to the core semantic and epistemological issues.** Only the papers by Devitt and Sainsbury are exceptions.

21. **The pro-Russell literature (including Neale 1990) fails to engage with the strongest objections to Russell's view.** These objections were raised decades earlier by Strawson and Searle.

### **Implicit/Subsidiary Positions**

22. **Cognitive value is determined by conceptual constituents.** The concept φ is a constituent of what is communicated by "…the φ…" sentences—this explains differences in cognitive value between co-referential descriptions.

23. **Intuition is evidentially significant in semantics.** Appeals to what "seems right" or what "intuition recoils at" carry weight.

24. **Etymology can be evidentially relevant to semantic analysis.** The derivation of "the" from "that" supports treating definite descriptions as demonstrative-like.

25. **The semantic/pragmatic boundary requires reconfiguration.** The traditional division underestimates pre-semantic phenomena and overestimates the scope of literal meaning.

---

**Total: 25 positions identified.**

Let me continue reading the full document to extract all positions comprehensively.Now I have thoroughly read the document. Let me compile a comprehensive extraction of all positions.

---

# EXTRACTED POSITIONS FROM "LITERAL MEANING AND COGNITIVE CONTENT" (J-M. Kuczynski)

## I. FOUNDATIONAL SEMANTIC POSITIONS

### On the Type-Token Distinction

1. **Reference is a property of expression-tokens, not expression-types.** No expression-type refers to anything. Only tokens refer.

2. **Meaning (sense) is a property of expression-types (platonic entities); reference is a property of expression-tokens (spatio-temporal entities).** No entity has both meaning and reference in the same sense.

3. **The meaning of an indexical sentence-type (e.g., "I am tired") is a function from contexts of utterance to propositions.** The meaning of such a token is a proposition.

4. **All or nearly all sentences of natural language are indexical** because they contain tense-markers. Therefore, virtually all sentence-types have functions (not propositions) for their meanings.

5. **The distinction between "sentences₁" (expressions with functions from contexts to propositions as meanings) and "sentences₂" (expressions with propositions as meanings) would introduce a massive, implausible cleavage into a unified class.** It is better to treat all sentences uniformly as having two-dimensional structure.

---

### On What Sentences Refer To

6. **Sentence-types do not refer to anything.** They no more refer than the type "you" refers.

7. **Sentence-tokens do not refer to truth-values.** One can understand a sentence-token without knowing its truth-value, but one cannot understand a referring term without knowing what it refers to (at the token level).

8. **Sentence-tokens refer to their meanings.** Very roughly, the meaning of a sentence-token is a proposition; more precisely, it is a certain kind of function involving a proposition.

9. **Forceless sentence-tokens (those embedded in larger sentences without independent assertoric, interrogative, or imperative force) refer to propositions.** For example, in "Necessarily, Mozart wrote music," the embedded "Mozart wrote music" denotes the proposition that Mozart wrote music.

10. **Forced sentence-tokens (those with assertoric, interrogative, or imperative force) refer to functions involving propositions, not to bare propositions.** The semantic content of a forced sentence-token is a function that assigns the property of success to that token exactly if the relevant proposition is true.

---

### The Analysis of Assertoric Force

11. **The semantic content of an indicative sentence-token must be something that an expression cannot have without having assertoric force.** This requires a certain kind of innocuous circularity in the analysis.

12. **Every indicative sentence-token (e.g., "Plato snores") is semantically equivalent to "A(that Plato snores)"** where "A" is an assertoric force-operator that assigns success to the token exactly if the proposition denoted by "that Plato snores" is true.

13. **Force is never generated by manipulating propositional content.** Replacing one proposition-denoting expression with another cannot create or change force. Force-operators do something categorically different from content-specification.

14. **Force-operators are not merely conventionalized expressions of propositional attitudes.** Saying "I believe that Plato snores" expresses belief but is semantically entirely different from asserting "Plato snores."

15. **The assertoric force-operator denotes a function that assigns the property of success to a specific token exactly if a certain proposition is true.** This self-referential structure is essential and non-viciously circular.

---

### On the Semantic Content of Sentence-Tokens (Full Analysis)

16. **Let t be an arbitrary sentence-token. t encodes some proposition P, but that is not all t encodes. The semantic content of t as a whole is a function F that assigns the property of success to t exactly if P is true. The semantic content of the corresponding type T is a function that assigns F to t.**

17. **This circularity is not vicious.** The sentence-token t is a mere physical entity identifiable without mentioning any function. For any proposition P, there exists a function F that assigns success to t exactly if P is true. We are simply identifying the semantic content of t with one of those functions.

18. **If the semantic content of t does not mention t, then it would be possible for an expression to have that very content without having assertoric force.** Self-reference is required for adequate semantics of force.

---

## II. THE SLINGSHOT AND ITS REFUTATION

19. **The Slingshot argument "proves" absurdities** (e.g., that your car is identical with my computer). Therefore, it contains errors that must be exposed.

20. **The Slingshot assumes (SS): Replacing a referring term with a co-referring term can result in a change of meaning.** This principle is false. If "the author of Waverly" and "Scott" co-refer, then replacing one with the other should not change meaning.

21. **The Slingshot uses (CR): Intersubstituting co-referring terms preserves reference.** But if (SS) is true, then (CR) is false, since replacing co-referring terms can change meaning in non-extensional contexts.

22. **If E is an expression that rigidly designates a proposition or concept, and e is a referring term occurring as a proper part of E, then replacing e with a co-referring term may result in an expression with a different referent.** This principle (S) shows that (CR) cannot be used by the Slingshot if sentences rigidly denote propositions.

23. **The Slingshot assumes that sentences do not rigidly denote propositions, but this cannot be assumed in the relevant argumentative context.** The question at issue is precisely what sentences refer to.

24. **Many Slingshots make spurious use of (LL): logically equivalent sentences co-refer.** But "1+1=2" and "triangles have three sides" don't say the same thing—one is about triangles, the other is not.

25. **The kind of "logical equivalence" between P and "the x such that x=1 and P" is entirely different from the logical equivalence between "1+1=2" and "triangles have three sides."** Without recognizing this, many Slingshots fail.

---

## III. UNIFIED SEMANTICS FOR NOUN-PHRASES

26. **All noun-phrases—"Plato," "some man," "every bird," "the teacher"—should denote the same basic kind of entity** to respect the grammatical unity of the category.

27. **A token of "Plato" denotes a function that assigns truth to a class C exactly if Plato is a member of C.** This makes tokens of "Plato" fall into the same semantic category as tokens of quantifiers.

28. **A token of "some" denotes a function F that assigns truth to a class C exactly if C is instantiated (non-empty).**

29. **A token of "every" denotes a function F that assigns truth to a class C exactly if C is universally instantiated.**

30. **This Montague-inspired semantics accommodates the direct referentiality of proper names and indexicals** while unifying them with quantifiers.

31. **Tokens of proper names are directly referential by way of encoding functions** that assign truth to classes based on whether the named individual is a member.

32. **The character of "I am tired" is not a function from contexts to propositions but a function that assigns meaning to its tokens.** If x uniquely utters a token t of "I am tired," the meaning of t is a function F that assigns success to t exactly if x is tired.

---

## IV. TRUTH AS INSTANTIATEDNESS AND THE UNITY OF THE PROPOSITION

### The Problem of Propositional Structure

33. **Propositions have decompositional structure.** A proposition is not specified merely by its truth-conditions; its decomposition must also be given.

34. **The Lewisian analysis (propositions as properties of worlds/sets of worlds) cannot accommodate the internal or decompositional differences between analytically equivalent propositions.** For example, "Alpha is a figure whose perimeter coincides with all points equidistant from a given point" and "Alpha is a closed two-dimensional figure of uniform curvature" are different propositions with the same truth-conditions.

35. **If propositions were merely properties of worlds, analytic propositions would "disappear"**—they would tell us nothing since all worlds have them.

36. **The naïve view that "Smith punches Jones" has three constituents (Smith, Jones, the relation of punching) overlooks additional structure.** The proposition also has components corresponding to "x punches Jones" (the property of being a thing that punches Jones) and "Smith punches x" (the property of being a thing that Smith punches).

37. **Frege correctly saw that the proposition "Smith punches Jones" is built out of the relation "x punches y" and the functions "x punches Jones" and "Smith punches x."**

---

### The Analysis of Propositions as Sets of Properties

38. **A proposition is identical with a set S of properties, and for that proposition to be true is for all members of S to be instantiated.**

39. **For the proposition "Smith punches Jones" (Ap), the relevant set S contains exactly these properties:**
   - Ps: the property of being identical with Smith
   - Pj: the property of being identical with Jones
   - Psx: the property of being a thing x such that Smith punches x
   - Pxj: the property of being a thing x such that x punches Jones
   - Pp: the relation of punching
   - P: the property of being a world where Smith punches Jones is true

40. **(Ap) is true exactly if all six properties are instantiated.** If any one is not instantiated, (Ap) is not true. For example, if the property "identical with Smith" is not instantiated, there is no Smith to punch Jones.

41. **The instantiation of these properties is both necessary and sufficient for (Ap)'s truth.** There is a one-to-one correspondence between discrete constituents of (Ap) and members of S.

42. **The inclusion of P in the set is not viciously circular.** P is more basic than (Ap). The truth of (Ap) supervenes on how mass-energy is distributed—the "rippling of the quantum." We use the proposition to identify the property, but the property is what enters into the analysis.

43. **Different propositions can share constituents on this analysis.** "Smith punches Jones" and "Plato punches Jones" share Pj, Pxj, and Pp, corresponding to the pre-theoretic intuition that they share constituents (Jones, the property of punching Jones, the relation of punching).

---

### Truth and Supervenience

44. **A contingent proposition is never just true—it is true in virtue of some fact about the basic constituents of the world.** Mass-energy is distributed a certain way; the "quantum is rippled" appropriately.

45. **The truth of "Plato punched Socrates" supervenes on facts about atomic movements, electron jumps, and mass-energy displacements.** These facts are more basic than the proposition and can be described without mentioning Plato, Socrates, or punching.

46. **There is no circularity in analyzing a proposition in terms of the property a world has if that proposition is true, because the property (the "rippling") is more basic than the proposition.**

47. **The storm of mass-energy displacements that realizes an event does not have the structure of the propositions describing it.** Jones in the proposition is discrete from his attributes; Jones in reality is inseparable from the states of affairs on which his existence supervenes.

---

### Quantified Propositions

48. **The proposition "nothing snores" (ns) is identical with a set containing:**
   - The property of being identical with the property "x snores" (the propositional form)
   - The property UT (universal falsity—every instance of the form is false)
   - The property P (the way the quantum is rippled in a world where nothing snores)

49. **The proposition "everything snores" (es) is identical with a set containing:**
   - The property of being identical with the property "x snores"
   - The property UT (universal truth—every instance of the form is true)
   - The property P (the appropriate quantum rippling)

50. **The proposition "something snores" (ss) is identical with a set containing:**
   - The property of being identical with the property of snoring
   - The property PT (being instantiated)
   - The property s* (the quantum rippling for a world where something snores)

51. **Quantified propositions are meta-propositional—they concern classes of propositions.** "Something snores" says at least one proposition of the form "x snores" is true.

---

### Grammar and the Unity of the Proposition

52. **Grammatical inflections do not themselves refer to anything but assign referents to sequences of expressions on the basis of the referents of the components.** The word-order in "Smith punches Jones" vs. "Jones punches Smith" determines which properties are members of the corresponding propositions.

53. **The difference between a sentence-token and an unmeaning heap lies in facts about grammar.** Grammatical facts encode the ordinal information that determines propositional structure.

54. **Word-order in English does exactly what is done in Latin or Russian by case-endings.** It is a grammatical device par excellence.

55. **Grammatical inflections determine what will be the constituents of the propositions meant by sentence-tokens.** In "Smith punches Jones," word-order tells you that Psx (the property of being a thing Smith punches) is a member of the corresponding proposition.

---

### Two Senses of "Denote"

56. **Denotes₁: E denotes₁ O exactly if, in virtue of having the form "…E…," a sentence-token encodes a proposition P such that P's being true involves a state of affairs having O as a constituent.** "Smith" denotes₁ Smith; "red" denotes₁ an instance of redness.

57. **Denotes₂: E denotes₂ O exactly if, in virtue of having the form "…E…," a sentence-token encodes a proposition P such that O is a member of the set with which P is identical.** "Tall" denotes₂ the property of tallness; "Smith" denotes₂ the property of being identical with Smith.

---

### Metaphysical Consequences

58. **Particulars like Smith are not separable, isolable constituents of the universe.** Smith's existence supervenes on innumerable subvenient states of affairs (sub-atomic, atomic, molecular, cellular). Smith is "more in the nature of an abstract."

59. **Individuals are properties of states of affairs.** If the basic "wrinkles in the quantum" are of the right type, Smith exists; otherwise not.

60. **What we call "properties" (redness, roundness) are really properties of properties of properties—third-order properties.** Instances of redness are properties of states of affairs, and states of affairs are properties of properties (of the quantum rippling).

---

## V. MEANING VS. COGNITIVE CONTENT (LITERAL VS. COMMUNICATED MEANING)

61. **Literal meaning (semantic encoding) must be distinguished from communicated meaning (cognitive significance).** They can diverge dramatically.

62. **Rationality is measured in terms of communicated meaning, not literal meaning.** One can rationally assent to "Hesperus is lovely" and deny "Phosphorus is lovely" without irrationality, because what is communicated differs even though the literal meaning is identical.

63. **Descriptive definition is really existential definition.** To say "'Hesperus' names the last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky" is really to say "Something x is uniquely a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky and 'Hesperus' names x."

64. **All perception is existential/predicational.** When you see an object, the content of your perception is given by an existence claim: "there is an object x such that x has shape [...] and luminosity [...] and..."

65. **The cognitive significance of "Hesperus is lovely" (for someone taught via ostension) is an existence claim:** "There is an object x such that x is alone in the morning sky, has [...] shape, [...] luminosity, and 'Hesperus' names x, and x is lovely."

66. **"Hesperus" and "Phosphorus" are synonymous (both are mere labels for Venus), but sentences containing them can have different cognitive significance** because the existence claims through which their meanings are communicated differ.

67. **The proposition literally encoded in a sentence is object-involving, but the cognitive significance may not be.** The planet Hesperus is "existentialized out" of what is cognitively grasped.

---

## VI. CRITIQUE OF EXTERNALISM

### Semantic Externalism vs. Content Externalism

68. **Semantic externalism (about literal meaning) is true; content externalism (about mental content) is false.**

69. **Semantic externalism:** The literal meaning of "water quenches thirst" differs in world w (where water is H₂O) and world w* (where "water" refers to XYZ). Literal meaning does not supervene on what is "in people's heads."

70. **Content externalism (rejected):** The view that two subjects who are intrinsically identical (leaving aside distal causes) can have different mental contents simply because the distal causes of their states differ.

71. **The information Jones-in-w associates with "water quenches thirst" is identical to what Jones-in-w* associates with it.** Both grasp the same existence claim. What differs is the truth-maker, not the truth-condition or the grasped content.

72. **Truth-makers can vary while truth-conditions remain constant.** "Sally met a man" has the same truth-conditions in all worlds; what satisfies those conditions (the specific man) varies.

---

### The Problem of Self-Knowledge

73. **Externalism creates a dilemma about self-knowledge.** If Hesperus-thoughts require a causal connection to Hesperus, and if I can know with incorrigible certainty that I am thinking about Hesperus, then I would have incorrigible proof of the external world—which is absurd.

74. **The resolution:** When Smith says "I know with incorrigible certainty that I am thinking that Hesperus is lovely," the de dicto (wide-scope) reading is what he grasps: he knows incorrigibly that he is thinking an existence claim. No external object is presupposed in the grasped content.

75. **Whatever is going on in one's Cartesian theatre does not logically necessitate the existence of any external object.** The communicated content is existential and object-neutral.

---

### Against the Causal Theory of Content

76. **Conception is never constituted by a causal connection between subject and object.** Conception is always constituted entirely by knowledge of a description that singles out the object.

77. **A causal connection may be mentioned in the identifying description, but it is never constitutive of the concept itself.**

78. **Causal relations are not fine-grained enough for reference.** Any causal relation I have to the clay is also a causal relation to the statue, but I can refer to one without referring to the other.

79. **The causal theory does not apply to expressions with constituent structure.** My concept of "brown angry cow" is not a causal connection to brown angry cows.

80. **Fodor's extreme causal theory of concepts (CCC) fails.** If some concepts are causal connections while others (complex concepts) are not, the concept of "concept" becomes implausibly disjunctive.

---

### The Arbitrariness of Externalism

81. **Some thoughts clearly have their representational contents essentially** (e.g., the thought that 2+2=4). It is arbitrary to say some thoughts have this property while others (externally individuated thoughts) do not.

82. **Externalist mental content appears causally inert.** What does causal work is the local, intrinsic brain state shared by Smith and Twin-Smith. The difference in distal cause (Mary vs. Twin-Mary) makes no causal difference to behavior.

83. **Jackson and Pettit's attempt to save externalism via "program causes" fails.** The distinction between causal efficacy and causal relevance does not rescue the causal potency of externally individuated content.

---

## VII. NECESSITY A POSTERIORI

84. **The proposition literally encoded in "Hesperus is Phosphorus" is analytic:** it is "Hesperus is Hesperus" (= Venus is Venus), which is trivially necessary.

85. **What is a posteriori is not the proposition encoded but the empirical work needed to discover that "Hesperus" and "Phosphorus" co-refer.** The cognitive significance involves existence claims that are contingent.

86. **"Hesperus might not have been Phosphorus" is, strictly speaking, absurd.** A thing cannot be other than itself. What is not absurd is a claim about our epistemic situation: the perceptions associated with "Hesperus" and "Phosphorus" could have been caused by two distinct objects.

87. **When we say S expresses a "necessary a posteriori" truth, we really mean:** the literal meaning of S is analytic, but empirical work is needed to figure out that fact.

88. **The wide-scope/narrow-scope distinction explains the appearance of "necessary a posteriori."** Giving the necessity operator narrowest scope yields analytic truths; widest scope yields contingent falsehoods.

---

## VIII. EMPTY AND FICTITIOUS NAMES

89. **Empty non-fictitious names (like "Vulcan") were supposed to refer but don't.** The cognitive significance of "Vulcan is a planet" is still an existence claim, explaining why such sentences are cognitively meaningful.

90. **Fictitious names (like "Sherlock Holmes") are not even supposed to refer—they are supposed to be supposed to refer.** Every story operates under an implicit "suppose that" operator.

91. **Within the scope of the fictional supposition, "Sherlock Holmes" functions as a proper name** with its reference fixed by a wide-scope description. But outside that scope, uses of "Sherlock Holmes" are gibberish (or homonymous with the fictional term).

92. **There is no need to posit the actual existence of fictional objects.** Direct reference theory can explain the cognitive significance of fictional sentences by distinguishing literal from communicated meaning and recognizing the existential nature of perception.

93. **Mythical objects (Zeus, Hera) are not fictitious—they were posits of erroneous beliefs, like Vulcan and phlogiston.** They are empty non-fictitious terms.

---

## IX. INDEXICALS, ANAPHORA, AND DEFINITE DESCRIPTIONS

94. **All indexicals contain sortal information.** "He" contains "male"; "today" contains "day"; "now" is short for "this time."

95. **A token of an indexical refers to the contextually salient instance of the relevant sortal.** Context can be physical (pointing) or discursive (what has been discussed).

96. **Pointing is a way of restricting context—narrowing the domain of discourse.** But even with pointing, sortal information is needed to fully determine reference when multiple candidates exist.

97. **"Context" sometimes refers to a region of physical space, sometimes to a region of discursive space.** This does not make the term ambiguous; context is simply the class of entities being spoken about.

98. **Pronouns in quantified sentences (like "he" in "for any man x, if x speaks twelve languages, he is smart") are not bound variables but quoted expressions.** The quantifier is a semantic rule that involves a quotation of the pronoun.

99. **This analysis preserves the intuition that "he" is not ambiguous** between its demonstrative and anaphoric uses—the anaphoric "he" is a quotation within the semantic rule.

100. **Definite descriptions behave exactly like indexicals:** tokens of "the phi" refer to the contextually salient instance of the sortal phi.

101. **Even mathematical descriptions like "the sum of two and three" are context-sensitive in principle.** Since only one entity can instantiate that sortal, it is by default always the salient instance.

---

## X. QUINE ON INTENSIONAL VERBS (CORRECTED)

102. **Quine's analysis of "John wants a sloop" wrongly makes "wants" ambiguous between an objectual attitude (wanting an object) and a propositional attitude (wanting a proposition to be true).**

103. **"Wants" always denotes a propositional attitude.** Even when John wants a specific sloop, what he wants is that a certain proposition be true (that John owns The Winds of War).

104. **The correct de re reading of "John wants a sloop" is:** "There is some particular sloop x such that John wants that John has x"—not Quine's "There is some sloop x such that John wants x."

105. **Intensional verbs are syntactically but not semantically ambiguous.** The ambiguity is in how constituents parse out (wide-scope vs. narrow-scope), not in the meaning of the verb itself.

---

## XI. THE FREGE-RUSSELL SEMANTIC RULE FOR QUANTIFIERS (VINDICATED)

106. **Frege's semantic rule (F): "...some phi..." means "there is some x such that x has phi and ...x..."** This rule is correct and generates exactly the right disambiguations when applied mechanically.

107. **The apparent failure of (F) for de dicto readings results from ignoring that intensional verbs have propositional complements.** "John wants a sloop" is really compressed from "John wants that John has a sloop."

108. **Phonetics sometimes obscures the propositional nature of intensional verb complements.** Once we decompress the sentence, (F) yields both wide-scope and narrow-scope readings correctly.

---

## XII. INDIRECT DISCOURSE

109. **In indirect discourse contexts, expressions do not shift in meaning.** "That Plato snores" denotes the same proposition in "Plato snores," "Fred believes that Plato snores," and "That Plato snores is possible."

110. **What varies across contexts is what is being said about the proposition, not what the proposition-denoting expression means.**

111. **The occurrence of "Plato snores" in "It is possible that Plato snores" is non-truth-functional not because of a meaning shift but because truth has not been ascribed to the proposition—only possibility.**

---

## SUMMARY OF CORE THESES

- **Sentence-tokens refer to functions involving propositions (not truth-values).**
- **Propositions are sets of properties; truth is the instantiation of all members.**
- **The unity of the proposition is explained by the set-theoretic structure containing properties corresponding to all constituents and sub-constituents.**
- **Literal meaning and cognitive significance (communicated meaning) must be distinguished.**
- **Semantic externalism is true; content externalism is false.**
- **The "necessary a posteriori" is really the analytic grasped through empirical investigation.**
- **All noun-phrases denote functions from classes to truth-values, unifying proper names with quantifiers.**
- **Grammar does not refer but assigns referents to expression-sequences.**
- **Individuals are abstractions—properties of states of affairs, not independent substances.**

Here are the positions advocated in this work:

---

## **Positions Extracted from *Pragmatism: Epistemology Posing as Metaphysics***

### **I. Central Thesis**

1. **Each of James's five core pragmatist theses (i)-(v) is false.** However, they are "distorted ways of expressing a number of legitimate insights concerning knowledge and the acquisition thereof."

2. **Pragmatism conflates epistemology with metaphysics/ontology.** What pragmatists incorrectly represent as claims about truth itself are actually claims about our knowledge of truth.

### **II. Critique of Specific Pragmatist Theses**

#### **On (i): "The meaning of a hypothesis lies in its observable consequences"**

3. **The meaning of a hypothesis is NOT identical to its observable consequences.** The relationship between a hypothesis and its observable consequences is always contingent, never analytic.

4. **Observable consequences depend on operative conditions and causal mechanisms.** Different conditions or mechanisms would yield different observational consequences from the same hypothesis.

5. **One can accept a hypothesis H while denying any particular specification of its observable consequences O^ without contradiction.** This proves H is not equivalent to O^.

6. **What (i) distortedly expresses is the truism (i+): "Our knowledge of the veracity of a given hypothesis is based on its observable consequences."** This is true but utterly truistic.

7. **Observable consequences are the "vector sum" of what a hypothesis says AND the subject's relationship to the alleged reality.** They are not purely a function of the hypothesis itself.

#### **On (ii): "A true idea is one that allows us to control the world"**

8. **It is not truth that is empowering; it is knowledge.** Truths are useless unless known.

9. **The property of being power-enhancing belongs to our knowledge of truths, not to those truths per se.**

10. **What (ii) distortedly expresses is (ii+): "Instances of knowledge are ipso facto empowering."** The pragmatist incorrectly attributes to truth what is actually a property of knowledge.

#### **On (iii): "True ideas are those we can assimilate"**

11. **There are highly assimilable false ideas and highly non-assimilable true ones.** (iii) is at best a half-truth.

12. **The pragmatist version (iii*), that truth IS assimilability, is an "outright falsehood."**

13. **What (iii) distortedly expresses is (iii+): "Knowledge is assimilated truth, and beliefs become increasingly knowledge-constitutive as they become increasingly grounded."**

#### **On (iv): "Truth happens to an idea"**

14. **(iv) is false taken literally.** An idea is either true or false; it does not become true.

15. **What (iv) distortedly expresses is (iv+): "The property of being true doesn't have any value until an idea that has that property becomes a piece of knowledge."** The value of trueness eventuates when truth is acquired/known.

#### **On (v): "Truth is made, not discovered"**

16. **(v) is "clearly false."** Truth is discovered, not made.

17. **What (v) distortedly expresses is (v+): "Knowledge is made, not discovered."** We construct knowledge (through operations on data), even though we discover truth.

18. **(v+) is "eminently defensible."**

### **III. The Pragmatist Error Pattern**

19. **Pragmatism systematically confuses properties of truth with properties of knowledge.** Each pragmatist thesis takes something true of knowledge and falsely attributes it to truth itself.

20. **Pragmatism replaces an object-oriented conception of knowledge with a subject-oriented (agent-oriented) conception.** This is what (i)-(v) have in common.

21. **Pragmatism combats an "intellectualist" conception of knowledge and replaces it with an "interactionist" or "operationalist" conception.**

### **IV. Critique of "Classical Epistemology" (CE)**

22. **The negations of (i)-(v) are each correct.** But they *suggest* (without implying) that knowledge-acquisition is purely passive reception.

23. **Classical Epistemology (CE)—that knowledge-acquisition is about passively taking in what exists—may be true in some narrow technical sense, but it is misleading.**

24. **Intellectual discoveries are made by solving practical problems.** Insights are the "collateral damage" of workarounds to practical roadblocks.

### **V. The Practical Origins of Theoretical Knowledge**

25. **Much of physics is fallout from attempts to create better weapons, dams, etc.** Mathematics is constructed to validate this fallout.

26. **Economics was invented to manage the influx of wealth from the New World into Europe.**

27. **Anthropology was invented to help Europeans interact more productively with colonized peoples.**

28. **Psychoanalysis was developed to solve otherwise unsolvable psychiatric problems.**

29. **Even "purely philosophical" problems are not purely philosophical.** Modern epistemology arose in the mid-1600s precisely when modern physics and engineering arose, and when Church doctrines were losing credibility because they interfered with scientific progress.

30. **Cartesian skepticism and Lockean empiricism arose because faith-based epistemology was no longer viable.**

31. **Modern logic began with Boole in the mid-1800s, with the objective of automating reasoning, precisely when physical production was being automated.** This is not coincidental.

### **VI. The Nature of "Purely Theoretical" Knowledge**

32. **"Purely theoretical" problems are problems relating to the mutual coherence of discoveries made in the course of solving practical problems.**

33. **Calculus was invented to compute planetary orbits and ballistics.** "Purely theoretical" questions (infinitesimals, fractals) arose to validate an enormously useful belief-system.

34. **"Purely theoretical" knowledge, insofar as it exists, tends to be stale and one-dimensional.**

35. **"Book knowledge" of principles proves useless in practice.** One learns formalisms based on principles, not the principles themselves, until forced to relearn them through practical application.

36. **"Pure theory" tends to concern itself with mere schemata.** Consequently, "theoretical knowledge" degenerates when not anchored in practical knowledge.

### **VII. The Truth-Utility Relationship**

37. **Ideas are NOT true because they are useful (contra James).** The theorems of trigonometry are useful because they are true, not the other way around.

38. **However, truths are learned—and are worth learning—because they are useful.** It is not absurd to identify the true *insofar as it is worth learning* with the useful.

39. **Theoretical knowledge should exist only as long as it is anchored in practical knowledge.** When it ceases to be so anchored, it degenerates into knowledge of empty formalisms.

40. **Truth is objective.** Either there is an even number of stars in the galaxy or there isn't, regardless of whether this is worth knowing.

41. **Knowledge is a relationship between subject and object (mind and world), and therefore has a subjective side.**

### **VIII. The Biological Function of Intellect**

42. **The intellect exists biologically to help the organism survive and procreate.**

43. **In human beings, intellect has to some extent become autonomous.** Pure mathematicians study relations "for their own sake."

44. **Even autonomous intellectual pursuits investigate coherence-relations internal to datasets that are themselves of interest only because of practical applications.**

### **IX. The Theoretician-Practitioner Relationship**

45. **The pure mathematician/philosopher studies coherence-relations within practically-originated datasets.**

46. **The theoretician is to the practitioner what the martial artist is to the soldier.** The theoretician exercises the ability to do what the practitioner is already doing.

47. **It is the practitioner who determines both what the theoretician studies and the general lines along which he studies it.**

### **X. Art and Theory**

48. **The artist, like the engineer, organizes matter (paint, marble, sound).** But the artist is interested in material relations "for their own sake" rather than for practical applications.

49. **The artist is interested either in deepening understanding of material relations or in exercising his ability to understand them.**

50. **The artist appears to have turned his back on reality only because he is exercising his ability to engage it.** The same holds of the theoretician.

51. **Interest in truth or beauty "for their own sake," though not directly concerned with practical results, is directly concerned with the cognitive basis of our ability to generate practical results.**

52. **James's thesis that truth is utility, though false, may be regarded as a distorted expression of the truth that theoretical activity is indirectly practical.**

---

**Total: 52 positions identified.**

# Positions Extracted from "Pragmatism: Epistemology Posing as Metaphysics"

## Critique of James's Pragmatist Definitions

1. James's five definitions of pragmatism are all false but express distorted versions of legitimate insights about knowledge acquisition
2. The relationship between a hypothesis and its observable consequences is always contingent, never analytic
3. A hypothesis is not equivalent to the description of its observable consequences
4. Observable consequences depend on operative conditions and causal mechanisms
5. One can accept a hypothesis while denying specific observational predictions without self-contradiction
6. Observational equivalence only guarantees actual equivalence when it is analytic (built into meanings)
7. When observational equivalence requires knowledge of physics to establish, the claims make different assertions about the world
8. Two hypotheses being observationally equivalent for reasons of natural law does not make them the same hypothesis
9. The pragmatist position that truth is usefulness is false
10. A claim's usefulness is derived from its truth, presupposing a distinction between truth and usefulness
11. The realist can explain why useful claims are useful; the pragmatist cannot
12. The nature and degree of a claim's usefulness varies from person to person
13. The nature and degree of a claim's usefulness varies from time to time
14. The realist can explain variability in usefulness; the pragmatist cannot
15. True ideas tend to be more assimilable than false ones (trivially true)
16. For an idea to be true is NOT for it to be assimilable (pragmatist error)
17. There are highly assimilable false ideas and highly non-assimilable true ones
18. The tight connection between truth and assimilability is partly an appearance born of selection bias
19. People are dismissive or ignorant of ideas irrelevant to their lives
20. The pragmatist has no way to explain variability in the connection between truth and assimilability
21. The realist explains assimilability as a contingent, circumstance-specific reflection of truth
22. "Truth happens to an idea" is opaque and false when taken literally
23. The claim that truth accrues to an idea merely presupposes that truth equals usefulness without providing independent evidence
24. Truth per se is discovered, not made
25. Knowledge, however, is indeed made (in contrast to truth)

## Categories and Constructs

26. Knives, forks, nations, economies, and armies are NOT merely projective constructs
27. A construct won't be useful unless it tracks objective realities
28. Useful constructs must be hewed to existing causal mechanisms
29. The blade and handle constitute a single object because they form a predictively robust ensemble
30. Practical interests wouldn't be well-served unless constructed collectives have causal and predictive integrity
31. We group things (people into nations, bricks into houses, stars into galaxies) because such groups have dynamic cohesiveness
32. Grouped entities support otherwise hard-to-generate predictions and explanations
33. "Fictions" that are useful track actual causal mechanisms
34. Higher-order entities (nations, people) exist derivatively of more fundamental entities
35. Higher-order entities are causally coherent and constitute undeniably real causal systems
36. A "fiction" isn't useful unless it tracks real causal mechanisms, in which case it isn't really a fiction
37. Scientific discoveries tend to give fine-grained knowledge of causal mechanisms embodied in pre-theoretical cognitive schemata
38. Scientists don't tell us water doesn't exist; they tell us what water is
39. Pre-theoretical categories would be utterly useless unless they represented actual fault-lines in nature

## Pragmatism Reinterpreted as Epistemology

40. Pragmatism has tremendous value as a description of knowledge acquisition, not of truth per se
41. Ideas acquire the property of being knowledge; they do not typically start out as knowledge
42. Acceptance can become increasingly informed and justified over time, becoming knowledge-constitutive
43. The property of being knowledge "happens" to beliefs through justification
44. Knowledge is made in two senses: generating the belief, and constructing its justification
45. Beliefs become knowledge through a process of justification-construction
46. Knowledge is acquired by being constructed
47. Knowledge is assimilated truth
48. Beliefs become increasingly knowledge-constitutive as they become increasingly grounded
49. Instances of knowledge are ipso facto empowering
50. The property of being power-enhancing belongs to knowledge of truths, not to truths per se
51. It isn't truth that is empowering; it is knowledge
52. Our knowledge of a hypothesis's veracity is based on its observable consequences (truistically true)

## The Essence of Pragmatism

53. What James's five theses have in common is combatting an "intellectualist" conception of knowledge
54. Pragmatism replaces an object-oriented conception of knowledge with an agent-oriented one
55. Classical Epistemology suggests knowledge-acquisition is about passively taking in what exists
56. Classical Epistemology implies knowledge-acquisition is antithetical to action
57. Classical Epistemology holds that actions in science are mere precursors to passive observation
58. Classical Epistemology may be true in some narrow technical sense
59. Intellectual discoveries are made by solving practical problems
60. Insights are the "collateral damage" of workarounds to practical roadblocks
61. Much of physics is fallout of attempts to create better weapons and dams
62. Much of mathematics is constructed to validate physics
63. Economics was invented to manage the influx of wealth from the New World into Europe
64. Anthropology was invented to help Europeans interact with colonized natives
65. Psychoanalysis was developed to solve otherwise unsolvable psychiatric problems

## Philosophy and Historical Context

66. "Purely philosophical" problems are not in fact purely philosophical
67. Modern epistemology came into existence in the mid-1600s alongside modern physics and engineering
68. Church doctrines lost credibility because they interfered with scientific progress
69. With faith-based epistemology no longer possible, philosophers developed non-dogmatic epistemologies
70. Cartesian skepticism and Lockean empiricism arose from the need for non-dogmatic epistemology
71. The discipline of logic began in the mid-1800s with Boole's objective to automate reasoning
72. Logic emerged precisely when physical production was being automated (not coincidental)
73. Once a discipline is launched, it can and should concern itself with "purely theoretical" problems
74. "Purely theoretical" problems are problems relating to mutual coherence of discoveries made solving practical problems
75. Calculus was invented to compute planetary orbits and ballistics-related problems
76. "Purely theoretical" questions about infinitesimals and fractals arose only because they validated an enormously useful belief-system

## Theory vs. Practice

77. "Purely theoretical" knowledge tends to be stale and one-dimensional
78. "Book knowledge" of principles often proves useless in practice
79. Formal learning provides schemata based on principles, not the principles themselves
80. Real understanding requires relearning principles to solve practical problems
81. Pure theory tends to concern itself with mere schemata
82. "Theoretical knowledge" tends to be stale and one-dimensional when unanchored from practice
83. The theorems of trigonometry are useful because they are true, not the other way around
84. Truths are learned—and are worth learning—because they are useful
85. Theoretical knowledge should exist as long as it is anchored in practical knowledge
86. When theoretical knowledge ceases to be anchored in practice, it degenerates into knowledge of empty formalisms
87. While absurd to identify the true with the useful, it is not absurd to identify truth-worth-learning with the useful

## Nature of Truth and Knowledge

88. Truth is objective (either there is an even number of stars or there isn't)
89. The truth of a matter may not be worth knowing
90. Knowledge is a relationship between subject and object—between mind and world
91. There is a subjective side to knowledge
92. The intellect exists biologically to help the organism survive and procreate
93. In human beings, intellect has to some extent become autonomous
94. The applied mathematician is interested in mathematical relations because of practical applications
95. The pure mathematician is interested in relations "for their own sake"
96. The pure mathematician studies coherence-relations internal to a dataset of practical interest
97. The philosopher investigates coherence-relations internal to datasets of practical application
98. In "disinterestedly" contemplating truth, the theoretician exercises his ability to do what the practitioner does
99. The theoretician is to the practitioner what the martial artist is to the soldier
100. The practitioner determines what the theoretician studies and the general lines of study

## Art and Theory

101. Like the engineer, the artist organizes matter (paint, marble, sound)
102. The engineer is interested in material relations for practical applications; the artist "for their own sake"
103. The artist is interested either in deepening understanding of relations or exercising ability to understand them
104. The artist appears to have turned his back on reality only because he is exercising his ability to engage it
105. Interest in truth or beauty "for their own sake" concerns the cognitive basis of our ability to generate practical results
106. James's thesis that truth is utility, though false, is a distorted expression of the truth about the practical grounding of theoretical knowledge

# Positions Extracted from the "Mac" Text on Panic Attacks

## Causal Direction of Panic Attacks

1. Panic attacks are often consequences of inability to perform, not causes of it
2. The claim that inability to work results from panic attacks often inverts the actual causal direction
3. Panic attacks result from inability to do work, not the reverse

## Living a Lie as Source of Panic

4. Living a lie causes panic attacks
5. Living a lie places one in an objectively threatening situation
6. Objectively threatening situations produce panic as a response
7. Panic is a response to genuine objective threat, not imagined threat

## The Neurotic Element

8. Panic attacks can be simultaneously justified by circumstances and neurotic in nature
9. The neurotic element in panic attacks consists in self-deception
10. Self-deception is what makes an otherwise justified panic response neurotic
11. Neurosis involves being unable to consciously acknowledge one's actual situation

## Adaptive vs. Non-Adaptive Responses

12. The adaptive response to being in over one's head is to change one's self-concept
13. Changing self-concept should lead to changing life-course
14. The non-adaptive response is to continue living a lie
15. Acknowledging "this is not what I am cut out for" is a healthy, non-neurotic response
16. Many people in similar situations simply acknowledge their unsuitability and move on
17. Conscious acknowledgment of unsuitability prevents panic attacks
18. One can remain in a disliked situation without panic attacks if one consciously acknowledges the situation
19. Conscious dislike of a situation is distinct from panic about it
20. Conscious negative affect does not produce panic; repressed threat-awareness does

## The Two-Factor Model of Panic

21. Panic attacks result from a confluence of two factors, not one
22. First factor: being seriously in over one's head (objective threat)
23. Second factor: inability to admit that fact without shattering one's self-concept
24. Neither factor alone produces panic attacks
25. Being in over one's head without self-deception produces conscious discomfort, not panic
26. Self-deception without objective threat would not produce panic attacks
27. The combination of real threat plus inability to acknowledge it produces panic

## Self-Concept and Its Role

28. Inflated self-concepts prevent acknowledgment of one's limitations
29. An inflated self-concept can make acknowledging reality psychologically catastrophic
30. The cost of admitting limitation is forfeiting an inflated self-concept
31. People protect inflated self-concepts at the cost of psychological health
32. Self-concept preservation can override rational self-assessment
33. Shattering of self-concept is experienced as worse than the panic itself

## General Theory of Panic Attacks

34. People have panic attacks when actually threatened but unable to admit it
35. The inability to admit threat stems from needing to protect an inflated self-concept
36. Panic attacks signal the presence of both real threat and self-deception about that threat
37. Panic attacks are diagnostic of the combination of genuine danger and denial

## Implications for Understanding Neurosis

38. Neurosis involves being in genuine danger while denying that danger
39. The "neurotic" aspect is not the fear itself but the self-deception surrounding it
40. Neurotic symptoms can be reality-based (response to actual threat) while still being neurotic (involving denial)
41. What makes a response neurotic is not its intensity but its unconscious, self-deceived character
42. A fully conscious response to the same situation would not be neurotic

## Practical Implications

43. Treating panic attacks requires addressing the underlying inability, not just the panic
44. Treating panic attacks requires addressing the self-deception, not just the situation
45. Accurate self-assessment prevents panic attacks
46. Realistic self-concept is prophylactic against panic
47. Leaving an unsuitable situation is healthier than remaining with denial
48. Even staying in an unsuitable situation is manageable if done with full conscious acknowledgment

## On Incompetence and Self-Presentation

49. Some people in demanding positions are genuinely incapable of the work
50. Incapacity can be extreme (below average 5th-grade level in graduate school)
51. Extreme incapacity combined with high-status positioning creates unsustainable situations
52. The gap between self-presentation and actual capacity creates psychological strain
53. Papers that appear to be papers may not actually be papers (form without substance)

**Positions Identified in "Ninety Paradoxes of Philosophy and Psychology"**

1. Losers hyper-value hierarchies that oppress them in order to prevent others from escaping
2. Useless employees are the most zealous enforcers of organizational rules
3. Independent writers face an unbreakable vicious circle requiring pre-existing popularity to gain popularity
4. Communications technology connects us logically while disconnecting us emotionally
5. US educational funding creates bloated bureaucracies rather than improving education
6. Public education spending is soft communism—government jobs displacing private sector productivity
7. Law enforcement jobs are largely fake jobs created to buy votes
8. Rationality is reflective and can break decision deadlocks that intelligence cannot
9. Obsessive-compulsive symptoms wither when fought rather than indulged
10. Primerica functions primarily as a welfare-qualification scheme for fake employment documentation
11. Optimism is a form of denial rooted in insecurity; self-belief is confidence-driven realism
12. The people who should be most grateful lack the integrity to give credit where due
13. Medium-funny comedians succeed more than genuinely funny ones
14. Self-identified liberals have higher environmental footprints than self-identified conservatives
15. Conservatives tend toward eco-friendly do-it-yourselfism; liberals toward group-dependency
16. Progress for humanity often renders specific individuals obsolete
17. Conformity to countercultures (goths, hippies) is still conformity
18. Fake rebellion increases where legitimate rebellion is dangerous
19. Old-guard hippies are the establishment; those they oppose are the actual rebels
20. Lawyers create the litigious environment that makes lawyers necessary
21. Suicide harms only those who care about the victim
22. In democracies, people oppress themselves
23. Computers eliminating work paradoxically increases work done
24. Economic efficiency increases unemployment (excluding artificial government jobs)
25. Recursive definitions cannot be recursively defined
26. Formal truth cannot be formally characterized
27. Automation cannot itself be automated
28. "Heterological" when applied to itself contains an undefined pronoun/free variable and is neither true nor false
29. The Liar Paradox: propositions, not words, bear truth values; "I am lying" is simply false when stated perspicuously
30. Berry's Paradox dissolves by distinguishing canonical from non-canonical naming
31. Wittgenstein's rule-following paradox collapses into the trivial point that erroneous hypotheses may fit restricted datasets
32. Quine's indeterminacy of translation thesis is false and presupposes broken behaviorist psychology
33. Sorites paradoxes are solved by replacing binary predicates with comparatives plus contextually-supplied benchmarks
34. A single grain of millet does make a sound—the "no sound" claim is like saying a stereo makes no sound because a deaf person can't hear it
35. To be at rest requires failing to move during a non-null interval; instantaneous position does not constitute rest
36. If irresistible forces exist, unmovable objects cannot, and vice versa (Asimov's solution)
37. Stringent therapist licensing reduces therapist effectiveness
38. Psychiatric treatment often causes more harm than it cures
39. More money spent on economic research yields more useless results
40. Lawyers are better at defending the guilty than the innocent
41. Unions prevent job creation, then claim credit for protecting the jobs that remain
42. People with modest responsibilities deliberately underperform to inflate their importance
43. Professors withhold information to artificially inflate its perceived value
44. Zeno's paradox dissolves because any finite distance can be represented as an infinite series sum
45. Places are constituents, not occupants, of space-time and therefore don't themselves have places
46. The probability of a coin landing in any exact region is infinitesimally small but not zero
47. High self-awareness correlates with both well-being and neurotic distress because self-criticism enables adaptation but causes suffering
48. Trying not to think of something initiates a cognitive process without letting it run its course
49. Schizophrenics respond better to treatment in developing countries because restoring self-esteem is easier where expectations are lower
50. Anti-trust laws hurt consumers when applied to firms with large market share due to superior competition
51. Anti-trust laws help consumers when applied to firms that restrict competition
52. Tenure eliminates economic incentives to do good work or hire threatening talent
53. Vindictive leaders are less likely to be overthrown than benevolent ones
54. Conceptual analyses can be informative because information-load depends on how something is said, not just what is said
55. Fitch's Paradox is not a paradox but a proof that not all truths can be known
56. People at the bottom of hierarchies enforce those hierarchies against peers trying to rise
57. Grassroots movements require leaders, but leaders need pre-existing power to gain followers—making true grassroots movements impossible
58. Incompetence has survival value because hyper-competence provokes resentment
59. Incompetent people get over-promoted (seen as controllable); hyper-competent people get under-promoted (seen as threatening)
60. School psychologists must blame children rather than institutions to keep their jobs
61. Useless laws give states incentive to criminalize populations
62. Defense lawyers' livelihoods depend on laws remaining punitive
63. Superabundant scholarship creates vested interests in suppressing genuine insights
64. Omniscience is incoherent because knowledge of one kind may exclude knowledge of another kind
65. An omniscient being has a frozen belief-set and therefore cannot decide anything
66. The Heavy Rock Paradox fails because an unliftable rock for an omnipotent being is a logical impossibility like a four-sided triangle
67. Problem-solving institutions have incentives to perpetuate problems when solving them would eliminate the institution
68. Hospitals solve problems because new patients always exist; philosophy departments suppress solutions because their practitioners cannot handle replacement problems
69. Race-studies departments exacerbate racial tensions
70. Authors don't believe everything they write—much is written because it seems warranted, not because it's believed true
71. Bhartrhari's Paradox is a logical blunder: "some things cannot be described" ascribes no property to any particular object
72. "Some things cannot be described" is true (given any language L, non-denumerably many objects cannot be described in L) and false (for any object, some possible language can describe it)
73. The Barber Paradox proves such a barber cannot exist
74. Russell's reasoning about the set of all non-self-containing sets is wrong; "doesn't self-contain" when not elliptical for a non-reflexive statement contains an undefined pronoun
75. The Axiom of Comprehension is correct
76. The Unexpected Hanging Paradox dissolves because "surprise" is relative to time—Smith lacks information until the day of hanging
77. Ross's Paradox: imperatival logic has world-to-word direction of fit, so validity flows from general to specific (opposite of statement logic)
78. The Lottery Paradox: high probability is not certainty; acceptance is pragmatic, belief is alethic
79. Beliefs are not justified on strictly statistical grounds but by explanatory superiority
80. Slackers work harder than non-slackers because defensive positioning forces them to accept unfavorable terms
81. Extremely successful people work mainly at choosing what work to do, not at doing work proper
82. Economic efficiency makes individuals economically useless and welfare-dependent
83. The Raven Paradox dissolves because only principled (nomic/causal) generalizations can be confirmed, and these are not equivalent to their contrapositives
84. Enumerative induction is either non-existent or illegitimate
85. Knowledge of the future is based on continuities, not regularities/repetitions
86. Causation is continuation, not constant conjunction
87. Regularities tell us where to look for continuities but never constitute causal knowledge
88. We can know singular causal claims without knowing of any similar cases
89. Goodman's "new riddle of induction" is a non-riddle because induction isn't based on concomitances
90. Names are mere labels that "pick up" descriptive information through acquisition context
91. Kripke is right about the semantics of proper names, but semantics isn't known in a vacuum
92. Knowledge starts with beliefs that are not knowledge; beliefs can be justified without the owner knowing the justification
93. Seeking knowledge is knowing a description is instantiated but not knowing the instance; finding knowledge is learning what satisfies that description
94. The ability to learn presupposes constitutive knowledge that isn't acquired
95. Content externalism has absurd consequences (content has no psychological effect; one cannot know what one is thinking about)
96. Thoughts about the external world are had via self-referential thoughts, explaining how different-referent thoughts can be subjectively identical and coincide in content
97. The more legal right a nation has to secede, the less moral right it has (legitimate laws reduce legitimacy of secession)
# Positions Extracted from "Ninety Paradoxes of Philosophy and Psychology"

## Epistemology & Logic

1. Rationality is inherently reflective; intelligence is not
2. Intelligence answers "what is objectively possible"; rationality answers "what do my limited resources make incumbent on me"
3. Recursively defined terms that contain undefined self-references are meaningless (contain free variables)
4. There is no recursive definition of the class of recursive definitions
5. There is no formal characterization of formal truth
6. Everything can be automated except automation itself
7. 'True of itself' is meaningful only when it abbreviates a non-reflexive construction
8. The Liar Paradox is solved by distinguishing words from underlying propositions
9. Canonical vs. non-canonical descriptions resolve Berry's Paradox
10. Knowledge of the future is based on continuities, not regularities/repetitions
11. Enumerative induction is either non-existent or illegitimate
12. Causation is continuation, not mere constant conjunction
13. Only principled (nomic/causal) generalizations can be confirmed, not accidental ones
14. Logically equivalent statements are not necessarily confirmationally equivalent when one has causal content
15. Goodman's "new riddle of induction" is a non-riddle because induction is based on continuities
16. A belief can be justified without its owner knowing what that justification is
17. Knowledge begins with beliefs that are not themselves knowledge
18. Seeking knowledge involves knowing a description is instantiated without knowing the instance
19. The ability to learn presupposes constitutive (non-acquired) knowledge
20. Acceptance is pragmatic; belief is alethic—they are distinct
21. Beliefs are not justified on strictly statistical grounds but by explanatory power
22. Self-referential thoughts about external objects explain how thoughts with different referents can be subjectively identical and share content
23. Self-ascriptive thoughts of the self-referential kind cannot possibly be false
24. Content externalism leads to absurd consequences about psychological properties
25. Omniscience is an incoherent concept (knowledge of one kind may exclude knowledge of another)
26. The concept of an omniscient decider is incoherent (omniscient beings never decide anything)
27. The Heavy Rock Paradox doesn't undermine omnipotence—incoherent conditions don't count as limitations

## Philosophy of Language

28. Names are non-descriptive mere labels but "pick up" descriptive information through acquisition
29. Semantics vs. knowledge of semantics: same literal meaning can convey different information
30. Frege's Puzzle is solved by recognizing that names carry associated property-sets for speakers
31. Kripke is right about semantics of proper names, but semantic knowledge isn't acquired in a vacuum
32. Bhartrhari's Paradox commits a fallacy—"some things cannot be described" doesn't predicate of any particular object

## Philosophy of Mind & Psychology

33. Obsessive-compulsive symptoms wither when fought, worsen when indulged
34. Attempting not to have certain thoughts makes them more likely (ironic process theory)
35. Self-awareness correlates with both well-being and distress
36. Self-awareness is a precondition for adaptation
37. Optimism is a form of denial rooted in insecurity; self-belief is confidence-driven realism
38. Schizophrenic outcomes differ by country because self-esteem is easier to restore where standards are lower
39. High sex drive in males may reduce sexual success by putting off women
40. People who try to avoid work end up working harder than those who don't

## Social & Institutional Dynamics

41. Losers hyper-value the hierarchies that oppress them to use against climbers
42. The more useless an employee, the more they toe the organization's line
43. Independent writers face a vicious circle: no reviews without popularity, no popularity without reviews
44. Communications technology connects logically while disconnecting emotionally
45. Information can be described without being disclosed, resolving Arrow's Information Paradox
46. US educational funding creates fake employment, not educational improvement
47. Public school funding is soft communism—dead hand of bureaucracy replacing market
48. Less money spent on public schools, the better
49. Self-identified liberals have higher environmental footprints than conservatives
50. Conservatives tend toward eco-friendly do-it-yourselfism; liberals toward group-dependence
51. Progress for humanity often means rendering specific individuals obsolete
52. "Rebels" in societies with few legitimate reasons to rebel are conformists
53. Where rebellion is legitimate, it's dangerous; fake rebels emerge where it's safe
54. Old-guard hippies are the establishment; those they trample are the real rebels
55. Lawyers create the litigiousness that makes lawyers necessary
56. Suicide only hurts those who care about the victim
57. In democracies, people oppress themselves; in non-democracies, government oppresses people
58. Computers eliminating work leads to more work being done
59. Economic efficiency increases unemployment (excluding government-created jobs)
60. Vindictive leaders are less likely to be overthrown than benevolent ones
61. Tenure prevents intellectual freedom by removing incentives and enabling gatekeeping
62. Institutions that exist to solve problems have incentives to prevent solutions
63. Whether an institution solves or prevents problems depends on whether solving creates new business
64. Philosophy departments are inhospitable to solutions because solving one problem doesn't create business for existing personnel
65. Race/gender/gay studies departments exacerbate the tensions they claim to address
66. Hospitals solve problems because there are always more patients
67. Useless laws give states incentive to criminalize populations
68. Possession of small amounts of drugs is punished more harshly than assault because drug laws need to seem necessary
69. Defense lawyers' livelihoods depend on keeping drugs illegal
70. Superabundance of scholarship creates institutional roadblocks to progress
71. People deeply vested in existing scholarship have incentives to suppress genuine insights
72. Bureaucrats requesting "more information" are determined not to help
73. Knowing too much about someone leads to making excuses for them
74. It's only when someone has no merit that it becomes politically obligatory to say they have merit
75. People who should be most grateful are least grateful (they lack integrity)
76. Medium-funny comedians succeed more than actually funny ones
77. The more stringent therapist licensing, the less effective therapists are
78. Psychiatric treatment often causes more harm than it cures
79. Money spent on economic research produces increasingly useless results
80. Lawyers are better at defending the guilty than the innocent
81. Unions prevent job-getting, creating the need for unions to protect job-keeping
82. People with modest responsibilities intentionally underperform to inflate importance
83. Professors withhold information to make it seem more valuable
84. School psychologists must blame students rather than schools to keep their jobs
85. Grassroots movements cannot exist because leaders need pre-existing power
86. Incompetence has survival value (meek inherit the earth)
87. Hyper-competent people are under-promoted; incompetent people are over-promoted
88. The lower someone is in a hierarchy, the more they enforce it against peers
89. People on welfare use Primerica as fake employment to maintain benefits
90. Slackers work harder because they're playing defensive, accepting whatever comes

## Metaphysics & Philosophy of Mathematics

91. Space-time regions don't have places—they are constituents, not occupants, of space-time
92. If an infinitely large class contains one x, chances of choosing x are infinitesimal but not nil
93. Sorites paradoxes are solved by replacing binary predicates with comparatives plus contextual benchmarks
94. A single grain of millet does make a sound—scale-relativity resolves the paradox
95. Motion exists; being "at rest" requires a non-null interval
96. Irresistible forces and unmovable objects are mutually exclusive by definition
97. The Hilbert-Bernays Paradox is resolved: self-referential definitions yield no referent
98. Any finite number can be represented as sum of infinite series, so traversing infinitely many distances in finite time is unparadoxical

## Ethics & Political Philosophy

99. Anti-trust laws hurt consumers when applied to efficient competitors, help when applied to competition-restrictors
100. The more legal right to secede, the less moral right (legitimate laws reduce secession justification)

## Philosophy of Action

101. Imperatival logic has world-to-word direction of fit; alethic logic has word-to-world
102. In imperative logic, validity flows general to specific; in statement logic, specific to general
103. Ross's Paradox is solved by direction-of-fit asymmetry

## Miscellaneous

104. Authors don't believe everything they write—they judge arguments relatively probative
105. The Preface Paradox dissolves because authors write what they judge warranted, not what they believe true
106. Wittgenstein's rule-following paradox collapses into the trivial point that erroneous hypotheses may fit restricted data
107. Quine's indeterminacy thesis presupposes and exposes the brokenness of behaviorist psychology
108. The Barber Paradox proves such a barber cannot exist; Russell's set paradox proves such a set cannot exist
109. The Axiom of Comprehension is not refuted by Russell's paradox—"doesn't self-contain" requires non-reflexive interpretation
110. Fitch's Paradox is not a paradox but a proof that not all truths can be known
111. The Unexpected Hanging Paradox is solved by recognizing "surprise" is relative to information available at each time

KUCZYNSKI POSITION STATEMENT ON CHOMSKY 


TEXT INTELLIGENCE REPORT
Generated: 12/7/2025, 1:19:42 AM
Source Length: 1878 words
LLM Used: grok

--- KEY QUOTATIONS ---
No quotes extracted

--- ANNOTATED CITATIONS ---
No annotated quotes

--- COMPRESSED REWRITE ---
[Chunk 1]
undefined

[Chunk 2]
undefined

--- DATABASE ---
═══ CHUNK 1 ═══
undefined

═══ CHUNK 2 ═══
undefined

--- TEXT ANALYZER ---
═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 1 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════

undefined

═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 2 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════

undefined

--- MAJOR VIEWS ---
1. VIEW: Noam Chomsky made two contributions to philosophy
   EVIDENCE: "Noam Chomsky's two contributions to philosophy are: 1. The so-called poverty of stimulus argument for the existence of pre- experiential knowledge, and 2. His argument for the existence of sub-personal thought."

2. VIEW: The poverty of stimulus argument supports the existence of pre-experiential knowledge
   EVIDENCE: "The so-called poverty of stimulus argument for the existence of pre- experiential knowledge"

3. VIEW: Chomsky argues for the existence of sub-personal thought
   EVIDENCE: "His argument for the existence of sub-personal thought."

4. VIEW: A rock, chair, or tree cannot learn a language even if exposed to the same stimuli as humans
   EVIDENCE: "If you bombarded a rock, or a chair, or a tree with those same sounds and patterns of light, would it learn a language? No."

5. VIEW: A dog, cat, or squirrel cannot understand language even if exposed to the same stimuli as humans
   EVIDENCE: "What about a dog, a cat, or a squirrel? If such a creature were placed in circumstances just like those that, in you, led to your having the ability to understand these very words, would that creature be able to understand these words? Of course not."

6. VIEW: Humans learn language due to their innate cognitive structure
   EVIDENCE: "Because of your innate cognitive structure, you---unlike a cat or a dog, not to mention a rock or a tree---respond to those sounds and light-patterns in the right way."

7. VIEW: Innate cognitive structure triggers language acquisition in humans
   EVIDENCE: "In you, but not in a cat or a dog or a tree, they trigger a constellation of responses that eventuate knowledge of a language."

8. VIEW: Without pre-existing cognitive structure, no amount of sensory stimulation would lead to language acquisition
   EVIDENCE: "If you did not ab initio all but know a language---if your cognitive structure were not already there, in a very developed state, just waiting for a little bit of experience to 'turn it on', so to speak---then no amount of sensory of stimulation would do the trick."

9. VIEW: The mind's innate structure enables acquisition of cognitive competence
   EVIDENCE: "It is your mind's innate structure that enables your mind to acquire linguistic ability and, by analogous reasoning, to acquire any of the various forms of cognitive competence of which it is now in possession."

10. VIEW: Humans have pre-experiential or a priori knowledge
   EVIDENCE: "And since this pre-experiential structure is cognitive in nature, it follows that you have pre-experiential---or, to use the philosophical term, a priori---knowledge of truths on the basis of which you are able to organize the various experiences that you have and to distill their contents into the various forms of cognitive competence that you have"

11. VIEW: People are not consciously aware of the cognitive operations described by Chomsky
   EVIDENCE: "'But I was not aware of these various cognitive operations of which you speak,' it will be said."

12. VIEW: Psychoanalysis does not make one conscious of the cognitive operations posited by Chomsky
   EVIDENCE: "And, what's more, it's not as though, if you were subjected to psycho- analysis, you would then be conscious of the various cognitive operations posited by Chomsky"

13. VIEW: The knowledge Chomsky discusses is not knowledge that the mind has, but is the mind itself
   EVIDENCE: "The knowledge that Chomsky is talking about is not knowledge that your mind has; that knowledge is your mind."

14. VIEW: Knowledge that one has presupposes an existing cognitive structure
   EVIDENCE: "Knowledge that you have is knowledge that presupposes an existing cognitive structure."

15. VIEW: A priori knowledge is the cognitive framework itself, not internal to it
   EVIDENCE: "The a priori knowledge that Chomsky is talking about is not internal to your cognitive framework: it is your cognitive framework."

16. VIEW: One is not aware of the cognitive framework because it is the basis of awareness
   EVIDENCE: "You are not aware of it, because it itself is your awareness."

17. VIEW: One can be aware of oneself, but this awareness is of the contents created by the cognitive architecture
   EVIDENCE: "Yes, you are aware of yourself---in the sense that you are aware of many of the feelings, thoughts, etc. created by your cognitive archicture."

18. VIEW: Mental contents like feelings are transient, but the cognitive framework remains constant
   EVIDENCE: "The feeling of sadness that you are now consciously experiencing will come and go. Yesterday, it didn't exist; now it does; tomorrow, once more, it won't. But you will be there all the same."

19. VIEW: The sort of ignorance of self discussed by Freud presupposes some other, more fundamental knowledge of self
   EVIDENCE: "sort of ignorance of self discussed by Freud presupposes some other, more fundamental knowledge of self"

20. VIEW: Beneath rationalizations there is self-knowledge
   EVIDENCE: "Beneath your rationalizations there is self-knowledge."

21. VIEW: Knowledge of sensations, perceptions, beliefs, deliberations, and so on is knowledge of the contents of one's cognitive framework
   EVIDENCE: "all of this is knowledge of the contents of your cognitve framework."

22. VIEW: The things known are to the mind itself what the occupants of a hotel are to the hotel
   EVIDENCE: "The things known are to your mind itself what the occupants of a hotel are to the hotel."

23. VIEW: The structure of the hotel imposes strict and rigidly defined limits on the way in which people in the hotel can move about and interact
   EVIDENCE: "The structure of the hotel imposes strict and rigidly defined limits on the way in which people in the hotel can move about and interact;"

24. VIEW: Our cognitive structure can be deduced from our thought-patterns
   EVIDENCE: "our cognitive structure can be deduced from our thought-patterns."

25. VIEW: Thoughts, perceptions, and feelings are not themselves the cognitive structure but are its productions
   EVIDENCE: "But those thoughts, perceptions, and feelings are not themselves that structure. They are its productions."

26. VIEW: When you are 'aware of yourself', the thing you are aware of is not your cognitive framework itself but some product of that framework
   EVIDENCE: "And when you are, as we say, 'aware of yourself', the thing you are aware of is not, strictly speaking, your self. It is not, that is to say-your cognitive framework itself. Rather, it is some product of that framework."

27. VIEW: The knowledge that is your cognitive framework is not the object of any instance of self-awareness
   EVIDENCE: "the knowledge that is your cognitive framework, rather than being a product of it---that is not the object of any instance of these misleadingly so-called cases of 'self'- awareness."

28. VIEW: The framework-constitutive structures and operations that mediate learning and cognitive competence are deeply unconscious
   EVIDENCE: "the framework-constitutive structures and operations that mediate your learning and, in due course your using, language, and that mediate other forms of cognitive competence---that is why those structures and operations are, to use Chomsky's term, deeply unconsicous,"

29. VIEW: The contents of the Freudian unconscious are unconscious, but not deeply so
   EVIDENCE: "unlike the contents of the Freudian unconscious, which are unconscious, but not deeply so."

30. VIEW: The structure involved in acquiring knowledge and cognitive competence is not strictly physiological in nature
   EVIDENCE: "Why not regard all of the structure involved in our acquiring knowledge and cognitive competence as being strictly physiological in nature?"

31. VIEW: Languages are both productive and systematic
   EVIDENCE: "Languages are therefoore both productive, meaning that linguistic epxressions can be combined into larger expressions, and systematic, meaning that the parts composing complex expressions can be re-arranged to form other complex expressions."

32. VIEW: The systematicity and productivity of language are reflections of corresponding facts about our cognitive structure
   EVIDENCE: "Given that we use and therefore understand language, it follows that the systematicity and productivity of language are reflections of corresponding facts about our cognitive structure."

33. VIEW: Language is productive and systematic because our minds are productive and systematic
   EVIDENCE: "Language is productive and systematic because our minds are productive and systematic."

34. VIEW: Cognitive abilities are mediated or implemented by physiology
   EVIDENCE: "Obviously these cognitive abilities are mediated or implemented by physiology---by 'wetware' of some kind or other."

35. VIEW: All knowledge is encoded in brain-structures
   EVIDENCE: "And obviously all knowledge, whether pre- or post-experiental, is encoded in brain-structures of some kind or other, the same being true of all aptitudes."

36. VIEW: Pure physiology would only enable stereotyped responses to situations
   EVIDENCE: "if we were dealing with pure physiology---as opposed to physiology that encoded insight and intelligence, that embodied an undersatnding of interrelations of logical dependence and of content- appropriateness---if that were the case, then experience, supposing we were even able to have it in the first place, would enable us only to respond to situations in a few stereotyped ways:"

37. VIEW: Where there is pure physiology, there can be training but not teaching
   EVIDENCE: "Where there is pure physiology, as opposed to physiology that mediates that intelligence, there can be training, but there cannot be teaching."

38. VIEW: The ability to use and learn language is proof that pre-experiential structural properties are cognitive in nature
   EVIDENCE: "The fact that we can use language in the ways in which we can use it--- and the very fact that we can learn it in the first place---is proof that these pre-experiential structural properties of ours are not physiological, but are rather cognitive in nature."

# 100 Positions from "A Quasi-Materialist, Quasi-Dualist Solution to the Mind-Body Problem"

## I. Core Thesis and Methodology

1. Physical objects are projections or isomorphs of objects whose essential properties are mental.

2. The constitutive (non-structural, non-phenomenal) properties of physical objects are mental—properties encountered only through introspection.

3. The physical chair is a "shadow" of an object exactly like it whose essential properties are mental.

4. This view explains the apparent responsiveness of mental to physical (and vice versa) without the problems of materialism, dualistic interactionism, or epiphenomenalism.

5. The concept of physicality is fundamentally a structural concept.

6. When we ascribe physicality to something, we are saying it has structural or formal properties of a certain kind.

7. Objects cannot have only structural properties; such properties must be "fleshed out" by non-structural content.

8. The properties that embody a structure cannot themselves always be purely structural, on pain of vicious regress.

9. Non-structural properties are therefore non-physical.

10. Physical entities may be regarded as Kantian "phenomena" whose corresponding "noumena" are mental.

## II. The Causal Closure Argument

11. If the mental can affect or be affected by the physical, then the mental must itself be physical.

12. The physical world is explanatorily closed—the cause of any physical event is another physical event.

13. If mental events were not physical, yet could affect physical events, exceptions to physical laws would be generated.

14. Every time something within the scope of physical law is affected by something outside that scope, an exception to that law is generated.

15. The physical world is explanatorily self-contained—all available empirical data supports this.

16. To explain bodily movements, it is not in principle necessary to take mental states into account.

17. Human bodies no more fall outside the scope of physical law than do rocks and billiard balls.

18. Either the mental doesn't affect the physical, or the mental is itself physical.

19. If the mental could affect the physical without being physical, there would be no laws of physical nature.

20. Interactionism is true only if materialism is also true.

## III. Against Epiphenomenalism

21. Epiphenomenalism (matter affects mind but not vice versa) is not tenable.

22. Causation is bidirectional: roughly, x affects y just in case y affects x (for direct causation).

23. Activity and passivity are concepts that apply to the human, not the physical, world.

24. If physical events bring about mental events, then mental events bring about physical events.

25. Dualism is incompatible with any kind of interactionism, no matter how limited.

26. If x affects y directly, y must affect x in its turn.

27. Mediated causation can be unidirectional, but direct causation cannot be.

## IV. Against Non-Reductive Materialism

28. Non-reductive materialism holds that mental entities are not identical with paradigmatically physical entities but are physical anyway.

29. Laws discovered by physical sciences govern paradigmatically physical entities alone.

30. An object that couldn't interact with any paradigmatically physical entity wouldn't qualify as physical.

31. A "physical" object with no effect on atoms, molecules, or nerve-endings would be totally undetectable.

32. If mental entities are physical, they must be capable of affecting paradigmatically physical entities.

33. Non-reductive materialism is inconsistent with the fact that the physical world is causally and explanatorily self-contained.

34. Non-reductive materialism is Cartesian dualism in disguise.

35. Non-reductive materialism is a dualism of paradigmatically physical and non-paradigmatically physical.

36. "Non-paradigmatically physical" covers what Descartes called "mental"; "paradigmatically physical" covers what he called "physical."

37. Anything not paradigmatically physical isn't physical at all.

## V. Against Reductive Materialism

38. Reductive materialism holds that first-person entities are identical with or constituted by paradigmatically physical entities.

39. Constitution differs from identity: a figurine made of clay is not identical with the clay.

40. For a physical state of affairs to obtain in region R is for certain physical concepts to be instantiated in R.

41. For a mental state of affairs to obtain in R is for certain mental concepts to be instantiated in R.

42. The term "concept" has two senses: subjective/psychological and objective/logical.

43. Concepts in the objective sense are platonic entities existing independently of mental states.

44. Materialism must hold that if physical concepts are instantiated in R, this necessitates that mental concepts are instantiated there.

45. "Necessitates" means metaphysically necessary—true in all possible circumstances.

46. For any two concepts C and C', if one grasps them, one has all information needed to determine what necessary relations hold between them.

47. Concepts are platonic entities not among constituents of the spatio-temporal world.

48. Concepts don't stand in spatio-temporal or causal relations to one another.

49. The only thing distinguishing one concept from another is its constitution—its essential properties.

50. One can identify a concept only by its constitution, unlike spatio-temporal entities which can be identified by their relations to oneself.

## VI. The A Priori Knowledge Argument

51. If one knows what physical states of affairs obtain in R, one cannot deduce what mental states of affairs obtain there.

52. Knowledge of atomic interactions in someone's brain provides no deductive basis for inferring mental states.

53. There is an a priori route from micro-facts to macro-facts, but not vice versa.

54. If you know the atomic facts, you can bootstrap to knowledge of physical facts at any level.

55. Any given macro-fact can be realized by infinitely many different types of micro-facts.

56. A given set of micro-interactions allows for at most one kind of macro-event.

57. The idea that mind is an "emergent property" while being physical is self-contradictory.

58. If mental facts constitute an "irreducible novelty" with respect to physical facts, mental entities aren't physical.

## VII. Against Property Dualism

59. Property dualism holds that mental properties are distinct from physical properties but belong to physical objects.

60. Objects are concomitances of properties, not substrates in which properties inhere.

61. To say two properties "belong to the same thing" just is to say they co-occur.

62. Property dualism reduces to: mental and physical properties co-occur because they co-occur—which is vacuous.

63. Property dualism has no explanatory content as a solution to the mind-body problem.

## VIII. Epistemology of Physical Objects

64. Sense-perception apprises us only of the structure of physical objects, not their constitutive properties.

65. Sense-perception makes us aware of two kinds of properties: structural ("bulk, figure, motion") and phenomenal (color, odor, etc.).

66. Physical objects in perception are structural skeletons whose flesh is phenomenal properties.

67. Phenomenal properties are either purely subjective (sensations projected onto objects) or purely structural features.

68. If phenomenal properties are just sensations, they aren't properties of objects at all.

69. If phenomenal properties correlate consistently with structural properties, what we learn is structural.

70. There is no consistent relationship between sensations and object properties unless it's structural.

71. Theoretical entities are known exclusively in terms of structural properties.

72. Analogy is a form-preserving, not content-preserving, operation.

73. Physical objects are known only "as regards their space-time structure" (Russell).

74. Our knowledge of the physical world leaves open all possibilities as to its intrinsic character.

## IX. The Positive Solution

75. External objects must have non-structural ("constitutive") properties—there cannot be disembodied structures.

76. Structures consist in relations between entities; not all entities can consist only in relations (vicious regress).

77. A world all of whose constituents have structure is a world with no substance (Wittgenstein).

78. We cannot discover constitutive properties of physical objects through natural scientific investigation.

79. If constitutive properties of physical objects are mental, we wouldn't have to explain how mental entities came into existence.

80. Mental entities would have existed ab initio as ultimate constituents.

81. Physical states and interactions mirror mental states and interactions.

82. Physical is a projection of mental; mental cannot be a projection of physical.

83. My desire to move my arm moves the noumena corresponding to my arm; the arm's movement is a phenomenal projection.

84. Pain accompanies certain neural events because such events are the "phenomenal form" of pain.

## X. The Definition of Physicality

85. Something is physical if it falls within the scope of physical sciences (physics, chemistry, biology).

86. A science is a physical science if its empirical basis lies exclusively in sense-perception, not introspection.

87. Some beliefs about the spatio-temporal world have empirical basis partly in introspection.

88. Knowledge of other minds has its empirical basis partly in sense-perception and partly in introspection.

89. Unless one had actually experienced pain, one wouldn't have the concept of pain.

90. The physical is that which can be known on the basis of sense-perception alone.

## XI. Concepts and Conceivability

91. Necessarily true propositions are either a priori or they are not about concepts.

92. One's concept of a spatio-temporal entity is often constituted partly by causal relations to that entity.

93. One's concept of a concept (in the objective sense) cannot be constituted by causal relations to it.

94. Concepts are not spatio-temporal and don't stand in causal relations.

95. One cannot identify a concept by its spatio-temporal relations since it has none.

96. One must grasp the constitution of a concept to have a concept of it.

97. A posteriori necessary sentences do not correspond to necessary a posteriori propositions about concepts.

98. To grasp a concept of heat (not just heat the phenomenon), one must know heat's constitution.

99. Object-dependent propositions exist, but object-dependent concepts do not.

100. Spatio-temporal individuals and natural kinds are not modes of presentation and therefore not concepts.
