1. Empiricism cannot explain observable events because it forbids embedding them in unobservable continuities.

2. The mind would consist only of disconnected spontaneities if completely described by conscious experience alone.

3. Conscious events must be embedded within otherwise unconscious psychological continuities to be explained.

4. The statement that X's parts are governed by laws L is not equivalent to the statement that X itself is governed by those laws.

5. The statement that X complies with the same laws as Y is not equivalent to the statement that X-internal events are to be explained by the same principles as Y-internal events.

6. Constitutive dependence is distinct from causal dependence.

7. Propositions are not identical with sentences.

8. Facts are distributions or redistributions of mass-energy.

9. A truth is distinct from the fact in virtue of which it holds.

10. Events are redistributions of mass-energy.

11. Properties are non-spatiotemporal entities.

12. Concepts are non-spatiotemporal.

13. The physical world is causally closed.

14. The mental affects the physical, therefore the mental must be physical (ontological materialism).

15. Explanatory dualism is true even if ontological dualism is false.

16. There is no way to understand why physicalistic statements being true should entail mentalistic statements being true.

17. Propositions consist of concepts.

18. The explanatory generalizations of different disciplines consist of distinct concepts.

19. Psychology and physiology are more remote from each other than physiology and microphysics.

20. Psychological propositions do not present the facts in virtue of which they hold as being in physical space.

21. Perceptions are not given to us as occurring in the same spatial manifold as physical events.

22. Scientific thought is not the same as empirical thought.

23. The term "empirical thought" is an oxymoron.

24. To the extent that thought mediates between observations and beliefs, beliefs are not directly supported by observation.

25. Most philosophers make heavy concessions to empiricism without empiricism-independent justification.

26. We do not sense-perceive forces or causal powers.

27. If empiricism is correct, we cannot know to what degree our sensory experiences are veridical.

28. If empiricism is correct, the future cannot be known on the basis of the present.

29. Hume accepted skepticism about perception and induction because they were corollaries of empiricism, instead of rejecting empiricism.

30. Logical relations hold among propositions, not sentences.

31. Propositions are non-spatiotemporal.

32. The spatiotemporal world comprises no instances of logical relations.

33. Entailment holds if, given P, it is not even a theoretical possibility that Q should fail to be true.

34. Confirmation holds if, given P, it is ceteris paribus more likely than not that Q is true.

35. Some philosophers hold that sentences are the relata of logical relations, but this is false.

36. Some philosophers hold that propositions are spatiotemporal, but this is false.

37. Properties are constituents of propositions.

38. Propositions consist of properties.

39. Formal entailment holds among propositions, not expressions.

40. Statements that a sentence is "formally true" are abbreviated ways of making statements about propositions.

41. The view that properties are identical with scattered objects composed of their instances is false.

42. Two uninstantiated properties would be identical if properties were identical with their instances (reductio).

43. One can change a scattered object without affecting the corresponding property.

44. Expression-tokens entail one another only in a derivative sense, via their meanings.

45. Logical relations hold among meanings, not among expressions per se.

46. The relata of logical relations must be things that are true or false.

47. Empiricists treat truth as a one-place relation (property) rather than a multi-place relation.

48. Empiricist subjectivism about arithmetic reflects inability to countenance non-spatiotemporal entities.

49. Conventionalization is culture-level subjectivization.

50. Empiricism mistakenly treats relations as properties.

51. Empiricism often treats 3-place relations as 2-place relations.

52. Colors are not purely subjective in the empiricist sense.

53. Colors are properties of three-place relations.

54. Color-experiences are informative, not categorically hallucinatory.

55. Colors are mind-dependent but not mental.

56. The empiricist puts headaches in the same category as concern for one's child's welfare, but this is false.

57. Emotions are not merely "sentiments" equivalent to bodily sensations.

58. Meanings are identical with sets of properties.

59. Wittgenstein's view that "meaning is use" is false.

60. If expression-tokens were nothing but bursts of noise, there could be linguistic activity on planets without sentient life (reductio).

61. Attempts to scientize psychology have typically been attempts to empiricize it.

62. Freud and Chomsky succeeded in scientizing certain sub-domains of psychology.

63. There is unconscious ideation.

64. There is ideation that is not only unconscious but subpersonal.

65. People can rationalize and deceive themselves.

66. People can repress knowledge they wish they didn't have.

67. People can be internally conflicted, and internal conflict is a battle between conscious and unconscious conceits.

68. Repressed emotions may be expressed as symptoms.

69. The concept of repression is coherent despite seemingly cogent arguments against it.

70. A psychopath is someone who doesn't have a conscience and never had one.

71. A sociopath is someone who had a conscience but ceased to have one.

72. Sociopathogenesis involves implementing a certain sort of rationalization.

73. Sociopaths are people who "sell out" and "die inside."

74. The pre-sociopath has values, internal conflict, capacity to love, and grasps non-instrumental goodness.

75. The sociopath lacks values, internal conflict, capacity to love, and grasp of non-instrumental goodness.

76. Psychopathy is a kind of perpetual infantilism.

77. Linguistic competence enhances cognitive competence.

78. There is nothing to thinking other than manipulating symbols (rejected position).

79. Anything thinkable with symbols is thinkable without them (alternative position, also problematic).

80. One must figure out what is meant by complex expressions; meaning cannot be directly determined by convention for complex expressions.

81. Without linguistic competence, a creature could not think discursively at the level of Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations.

82. Linguistic competence is constitutively, not merely causally, related to cognitive competence.

83. It is a conceptual necessity, not an idiosyncrasy of human psychology, that certain cogitations need linguistic vehicles.

84. There is subpersonal thought underlying conscious, pre-conscious, and repressed ideation.

85. Subpersonal cognitive operations mediate vision, language-comprehension, and musical ability.

86. Your mind figures out how to convert sensory disturbances into visual images, but not you (your self).

87. It would be viciously regressive to say the self carried out cognitive operations underlying sense-perception.

88. Perception is not mere sensation; perceptions are articulated sensations.

89. Articulations of perception correspond to conceptual knowledge.

90. Subpersonal, non-iconic ideation becomes hewed to sequences of expression-images.

91. Pleasant affects alert us to certain structural features in works of art.

92. Congenial phenomenology alerts us to positive properties like truthfulness and validity in expression-image series.

93. The nucleus of one's self is consciousness.

94. We don't grasp universals except by way of linguistic symbols (at the personal level).

95. Our minds can grasp universals non-linguistically at the subpersonal level.

96. Berkeley conflated images with concepts using the word "idea" for both.

97. Images are not concepts; universals are grasped through conception.

98. Empiricism cannot countenance non-image-mediated thought.

99. Concepts are not constituents of consciousness but are access-conscious.

100. Empiricism is inimical to the idea of invisible structure.