
Logico-Linguistic Papers 
J.-M. Kuczynski 
Introduction 
Slinging 
the 
slingshot 
Implicit 
Comparatives 
and 
the 
Sorites 
The 
Ravens 

Are 
Definite 
Descriptions 
Referring 
Terms? 
Non-declarative 
contexts 
and 
the 
theory 
of 
descriptions 
Counterfactuals: 
The 
Epistemic 
Analysis 

Sentential 
Reference 
Sentence-reference 
versus 
Sentence-meaning 

Sentential 
Reference 
the 
Foundations 
of 
Semantics 
Slippery 
Slope 
Paradoxes 
The 
Sorites 
and 
Pseudo-monadic 
Predicates 

The 
concept 
of 
a 
symbol 
and 
the 
vacuousness 
of 
the 
symbolic 
conception 
of 
thought 
Grammatical 
inflexions 
in 
connection 
with 
the 
nature 
of 
Sentence-level 

Meaning 
A 
Post-Kripkean 
Analysis 
of 
Analyticity 
Extensionality 
Knowledge 
of 
Referent 
versus 
of 
Knowledge 
of 
Meaning 
Quantification 
in 
Natural 
Language 
Intensionality 

Analyticity 

A 
cure 
for 
Nathan 
Salmonella: 
How 
to 
do 
semantics 
without 
butchering 
the 
laws 
of 
logic 
No 
Such 
thing 
as 
a 
Meaningless 
Sentence: 
Erin 
McCready 
Refuted 

A 
Review 
of 
Erin 
McCready s 
Review 
of 

Conceptual 
Atomism 
and 
the 
Computational 
Theory 
of 
Mind 

Induction 
by 
enumeration 
vs. 
inference 
to 
the 
best 
explanation 

Introduction 
In this volume, clear answers are given to age-old questions relating to: 
*The nature of counterfactuals *Extensionality *The nature of linguistic meaning and the distinction between meaning and reference *The relationship between logical form and grammatical form *Analytic truth *The relationship between cognitive content (what we think) and linguistic meaning (what we say) *Hempel s Paradox (a.k.a. the Raven Paradox) *The Paradox of the Heap (a.k.a. the Sorites Paradox), and finally *The nature, and justification of, of inductive inference. 
Slinging the slingshot 
1.0 The Slingshot Consider the following sentences: 
(1) 
Mozart was a composer. 

(2) 
The class of all things x such that Mozart was a composer and x is self-identical is identical with the class of all things x such that x is self-identical. 

(3) 
The class of all things x such that Bill Clinton was U.S. President in 1997 and x is self-identical is identical with the class of all things x such that x is self-identical. 

(4) 
Bill Clinton was U.S. President in 1997. 


Here is the position of those who believe in the cogency of so-called "slingshot"-style arguments: 
(SS) (1) is logically equivalent with (2). Therefore, (1) and (2) must co-refer, supposing that either refers to anything. (It is being assumed that logically equivalent expressions cannot have different referents.) 
(3) 
is what results when a referring term in (2) is replaced with a co-referring term.) ( The class of all things x such that Mozart was a composer and x is self-identical  refers to the class of all self-identical objects, and so too does  the class of all things x such that Bill Clinton was U.S. President in 1997 and x is self-identical. ) Since intersubstituting co-referring terms preserves reference, it follows that 

(2) 
and (3) co-refer, supposing that either refers to anything. 

(3) 
is equivalent with (4). Therefore, (3) and (4) must co-refer, supposing that either refers to anything. Therefore, (1) and (4) must co-refer, supposing that they refer to anything. 


If the occurrences in (1)-(4)  Mozart was a composer  and  Bill Clinton was U.S. President in 1997  are replaced with occurrences of any two true sentences, the argument that results is cogent. Thus, any two true sentences co-refer, supposing that any true sentence refers to anything. (For the same reason mutatis mutandis, any two false sentences co-refer, supposing that any false sentence refers to anything.) 
The property of being true is the one semantically significant thing that (1) and (4) have in common. So, supposing that sentences refer to anything, (1) and (4) must refer to the property of being true, and true sentences must in general be assumed to refer to the property of being 
[1]

true.   For the same reason mutatis mutandis, false sentences must 
[2]

refer to the property of being false. 
In general, a slingshot-style argument is one to the effect that, since logically equivalent expressions can t have different referents and since intersubstituting co-referring terms preserves truth-value, some class that would seem to comprise several objects (for example, the class of things that are referred by true sentences) in fact only comprises one object (for example, the property of being true). 
1.1 One problems with SS and with other slingshot-style arguments SS is a poor argument that embodies a spurious understanding of reference, the same being true of every other slingshot-style argument. Suppose for argument s sake that  the class of all things x such that Mozart was a composer x is self-identical  is functioning as a device of reference. In that case, it s picking out the class of self-identical objects, and what (2) is saying about that class is that it s identical with itself; in other words, (2), thus interpreted, says that: 
(2*) the class of self-identical objects is identical with the class of self-identical objects. 
But (2*) is not equivalent with (1). Therefore, if the definite descriptions in 
(1) and (2) are assumed to be referring terms which is precisely what they are being assumed to be (2) isn t equivalent with (1). For the same reason mutatis mutandis, (4) is not equivalent with (3) if  the class of all things x such that Bill Clinton was U.S. President in 1997 and x is self-identical  is taken to be a device of reference. 
In order for (2) to be equivalent with (1), the former must be taken to be to the effect that: 
(2#) there exists a class to which a thing belongs iff Mozart is a composer and that thing is self-identical; and there exists a class to which a thing belongs iff that thing is self-identical; and the first class is identical with the second class. 
But if (2) is interpreted in this way, the definite description occurring in it is a 
[3]
quantifier , not a referring term. And, in that case, (3) is not what result when a referring term is replaced with a co-referring term. (It s what results when a non-referring term is replaced with a non-referring term.) 
So SS is a failure. 
Note: Some would disagree with our contention that, when read attributively, occurrences of definite descriptions are functioning as quantifiers, not as referring terms. Some, in other words, hold that there is such a thing as "attributive" reference. This is the position of Frege and his followers (e.g. Church). In Sections 2.0-2.3, we'll see why Frege's position is both indefensible and unnecessary. 
1.2 Is the conclusion of SS correct? Do true sentences refer to truth-values? In this section we'll see that, in respect of its semantic properties,  snow is white  bears little resemblance to "the property of being true." And we'll see that, for this reason, it is implausible, if not incoherent, to hold that "snow is white" (or any other true sentence) co-refers with "the property of 
[4] 
being true" (or "the True" or "the truth-value True"). 
Let s start with some platitudes about reference. To say that expression R refers to object O is to say that, for any property phi, +R has phi+ attributes 
[5] 

phi to O. If you want to say of Benjamin Franklin (BF) that he s bald, you can do so by saying  Benjamin Franklin is bald.  (Of course, BF is no longer with us. But to set the aside some extremely intricate and, in this context, irrelevant issues relating to tense, let us pretend that Franklin is alive and that we can speak of him in the present tense.) And (the remaining semantic rules of English being what they are) if you couldn t attribute baldness to BF by 
[6] 

uttering that sentence, then  Benjamin Franklin  wouldn t refer to BF. If, in saying  Benjamin Franklin is bald,  one was attributing baldness to Aristotle, then, in that context at least,  Benjamin Franklin  would refer to Aristotle. 
Let s generalize these points. For any property phi,  Benjamin Franklin  refers to BF (and not to Aristotle, for example) because +Benjamin Franklin has phi+ attributes phi to Benjamin Franklin; and if one couldn t attribute phi to Benjamin Franklin by saying +Benjamin Franklin has phi+, then 
 Benjamin Franklin  would not refer to BF. Further, if, in uttering that sentence, one was attributing baldness to Aristotle (but not BF), then  Benjamin Franklin  would refer to Aristotle (but not Benjamin Franklin). Thus, for  Benjamin Franklin  to refer to BF it is both necessary and sufficient that +Benjamin Franklin has phi+ attribute phi to BF. The fact that  Benjamin Franklin  refers to BF is identical with the fact that +Benjamin Franklin has phi+ attributes phi to Benjamin Franklin, for any property phi. 
In general, expression E refers to O if and only if, for any property phi, +E has phi+ attributes phi to O. E s referring to O may be identified with E s being such that, in virtue of containing it, a sentence ipso facto attributes a property to O. 
Bearing these points in mind, let's revisit the question: Do sentences refer to truth-values? Does "snow is white" refer to the property of being true (which, in this context, we're assuming for argument's sake to be identical with the truth-value true)? No. In virtue of having the form, + the property of being true +, a sentence is about the property of being true. ( Everything Bill says has the property of being true  says of the property of being true that it is instantiated by everything that Bill says. ) But it isn't the case that, in virtue of having the form + snow is white +, a sentence is about the property of being true. 
Of course,  if snow is white, then snow isn t green  can, like any other sentence, be interpreted as concerning the property of being true it can be interpreted as saying that the property of being true is a characteristic of the proposition that snow isn t green if it s white. But given how artificial it is to paraphrase "if snow is white, then snow isn't green" in this way, it's clear that, in some respect that is deeply relevant to their semantics, "the property of being true" and "snow is white" aren't comparable. Which, in its turn, suggests that it isn t in virtue of it s containing an occurrence of  snow is white  that  if snow is white, then snow isn t green  concerns that property. 
But even if, in virtue of having the form + snow is white +, a sentence is about the property of being true, the way in which, in virtue of having that form, such a sentence concerns that property is obviously different from the way in which, in virtue of having the form + the property of being true +, a sentence concerns the property of being true. A story may help make this clear. You are my philosophy professor and I am taking an exam that consists of just one question: I must identify at least one property that all propositions of the form x is even iff x is divisible by two have in common. I duly say (or write) "the property of being true." I pass. But I would have failed if I had instead said "snow is white" (or "grass is green"). In any case, you'd have no reason independently of Frege's argument for passing me. Which, taken together with the points made in the previous section, suggests that you'd have no reason at all for passing me. 
It's hard to find any reason, apart from Frege's argument to the contrary, to hold that "snow is white" refers to the property of being true. Which, given how far Frege's argument to the contrary falls short of being probative, suggests that "snow is white" does not so refer. 
1.2.1 Can sentences coherently be stipulated to have truth-values for their referents? Some (e.g. Church 1943) have stipulated that true sentences refer to that property (and that false ones refer to the property of being false). But some stipulations are incoherent, and this particular stipulation falls into that category. If I stipulate that "Gloxo" is to unambiguously refer to the number two, I cannot coherently stipulate that it is also to refer to the number of sides had by an arbitrary pentagon. 
Bearing this in mind, consider the following variant of the just-told story. You are my geography professor, and you've just given me a test containing just one question: identify the state that lies on the Northern border of California. Instead of saying "Oregon", which is the right answer, I say "snow is white." You duly fail me. 
Of course, if you and I have agreed that, by our stipulation, "snow is white" is to refer to Oregon, then "snow is white" would be an acceptable answer. But to the extent that "snow is white" would, for that reason, have been an acceptable answer, it obviously wouldn't have been functioning in the same way as the homonymous sentence "snow is white." And it is thus incoherent to stipulate that "snow is white" is unambiguously both an English sentence (to the effect that a certain crystalline substance has a certain chromatic property) and is also an English expression that refers to the state of Oregon. For the same reason mutatis mutandis, it is incoherent to stipulate that the English sentence "snow is white" unambiguously refers to the property of being true. 
1.2.2 To what, if anything, do sentences refer? Given that "snow is white" doesn't refer to the property of being true, to what, if anything, does it refer? It seems to me and I'm speaking very tentatively---that, if it refers to anything, that sentence refers to the proposition that snow is white. In virtue of having the form +...snow is white... +, a sentence is ipso facto about the proposition that snow is white.  If snow is white, then snow isn t green  says that the proposition that snow is white entails (or otherwise has as a consequence) the proposition that snow isn t green. "It is not the case that snow is white" says that the proposition that snow is white has the property of being false. "Grass is green and snow is white" says that the proposition that snow is white has the property of being a thing x such that both x and the proposition that grass is green are true. So given the reasonable presumption that E refers O if, in virtue of having the form +...E... +, a sentence is to the effect that...O..., it seems to follow that "snow is white" refers to the proposition that snow is white. 
And even if it doesn't follow, we'd be doing less damage to the concept of reference by saying that "snow is white" referred to the corresponding proposition than we would be if we said that it referred to its truth-value. Permit me to clarify this statement. 
It often happens that, in order for a discipline to move forward, the scope of a given term must be expanded. To be of use to science, terms such as "temperature" and "acid" must be given meanings that, although consistent with the pretheoretic judgments of laypersons, have a much wider sphere of application than do the concepts associated with those terms by the laity. By defining "temperature" as (I'm simplifying) "mean kinetic energy", the jurisdiction of the former term is increased even though its meaning is otherwise unchanged. Such redefinitions are sometimes referred to as "precisifications" or "delineations." 
It's a distinct possibility that, in saying that sentences are referring terms, one is precisifying the term "reference", not identifying its existing meaning. Supposing this true, it's still wrong (or, in any case, bad in some relevant way or other) to say that sentences refer to their truth-values, and it's less wrong to say that they refer to the propositions they express. In order to be a precisification of a given term T, as opposed to wholesale redefinition of it, an extension of T's jurisdiction must be consistent (for the most part) with T's existing meaning. (I say "for the most part" since pretheoretic judgments are sometimes revised in light of their own theoretical off-shoots. There are, or could be, objects x such that x is cold according to pretheoretic intuition even though, if temperature is identified with mean kinetic energy, x is extremely hot. ) What we know about the existing meaning of "refer" is that (the remaining semantic rules of English being what they are) it is in virtue of the fact that "Socrates" refers to Socrates that +Socrates has phi+ attributes phi to Socrates; we also know (same qualification) that, if one couldn't attribute phi to Socrates by saying +Socrates has phi+, then "Socrates" would not refer to Socrates. In general, we know that to the extent that, in virtue of having the form...E..., a sentence is to the effect that...O..., then E refers to O and that E fails to refer to O to the extent that this condition isn't satisfied. Given this fact, it follows that we'd be horribly misprecisifying the term "reference" were we to say that sentences referred to their truth-values; it also follows that we would not be misprecisifying it as horribly were we to say that they referred to the propositions they meant. Give or take some niceties, if S is a sentence that has proposition P for its meaning, then, in virtue of having the form +...S... +, a sentence S* is to the effect that...P...This suggests, if only feebly, that, if sentences refer to anything, it is to the propositions they express and, moreover, that it is not to their truth 
[7] 
values. 
1.3 Davidson on facts Despite everything thus far said, Donald Davidson 
[8] 

took it for granted that SS is cogent. And he argued that, given the (alleged) fact that SS is cogent, it follows that there is only one fact. His argument is simple. Put the expression  the fact that  in front of each of (1) (4). The same principles that show that (1) and (4) must co-refer also shows that  the fact that Mozart was a composer  co-refers with  the fact that Bill Clinton was U.S. President in 1997).  
Instead of rejecting SS, Davidson concluded, absurdly, that these two facts are identical and that, by obvious extensions of this reasoning, there is, at most, only one fact. Having, in his mind, established that there is only one fact, he argued that, for this reason, mental states are not representations. Since there is only one fact, Davidson argued, no two mental states represent different facts. On this basis, Davidson concluded that differences between mental states between, for example, my perception of the piano in my living room and your perception of the ink-marks in front of you are not representational differences. 
Why is this? Because, says Davidson, representations, supposing them to exist, are representations of facts; and, says Davidson, we've seen that there is only one fact. Therefore, Davidson says, my perception of the piano in my living room doesn't differ in respect of which fact it represents from your perception of the ink-marks in front of you. From this Davidson concludes (fallaciously, even relative to his own assumptions), that the one perception is representationally just like the other. Thus, the differences between those perceptions  or, by obvious extensions of this reasoning, between any two things---have nothing to do with any representational differences that there might be between them. Which means that, if there are any such differences, they are innocuous in other words, it is not in terms of those differences that the palpable differences between those perceptions are to be understood. Which, in its turn, means either (i) that neither perception represents anything or (ii) that, if either perception does represent something, it is irrelevant to how that perception differs from the other perception and, therefore, to what sort of thing that perception is. Which, give or take some unimportant nuances, means that neither represents anything. 
1.3.1 Evaluating Davidson's contention Davidson s position is obviously false. The fact that I am typing this sentence is distinct from the fact that you are reading it. There is more than one fact. What could be more obvious? 
Of course, the word "fact" is a vague one; and, surely, it's at least partly for this reason that Davidson's position has been given any credence. In any 
[9] 

case, there is no precisification of the term "fact" that validates Davidson's position. 
In some contexts, the word "fact" is synonymous with the word "truth." ("The fact that arithmetic is incomplete was unknown to Frege" is synonymous with "the truth that arithmetic is incomplete was unknown to Frege.") Since there are many truths, this interpretation of the word "fact" doesn't validate Davidson's view. 
In other contexts, the word "fact" seems to refer to (re)distributions of 
[10]
mass-energy ---to the spatiotemporal conditions and changes in virtue of which certain propositions are true and others are false. Let M be the mass-energy (re)distribution in virtue of which the proposition x is now asleep (where x is any sleeping person) is true. Let N be the mass-energy distribution in virtue of which the Earth is now travelling at approximately 17,000 mph with respect to the Sun is true. M.N. That's a just a fact. Pun intended. 
Are there are precisifications of the word fact? Probably. (For example, physical laws may qualify as "facts", at least on one interpretation of that word, even though it's not clear that physical laws are identical either with truths or with (re)distributions of mass-energy). But, apart from Davidson's argument to the contrary, there is no reason to expect any of the remaining precisifications to do a better job of validating Davidson's contention than those we've just considered. 
1.3.2 Evaluating Davidson's argument for his contention Davidson's argument fails for the same reason mutatis mutandis that SS fails. But Davidson s argument involves a blunder of which SS is innocent. For a mental state to be representational is not for there to be some fact that it represents. Suppose that I hallucinate that there is a pink elephant in my living room. (Assume that, in actuality, there is no such elephant. In other words, suppose my hallucination not to coincidentally correspond to reality.) My hallucination is representational. It isn t like a rock. But there is no elephant x such that my hallucination represents some pink elephant x such that x is in my living room. My hallucination is representational in the sense that it is to the effect that that there exists some pink elephant x such that x is in my living room. For mental state M to be representational isn't (necessarily) for there to be some fact that M represents; it is (or can be) for M to be to the effect that there exists a fact having such and such characteristics. And the non-existence of such a fact is obviously compatible with the existence of erroneous propositional attitudes to the contrary. 
1.4 Neale on a variant of SS In his (ironically named) book Facing the 
[11]
Facts , Stephen Neale puts forth what he believes to be an improvement 
[12]
on SS. Neale s argument involves the following four assumptions: 
G1: The sentence  Fa  stands for the same fact as the sentence  a=the unique thing x such that (x=a and Fx).  (In this context,  =  is to be taken to mean  is identical with. ) G2: Any sentence can be put into subject-predicate form. G3: What a complex expression refers to is a function of what its parts refer to. G4: Definite descriptions are referring terms.  The even prime  is an expression that picks out the number two. 
Assume that for some individuals a and b, and some properties G and F, the following are true:  Fa,   Gb,  and  a.b ; and suppose that these sentences stand for facts F1, F2, and F3, respectively. 
Bearing these assumptions in mind, consider the following seven sentences. 
1. 
Fa. By assumption. 

2. 
a.b. By assumption. 

3. 
Gb. By assumption. 

4. 
a=the unique thing x such that (x=a and Fx). Follows from 1, by G1. 

5. 
a=the unique thing x such that (x=a and x.b). Follows from 2, by G2. 

6. 
b=the unique thing x such that (x=b and Gx). Follows from 3, by G1. 

7. 
b=the unique thing x such that (x=b and x.a). Follows from 2, by G1. 


1 and 4 stand for the same fact, namely F1. 2, 5, and 7 all stand for the same fact, namely F2. And 3 and 6 stand for the same fact, namely F3.  The unique thing x such that (x=a and Fx)  co-refers with  the unique thing x such that (x=a and x.b) , since both expression refer to a. Therefore, 5 is what results when the definite description in 4 is replaced with a co-referring definite description. Therefore, 4 and 5 refer to the same fact. Since they refer, respectively, to F1 and F2, it follows that F1 and F2 are the same fact.  The unique thing x such that (x=b and x.a)  co-refers with  the unique thing x such that (x=b and Gx),  since both expression refer to b. Therefore, 7 is what results when the definite description in 6 is replaced with a co-referring definite description. Therefore, 6 and 7 refer to the same fact. Since they refer, respectively, to F3 and F1, it follows that F3 and F1 are the same fact. Now, if G4 is wrong, then definite descriptions are not referring terms, which case 5 is not what results when the definite descriptions in 4 is replaced with a co-referring expression, and 7 is what not results when the definite description in 6 is replaced with a co-referring expression. But assuming that G4 is right, we ve established that F1=F2. Therefore F1=F2=F3, and  Fa  therefore co-refers with  Gb  and also with  a.b.  So, assuming that definite descriptions are what they appear to be, viz. referring terms, it follows there is only one fact. 
As Neale points out, this result, if it is in fact true, is astonishing. But, as Neale then points out, G2 allows us to go further. Let S and S* be any two distinct statements that are true. (So S and S* needn t have subject-predicate form.) According to G2, S and be put in subject-predicate form, and so can S*. Given any existing individual a, S can be rendered as  a is an x such that S ; and given any existing individual b, S* can be rendered as  b is an x such that S*.  And once that is granted, it follows, by the foregoing argument, that S and S* stand for the same fact. It follows that, given G1-G4, any two true sentences stand for the same fact. 
1.4.1 Evaluating Neale s argument The problems with this argument are very similar to the problems with Davidson s. Consider line 4 of Neale s argument: 
4. a=the unique thing x such that (x=a and Fx). 
If this sentence is read attributively (in other words, if the definite descriptions in them are treated as quantifiers, as opposed to referring terms), then it is logically equivalent with 
1. Fa, 
in which case those two sentences can therefore be seen as standing for the same fact. But if 4 is read referentially (in other words, if the definite descriptions in them are treated as referring terms, as opposed to quantifiers), then 4 stands for the same fact as: 
4R: a=a, 
in which case 1 and 4 cannot plausibly be seen as standing for the same fact. 
For exactly similar reasons, 5, 6, and 7 must be read attributively if they are can plausibly regarded as standing for the same facts as, respectively, 2, 3, and 4. In general, G1 is false if 4-7 are read referentially, 4-7 must therefore be read attributively. Bottom line: Neale s argument fails if 4-7 are read referentially. It also fails, for obvious reasons, if they re read attributively. 
2.0 Why the Fregean views underlying the Slingshot are incoherent A quick look at an old puzzle will make it clear why SS is unsalvageable. Benjamin Franklin (BF) invented bifocals and he was also the first postmaster general. The semantic rules of English being what they are, it follows that 
(CB) "the inventor of bifocals is identical with the first postmaster general." 
is correct and that 
(TB) "the inventor of bifocals is identical with the inventor of bifocals" 
is correct. 
[13]
But, whereas TB is trivial, CB is non-trivial. 
The non-triviality of CB is hard to explain if definite descriptions are supposed to be referring terms. As we saw in Section 1.2, the semantic rules of English being what they are,  the inventor of bifocals  refers to BF exactly if +the inventor of bifocals has phi+ attributes phi to BF. So supposing that  the inventor of bifocals  does in fact refer to BF, it follows that CB attributes the property of being identical with the first postmaster general to BF. And supposing that  the first postmaster general  refers to BF, it follows that CB attributes the property of being identical with the inventor of bifocals to BF. And given both suppositions, it follows that CB says of BF that it has the property of being identical with BF. Which is trivial. 
Right now we'll consider Russell's solution to this problem, and we'll then consider Frege's solution. Frege's solution is more easily understood in terms of Russell's than vice versa, that being why we're consider Russell's solution first. 
2.1 Russell's solution: The Theory of Descriptions According to Russell's Theory of Descriptions (TD) +the inventor of bifocals has phi+ says that something uniquely invented bifocals and, moreover, that any such thing has phi. And, according to TD, + the first postmaster general has phi+ says that 
something was a unique first postmaster general and, moreover, that any such thing has phi. It follows that, if TD is right, CB says the same thing as: 
(CB3)  something uniquely invented bifocals, and any such thing is a unique first postmaster general; and something was a unique first postmaster general, and any such thing is a unique inventor of bifocals.  
It is readily seen that CB3 is more succinctly expressed as follows (the  R  stands for  Russell ): 
(CBR)  there is some one thing that uniquely invented bifocals and was also a unique first postmaster general.  
To sum up, if TD is right, then CB means the same thing as CBR. It is easily verified that, indeed, CB is true exactly if CBR is true. TD thus seems 
[14] 

to get the right result. Given that CBR is non-trivial given that historical knowledge is needed to know it TD readily explains why CB is non-trivial. 


2.2 Frege's solution 
Here is Frege s solution to this problem: 
[15]
(FR)  The inventors of bifocals  is a referring term; it picks something out. That expression refers to a given thing if and only if that thing has the property of being a unique bifocal-inventor. If a given thing didn t invent bifocals then  the inventors of bifocals  doesn t refer to it. If lots of different individuals invented bifocals, then  the inventors of bifocals  doesn t refer to anything. (If ten people collectively wrote War and Peace, it would be wrong to speak of the author of that book.) And if a given thing did uniquely invent bifocals, then  the inventors of bifocals  does refer to it. 
So there are two dimensions to the semantics of  the inventors of bifocals.  There is what it refers to: this is the referent of  the inventors of bifocals.  (Sometimes  reference  is used instead of  referent. ) And there s the property that a thing must have to be its referent; this property is the sense of that expression. The referent is BF, and the sense is the property of being a unique bifocal inventor. 
Analogues of these points hold with respect to  the first postmaster general.  There is its referent (which is BF); and there is its sense (which is the property of being a unique first postmaster general). 

The reason that TB is non-trivial is that, although the definite 
descriptions in it have the same referent, they have different senses. A comparison may help. Imagine that you re looking at a certain person in the distance. That person is in fact Ralph, but you don t know it, because he s so far away and also, let us suppose, because he is (for reasons that aren t important) wearing a suit of armor. You see that he is doing jumping jacks. Later Ralph is standing right in front of you and, of course, you see him. He s wearing a plaid shirt. Once again, he s doing jumping jacks. 
The first visual perception has the same object as the second. And each of those perceptions says of that object that he or she is doing jumping jacks. But those two perceptions pick out that object in different ways. In the first case, that object is presented to you as something that has one set of properties (it s far away, it's wearing a suit of armor, etc.); in the other case it s presented as having a different set of properties (it s nearby, it's wearing a plaid shirt, etc.). And that s why, even though those perceptions have the same object, and even though both attribute the property of doing jumping jacks to that object, those perceptions tell you different things. 
Something similar holds of  the inventors of bifocals  and  the first postmaster general.  They have the same object (referent); but they pick that thing out through different bodies of information. That s why +the inventors of bifocals has phi+ and +the first postmaster general has phi+ tell you different things, even though they attribute the same 
[16]

property (phi) to the same object (BF). 
2.2.1 Evaluating Frege's solution This all seems not only plausible, but practically self-evident. But, so far as what Frege says doesn't coincide with TD, what Frege is saying is false and, indeed, incoherent. 
Let s consider the two sense-perceptions discussed in FR. The one perception tells you that there is something in the distance, that it's wearing a suite of armor, etc., and that, moreover, that thing is doing jumping jacks. So the sense in which Ralph is the object of that perception is that Ralph in your perception describes Ralph. Your perception says:  something or other is over there, in the distance, wearing a suit of armor, [etc.].  Who (or what) fits that description? In other words, who has the relevant properties? Ralph. So Ralph is the object of that perception in the sense it describes him. 
The information borne by that perception has the form  something has such and such properties [it s wearing a suit of armor etc.], and any such thing is doing jumping jacks.  Thus, the content of that perception is given by an existence-claim (a claim of the form  something has phi ). Ralph uniquely satisfies that existence-claim. (In other words, he and he alone has the relevant property.) And it is in virtue of his doing so that he is the object of the perception in question. 
The same thing mutatis mutandis is true of your second perception. The information borne by that perception is along the lines of  something has thus and such properties [it s standing nearby, is wearing a plaid shirt etc.], and any such thing is doing jumping jacks.  Ralph is the object of that perception by virtue of the fact that he and he alone has the relevant properties that he and he alone is a thing standing in the relevant place while wearing a plaid shirt, etc. 
In general, when a given thing x is picked out by way of descriptive information, what s really going on is that some statement of the form  something has such and such properties  is being affirmed (not necessarily verbally), and x is what fits the description. 
If we bear this point in mind, we find that, so far as it isn t totally incoherent, Frege s analysis collapses into Russell s. Consider the sentence: 
[17]
(IB )  the inventor of bifocals is tall.  
By Frege s own admission,  the inventors of bifocals  picks a given thing out if and only if that thing fits the relevant description (i.e., if and only if that thing is a unique inventor of bifocals). And if there is a unique inventor of bifocals, that thing, whatever it is, is the thing to which  the inventors of bifocals  refers. So supposing that there is such a thing and that x is it, IB describes x as being tall. 
It goes without saying that, if there is no unique inventor of bifocals, then there is no way that IB can be true. Frege himself emphasizes this last point. (And he s right to do so. There s no way that  the elephant in the corner is eating peanuts  can be true, if there s no elephant in the corner.) 
The upshot is that IB is true if and only if: 
(IB*) there is a unique inventor of bifocals and, moreover, that thing, whatever it is, is tall. 
But what does TD say about IB? According to TD, the meaning of IB is: something uniquely invented bifocals, and any such thing is tall. Which is precisely what FB says. So Frege s theory collapses into Russell s. 
By obvious extensions of this, it follows that, if Frege s theory is right, then CB s meaning is identical with that of CBR. So Frege s theory accounts for the non-triviality of CB in the same way as Russell s theory (as TD). 
2.2.2 Evaluating Frege's solution (continued) For argument's sake, suppose that the prettiest living woman is identical with most evil living person. 
Given only that 
(1) 
 Smith wants to marry the prettiest woman on the planet  is true, it doesn't follow that: 

(2) 
 Smith wants to marry the most evil person on the planet  


is true. But why not? Because what (1) really says is that: 
(1*) Smith wants it to be the case that Smith is married to a woman who is prettier than anyone else, 
and what (2) really says is that 
(2*) Smith wants it to be the case that Smith is married to somebody who is more evil than anyone else. 
(1*) makes it clear that, if (1) is true, the object of Smith s desire is not a person and is instead a proposition. And (2*) makes it clear that, if (2) is correct, Smith wants a certain proposition to hold, namely, that Smith is (or will be) married to a woman who is prettier than anyone else. And (2*), if correct, makes it clear that the object of Smith s desire is not a person, but a proposition, namely, that Smith is married to somebody who is more evil than anyone else. Since those two propositions are different, the fact that one of them has the property of being desired to be true by Smith, whereas the other does not lack that property, does not constitute a violation of Leibniz s Law (if x=y, x has a given property iff y has that property). 
Few authors, if any, deny that apparent exceptions to Leibniz's Law are 
[18] 

to be solved in this way. So given that, according to TD, the meanings of 
(1) and (2) are given by (1*) and (2*), and given that, nuances, aside, there's no other way to deal with the datum that (1) and (2) can simultaneously be true, it's odd that authors have continued to countenance Frege's system. 
2.2.3 Special compositionality in relation to Frege's theory There are other, related problems with that system According to the principle of special compositionality (SC), what a referring term picks out is a function of 
[19]
what its parts pick out. Bearing this in mind, let's suppose, as before, that the prettiest woman in existence is also the most evil person in existence. And let's also suppose, with Frege, that definite descriptions are referring terms. Given these suppositions, it would seem to follow that the underlined part of: 
(3) 
Smith believes that the prettiest woman in existence is identical with the prettiest woman in existence 

refers to the same proposition as 

(4) 
Smith believes that the prettiest woman in existence is identical with the most evil person in existence. 


But the underlined part of (3) very much seems not to co-refer with the corresponding part of (4). 
There are only three ways to go here. (i) Deny SC. (ii) Deny that the underlined parts of 3 and 4 refer to different propositions. (I.e. take the view that they co-refer.) (iii) Deny that 4 is what results when a referring term in 1 is replaced with a co-referring term. 
Understandably, Frege rejects each of (i) and (ii) and thus accepts (iii). (To this extent, his semantics coincides with Russell's, give or take some technicalities relating to the fact that, according to TD, each of 3 and 4 is syntactically ambiguous.) Frege thus says that the definite descriptions occurring in 3 and 4 refer, not to some person, but rather to their "customary senses." What he means is that, in each of 3 and 4, "the prettiest woman in existence" refers, not to Sally or Betty or Ethel, but rather to the property (or concept) of being a woman who is prettier than every other (or some 
[20]
such ); and, in 4, "the most evil woman in existence" refers to the property (concept) of being a person who is more evil than any other. 
An immediate consequence of Frege s theory is that the word  snow  has three utterly distinct meanings in: 
(5)  snow is white and Jerry believes that snow is white and Fred believes that Jerry believes that snow is white.  
The first occurrence of  snow  in 6 refers to snow. The second to the sense of the first occurrence. The third refers to the sense of the second occurrence. 
But surely all three occurrences of  snow  in (6) mean the same thing. Frege s is clearly jumping through hoops to make his bankrupt theory work. 
Another immediate consequence of Frege s theory is that the word  snow  doesn t refer to snow in: 
(6) it is true that snow is white. 
But that s obviously false. (In any case, there's no independent support 
[21]
for this claim. ) The occurrence of  snow  in (6) clearly has the same meaning as its counterpart in  snow is white.  
In any case, what does it even mean to say that, in (5), the third occurrence of  snow  refers to the sense of the sense of  snow.  If you say  Socrates was bald,  you are attributing baldness to Socrates not to Aristotle or Plato or anyone else who isn t Socrates. If you say  Socrates was intelligent,  you are attributing intelligence to Socrates and Socrates alone. Thus,  Socrates  refers to Socrates because, the remaining semantic rules of 
English being what they are, + Socrates has psi+ attributes psi to Socrates. By parity of reasoning, if the third occurrence of  snow  in (5) really referred to a second-order sense, then it would make some statement about that sense  it would attribute a property to it. But it doesn t. It doesn t say anything about such a sense. Whatever it is that it does in connection with such a sense, it isn t comparable to what  Socrates was intelligent  does in connection with Socrates. 
Finally, to the extent that Frege's views concerning indirect reference are intelligible, they undermine his own semantics. According to Frege, the proposition meant by 
(#) "the prettiest woman in existence is smart" 
is true just in case: 
(##) somebody who is smart is uniquely a woman who is prettier than any other. 
In general, the proposition meant by: 
(*)+...the phi... + 
is true just in case: 
(**) something x such that...x...uniquely has phi. 
Let "FR" (short for "Frege-Russell") be the principle ("hypothesis" might be a better word) that the meaning of (*) is given by some proposition that is equivalent (if not identical with) (**) as FR. It is to be emphasized that Russell and Frege both accept FR. 
Here's where they differ. According to Russell's system (TD), +the phi + is in the same category as "something", "everyone", etc. According to Frege's system, +the phi + is not in that category. 
Here's the problem. Let O be an occurrence of "the prettiest woman in existence" that falls within the scope of four epistemic (or modal) operators. So O might be the underlined expression in: 
(&) "Smith believes that Sally knows that Larry hopes that Mary is certain that the prettiest woman in existence is smart." 
A consequence of TD and of Frege's system is that the semantics of the occurrence in (&) "the prettiest woman in existence" is given by FR. But if Frege's system is correct, then that occurrence refers, not to Sally (who, we'll assume, is the prettiest woman in existence), but to the "customary sense" of the customary sense of the customary sense of the customary sense of the occurrence in (#) of "the prettiest woman.  (Let O# be the just-mentioned occurrence.) So, if Frege's system is right, then the semantics of each of O and O# is given by FR even though, whereas the one occurrence refers to Sally, the other refers to a fifth order property (or concept). Thus, a consequence of Frege's theory is that, in respect of their semantics, two expression-occurrences can be functioning in the very same way even though the one occurrence refers to an individual while the other refers to an nth order property (for any whole number n). So a consequence of Frege's system is that there can be reference-shifts where there haven't been semantic shifts. Which is obviously incompatible with the principle (thought by many authorities, e.g Dummett (1973), to be (part of) the meaning of Frege's celebrated "context principle") that, it is in virtue of how a given expression E affects the truth-conditions (or meaning) of sentences in which it occurs that E refers to this as opposed to that object. In Section 1.2, we saw reason to 
believe that for "Socrates" to refer Socrates is for +....Socrates... + to be to the effect that ...Socrates...---that this condition's being satisfied is necessary and sufficient for that expression's referring to that individual. 
Basically, for a given expression to have a given referent is for it to have certain effects on the truth-conditions of the sentences in which it occurs. A corollary is that there, where those changes haven't occurred, there hasn't been a shift in reference, a related corollary being that, where they have occurred, there has been such a shift. For any property phi, and for any whole number n, the semantics of an occurrence O^ that falls within the scope of n epistemic (or modal or otherwise intensional) operators of the phi is given by FR. Thus, so far as Frege s clearly contrived and ad hoc theory has any intelligible meaning, it s clearly false. 

2.3 A final note concerning SS SS assumes that: 
(i) 
each of the two definite descriptions occurring in it is a singular term. 

SS makes the additional assumption that 

(ii) 
reference isn t changed by intersubstituting co-referring terms that have different senses. 


And, of course, SS assumes that 
(iii) referring terms can have both sense and reference (it assumes that the definite desriptions occurring in the second and third sentences have both sense and reference). 
(i) is innocuous. Even though, for reasons already discussed, some hold that definite descriptions are not singular terms, being instead quantifiers, we could obviously stipulate that the definite descriptions in SS are referring terms. We could stipulate that, for any property phi, and for any object O, +the phi+ refers to O exactly if O uniquely has phi. 
But this wouldn t be enough to get SS go through. For argument s sake, suppose that +the phi+ refers to O exactly if O uniquely has phi; and further suppose that, in virtue of having the form + the phi +, a sentence is true exactly if O In that case, supposing that O were a unique phi, +Plato thought highly of the phi+ would bear a proposition that was true exactly if Plato thought highly of O, it being entirely irrelevant what properties (other than being thought highly be Plato) O had, and +the phi was a great wrestler+ would bear a proposition that was true exactly if O was a great wrestler, it being entirely irrelevant what properties (other than being a great 
wrestler) O had. Thus, supposing that +...the phi + were defined in the way thus proposed, there is some x such that x=Socrates such that: 
(*)  Plato thought highly of the author of the great philosopher who died of hemlock poisoning" 
would be true iff: 
(**) Plato thought highly of x. 
SS therefore assumes, not just that +the phi+ is a singular term, but also that that, in virtue of having the form + the phi +, a sentence be true just in case: exactly one thing O has phi and x  
But, as we just saw, that assumption, which is the essence of Frege's semantics, is not a coherent one; and we may conclude, if only tentatively, that SS is a spurious attempt to establish a conclusion for which (see Section 
1.2) there is no independent evidence and for whose negation there is independent evidence (op. cit.). 
Bibliography 
The Philosophy of Language. (1990.) Second Edition A.P. Martinich (ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Anderson, C. Anthony. 1998.  Alonzo Church s Contributions to Philosophy and Intensional Logic . Bulletin of Symbolic Logic. Volume 4. Number 2. June 1998. 
Barwise, Jon and Perry, John.1983.  Semantic Innocence and 
Uncompromising Situations . In The Philosophy of Language. (1990.) Second Edition A.P. Martinich (ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Beaney, Michael (ed.). 1997. In The Frege Reader. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Church, Alonzo.  Carnap s Introduction to Semantics . The Philosophical Review. Vol. LII. No. 3. 1943. 298-304. Church, Alonzo. 1956. Introduction to Mathematical Logic. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Davidson, Donald. 1984.  True to the Facts . In Essays on Truth and Interpretation. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Davidson, Donald. 1967. Truth and Meaning. Synthese 17, 304-323. Davidson, Donald. 1980. Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation. New York: Oxford University Press. Frege, Gottlob. 1892a. On Sinn and Bedeutung. In Michael Beaney (Ed.), The Frege Reader, (pp. 151-171). Oxford: Blackwell. Meaning and Truth. 1991. Jay L. Garfield and Murray Kitely (eds.) St. Paul, Minnesota: Paragon House 
Dummett, Michael. 1973. Frege: Philosophy of Language. Cambridge MA: Harvard. 
G del, Kurt. 1944.  Russell s Mathematical Logic.  In The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell. Edited by Paul Arthur Schilpp. Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University Press. 
Neale, Stephen. 2001. Facing the Facts. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Perry, John. 2000. The Problem of the Essential Indexical and Other Essays. Palo Alto: CSLI Publications. 
Quine, Willard van Orman. 1953.  Reference and Modality.  In From a Logical Point of View. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. --1960. Word and Object. Cambridge: The M.I.T. Press. --1966.  Three Grades of Modal Involvement.  In The Ways of Paradox. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Russell, Bertrand.1905.  On Denoting . In A.P. Martinich (ed) The Philosophy of Language Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Strawson, Peter. 1950.  On Referring . In A.P. Martinich (ed.) The Philosophy of Language. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Taylor, Kenneth. 1998. Truth & Meaning. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Implicit Comparatives and the Sorites 
Abstract. A person with one dollar is poor. If a person with n dollars is poor, then so is a person with n+1 dollars. Therefore a person with a billion dollars is poor. True premises, valid reasoning, a false a conclusion: a paradox. This is an instance of the Sorites-paradox. Most attempts to solve this paradox reject some law of classical logic, usually the law of bivalence. I show that this paradox can be solved while holding onto all the laws of classical logic. Given any predicate that generates a Sorites-paradox, significant use of that predicate is actually elliptical for a relational statement: a significant token of  Bob is poor  means Bob is poor compared to x, for some value of x. Once a value of x is supplied, a definite cut-off line between having and not having the paradox-generating predicate is supplied. This neutralizes the inductive step in the associated Sorites argument, and the would-be paradox is avoided. 
I. A person with an IQ of 70 is not smart. For any number n, if a person with an IQ of n is not smart, then a person with an IQ of n+1 is not smart. Thus a person with an IQ of 455 is not smart. But this conclusion is false. So we have a false conclusion following from true premises. 
A person with one dollar is not wealthy. For any number n, if a person with n dollars is not wealthy, then a person with n+1 dollars is not wealthy. Thus a person with 777 million dollars is not wealthy. True premises, valid reasoning, false conclusion: a paradox. 
These are examples of the Sorites paradox. This essay will set forth a solution to this paradox. This solution is not in the literature and is not 
[22]
derivative of anything in the literature. 
A disclaimer is appropriate. There are many different Sorites-type paradoxes   we ve already considered two different ones. I do not know whether what we will say constitutes a solution to every paradox belonging to this class. But I am fairly certain that it constitutes a solution to some of them. 
The Sorites paradox is an ancient one. It was first put forth by a contemporary of Aristotle s, one Eubilides of Miletus. But no serious 
[23] 
attempts at a solution were made until the last thirty years or so. Almost all of the solutions that have been offered involve the abandonment of some accepted law of logic. According to one of these solutions, the existence of Sorites-paradoxes show that some propositions are neither true nor false. According to another solution, such paradoxes show that propositions admit of degrees of truth: some propositions are 70% true, others are 98% true, and 
[24] 
so on. 
Both of these solutions involve the abandonment of the law of excluded middle: any proposition is either 100% true or 100% false. Of course, this principle is one of the cornerstones of classical logic. 
Presumably the laws of classical logic should not be rejected if there is any way to hold onto them. My solution to the Sorites does not involve any abandonment of those laws and is therefore preferable (ceteris paribus) to a solution that abandons them. 
Sorites arguments have the following structure. They consist of (i) a  base  clause ( someone with an IQ of 70 is not smart ), (ii) an  inductive clause  ( if a person with an IQ of n is not smart, then a person with an IQ of n+1 is not smart ), and a conclusion that follows from the premises but is plainly false ( a person with an IQ of 455 is not smart ). 
The argument set forth in this paper is basically this. The base clause of any Sorites argument is implicitly a comparison of some kind: it involves comparison to some standard or to some other entity. Once it is made explicit what the standard or object of comparison is, the inductive clause is immediately seen to be false: for once that standard is identified, a definite cut-off line between having and not having the offending property is thereby established. 
Consider the base-clause in the argument set forth in the first paragraph of this paper. It is meaningful to ask:  a person with an IQ of 70 is not smart compared to what?  And it would be meaningless to respond by saying:  not compared to anything; such a person is not smart simpliciter.  No a person with an IQ of 70 is very stupid compared to the average person but astronomically and incalculably intelligent compared to the average potato bug. So any significant utterance of  a person with an IQ of 70 is not smart  involves reference to some standard; it is elliptical for some proposition like  a person with an IQ of 70 is not smart compared to the average person.  Of course, once that italicized qualification is added to the base-clause, corresponding qualifications must be added to the other two clauses, lest the argument involve an equivocation. So the inductive clause and the conclusion become: (ii)  if a person with an IQ of n is not smart compared to the average person, then a person with an IQ of n+1 is not smart compared to the average person  and (iii)  a person with an IQ of 455 is not smart compared to the average person.  
But notice that (ii) is simply false. Suppose that the average IQ of human beings is 102. In that case, there is some n such that a person with an IQ of not smart compared to the average person, and such that a person with an IQ of n+1 is smart compared to the average person. It is true for n=101.5, n=101.6, and so on. So the inductive clause is simply false. And the paradox 
[25]is thereby avoided. 
I submit that a corresponding treatment of many other Sorites arguments will show each those arguments to contain a false premise (the inductive clause). Thus the associated paradox vanishes; for it is in no way paradoxical that a false conclusion should follow from false premises. The purpose of this essay is to give a rigorous and comparatively general statement of the argument just given. 
II. Some preliminary remarks are in order. Not all properties generate Sorites type arguments. Only properties that can be had to varying degrees generate them. The property of weighing 323 lbs is binary: one either has it or one doesn t. One can t weigh 323 lbs to a greater extent than another person.  Binary  properties ---those that don t admit of comparatives   don t generate Sorites arguments. But, as far as I can tell, all properties that do admit of comparatives generate them: fatness, slowness, dirtiness, smartness. 
Given any statement of the form  x is P , where P is a property of the kind that generates a Sorites paradox, let us describe that sentence as a  Sorites sentence . Examples of such sentences are  that woman is smart ,  that man is tall ,  that object is moving quickly.  Further, we will describe properties like P as  Sorites-properties ; and we will describe predicates like  P  (the expression denoting P) as  Sorites-predicates.  
Given a Sorites-sentence, the sentence formed by negating the predicate is itself a Sorites-sentence.  Bob is wealthy  is a Sorites sentence. So, therefore, 
[26] 

is  Bob is not wealthy . And prefixing a  not  onto any Sorites-type predicate results in a Sorites predicate.  Smart  is a sorites-type predicate; so, therefore, is  not smart.  (Thus, the property of being not smart is a Sorites property.) 
III. Let us now proceed to the argument proper. Sorites-sentences are context-sensitive. The sentence  Bob is fast  makes a false statement if Bob is a cheetah whose top running speed is 30 mph. That same sentence makes a true statement if Bob is a turtle whose top crawling speed is 2 mph. In a very poor country, the sentence  Bob is not wealthy  may be false if Bob has $100 to his name. In a very rich country, the sentence  Bob is not wealthy  may be true if Bob has $90,000 to his name. 
This context-sensitivity is easily explained when it is realized Bob cannot be wealthy simpliciter. He must be wealthy compared to most Albanians, or wealthy compared to most Americans, or wealthy enough to take adequate care of his children (who have medical conditions requiring expensive treatment). It would be meaningless to say that Bob was just wealthy. Pick any amount of money. For any amount of money M (other than no money at all), there will be some context such that a person with M can be truly characterized as  wealthy  and a different one where a person with M can be truly characterized as  not wealthy.  
What this tells us is that  wealthy  (and therefore  not wealthy ) is not really a one-place, but a two-place, predicate:  x is wealthy relative to some standard ,  x is wealthy compared to y.  
This applies mutatis mutandis to any Sorites sentence. Suppose you say  Bob is smart.  I can legitimately ask:  Smart compared to what? Smart compared to most PhD s in physics? Smart compared to most people?  Given any sentence of the form  x is smart , there are some contexts where that would constitute a true statement and some where it would not. (This is the case unless x has absolutely no intelligence at all. We will deal with this problem below). This tells us, I submit, that sentences of the form  x is smart  really express propositions that relativize x s intelligence to some standard: x s intelligence is being compared to that of other PhD s in physics, to other people in the remedial reading class, to other dogs, or other iguanas. 
So different tokens of  x of smart  involve comparison to different standards, and thus express what are, strictly speaking, different propositions. If Bob is a dog, and you say  Bob is smart  you are probably saying  Bob is smart for a dog . If you say  Bob is smart  and Bob is a Nobel laureate, you are probably saying  Bob is smart for a person . In any case, if Bob is a Nobel Laureate, and you say  Bob is smart , you are probably not saying that Bob is smart compared to a dog. That is why the truth-conditions for  Bob [a dog] is smart  are not the same as  Bob [the Nobel Laureate] is smart . They have different truth-conditions because they express different propositions: Bob is smart compared to the average dog and Bob is smart compared to the average human. This point applies to many, if not all, sentence of the form  x has phi , where  phi  is a Sorites-predicate. 
Let us apply these considerations to some specific Sorites-argument: 
(i) An object moving at one mph is not moving quickly. (ii) If an object moving n mph is not moving quickly, then an object moving n+1 mph is not moving quickly. (iii) So an object moving 400 million mph is not moving quickly. 
Let us refer to this argument as S. 
The first sentence of S, if used significantly, must (elliptically) express a proposition that relativizes the speed of an object moving one mph to some standard   that compares the speed of such an object with that of some other object (or class of objects). For it is legitimate to ask: Relative to what is an object moving at one mph not moving quickly? Compared to a glacier? No. Compared to a light-ray? Yes. 
So someone who was putting forth S would have say relative to what an object moving one mph was not moving quickly. So, in effect, the base clause of S would be some comparative statement like: 
(i ) An object moving one mph is moving slowly compared to the average horse. 
The validity of an argument depends on the terms in it being used with a uniform meaning. If  quickly  in (i) is elliptical for quickly compared to the average horse, while  quickly  in (ii) is elliptical for quickly compared to the average meteor, then S cannot possibly have any validity. So  quickly  in each of (i), (ii) and (iii) must be used with the same meaning   it must be elliptical for the same thing in each case. Consequently, we must make the appropriate substitutions. So S then becomes (say): 
(i ) An object moving at one mph is not moving quickly compared to the average horse (ii ) If an object moving n mph is not moving quickly compared to the average horse, then an object moving n+1 mph is not moving quickly compared to the average horse. (iii ) So an object moving 400 million mph is not moving quickly compared to the average horse. 
But once these substitutions are made, it becomes clear that (ii )   the inductive clause   is simply false. For there is some number n such that, if an object x is moving at n mph, then x is not moving faster than the average horse, and such that if x is moving n+1 mph, then x is moving faster than the average horse. Suppose that the average horse has a maximum speed of 45 mph. In that case, if x is moving 44.5 mph, then x is not moving faster than the average horse, and if x is moving 45.5 mph, then x is moving faster than the average horse. 
It is pretty clear that these considerations apply mutatis mutandis to any Sorites predicate. Given any use of a predicate that admits of comparative   and all Sorites predicates are of this kind   it is legitimate to ask for a standard of comparison. If you say  that rock is heavy , I can legitimately ask:  heavy compared to what?  In other words, I can ask for a standard of comparison. And once a standard is supplied, then the associated Sorites generating inductive clause is blocked.  For all n, if an object weighing n lbs is not heavy compared to the average human, then an object weighing n+1 lbs not wealthy compared to the average human.  But that statement is false. If the average American weighs 145 lbs, then an object weighing 144.5 lbs will not be heavy compared to the average human while an object weighing 
145.5 will be heavy compared to the average human.  
IV. Let us now consider some objections to our argument. The major resistance to it will, I think, be this (single-spaced statements are those of an imaginary objector): 
Despite what you ve said, I think that sentences like  Bob is tall ,  that rock is heavy , and  Fred is wealthy    Sorites-type sentences   have a non-comparative meaning. It is meaningful to say  Bob is wealthy simpliciter.  The same applies to all other sentences involving Sorites-type predicates 
I ve already given one argument against this. Here is another. Consider the following two sentences: 
(A) 
Bob is tall. 

(B) 
Bob is taller than Fred. 

(B) 
is synonymous with 


(B ) Bob is more tall than Fred. 
And (B) is also synonymous with 
(B  ) Bob is tall compared to Fred. 
In (B  )  tall  is really a two-place predicate. In other words, in (B  ), the word  tall  must be thought of as a predicate with two argument places. Now surely the word  tall  has the same meaning in (A) that it has in (B  ). There is obviously no ambiguity at work here. (It is not like the word  bank , which has two different meanings.) Now if  tall  were a two-place predicate in (B  ), and a one-place predicate in (A), then it couldn t have the same meaning in both (A) and (B  ). 
Let me clarify this. Obviously  tall  is functioning in a completely orthodox way in (B  ). And obviously  tall  is a two-place predicate in (B  ). Finally,  tall  clearly has the same meaning in both (A) and (B  ). Given these facts, it is hard to see how  tall  could not be functioning as a two-place predicate in (A). This shows that  tall  is really elliptical for  tall compared to__ . 
As against this, one might reason as follows: 
It is true both that  tall  has the same meaning in both (A) and (B  ). It is also true that  tall  is part of a two-place predicate in (B  ). Nonetheless  tall , in (A), is a one-place predicate, and is not part of a two-place predicate. What is going on is that the aforementioned two-place predicate in (B  ) is being constructed out of the one place predicate in (A). 
The problem with this proposal is not hard to see. The meaning of a 
predicate is intimately bound up with the number of argument places it has. 
[27] 

If P1 and P2 are predicates of different degrees (i.e. if they have a different number of argument places), then ipso facto they have different meanings. And I don t see how the obviously two-place predicate  __ is tall compared to__  could be constructed out of a one place predicate. 
The natural resolution of this is the one we considered a moment ago. The term  tall  has the same meaning in both (A) and (B  ). And this predicate doesn t somehow retain the same meaning while shifting the number of argument places it has, or while somehow being assimilated into a predicate of a different degree than it originally had. What we say is that  tall  is always comparative: x is tall compared to some standard. Sometimes the comparison is explicit. Sometimes it is implicit. Presumably, it is left implicit when the standard can be taken for granted, which is often the case. 
Admittedly, there are apparent problems with the line of reasoning just set forth: 
Consider the predicate  acidic.  Some things can be more acidic than others. So statements of the form  x is more acidic than y  are significant. But it is obviously meaningful to say  x is acidic  simpliciter. At the same time,  acidic  obviously has the same meaning in  x is acidic    where  acidic  is functioning as a one-place predicate   that it has  x is more acidic than y    where  acidic  is part of a two-place predicate. So there must be some error in your reasoning. Exactly similar remarks apply to  electrified ,  malleable ,  ductile  and various other physical terms. Also, it seems to apply to the term  intelligent . We speak of a life-form as being  intelligent  simpliciter, meaning that it has some intelligence. But we can also meaningfully speak of one thing as being more intelligent than another. 
When it is said that  x is acidic , what is really meant is:  x is acidic to 
some positive degree  or  for some positive number n, x is acidic to degree n . Degree-statements (even highly generic ones, like  x has P to some positive degree or other ) are really statements about the measure of something. And relativization to a standard is the essence of measurement: to measure is to compare   to compare with something taken as a standard. So statements about measurements are comparative statements. Given this, it follows that degree-statements   even highly generic ones like  x is acidic to some positive degree or other  --always presuppose some benchmark (in a quite literal sense of  benchmark , in some cases). So to say  x is acidic  is in fact to make a kind of comparative statement. 
I d like to consider another prima facie problem with our analysis. If somebody has no money, then it certainly seems reasonable to say that she is non-wealthy in an absolute sense. The same is true mutatis mutandis of all other Sorites-type predicates. And this seems to controvert my point that  wealthy ,  non-wealthy ,  tall ,  smart , and so on, have only a comparative meaning. 
This point does not go through. We ve seen reason to believe that  non wealthy  is typically used to make a comparative statement. So if we say that  non-wealthy  has a truly absolute and non-comparative meaning, then we are really saying that it has two meanings: we are saying that  non-wealthy  is sometimes a non-comparative predicate and is sometimes a comparative predicate, and is thus ambiguous between two very different significances. 
But it seems extremely arbitrary to say that  non-wealthy  is sometimes an absolute (one-place) predicate and sometimes a comparative (two-place) predicate. Obviously  non-wealthy  has the same meaning in  Bob is absolutely non-wealthy  (meaning: he has no money) that it has in  Bob is comparatively non-wealthy  (meaning: he has less money than others in a certain reference class). And there is no reason to believe that the term  non wealthy  corresponds to predicates with different numbers of argument places in these two sentences; it is simply not natural to suppose that such a dramatic shift in its semantics occurs. 
The natural way to go is this. It is in some sense true to say that a person who has no money is non-wealthy in an  absolute sense . But to say that Bob is non-wealthy in an absolute sense is not to say that he is non-wealthy in some way that involves reference to no standard. On the contrary, it is to say that he is non-wealthy relative to every standard. So being  absolutely  non-wealthy involves just as much a reference to some standard of comparison as being comparatively non-wealthy. 
I would like to end this essay by discharging an assumption that I have 
[28]
relied on throughout. I have said that 
(i) 
 x is smarter than y  

(ii) 
 x is smart compared to y  


is equivalent to 
and also to 
(iii)  x is smart relative to y . 
This assumption is obviously crucial to my argument. Obviously  smarter  is a two-place predicate. (It would be meaningless to say  Sam is smarter , unless that were elliptical for  Sam is smarter than Bob  or some other relational sentence.) It is essential to my argument that  smart  is really elliptical for some two-place predicate that has the same logical form as  smarter . My judgment is that  __is smart compared to__  and  __is smart relative to__  are such two-place predicates. But this judgment might be questioned, for one might say: 
Offhand, it does not seem to me that the statements  x is smarter than y  has quite the same meaning as  x is smarter compared to y  or  x is smart relative to y . 
[29] 

My response is this. Perhaps it may legitimately be questioned whether  x is smarter than y  has the same meaning as  x is smart compared to y  or  x is smart relative to y . But that isn t ultimately relevant. The important point is that one obviously could construct a two-place predicate out of  smart  
[30] 

that had the same meaning as  smarter . Once it is granted that  smart  is elliptical for some such two-place predicate, then my argument in its entirety goes through. Now it may be that  __is smart compared to__  is not that predicate. But as long as some two-place predicate can be constructed out of  smart  that has the same meaning as  smarter , then my argument goes through. (Whether the English language already contains such a predicate is irrelevant.) Now clearly there is no barrier to creating some predicate out of  smart  that has the same logical form as  smarter : let  __is smart kompared to__  be that predicate. (So  x is smart kompared to y  has the same logical form as  x is smarter than y .) Given the absence of such a barrier, it is plain that  smart  is elliptical for a two-place comparative predicate. (For as we, in effect, saw earlier, it wouldn t be possible to construct a two-place predicate out of  smart , unless  smart  were already such a predicate.) And, as we ve seen, once this is granted, then our analysis goes through in its entirety. 
References 
Cargile, James. 1999,  The Sorites Paradox . in Vagueness: A Reader, Rosanna Keefe and Peter Smith (eds.), Cambridge: The M.I.T. Press. 
Dummett, Michael. 1978,  Wang s Paradox , in Truth and Other Enigmas, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Fine, Kit. 1999,  Vagueness, Truth and Logic , in Vagueness: A Reader, Rosanna Keefe and Peter Smith (eds.), Cambridge: The M.I.T. Press. 
Parsons, Terence. 2000, Indeterminate Identity: Metaphysics and Semantics, Cambridge: The M.I.T. Press. 
Sorensen, Roy. 1998, Blindspots, Oxford: Clarendon Press. --2001, Vagueness and Contradiction, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Tye, Michael. 1999,  Sorites Paradoxes and the Semantics of Vagueness , in Vagueness: A Reader, Rosanna Keefe and Peter Smith (eds.), Cambridge: The M.I.T. Press. 
Williamson, Timothy. 1990. Identity and Discrimination, Oxford: Basil Blackwell. --1994. Vagueness, London: Routledge. --1999a.  Vagueness and Ignorance , in Vagueness: A Reader, Rosanna 
Keefe and Peter Smith (eds.), Cambridge: The M.I.T. Press. --1999b.  Vagueness, Truth and Logic . In Vagueness: A Reader. Rosanna Keefe and Peter Smith (eds.). Cambridge: The M.I.T. Press. 
Williamson, Timothy and Sainsbury. R.M. 1998,  Sorites , in A Companion to the Philosophy of Language A Companion to the Philosophy of Language, Bob Hale and Crispin Wright (eds.), Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Wright, Crispin. 1999.  Further Reflections on the Sorites Paradox , in Vagueness: A Reader, Rosanna Keefe and Peter Smith (eds.), Cambridge: The M.I.T. Press. 
Sainsbury, R.M. 1999.  Concepts without Boundaries , in Vagueness: A Reader, Rosanna Keefe and Peter Smith (eds.), Cambridge: The M.I.T. Press. 
The Ravens 
Here is an apparent paradox. (a)  All ravens are black  is logically equivalent with (b)  all non-black things are non-ravens . One can confirm 
(b) by citing red carpet fibers and green automobiles. Since (a) and (b) are logically equivalent, it follows that those same carpet fibers and automobiles equally confirm (a). But this seems very strange. People have dealt with  the paradox of the ravens  either by countenancing non-classical logics or by saying that red carpet fibers do confirm (a) as much as they confirm (b) (the appearance to the contrary is explained away as some kind of epistemic epiphenomenon). Neither position has to be taken. We simply have to look beneath the surface of the sentences involved. (a) expresses a nomic, not an accidental, generalization; it expresses a nomic connection between the property of being a raven and that of being black. (b), on the other hand, does not express a nomic connection. There is a causal or constitutive relation between the property of being a raven and that of being black, but there is no such relation between the property of being non-black and that of being a non-raven. Although there is an interpretation of (a) and (b) on which they are logically equivalent, that is not the interpretation that is usually intended by utterances of (a). The only interpretation on which (a) and (b) are logically equivalent is the artificial reading whereby (a) expresses a purely extensional proposition, in the same class as the infamous  every coin in my pocket is a quarter . Once we peel away surface-structure of (a), and delineate its nomic content, the paradox disappears. Attempts to show that our analysis is question-begging or otherwise innocuous are shown, first, to embody the absurd idea that x causes y is logically equivalent with y causes x and, second, to presupposes 
For any two logically equivalent hypotheses, any given piece of evidence will confirm the one hypothesis exactly as much as it confirms the other. In any case, it is hard to see how this could be false. It is hard to see how logically equivalent propositions could receive different degrees of support from a given piece of evidence. 
But this seemingly unexceptionable thesis seems to have a paradoxical consequence. Consider: 
(R1) All ravens are black. (R2) All non-black things are non-ravens. 
R1 and R2 are logically equivalent. I can confirm R2 by looking at red carpet fibers, green leaves, and white kitchen tiles. Therefore I can confirm that all ravens are black by looking at green bars of soap and white kitchen 
[31] 
tiles. But intuitively this seems quite wrong. 
Many have argued that, strictly speaking, one can confirm R1 by looking 
[32]
at red carpet fibers and green bars of soap. Others have denied that this can be done, and have tried to solve the paradox by appealing to non-standard 
[33]logics. 
Both of these  solutions  are desperate, and neither need be adopted. There is a much simpler solution. 
Let us refer to any paradox of the type just described as a  raven-type  paradox. Of course, most raven-type paradoxes have nothing to do with ravens. It will help if we initially focus on some of these other paradoxes: the fallacious reasoning that is involved, in a very obscure way, in the original raven-paradox is involved in a very transparent, and easily identified, way in some of these others. So before we give our solution, let us consider two other raven-type paradoxes: 
Consider: 
(H1) For any x, if x is a human who drank massive quantities of arsenic, then 
x is dead. (H2) For any x, if x is not dead, then x is not a human who drank massive quantities of arsenic. 
Suppose that H1 and H2 are logically equivalent. In that case, any evidence confirms the one hypothesis exactly as much as it confirms the other. But this has a paradoxical consequence. We can confirm H2 by finding a person who is not dead who has not drunk arsenic. Actually, anything that is not dead, so long as it is not a person that has consumed arsenic, constitutes support for H2. But it is very hard to believe that I am confirming H1 by citing cases of living people who have not drunk arsenic, or cases of non-dead non-humans that may or may not have drunk arsenic. 
Before we give our solution, here is one last example of a raven-type paradox: 
(C1) All copper conducts electricity. 
(C2) All non-conductors (of electricity) are non-copper. 
C1 and C2 are logically equivalent. C2 is confirmed by the fact that the number five is a non-conductor that is non-copper. Thus C1 is confirmed by that same fact. But that is surely wrong. 
If I am not mistaken, these paradoxes are easily dissolved. Let us focus on H1 and H2. When somebody puts forth H1, what is he really saying? He is saying something roughly along the following lines: first, all humans that have drunk arsenic are in fact dead; second, that fact is not mere happenstance, but has its basis in some kind of nomic or principled connection holding among the properties in question. It is not an accident that everyone who has consumed megadoses of arsenic is no longer living. 
Obviously there is some kind of principled connection between the property human who has consumed megadoses of arsenic, on the one hand and, on the other hand, the property no longer living. There is obviously a causal relation between x s having the first property and x s having the second. So when somebody puts forth (H1), what he is really saying is something at least vaguely like this: 
(H1C) Given any x, if x is a human being, then x s drinking arsenic 
[34]
causes death. 
H2 is not logically equivalent to (H1C). This is a matter of elementary logic. (H1C) says that a person s drinking arsenic causes his death. H2 doesn t say anything about causal relations. Further, there is no way obvious way to reconfigure H2 so as to make it equivalent with (H1C). Consider: 
(H2*) For any x, x s being not dead causes x to be something other than a human who drank massive quantifies of arsenic. 
H2* is false (in fact, it is arguably absurd); and it is not logically equivalent with (H1C). The two aren t even materially equivalent. 
Let us generalize the points just made. Speaking very roughly,  all  statements usually affirm relations between classes or between properties.  All politicians are liars  makes a statement about the relationship between the class of politicians and the class of liars.  All copper conducts electricity  makes a statement about the relationship between the class of copper objects and the class of objects that conduct electricity. (There is a nuance here. Depending on how the  all  is read in such statements, they can either affirm a relation between classes or they can affirm a relation between properties. 
This is a point we will often revisit.) 
Oftentimes, when people make  all  statements, they are not just saying that every object falling into one class falls into some other class. When you say  All copper conducts electricity , you are not just saying that, as it happens, all the copper things that exist also conduct electricity. You are making a deeper statement. You are saying that there is some kind of nomic connection between the property of being coppery and the property of being a 
[35]
conductor. When you say  any person who just drank a gallon of arsenic is now dead , you are not saying that, as it happens, anything having the first property also has the second. You are making a deeper statement. You are saying that there is some kind of nomic connection between, on the one hand, the property of being a person who just drank a gallon of arsenic and, on the other hand, the property of being dead. 
 All copper conducts electricity  does not affirm an accidental generalization. It affirms some kind of nomic connection or, in any case, some kind of principled connection between two properties. 
As it would usually be meant, the same is true of H1: it affirms some kind of nomic or, in any case, principled connection between two properties. The connection is: having the first property causes a thing to have the second property. 
I do not wish to be misunderstood. In some cases,  all  statement do affirm  accidental  generalizations. The stock example is: 
(CP)  For all x, if x is a coin in my pocket, then x is a quarter.  
Here all that is being said is that everything falling into one class happens to fall into another; everything having one property (that of being a coin in 
my pocket) happens to have another (tha 
Conceivably, one could use H1 to expr generalization. But that is probably not h is not how it would usually be taken. Su to drink arsenic. You tell him:  everyone you are saying, and what you will proba some kind of connection   not a purely a between the property of drinking arsenic 
It is a simple fact that, in at least som intended to express nomic   and not mer relations between classes. Whether this i pragmatics   of literal meaning as oppos explicature as opposed to implicature   i can leave that problem to the philosophe with what is communicated and meant (i statements, not (necessarily) with what t it is enough to know that, if you utter (H kind of nomic statement; you are probab there is some kind of principled connect involved. What you are saying is at least 
(H1C) Given any x, if x is a human bein cause death. 
Clearly (H1C) is not in logically equival 
(H2) For any x, if x is not dead, then x i quantities of arsenic. 















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































Induction by enumeration vs. inference to the best explanation 
Given only that every single one of the 5,000 first editions you ve ever come across smelled like pipe tobacco, you cannot reasonably infer that all first editions smell like pipe tobacco. What if all of those first editions were the property of your pipe-smoking friend Larry? In that case, you d have good to reason to suspect that their smelling like pipe tobacco had to do, not with their being first editions, but with their being things that had been around Larry. By the same token, so far as you are entitled to infer that all first editions smell like pipe tobacco, it s only to the extent that you have reason to believe that a thing s smelling like pipe tobacco is rooted in its being a first edition. But that means that, if the data entitles you to infer that all first editions smell like pipe tobacco, it s only because it also entitles you to accept some inference to the best explanation (one to the effect that a thing s being a first edition is, for some reason or other, responsible for its smelling like pipe tobacco). In general, induction by enumeration is parasitic on inference to the best explanation. 
Another example: You are playing a game of roulette. You know that nothing about the game is in any way rigged and that that there is nothing about you---your body, mind, or dice-throwing practices---that disposes a die that you ve thrown to roll one way as opposed to anotherYou ve rolled the dice seven times. Each time, at least one of the die has landed in slot #27. Under these circumstances, it would be natural to predict that you ll roll a 27 next time. But that prediction would be irrational: you have no more reason to believe that you ll roll a 27 than you will any other number. By the same token, no matter how many consecutive 27s you roll, you are never any more entitled to bet that, next time, you won t roll a 27 than you are to bet that you won t roll any one of the other available numbers. Since, by hypothesis, the conditions that obtain on any two occasions are identical, it would be irrational on any given occasion to think any one outcome any more or any less likely than any other. 
When would it become rational to believe that, next time, you re more likely than not to roll this as opposed to that number that, for example, you re especially likely to roll a 27? This belief becomes rational when, and only when, you have reason to believe that a 27-roll is favored by the structures involved in the game. It would be rational were to you learn that the dice are magnetically attracted to the 27-slot, or that the 27-slot is much bigger than any of the other slots. So a long-run of 27 s is evidence of another 27 to the extent that it s evidence of a mechanism that programs for a 
27. In and of itself, a long of 27 s is, as Hume made clear, evidence of nothing. Supposing that (i) no roll affects any later and (ii) that there s nothing underlying the various rolls that directs them towards a common outcome, the fact that you ve rolled consecutive 27 s is ipso facto irrelevant to what you ll roll next. 
The best, and the only, explanation of the fact that all known phi s are psi s is that, thanks to some mechanism, a thing s being a phi disposes it to be a psi; and as soon as such a mechanism has been posited, and not one second sooner, your knowing of a given thing that it s a phi is a reason for you to hold that it s a psi. So any non-fallacious  induction by enumeration  is parasitic on a case of inference to the best explanation. 
A consequence According to the frequency interpretation of probability, for it to be probable that x has psi, given that x has phi, is for phi s that are psi s to outnumber phi s that are non-psi s. Given what we ve just said, this must be qualified. Supposing the number of phi s that are psi s to be high (relative to the number of phi s that are non-psi s), that is evidence that the next phi will be a psi only to the extent that it s evidence of something that disposes phi s to be psi s. 
A small but heterogeneous class of phi s that are psi s may definitively establish that that all phi s are psi s and a large but homogenous class of phi s 
[497] 

that are psi s may provide no support for it. Why does a heterogeneous reference class matter? If two otherwise dissimilar phi s are psi s, we know that, if anything about either is responsible for its having psi, it is its having phi. But if two otherwise similar phi s are psi s, we don t (for that reason alone) have any reason to conclude that either one s being a psi has anything to do with its being a phi. 
Thus, the more resilient the connection is between a thing s being a phi and its being a psi---the more varied are the contexts within which a thing s being a phi is accompanied by its being a psi---the better the chance that the next known phi will be a psi. Presumably this is because causal relations do, whereas mere correlations do not, tend to be context-independent. 
Also, there are many perfect concomitances that, for reasons having nothing to do with their degree of context-invariance, we instinctively know to have no predictive or explanatory importance. We know that every green emerald is grue (green if examined before t (today s date) or blue and examined thereafter); but we don t think that tomorrow emeralds will be blue. Be it noted that the property of being an emerald no less resiliently, context-invariantly associated with the property of being grue than with the property of being green. So there is no reason to suppose that the next phi will be given only the fact that, in each of many qualitatively different contexts, they are frequently (always) conjoined. Given that fact with some other fact, which we have to identify, it is likely that the next phi will be a psi. But this suggests that concomitances have no predictive value, save what they leach off of something underlying them. 
Why is so little predictive stock to be put in the fact that all known emeralds are grue? xxx 
This is made clear by the following paradox, commonly referred to as the  lottery paradox  ( LP,  for short): 
(LP) There s a lottery. One million tickets are sold. There s one winner. So, given any one ticket, the probability of its losing are 999,999 in 1,000,000. You buy a ticket. Let x be this ticket. You know that ( LT  is short for  losing ticket ): 
(LT) the probability of ticket x s losing is 999,999 in 1,000,000. 
But do you know that it ll lose? No. It may even have been rational for you to buy the ticket. Given what you stand to lose by buying the ticket and given what you stand to gain in the remote chance that you win, it may have been in your interest to buy it, even after you take into account that the chances of your losing is 999,999 in 1,000,000. But this decision couldn t possibly have been rational if you knew that your ticket would lose. 
In general, there s no knowledge where there isn t certainty. If, given the information at your disposal, there is any chance, no matter how small, that P isn t the case, then you don t know P. We all know (or so let us suppose) that: 
(UB) the probability that future unsupported objects will fall is extremely high, given that such objects have fallen so far. 
Is there any chance that, all of a sudden, unsupported objects will no longer fall? Yes. (The statement  all of a sudden, unsupported objects will no longer fall  isn t ruled out by the laws of logic. So it could, theoretically, be true.) Therefore, you don t know that they won t fall; and, by obvious extensions of this arguments, you don t know anything about the future (apart from sterile trivialities; e.g.,  whatever happens, happens ). The very concept of  probable  knowledge is incoherent. The merely probable is ipso facto not known. To know it to be 99.9999% likely that unsupported objects will continue to fall is to not know that they ll fall. 
The problem with LP 
LP uses word  probability  in an equivocal manner. Once this is seen, LP loses any appearance of cogency that it might otherwise have had. Let s take another look at: 
(LT) the probability of ticket x s losing is 999,999 in 1,000,000. 
LT says that there are one million tickets but only one winner. That s all it says. But UB doesn t say anything of the sort. UB doesn t make a statistical point. It doesn t say:  nine times out of ten, unsupported objects fall.  UB makes a point about the relative merits of two competing hypotheses, these being: 
(H1) unsupported objects will continue to fall, 
And: 
(H2) unsupported objects will not continue to fall. 
UB is true if, given the data that we have, H1  s being true would undermine the integrity of our belief system to a lesser degree than H2  s being true. Given the information that we have right now: 
[498]
(SB) there is only an extremely low probability that walking on stilts for an hour while wearing a beanie with a propeller on it is a foolproof cure for cancer. 
Does SB say that better than nine cases of cancer out of 10 aren t cured in this way? No. It doesn t make any sort of statistical claim. SB is a claim, not about statistics, but about explanatory integrity. It says that more damage will be done to our belief system if it turns out that cancer can be cured in that way than if it turns out that it cannot. If, by some remote chance, cancer can be cured in that way, everything we  know  about medicine and pathology is false. But the damage wouldn t end there. Our medical beliefs are rooted in general assumptions about the causal structure of the world. (For example, given the information that Smith has gone into anaphylactic shock whenever he s eaten peanuts or anything with peanuts in it, even cutting-edge medical researchers will assume that Smith will go into anaphylactic shock if he eats peanuts that have been painted green. This assumption is rooted in generally held causal beliefs. No inside information is involved.) Were it found out that SB was false, many of the commonsense-based underpinnings of our medical beliefs would have to be reconsidered. But all of those beliefs remain intact if cancer cannot be cured in that way. It is improbable that walking on stilts (etc.) cures cancer to the extent that our current beliefs depend on its not being a cure. And it s probable that walking on stilts (etc.) isn t a cancer cure to the extent our beliefs depend on it. 
In general, P is probable to the extent that our beliefs depend on it, and improbable to the extent that they depend on its negation. 
Counterstatistical vs. counterexplanatory 
Counterstatistical events are innocuous, but counter-explanatory events are not. Smith rolls double-sixes five times in a row. Statistically unlikely  yes. Important no. Must we change our belief system because of it? No. Need we reconsider our assumptions about the basic structure of the world? No. And it makes no difference whether it s five double-sixes in a row or a billion. The improbable sometimes happens, and that s the end of it. When it happens, we have a nice anecdote for cocktail parties; we don t have a situation worthy of scientific scrutiny. But we do have such a situation if it turns out that Smith is using telekinetic powers to make the dice come up sixes. For, in that case, some deeply held convictions of ours have to be revised. 
In describing Smith s rolling double-sixes five times in a row as  improbable,  what one is saying is very different from what one would be saying in describing Smith s having telekinetic powers as  improbable.  In the first case, one is affirming a mere statistical improbability. One is saying only that such things don t often happen. In the second case, one isn t saying anything of the sort. One is saying Smith s having such powers is inconsistent with some fundamental beliefs of ours with beliefs that, if jettisoned, would take a lot of other obviously (or at least presumably) correct beliefs with them. 
Given any event, there is a way of describing it that makes it improbable in the statistical sense. In fact, any given event, described at all precisely, has a statistical probability of vanishingly close to zero. I flip a coin. Nothing improbable about this. But it s a safe bet that no coin has ever moved in exactly the way this one did after I flipped it. Described as a case of my flipping a coin, the event isn t improbable at all. 
But that same event is extremely improbable if described as a case of an object s moving in manner M, where M is the exact way that it did move. But even though nothing apart from that coin has ever moved in manner M, that coin s doing so isn t a matter that deserves the slightest scientific scrutiny. Its moving in that way is consistent with everything we know about the world, and there is therefore nothing to be explained. But there is something to be explained if Smith turns out to have telekinetic powers, since his having such powers is improbable in the explanatory sense. It s irrelevant that it is also improbable in the statistical sense. Every event is improbable in the statistical sense. 
My winning the lottery is improbable in the statistical sense, but not in the explanatory sense. And that s why, before the winner is announced, we can t say that we know it won t win: my winning is consistent with everything we know about the world. My sprouting wings in the next five minutes is improbable in the explanatory sense. And that s why we can say that we know it won t happen. It s inconsistent with everything (or much, at any rate) that we know about the world. 
Grue: the problem of counterinduction 
[499] 
A puzzle devised by Nelson Goodman will clarify, as well as support, what we ve said: 
[500]
(GA) : Let s invent a new word:  grue,  to be defined as follows. Something is grue if it is green before Jan. 1, 2010, or blue thereafter. So a shirt that s green on Oct. 12, 2007, is grue, as is a shirt that s blue on Nov. 11, 2012. Let s assume that, before Jan. 1. 2010, all emeralds have been green. (From now on, we ll abbreviate  Jan. 1, 2010,  as  2010. ) In that case, all emeralds have been grue prior to 2010. Anything that is green-and examined-before-2010 is also grue. So the fact that all emeralds examined before 2010 are green means that all emeralds examined before 2010 are grue. We are assuming for argument s sake that, given the fact that all emeralds examined before 2010 were green, we are inductively warranted in believing that all emeralds examined after 2010 are green. By that logic, it follows that, given the fact that all emeralds examined before 2010 were grue, we are inductively warranted in believing that all emeralds examined after 2010 are grue. But anything examined after 2010 that is grue is blue, not green. So, given that all emeralds before 2010 were green, our inductive grounds for believing they ll be blue after 2010 are as strong as our grounds that they ll be green. 
The degree to which a given fact is statistically improbable depends on how it is described. Given some emerald x that was examined before 2010 and found to be green,  x is grue after 2010  is, from a strictly statistical viewpoint, equiprobable with  x is green after 2010  and also with  x is blue after 2010.  But that s no cause for alarm. Statistical improbability is innocuous. It s explanatory improbability that you have to worry about. But the explanatory probability of  x is green after 2010  dwarfs that of  x is grue after 2010  and, therefore,  x is blue after 2010.  The supposition that objects don t change color (except under conditions that emeralds don t satisfy, at least not in virtue of making it to 2010) is deeply embedded in scientific theory and also in the commonsense underpinning of scientific theory. If it s wrong, then science is in serious trouble, and so is human knowledge in general. 
In response to this, it will be said that: 
[501]
(OA) If GA is right, emeralds that  turn blue  at the beginning of 2010 don t change color. They stay the same color grue. And emeralds that  stay green  do change color, since they go from being grue to having some other color. (Or, to be more precise, emeralds do change color at the beginning of 2010 but only relative to one set of color-terms [ red,   green,  etc.]. But emeralds stay the same color relative to different color terms [ grue,   bleen,  etc.].) 
OA simply isn t true. Pictures of green emeralds (taken before 2010) show them not to have the same color as blue things after 2010. Grueness and greenness are different properties. But they re not different colors. Grueness isn t a color at all it s a color-related property. Let s say that x is a  squiangle  (rhymes with  triangle ) if it s square-shaped before 2010 and triangle-shaped thereafter. If, for some reason, some object that was square before 2010 suddenly becomes a triangle, it s obviously changed shape. It used to have four sides. Now it has three. And a  squiangular  object that is square-shaped after 2010 has started in other words, an object that had four straight sides, etc., before 2010, and continued to have that shape hasn t changed shape; it hasn t gone from being a  squiangle  to being a square. It s stayed the same shape. The same goes for  grue.  


[1] 
Advocates of this argument say that the true sentences refer to The True, and that false sentences refer to The False. They don t say what these terms mean. In an effort to free their argument of needless obscurities and indefensible assumptions, I ve taken the liberty of assuming that they refer to the properties of being true and false, respectively. 
[2] 
Give or take some irrelevant details, this argument was put forth by Frege in his landmark paper On sense and reference. 
[3] 

Inevitably, some will quibble over whether, when they are interpreted in this (Russellian) fashion, definite descriptions are quantifiers. First of all, it doesn t matter. If, when read attributively, the meaning of  the inventor of bifocals is smart  is identical, or equivalent, with the proposition something or other uniquely invented bifocals and any such thing is smart, then, thus read, that sentence is an existence-claim; in which case, the occurrence of the  inventor of bifocals  therein isn t a singular term and, at the very least, quantifier-like. Second, when read attributively, definite descriptions are functioning as quantifiers. 
But, for what it's worth, definite descriptions are quantifiers if Russell is right about them. A quantifier is an expression that, when coupled with a predicate yields a sentence saying how many things of a given kind have that property.  All people  is a quantifier, since, when coupled with  snore,  which denotes the property of snoring, yields  all people snore,  which says how many things of a certain kind have the property of snoring.  No fish  is a quantifier since, given the expression snore, yields the sentence  no fish read Shakespeare,  which says how many things of a given kind have the property of reading Shakespeare. 
Thus  no fish  is to be defined thus: in virtue of having the form   no fish ,  a sentence says that the class of fish doesn t overlap with the class of things x such that x ( No fish snore  says that the class of fish doesn t overlap with the class of things x such that x snores.  Jim hates no fish  says that the class of fish doesn t overlap with the class of things x such that x snores.)  All people  is defined thus: in virtue of having the form   all people ,  a sentence says that the class of people is a subset of the class of things x such that x ( All people snore  says that the class of people is a subset of the class of things x such that x snores.  Jim hates all people  says that that the class of people is a subset of the class of things x such that Jim hates x.) 
Assuming for argument s sake that the CBR is the proposition meant by CB, the semantic rule for  the inventor of bifocals  is given by the proposition that, in virtue of having the form   the inventor of bifocals . , a sentence says that the class of things that uniquely invented bifocals has exactly one member in common with the class of things x such that x A consequence is that, given the aforementioned assumption,  the inventor of bifocals  is a quantifier. Given any other definite description, the same argument mutatis mutandis shows that, when read attributively, it is 
functioning as a quantifier. 
[4] 

What follows is a duly updated version of Footnote 3. Frege said that true sentence refer to the True. But he didn't say what the True is, and it's a matter of debate what exactly the True is supposed to be. But whatever the True is, let's stipulate, strictly for argument's sake, that "the property of being true" refers to that thing. If, in the forthcoming argument, each occurrence of "the property of being true" replaced with E, the resulting argument is cogent iff the original argument is cogent. 
[5] A less vivid, but more accurate (and also more general), formulation would be: R refers to O exactly 
if, in virtue of having the form +...R...+, a sentence S is to the effect that...O... 
[6] 
To clarify the parenthetical qualification: given what is meant by  bald ,  is  and all of the material occurring in that sentence besides  Benjamin Franklin , if you couldn t attribute baldness to BF by saying  Benjamin Franklin is bald , then, in that context at least,  Benjamin Franklin  wouldn t refer to BF. Why include this qualification? Because there could obviously exist a language in which  bald  referred to BF and in which some homonym of the  Benjamin Franklin is bald  attributed baldness to BF. So given only the supposition that one can t attribute baldness to BF by saying  Benjamin Franklin is bald , it doesn t follow that  Benjamin Franklin  doesn t refer to BF. But this conclusion does if follow given what the remaining semantic (and, presumably, syntactic) rules of English are. 
[7] 
Strictly speaking, there is no such thing as the sentence "snow is white." There is the sentence-type; and there are tokens of that sentence. And, for reasons that I've identified elsewhere (note to editor: I've omitted the references since the present paper is still being reviewed I'll supply them upon your request) that sentence-type is not semantically comparable, at least not in any respects that are relevant here, to its tokens. 
Also, it seems to me that, in this context, it's important to distinguish between embedded occurrences of "snow is white" (an utterance of that sentence that is constitutive of an utterance of some other sentence, e.g. the occurrence of it in a given utterance of "if snow is white, then at least one substance is white") and non-embedded occurrences of that sentence. There is a difference between saying "snow is white", on the one hand, and "the proposition that snow is white." A non-embedded utterance of the latter is neither true nor false. A non-embedded utterance of the former is true or false (since it's true). And if, having been ordered to identify a proposition that attributes a color to some substance, I say "the proposition that snow is white", I've clearly done what I've been told. But if, having been given that same order, I say "snow is white", I haven't clearly done what I've been told. This suggests that, if it isn't outright false, the thesis that "snow is white" refers to the corresponding proposition must be heavily qualified. 
And even when it occurs as a proper part of another sentence, "snow is white" isn't interchangeable with "the proposition that snow is white." Whereas " grass is green and snow is white" is true, "grass is green and the proposition that snow is white" is ill-formed and is therefore neither true nor false. 
That said, the semantic gulf between "grass is green and snow is white" and "grass is green and the proposition that snow is white" is miniscule compared to the semantic gulf between "grass is green and snow is white" and "grass is green and the property of being true." And 
My feeling is thus that both embedded and non-embedded occurrences of "snow is white" do refer to the proposition that snow is white---but that this isn't all that they do. I suspect that such occurrences contained phonetically unrealized material not contained by "the proposition that snow is white"; and it is because of these (alleged) differences, I suspect, that "snow is white" isn't, at least not categorically, interchangeable with "the proposition that snow is white." 
[8] 
See his papers "Truth and meaning" and  True to the facts,  both of which were published in his (1984) collection of his papers Essays on Truth and Interpretation. 
[9] 
Given a vague expression E, a  precisification  of E is an assignment of meaning to E that, although non-vague, is otherwise like E s existing meaning. See Section 1.2. The term  bald  is vague. But we d be precisifying the word  bald  were to say exactly how many hairs (of a certain 
thickness) a person x (whose cranium was of a certain size) had to have for +x is bald+, x is bald to be true. (It seems to me that this sort of precisification may not be in quite the same category as the precisifications put forth by science (e.g.  temperature=mean kinetic energy ). There are (at least) two reasons for this. First, scientific precisifications are less stipulative, and more descriptive, in nature than precisifications of the sort just discussed. Second, whereas non-trivial, non-linguistic discoveries must be made to successfully precisify terms such as  temperature  and  acid , such discoveries are irrelevant when it comes to precisifying terms like  bald  and  nice : the requisite knowledge is of a highly generic and, for the most part, strictly linguistic nature. 
[10] 
I m including mental (mass-)energy. Of course, materialists will say that, since mind is matter, it s unnecessary of me to say this. But I don t want to prejudge the question whether the mental is identical (or otherwise constituted by) the physical. (Also, speaking personally, even though I am, ultimately, a materialist, I have dualistic sympathies.) 
[11] Oxford University Press, 2005. 
[12] 
In what follows, I use actual quotation marks where I should, strictly speaking, use quasi-quotation marks. 
[13] 
In what follows, we'll set aside irrelevant subtleties relating to the tense-markers occurring in the sentences we're examining, and we'll also set aside subtleties relating to the fact that BF is no longer with us. 
[14] 

Why do I say "seems"? CB is a sentence. Given only that CB is equivalent with CBR, it doesn't follow that the proposition meant by the one is equivalent with the proposition meant by the other. Strawson (1950) made this clear. (Strawson's insight was popularized by Kaplan (1989.) Suppose for argument's sake that the semantic rule for "that person over there is" is: if, in a context C, somebody O 
is uniquely a salient person, then an utterance in C of +that person over there is has phi+ has for its meaning some proposition equivalent (if not identical) with O has phi; and if, in C, there is no uniquely salient person, then such an utterance is neither true nor false (the reason being that the demonstrative 
doesn't have a referent). But, given that same supposition, the sentence +that person over there is has phi+ would be true exactly if, in the relevant context, somebody x were uniquely a contextually salient person and, moreover, any such person had phi. Thus, given only that Russell's theory correctly models the logic of CB and other sentences containing definite descriptions, it doesn't follow that it correctly identifies the propositions meant by such sentences. My own view is that, indeed, TD is false. But I also believe, partly for the reasons given here, that Frege's view is false. My alternative to their analysis is put forth else where (note to editor: I'll supply the references upon request). 
[15] 
 FR  is short for   Frege.  
[16] Frege (1892). 
[17]   IB  is short for  the inventor of bifocals.  
[18] 
Actually, according to TD, each of (1) is and (2) is ambiguous between "wide-scope" and "narrow scope" interpretations, (1*) and (2*) being the narrow scope interpretations. (See Russell 1905.) In any case, what's important is that (1*) and (2*) are among the meanings that TD ascribes to (1) and (2), respectively. 
[19] 
Special compositionality is to be distinguished from the more general principle that the meaning (semantics) of a given expression is a function of the meanings (semantics) of its constituents. 
[20] 
In any case, supposing that O is the prettiest woman in existence, it refers, according to Frege, to something that is individuative of O. It doesn't matter, at least not in this context, whether, when referring to that thing, we use the term "concept" or "property." 
[21] 
In his paper "Theories of meaning and learnable languages", Davidson masterfully shows why, if Frege's semantics is correct, no human language would be learnable. That paper is published in Inquiries into Meaning and Truth. Also published in that volume is Davidson's paper "True to the facts", in which he argues that there is only one fact. This argument of his is discussed in Section 1.3 of the present paper. That argument, it will be recalled, is a variant of SS. And, as Frege himself realized, a corollary of Frege's semantics is that SS is cogent. Thus, Davidson himself showed that Frege s semantics is fallacious; and he does this in the very same book where, on the basis of SS, he tries to show that there is, at most, one fact. SS assumes the truth of Frege s semantics and, therefore, of the very semantics on which Davidson s one-fact (or no-fact) argument is based. In that same book, Davidson puts forth an entire philosophical system that is, in part, based on the assumption that there is, at most, only one fact. It follows that, in one and the same book, puts forth a philosophical system and refutes that same system. 
[22] 
See e.g. Dummett (1978) Fine (1999) , Williamson (1994, 1998a, 1998b), Williamson and Sainsbury (1998), Sainsbury (1999), Wright (1999), Parsons (2000), Sorensen (1998), Cargile (1999), and Tye (1999). The view put forth in the present paper is not even mentioned, let alone considered, in any of these works, or for that matter in any of the works known to me on vagueness or the Sorites paradox. 
For a review of all the dominant solutions to the Sorites, see Williamson and Sainsbury (1998). The solution I will present is not among those considered by Williamson and Sainsbury. 
[23] 
See Williamson and Sainsbury (1998: 458). I am relying on Williamson and Sainsbury for this historical information. 
[24] 
See Williamson and Sainsbury (1998: 466-481). I say that almost all of the solutions involve an abandonment of some law of classical logic; for there is the so-called epistemicist view, according to which there is a sharp cut-off between being bald and not-bald, rich and not rich. So somebody with $10,000 is not rich, while somebody with $10,001 is rich. But such a view seems deeply arbitrary; and  there is no evidence that [predicates like  rich  and  bald ] induce sharp cut-offs.  (Williamson and Sainsbury, p. 479.) Also, it is hard to believe that rich has such a precise meaning, given that absolutely no one knows what that meaning is: but surely since it is people who give meaning to terms like  rich  and  bald  through their use of such terms, it makes no sense to suppose that people should be so radically ignorant of the conditions of their application. (Williamson and Sainsbury (1998: 480) make essentially this point.) So the epistemicist view is, understandably, not taken seriously. 
[25] 
It is true that we are unlikely to characterize someone who is only marginally more intelligent than average as  smart compared to the average person.  But that has to do with pragmatics, not with semantics. The margin of difference would be negligible and would thus be of no pragmatic significance (except in rare contexts, like the present one, where delicate points about meaning are just what is at issue). A comparison might help. For something to be  massive  is, technically, just for it to have mass. But no one would ever describe a mouse as  massive  (except in comparison to, say, a proton); for it would be very misleading to do so, even though such a characterization would technically be correct. Similarly, it would be misleading   though technically correct   to say that George was smart  compared to average person  so long as George s IQ is so much as one point higher than average. In this paper, we are concerned with the finer aspects of meaning, not with the course-grained analogues of them constitute the bulk of everyday discourse. So we will use the expression  compared to  in its strict and literal meaning; we will say that George is  smart compared to the average person  iff George is smarter than the average person, no matter by how little. I further discuss this point at the end of the present paper. 

[26] 
In an earlier draft of this paper, I confused sentence-negation with predicate-negation. I d like to thank an anonymous reviewer at this journal for setting me straight on this. 
[27] 
Donald Davidson makes this point, and uses it to good advantage, in  The Logical Form of Action Sentences.  
[28] 
What follows is a response to a point made by an anonymous reviewer at History and Philosophy of Logic. 
[29] 
Though I doubt it.  x is smart compared to y  is quite obviously, in my view, merely a pedantic way of saying  x is smarter than y.  
[30] 
Actually  smarter  is itself such a predicate. Surely it is not a phonemic accident that the sound  smart  occurs at the beginning of  smarter.  
[31] 
Of course, Carl. Hempel (1945a, 1945b) discovered the paradox. The paradox has been re-articulated many times, sometimes with interesting twists. (See Maher 1999). Hempel bit the bullet, saying that one does confirm (R1) by encountering non-black non-ravens. An intuitively more plausible view is proposed by Quine (1969). (My solution here has some vague affinities with Quine s view.) Some sharp --in fact, devastating --criticisms of the views prevailing during his time, including Quine s, is given by Ayer (1971). Scheffler (1981) admirably reviews all the major solutions prevailing at the time of his writing. Most solutions propose that (R1) and (R2) are, indeed, equivalent. See Schlesinger (1974), Trusted (1979), Cohen (1989), Leavitt (1996), Sainsbury (1997), Maher (1999). 
There are views that try to destroy the alleged equivalence between (R1) and (R2). But these views always resort to non-classical logics. (See Sylvan and Nola (1991)).So in effect these views do concede that, within a classical framework, (R1) and (R2) are indeed, equivalent. So these views presuppose that (R1) and (R2) are equivalent, if only within a classical framework: otherwise non standard logics wouldn t be invoked to block the equivalence. 
These are all worthy views. For reasons of space I cannot review them all here. But what I can say is that, since they all presuppose a certain equivalence between (R1) and (R2), they are hobbled at the outset. Again, I grant that on a legitimate reading, (R1) and (R2) are, within the framework of classical logic, logically equivalent. But  all  statements are not always so transparent in terms of their content. And this is a case where the nuances of the word  all  are relevant. I submit that once we make these nuances explicit, we will find that even within a classical framework, what is said (or at least meant or insinuated) by (R1) and (R2) is not equivalent. 
[32] Hempel (1945a, 1945b), Sheffler (1981). 
[33] Sylvan and Nola (1991) 
[34] 
When I use the term  cause , I mean to include partial causes. Obviously total causes are very hard to identify, and definitely are not to be found in the paradigms we are considering. When I say  x causes y , I mean  x is causative of y , not  x is causally sufficient for y  or even  x is causally necessary for y . If you eat rotten fish, that is causative of your becoming ill. But it is not sufficient; if you had different digestive processes you wouldn t have become ill. And it isn t even necessary: you could have eaten rotten pork. But, in some legitimate sense of the word  cause , your eating the fish is still a cause of your becoming ill. That is the sense in which  cause  is used in this paper. (It probably corresponds to Mackie s (1977) INUS analysis. But we can leave that aside.) 
[35] 
Notice that I say  nomic  and not (necessarily)  causal . I distinguish between nomic and causal connections because   this is the received wisdom, anyway  some laws are not causal, but are merely  functional . (See Mackie 1977.) Also, it seems quite right to say that there is a nomic relation between x s having such and such temperature and x s having thus and such mean kinetic energy. But the relationship is not causal; it is a relationship of realization or supervenience or, possibly, identity. 
[36] See Goodman 1954, Hempel 1966. 
[37] 
Again, not all the solutions take for granted the equivalence of R1 and R2. But those that do not invoke deviant or non-standard logics to block the equivalence. So such views do concede that, within classical logic, what is being said by (R1) is equivalent to what is being said by (R2). See Sylvan and Nola (1991). 
The essence of my discussion is that, read the appropriate way, (R1) and (R2) are not equivalent: if we give the  all  the appropriate valence, there is no equivalence   even within the strictures of classical logic. So no non-classical logics are resorted to. 
And this, surely, is a good thing. All other things being equal, it is usually best to try to solve a paradox within the framework of classical logic. Otherwise we run the risk of a global conceptual upheaval in our effort to deal with a relatively local one. We don t want to induce systemic alterations of our conceptual system unless no alternative is possible. The solution here doesn t involve systemic changes   it doesn t involve any non-conservative logical moves. 
[38] 
In the sense of being communicated, not necessarily in the sense of being literally or semantically meant. 
[39] 
The word  consequence  here is not to be taken in the material sense.  snow is white  is a material consequence of  grass is green.  But the former is not a consequence, in any more robust sense, of the latter. In P4, the word  consequence  is to be taken as having a robust meaning. Granted, the word  consequence  has many different robust meanings: causal, metaphysical, logical. But it seems fair to say that, for one of those meanings, P4 is correct statement. 
[40] 
The word  consequence  here is not to be taken in the material sense.  snow is white  is a material consequence of  grass is green.  But the former is not a consequence, in any more robust sense, of the latter. In P4, the word  consequence  is to be taken as having a robust meaning. 
Granted, the word  consequence  has many different robust meanings: causal, metaphysical, logical. But it seems fair to say that, for one of those meanings, P4 is correct statement. 
[41] 
I say  arguably  because, in my view, there is nothing obvious about the status of statements like  water is H2O . We must distinguish the sentence from the proposition; and we must also distinguish the proposition from the information through which we access that proposition. Once these variables are taken into account, the obviousness that characterized discourse about the  a posteriori necessary  vanishes. I discuss this issue at length in my books__ and___. 
[42] 
Of course, one could certainly use the sentence  all ravens are black  to say that, as it happens, everything that is a raven is also black. And there would be nothing wrong with such usage. But, it seems, when a zoologist   or, for that matter, practically anyone   uses that sentences, he/she means something a bit stronger than that every raven happens to be black. There seems to be some nomic content. 
[43] The first to argue this was probably Berkeley, in Principles of Human Knowledge. 
[44] The sub-script stands form  formal.  
[45] 
It would be more correct to say that (v) is a Russellian paraphrase of (iv). For  There some x, such 
that given any y, y=x iff y is a king of France, and x punched Bob  is also a Russellian paraphrase of 
(iv). 
[46] Strawson is probably the most famous exponent of this view. See Strawson [1]. 
[47] See Blackburn 1984: 310. 
[48] See Neale 1990: chapters 2-3. 
[49] See Dummett 1981: chapter 1. 
[50] Or if he were to utter a sentence of mathematics, logic etc.: tone-free sentences. 
[51] 
Everybody who agrees that there are any completely synonymous sentences agrees that these are examples of that. Some philosophers, possibly Quine (at certain junctures) deny, in effect, that there is such a relation as synonymy, and a fortiori that such a relation is actually instantiated. 
[52] MacCawley 1993: 302. See also Grice: 1989a. 
[53] This exact point was made to me in private correspondence by Nathan Salmon. 
[54] 
See Strawson 1990: 232-233. See also Graff: 2001 I borrowed this exampled from Graff. [55][55] 
This that definite descriptions can be used predicatively, and the relevance of this fact to my paper, were brought to my attention by an anonymous reviewer at this journal. Addressing this point has considerably enriched this paper. 
[56] Kripke 1991: 179. 
[57] 
I have verified this with several linguists, including Tim Stowell (University of California, Santa Barbara) and Susanna Cummings (University of California, Santa Barbara). 
[58] The contents of the next ten paragraphs are from Kaplan 1989. 
[59] This is all neatly summarized by Kaplan in Kaplan 1989: 523. 
[60] Again, I have verified this point with Professors Stowell and Cummings. 
[61] The analysis I m about to give is nearly enough given in Strawson s article. 
[62] This problem was brought to my attention by an anonymous reviewer at this journal. 
[63] 
The need to address this problem was brought to my attention by an anonymous reviewer at this journal. 
[64] Kaplan 1989. 
[65] Stroud (2002: 102-103). 
[66] 
Examples of definite descriptions are  the king of France ,  the table , and  my neighbor . A definite description might be defined as one that is either (i) of the form  the phi  (where this expression is in the singular, not the plural, case) or (ii) as one that is synonymous with such an expression. So  the king of France  is a definite description by (i). And  my neighbor  is a definite description by (ii); for  my neighbor  is surely synonymous with  the person who is my neighbor.  The expression  the people over there  is not a definite description, since it is in the plural case. 
[67] The subscript stands for  formal . 
[68] 
In this paper, by  proposition  I mean simply  sentence meaning.  I am not using the term to denote some specific conception of what a proposition. Everybody agrees that a proposition is the meaning of a sentence. Where people disagree is as to what sort of a thing a sentence-meaning is. Russell thought that such things are complexes of objects and properties. Others think that they are sets of possible worlds or functions from worlds to truth-values. My use of the word  proposition  is neutral with respect to these different theories as to what a proposition is; I am, to repeat, using the term to mean  sentence meaning , not to denote this or that particular theory as to what sort of a thing a sentence-meaning is. 
[69] 
See Neale [1], Lambert [1]. Also, Gareth Evans advocates Russell s theory in The Varieties of Reference. See Evans [1] chapter 2 especially pp. 51-60. Simon Blackburn defends the Theory of Descriptions in Spreading the Word. 
[70] 
In 1990 Stephen Neale published a brilliant defense of Russell s theory (Neale [1], chapters 5 and 6.) But the topic of D-questions and D-imperatives and D-optatives   of D-sentences that are not assertoric --is not mentioned even once, let alone discussed. And in 1984 Simon Blackburn wrote a brilliant exposition and defense of Russell s theory, which masterfully showed how a Russellian could deal with the fact that e.g.  the man in the corner is bald  might be de re about a certain man (which prima facie favors the view that  the man in the corner  is functioning as a referring expression and not pace Russell as a kind of quantifier) and with the fact that, if we heard  the king of France is bald  we would be unlikely to reply  that s false  (which prima facie suggests that  the King of France is bald  does not, pace Russell, assert that there is a king of France.) But Blackburn completely ignores the question whether the theory of descriptions applies to definite descriptions occurring in non-assertoric contexts. Kent Bach published an extended defense of the Theory of Descriptions, in which he ably challenged a number of traditional attacks on it. But he does not even a single time discuss D-questions or D-imperatives. In the anthologies on definite descriptions that I have read through, the only D-sentences discussed are D-assertions. (See e.g. Ostertag [1]. ) There is not a single mention of   let alone discussion of   the question whether Russell s theory is viable so far as definite descriptions occurring in non-assertoric contexts are concerned. For some reason, contemporary discussions of the viability of Russell s theory tend to concern anaphora (See e.g. Neale [1]) and the apparently referential function performed by (some uses of) definite descriptions, e.g.  the man in the corner is an economist ,  the table is covered with books.  (See Kripke [1], Grice [1], Bach [1].) 
[71] The F-subscript stands for  formal . 
[72] 
In this connection, I am using  good  to mean  reasonable  (not necessarily  valid  in the technical sense   for (b) is probably not technically valid), and  bad  to mean  unreasonable . 
[73] This is, ironically, Neale s own example of an ambiguous sentence. 
[74] 

Notice that, if you disambiguate a sentence uncharitably, there is a feeling of strangeness or discomfort. Consider the following sequence:  Bob has no self-control. He can t strop drinking. He can t stop smoking. He can t stop gambling.  Now force yourself to disambiguate the boldfaced sentence uncharitably (i.e. read it to mean he can t prevent people in general from gambling). As long as you force yourself to read it that way, there is a feeling of discomfort. But once you disambiguate charitably   once you read it to mean he cannot resist his own compulsion to gamble   the sentence falls into place, and your feeling of discomfort vanishes. But now consider the following sequence:  Bob has no self-control. He can t strop drinking. He can t stop smoking. He can t prevent gambling.  The last sentence is not ambiguous between a meaning that is appropriate and one that is inappropriate. It is incorrigibly or irremediably out of place; and this is manifested by an ineradicable feeling of oddness (as opposed to the eradicable oddness borne by  He can t stop gambling  in (b). 
[75] 
I think that this point goes back to Grice (though I do not know whether he makes it in exactly this form). See Grice [2]. 
[76] 
One might object:  Suppose A said  Does your one neighbor drink?  Wouldn t that normalize his response?   I have two points to make in response. We ve already seen (section II) several reasons not to think that this tactic is available to the Russellian. For example, A s question seems to be a strict use of a definite description, if there ever was one (it is  proper ). But even if we leave that aside, the objector s point is doubtful. To my ear the following dialogue still sounds markedly strange even if we replace A s response with  does your one neighbor drink?  And the most obvious diagnosis of why it sounds strange is the one we ve given all along: that B is required, not to presuppose, but to assert the uniqueness and existence of A s neighbor, and that by using a definite description   even one with  one  added   he has really only presupposed this. 
[77] 
Dummett makes some remarks that might be seen as responsive to this question. See Dummett [1], p. 316. 
[78] This point was made to me, in response to an earlier draft of the present paper, by Nathan Salmon. 
[79] 
(ii) is also ill-formed, but for some reason, the use of  for some x  instead of  there is some x such that  seems to have an ameliorative effect; it to some extent   though, to my ear, by no means completely   disguises the fact that (ii) is ill-formed. 
[80] And also (ii). 
[81] 
It will be noticed that here I am talking as though force operators are applied not to bits of verbiage but to the meanings (propositions or fragments thereof) borne by bits of verbiage. This is indeed how I wish to be understood. Force-operators do not apply to sentences; they apply to propositions. Any (well-formed) sentence, by virtue of its grammatical properties, necessarily embodies a force.  Bob went to the store  already embodies a force; and so do  did Bob go to the store  and  make Bob go to the store.  So force-operators cannot significantly be applied to sentences   doing so would be redundant. However propositions are initially force-less. The sentences  did Bob go the store  and Bob went to the store  and  would that Bob went to the store  all encode the same proposition (Bob went to the store). But by virtue of their grammatical properties, these sentence embody the application of different force-operators to that same proposition. Basically the application of a force operator is expressed in natural language by such things as word order (in English the order of subject and verb is inverted in questions) and inflection (the tone of a question tends to be a rising one, whereas that of an assertion tends not to do this); in short, the application of a force operator is, in natural language,  written into  the grammar of a sentence (and is not usually indicated by the application of a single character). To sum up, it is propositions that are assigned forces, not sentences. Sentences come into existence already having force: a well-formed sentence is ipso facto something that has a force. Not so of a proposition. 
[82] 
This point was made to me, in private discussion, by both Francis Dauer and Nathan Salmon. 
[83] 
I would conjecture that this is not a peculiarity of the English language; that it is universal. 
[84] 
Notice I am not saying that the proposition in question would be Bob went to the store and did Bob buy some cheese. I am taking it for granted that  Bob bought some cheese  and  did Bob buy some cheese  are associated with the same proposition (Bob bought some cheese) but have different forces. I think it s a good idea not to try to assimilate force to propositional content: we want to be able to say that one can assert, ask, command one and the same proposition (at different times). If we reduce forces to components of propositions, then a given proposition will be capable only of being (say) asserted, not of being asked or commanded; and this is probably not the case. 
[85] See the last footnote. 
[86] 
Of course, oftentimes in writing, we encounter sentences that begin with  And : e.g.  people are mean. And they are greedy too.  But we shouldn t be misled by orthography here.  And they are greedy  cannot by itself be assigned a force. Obviously what is assigned a force is that sentence in conjunction with the preceding one. To make this clear, suppose someone came up to you out of the blue and said:  And people are greedy . You could obviously make sense of  people are greedy , but not of the  and . You would assume, I think, that either you were hearing the second conjunct of some conjunction or that you were hearing something that wasn t quite well-formed. 
[87] 
Technically, there is the option of saying that some sentences are, as wholes, to be assigned  mixed forces   are e.g. both questions and assertions   but (ii) that those sentences contain no well-formed assertoric part and/or no well-formed interrogative part. So  Bob went to the store and did Bob buy some cheese  is irreducibly a question-assertion: as a whole, it is a question-assertion, but it cannot be neatly divided into a part that is a question and a part that is an assertion. It would take us too far afield to argued against this. But surely I am not alone in feeling that such a proposal stretches the limits of the intelligible. In any case, it is ad hoc. 
[88] 
It may initially seem strange to say that, in saying (iii), I have commanded you to make a conditional proposition be true when we consider some related locutions, e.g.: 
(v) 
I want the following to be the case: if Bob comes home, then you will tell him to call me. 

(vi) 
I order that the following be the case: if Bob comes home, then you will tell him to call me. 

(vi) 
is not strange. And (vi) is the assertoric analogue of: 


There is nothing strange about (v) (except that it is long-winded and pedantic). Consider a close-cousin of (v): 
(vii) 
Make the following be the case: if Bob comes home, then you will tell him to call me. 

(vii) 
of course is just a long-winded, but otherwise normal, way of saying 


(viii) Make the case that [if Bob comes home, then you will tell him to call me] 
or, more simply, 
(ix) If Bob comes home, then tell him to call me. 
[89] See Grice [1], p. 270. 
[90] This objection was made by an anonymous reviewer at Principia. 
[91] 
Suppose I say:  I wish to know whether the king of France went to the store; therefore there is something I wish to know.  At the level of literal meaning, those words express a valid argument. But the following does not express a valid argument, at least at the level of literal meaning:  Did the king of France go to the store? Therefore there is something I wish to know.  That is nonsense. It is hard to see how replacing a synonymous sentence with a synonymous sentence could turn good sense into nonsense. So surely  I wish to know whether the king of France went to the store  is not synonymous with  did the king of France go the store?  
[92] This objection is due to an anonymous reviewer at Principia. 
[93] These are the exact words of the reviewer mentioned in the last footnote. 
[94] Quine 1982 (23). 
[95] 
Clarence Lewis (1929) argued compellingly that every statement about the physical world   even those that seem to have no counter-factual component   are in fact implicitly counterfactual. When you say that something is steel, you are saying something about how it would behave if it were subjected to certain conditions. I am inclined to agree with Lewis. There is no way to purge our discourse of counter-factual elements. So we have to find a way to make counterfactuals work. 
[96] Lewis 1973 (1). 
[97] When they are true. 
[98] 
Though perhaps not in all his views, e.g. his modal realism. But the truth is that Lewis  modal realism is, I think, common sense through to its logical conclusion. It is usually thought that Lewis  modal realism   his belief that possible worlds are real worlds that are not identical with this one   is a monstrosity created by a logician with his head in the clouds. The truth is, in my view, that the ordinary person thinks of counterfactuals in factualist terms: as expressing relations among concrete things   states of affairs   with the qualification that these concrete things don t exist here. But unless one is willing to take a completely non-factualist view   is willing to see counterfactuals as something like disguised probability statements   then it is (I think) impossible to avoid modal realism. For any state of affairs is per force a concrete state of affairs: something that exists in space and time. A  non-concrete  state of affairs must be an obscure way of saying  proposition  or  concept . And , of course, a concrete thing can exist only in a concrete world, not a merely possible one. For a  merely possible concrete world  is an oxymoron. 
Lewis  modal realism is, in this respect, like Wittgenstein s picture theory. The picture theory has always been reviled. But if one takes seriously the idea that a proposition s being true consists in its  corresponding  with the facts   and how could one not take such a view?   then, of course, one must say what this  correspondence  consists in. And   although the picture theory is probably false 
  the picture theory is the only non-trivial conception, thus far produced, of what that correspondence consists in. I think the picture theory delineates a conceit that is operative in virtually everyone s thinking about propositions: only, before Wittgenstein came along, it was never stated clearly, so the falsity of it was never seen. Inevitably, Wittgenstein was attacked. But really we should be attacked for endorsing the picture-theory (if, in fact, it is wrong). Similarly, although Lewis is attacked for his modal realism, he is, I think, simply saying in a logically developed way what everybody thinks in an inchoate, confused way. So if modal realism is wrong (which, I argue, it is: at least in connection with counter-factuals), it is not Lewis who should be attacked, but us. 
[99] Blackburn 1984 (215) mentions this move and makes some incisive remarks about it. 
[100] 
Lewis (1973: 77-78) himself gives criticisms of M that are very similar to the ones I give. 
[101] This example was borrowed from Carnap, who makes this very point. 
[102] 
Isaac Asimov wrote an interesting short story about this. (I can t remember the title.) The basic idea was that, if the law of gravity were suspended, the results would not be the pedestrian and comical ones we would expect (people floating upwards, and so on), but amounted to a total annihilation of reality as we know it. 
[103] 
Of course, we can run counter-nomic statements ( if the inverse-square law didn t hold, but otherwise the initial conditions in experiment E were the same  ) But, first of all, those sorts of counterfactuals are quite rare; people seldom assert them. Second, everything we said about  ordinary  counterfactuals   i.e. counterfactuals where the laws are kept the same, but the events are varied   applies tenfold to counter-nomic statements. If a given physical law didn t hold, then the probability of anything being even remotely like anything in our world, on any level, would be essentially zero. A variation in laws would be much harder to contain than a variation in some fact. More exactly, both such things are impossible to contain, but the former are more obviously impossible to contain. 
[104] 
I should mention that, in Experience and Prediction, Reichenbach does say that there are degrees of truth. In fact, he says in some places that there is no such thing as 100% truth. I think that Reichenbach is confusing epistemological with metaphysical (or semantic) issues. But leaving that aside, I highly doubt that even Reichenbach would characterize (*) as true. It isn t even clear if he d characterize it as 73% true. 
[105] 
Keynes  work on probability is based on this point, which he very clearly states at the beginning of his treatise. See Keynes 1921 (sections 2-3). 
[106] I also allow that all probability statements are purely epistemic. 
[107] 
We must make this assumption. It isn t worth considering the case where stupidity affects what answers the person gives. I am assuming that counter-factuals are objectively true or false   they are not mere expressions of how we feel. (Some, amazingly, have argued that they are expressions of feeling. I think that ultimately   despite his numerous disclaimers -Blackburn has essentially this view. See Blackburn 1984 (chapter 6) and Blackburn: 1993. I am arguing that correct counter factuals are statements of the form P1..Pn gives such and such credibility to Pn+1. Obviously I want 
to illustrate this point by discussing people who assign the right probability of Pn+1, given P1 Pn, 
not the ones who do it the wrong way. 
[108] 
An atomic proposition is one that is not a generalization of some kind and is not built out of other propositions. 
[109] And this is precisely the answer given by Hintikka, Carnap, and countless others. 
[110] 
I myself hold a version of this view. It has to be refined a bit to avoid some set-theoretical paradoxes. But the basic idea is unquestionably correct. If P entails Q then thre is obviously an internal relationship between P and Q: a relationship that couldn t possibly hold between two distinct things. So some kind of containment relationship must hold between them. In my book Conceptual Atomism and the Computational Theory of Mind (unpublished) I defend, at great length, this very conception of propositionality. And I show why, contrary to first appearances, that conception is consistent with the fact that entailments are often informative. 
[111] 
This example has been used many times. Goodman and Hempel use it   to illustrate this very point. 
[112] 
The only philosopher I know of who denies (L) is Bas van Fraassen. But van Fraassen s conception of natural law and of counter-factuals does not involve the notion of possible worlds at all. 
[113] Not one I agree with. 
[114] The obvious response is this: 
Suppose that Bob and Bob* have the exact same beliefs concerning what has happened, but Bob knows about laws that Bob* doesn t know about. For example, Bob knows that metal expands when heated, Bob* doesn t know this, but their respective knowledge of what has happened   of what states of affairs have obtained   is the same. In that case, Bob and Bob* can rationally assign different probabilities to, say, the possibility of some metal s expanding upon being heated. 
Fine. But remember that whatever probability can reasonably be attached to a putative law of nature, the sole basis for that evaluation must lie in what has happened: ultimately all probability-assessments flow from what has happened and, indeed, from what is known. Of course, Bob may believe in some law L not because he has personally witnessed states of affairs that confirm it, but because some scientist told him about it or because he read about it in a book written by an authority. But in this case, Bob s  knowledge  is obviously parasitic on other people s knowledge of singular states of affairs. In the end, what gives probability to a position is the totality of known singular states of affairs. So the way to respond to the objector is to say: if we leave aside parasitic knowledge (like Bob s knowledge of the laws of physics) or, alternatively, if we take into account the singular knowledge had by the communities to which Bob and Bob* belong, and from which their knowledge of laws is derivative, then there cannot be a divergence in the probability-assessments of these two people unless one of them is being irrational or, in any case, unless one of them is evaluating the data less competently than the other. 
[115] Kripke 1980. 
[116] 
At any rate, it used to be epistemically possible. Perhaps now it is definitive of the concept of water that, if something isn t H2O, it doesn t fall under that concept. 
[117] 
See Blanshard 1961 (20-22) for an insightful discussion of the probative value of one s  feeling of freedom . 
[118] Grice 1990 and Kripke 1991. 
[119] This point is borrowed from Kripke 1991. 
[120] 
Just as, in my view,  probably  would be ambiguous if it had both epistemic and non-epistemic meanings. That is why I think, even in statements like  the probability the electron will jump is .8  the  probably  is really epistemic. The electron will either jump or it won t. It could be that there s no law, and no hidden variable, that  makes  it jump now as opposed to later. It could be that it just jumps. Let us suppose that to be the case. Where, in that picture, is there room for non-epistemic probability? I see room for epistemic probability: in the past, 80% of cases like this one have involved the electron jumping, and the other s have not. So the current situation gives an 80% probability to the proposition the electron jumps. But what about  objective  probability? What is it for something other than a proposition to probabilify something other than a proposition? Do the circumstances involving electrons make the electron jump 80% of the time but not the other 20% of the time. That would be incoherent. By assumption there is no hidden variable; nothing is making anything happen in the one set of cases that isn t also operative in the other. So does the  objective  probability in this case mean that the state of the universe prior to the electron jumping is 80% responsible for its jumping? That is even more blatantly incoherent. When we have an irreducibly indeterministic law   a law that doles out probabilities (of less than 100%) that we can t exchange for deterministic laws, no matter how much we come to know   we are still dealing with purely epistemic probabilities: the only difference is that, in this sort of case, an increase in knowledge won t change the probabilities, whereas when we are dealing with reducibly probabilistic laws (e.g. 75% of people shot in the chest die), we can, with increases in knowledge, exchange that law for ones that dole out probabilities closer to (and sometimes coincident with) 100%. 
[121] 
Actually, the word  if  is ambiguous: sometimes it means  whether  (  I don t know if Bill is coming back ) and sometimes it denotes a relationship of conditionality or truth-dependence ( if Smith eats too much, he won t lose weight ). But if we confine ourselves to the latter kind of  if    which, obviously, we are in the present context   then it is very hard to see how  if  could actually have different linguistic meanings in  if arithmetic were complete, then robots could think  (counter logical  if ) and  if Bob had been nicer to his department head, he would have gotten tenure  (counter-factual  if ). 
[122] 
For the record, I think that sentence-tokens do refer. But I haven t space enough to make a case for this here. 
[123] 
But curiously, their compelling criticism of the Slingshot seems to have had little effect on discourse about the Slingshot. For example, it is nowhere mentioned in Neale s 2001 book on the Slingshot; nor is it mentioned in Neale s 1994 article on it. 
[124] 
See Kaplan 1989. I believe that this point is found, in some form, in Strawson 1951. 
Let me explain the  very roughly  qualification. A token of  that I am tired  is not true or false. If I 
say, simply,  that I am tired , I have not said anything true or false, even though the proposition 
denoted by my words is true or false. On the other hand, a token of  I am tired  is true or false. So there 
is a semantic difference between a token of  I am tired  and a token of  that I am tired , even though, 
plainly, those expressions are closely related in meaning. So the semantic content that a token of  I am 
tired  is assigned by the corresponding type is different from the semantic content had by  that I am 
tired . After all, a token of  I am tired  is true or false, whereas a token of  that I am tired  is neither. 
Thus the type  I am tired  does more than assign propositions to its tokens; it seems to assign 
propositions plus assertoric force-operators. So it is not entirely accurate to say that the semantic 
content of  I am tired  is a function that assigns propositions to its tokens: the function in question assigns propositions and it also assigns a force to the propositions. But in this context, it will help discussion if we speak approximately, and say that the semantic content of the type  I am tired  is a function that assigns propositions to its tokens. This slight inaccuracy won t vitiate any of the points argued for here. And it can be corrected by mentally replaced the term  proposition  with  proposition plus assertoric force . 
[125] 
See Barwise and Perry 1999, and also McCawley 1981. This point pervades linguistic literature. 
[126] 
Keep in mind the caveat stated in the first footnote. The meaning of the type  I am tired  is a 
function that assigns propositions plus forces to its tokens; that function doesn t merely assign 
propositions to its tokens   though, of course, it does do that. [127] 
Given the right circumstances, one could use any term, no matter what its literal meaning, to refer 
to anything. I could sarcastically use the term  Genghis Kahn  to refer to Bob. Such a usage is non-
literal. I can use  Plato  in a literal way to refer to Plato. Obviously this fact is fact is essentially 
connected to the fact that  Plato  refers to Plato. [128] 
Give or take some subtleties relating to force. Strictly speaking, the semantic content of a token 
of  I am tired  is in part a proposition. But that semantic content also has assertoric force. That is 
why a token of  am I tired  won t have the same exact semantic content as a token of  I am tired , 
even though both may encode the very same proposition [129] 

The special cases I have in mind are analytic propositions like  Socrates is identical with Socrates . It isn t even clear that a grasp of the semantic content of these sentences necessarily involves a grasp of their truth. Even if it does, that has nothing to do with semantics; it has to do with epistemology. 
[130] 
There is an obvious   and erroneous --way to deal with this. One can say: 
 You say that  presumably, the referent of a referring term is at least part of its semantic content . But your presumption is wrong. The referent of a referring term is not a part of its semantic content.  The inventor of bifocals  has the same semantic in both w and w*, even though it refers to different things in those worlds. This is perfectly acceptable. What an expression refers to simply doesn t have anything to do with what its semantic content is.  
The position is a non-starter.  Plato  refers to Plato. Its having that referent is, to say the least, an integral part of its semantics. If  Plato  referred to Aristotle it would have a very different semantics. So it really isn t feasible to deny that what a term refers to is an integral part of its semantic content. 
Frege actually did hold that, even if  Plato  referred to Aristotle, it wouldn t necessarily have a different semantic content from what it actually has. For the semantic content of  Plato , in Frege s view, is a sense; and so long as it  Plato  keeps the same sense, it keeps the same semantic content: it doesn t matter whether its referent changes. So a Fregean might deny our claim that reference is essential to semantic content. 
Later on, we ll see that, if Frege were right about  Plato , then  Plato  would actually be a quantifier, and not an expression that referred to some individual. But our defense of this will have to wait. 
But right now we can make a couple of points that render Frege s position innocuous, at least in this context. First of all, given what Kripke said, it is pretty clear that Frege is wrong about  Plato . Kripke s work also makes it clear that, if  Plato  had a different referent, it would have a different 
semantic content. Putnam s work also makes this clear. If  water  referred to xyz, as opposed to H2O, it would have a very different semantic content. So, to say the least, it is unnatural to deny that, if a term refers, its reference is integral to its semantic content. Conceivably, one could counter by saying: 
 Granted, the referent of a proper name, like  Plato , is part of its semantic content. But this is not the case with other referring terms (e.g.  you ,  the inventor of bifocals ). In some cases, reference is essential to semantic content; in others, it is not.  
But this is an extremely tortured and arbitrary view. It is clear that where some referring terms 
(e.g. proper names) are concerned, reference and semantic contribution are inextricably linked. If we say that this is not the case where other referring terms are concerned, we are in a position like that of someone who says  atomic structure is essential to some elements, but quite inessential to others . So it is surely best not to say  the referent of a referring term is no part of its semantic content . To put it in positive terms, if an expression refers to something, its referring to that thing is an integral part of its semantics. A corollary is that if two expressions refer to different things, then they have different semantics. 
So we still have a conundrum. If two expressions refer to different things, then they have different semantic contents. At the same time, it seems that if  the inventor of bifocals  is a singular term, then it can refer to different things in different worlds, while keeping the same semantics. 
[131] Strawson 1951. 
[132] 
I actually think this does not give quite the right rule. Where definite descriptions are concerned, the context of utterance is defined by much more than just the world in which the tokening occurred. But the niceties are not important here. What is important here is that if  the inventor of bifocals  is taken as a non-quantifier, then what a token of it refers to is semantically dependent on the context of utterance, in some sense of the word  context . 
[133] 

It should be made clear that the foregoing discussion has nothing to do with the actual semantics of definite descriptions. Some hold that  the inventor of bifocals  is not a singular term; it is a 
[133] quantifier, and   the inventor of bifocals   means (roughly ): something x uniquely invented bifocals and x So  the inventor of bifocals snored  means: something x uniquely invented bifocals and x snored. 
Even if this view is right, it in no way confutes our principle that, if a term refers, one must know what it refers to know its semantic content. Quite the contrary. Let us define  ze phi  as follows. If there some x such that x is a unique phi, then  ze phi  refers to x. If there is no such x, then  ze phi  is abortive. Everything we just said about  the phi  applies to  ze phi . Suppose that, in w and w*,  ze inventor of bifocals  has the same semantics. But in w*, it refers to Franklin, whereas in w* it refers to Jefferson. Here we seem to have a case where a single expression has a semantics but variable reference. But, for reasons we ve seen, we don t want to say this; and there is an easy way to avoid saying this. The type  ze inventor of bifocals  has the same semantics in both w and w*. But the semantic content of the type is a function that assigns referents to its tokens. The type itself doesn t refer to anything. So our principle continues to be upheld. (For our principle is: if an expression refers to something, one must know to what it refers if one is to know its semantics.) Tokens of  ze inventor of bifocals  are what refer. The semantic content of such a token is what the function described a moment ago assigns to it; so the semantic content of such a token is its referent. Thus, to know the semantic content of a token of  ze inventor of bifocals , one must know what that referent is. 
[134] This is how Richard Montague, along with many other contemporary semanticists, think of 
 and ,  not , and other connectives. [135] 

This line of thought is obviously not an innocuous one, and perhaps requires development. I would like to outline how that development would go. The sentence: 
(sn)  snow is not white  
is equivalent to: 
(sn*) not* <snow is white>, 
where  not*  ascribes falsity to the proposition encoded in the sentence-token falling in its scope. So the  not  in (sn) can be seen as a second-level property   on that ascribes falsity to the proposition encoded in the sentence-token falling in its scope. (Equivalently, it can be seen as encoding a function that assigns truth to a sentence-token exactly if the proposition encoded in that token is false.) The reason that  snow is white  occurs truth-functionally in (sn) and (sn*) is not that it contributes a truth-value; it is that a truth-value (falsity) is ascribed to the proposition it encodes. So we see, once again, that for a sentence-token to occur truth-functionally is not for it to contribute a truth-value; it is for a truth-value to be ascribed to the proposition that it encodes. 
The case is not significantly different when we re dealing with atomic sentences. But here we have to proceed very cautiously. Obviously the truth of 
(sw)  snow is white  
depends on whether the proposition encoded in that sentence (namely that snow is white) has the property of truth. We ve seen that, when it occurs in the scope of  and  or  not ,  snow is white  doesn t contribute a truth-value. It would be highly unnatural to suppose that  snow is white  makes one semantic contribution in (sg) and a different one in (sw). It very much seems to make the same contribution in both. We ve seen that, in (sg),  snow is white  does not contribute a truth-value. 
Given all of this, here is what I would propose. In (sw),  snow is white  isn t flanked by any verbiage. So it is occurring in what is sometimes called a  null  context. Null contexts, as linguists know, are often semantically pregnant. (They are null in a phonetic, not necessarily a semantic sense.) In English, when a sentence-token occurs in a null-context, truth is to be ascribed to the proposition encoded in that sentence-token. The null context is thus a phonetically invisible way of ascribing truth to the proposition encoded in the sentence. But here the relevant point is that what ascribes truth   what contributes the truth-value true   is, strictly speaking, the null context, not the token  snow is white  per se. 
Here is another way of looking at it. Whether the sentence-token: 
(st)  that snow is white is true . 
is true is a function of whether that snow is white is true. As we saw, this is equivalent to saying that (st) attributes truth to that proposition. Obviously (sw) is a function of whether that snow is white is true. So (sw) attributes truth to that proposition. Thus, (st) attributes truth to that snow is white and so does (sw); and neither does anything besides that. (st) is true exactly if that snow is white is true, and the same holds of (sw). So the differences between (st) and (sw) do not lie in what they say. Those differences appear to have nothing to do with content and to be entirely phonetic. In the case of (st), the ascription of truth is phonetically realized. In the case of (sw), it is not phonetically realized. Given this, it seems reasonable to say that, in the case of (sw), the absence of phonetically realized neighboring material performs the very function that, in the case of (st), is performed by phonetically realized material. 
[136] I am innocuously modifying his argument 
[137] I am slightly adapting Church s argument. 
[138] Davidson 1967. The technique used in his argument is really due to Church 1943. 
[139] See Davidson 1984, Neale 2001. 
[140] This line of thought is found in Montague s groundbreaking work. 
[141] See Barwise and Perry 1983 (399). They make this exact point. 
[142] Frege 1892a. 
[143] See the introduction to Whitehead and Russell 1912. 
[144] Strawson 1950. 
[145] 
The same is true with G del 1944, Quine 1953, and Davidson 1967. 
[146] 
Compare Barwise and Perry 1999 (44-45):  [T]here is something profoundly misleading about the traditional concern over entailments between sentences. For one thing, their concern obscures the efficiency of language, and it is this efficiency that is central to meaning. For example the sentence SOCRATES IS SPEAKING does not follow from the sentences EVERY PHILOSOPHER IS SPEAKING [and] SOCRATES IS A PHILOSOPHER even though this argument as the same  logical form  (on most accounts of logical form) as [ALL MEN ARE MORTAL, SOCRATES IS A MAN, THEREFORE SOCRATES IS MORTAL]. In the first place, there is the matter of tense. At the very least the three sentences would have to be said at more or less the same time for the argument to be valid A rather startling consequence of this is that there can be no syntactic counterpart, of the kind traditionally sought in proof theory and theories of logical form, to the semantic theory of consequence. For consequence is simply not a relation between purely syntactic elements.  
[147] 
For example, Church 1943, G del 1944, Quine 1953, Davidson 1967 all fail for that reason (and 
for others). 
[148] 
Arguably, some will say that in some languages (e.g. Russian), one doesn t say  Bob is tired ; one says simply  Bob tired . Thus, it might be proposed, these languages are rife with non-indexical sentence-types. 
That is very shallow reasoning. The way that the present-tense marker is expressed in such a language is by dropping the verb  to be  in contexts where it is understood to be the main connective. 
[149] Quine makes a similar point in Methods of Logic. 
[150] I m adapting Church s argument a bit. 
[151] Davidson 1967. The technique used in his argument is really due to Church 1943. 
[152] See Barwise and Perry 1990: 399. They make this exact point. 
[153] 1892a. 
[154] 1956. 
[155] Davidson 1990/1967. 
[156] Quine 1953, 1960. 1966. 
[157] Quine 1953, 1960, 1966. 
[158] 

Frege actually gives two quite distinct arguments for the thesis that sentences refer to truth-values. For reasons of space, I will consider only the second (the slingshot). If cogent, the first argument   the one I don t give   shows that sentences do refer to truth-values. If cogent, the second one   the famous one (the  slingshot )   only shows that if sentences refer to anything, it is to truth-values. 
[159] Strawson 1951. 
[160] Russell 1990/1905. Whitehead and Russell 1997/1912 (introduction). 
[161] Frege 1990/1892a. 
[162] 
1990/1951. 
[163] 
I actually think this does not give quite the right rule. Where definite descriptions are concerned, the context of utterance is defined by much more than just the world in which the tokening occurred. But the niceties are not important here. What is important here is that if  the inventor of bifocals  is taken as a non-quantifier, then what a token of it refers to is semantically dependent on the context of utterance, in some sense of the word  context . 
[164] 
Kripke 1971 makes similar points. He says that  the number that comes after four  is de facto rigid, meaning that, for reasons lying outside of semantics, it denotes the same thing in all worlds. And he says that  Nixon  is de jure rigid, meaning that for reasons lying within semantics it denotes the same thing in all worlds. 
[165] Quine 1951. Putnam 1962. 
[166] In some extremely broad and tenuous sense of  conceivably . 
[167] 
I say  typically  because it has been argued (with considerable plausibility, in my view) that one cannot be acquainted with the contents of consciousness without knowing everything about them (leaving aside, of course, extrinsic facts about them). 
[168] 

With some qualifications, I believe this point can be extended to the distinction between intension and extension. The word  whale , we are told, has both intension and extension. The intension is a property or function (from objects to the truth-values). The extension is the class of whales (Shamu, Willy, Moby Dick ) 
But there is no one expression that has both intension and extension. Tokens of  whale  have extension; the expression-type  whale  have intension. Nothing has both. We don t want to say that the expression-type  whales  denotes different classes in different worlds, while having the same semantics. That is perilously close to absurdity. 
What we say is: tokens of  whales  denote different classes in different worlds; the type has an 
invariant meaning: it pairs off a token of  whale  in a world W with a class C iff C is the class 
containing al and only whales in W. So intensions are the semantics of expression-types. Extensions are the semantic content of 
expression-tokens. So what has  intension  is entirely different entity from what has  extension . Having said this, the parallel between  the inventor of bifocals  and  whales  is not perfect. Consider the sentence  whales are mammals . This is capable of very different readings. (Whether we are dealing with a semantic distinction, or merely a pragmatic one, is a question I leave open.) It is capable of both  referential  and  attributive  readings. The attributive reading is this: 
(A) 
if a thing is a whale, then it is a mammal. 

The referential reading is: 

(R) 
Shamu and Willy and Moby Dick are mammals. 


The referential reading says of those things that are whales that they are mammals. The referential reading is to the effect that the things that are actually whales are mammals; so the referential reading makes the proposition in question turn on the mammal-hood of Willy, Shamu, and so on. It is object-involving with respect to those creatures. 
The same is true (mutatis mutandis) if all plural nouns. They can be read attributively, as quantifiers, or they can be read referentially, as terms that pick out the things that in fact have the relevant property. 
If  whales  is a quantifier, then one can understand a token of  whales are mammals  without knowing exactly which things are whales. (This is the reading that Frege (1884) favored.) If  whales  is what it appears to   a term that refers to the actual whales that exist   then one could not understand a token of  whales are mammals  without knowing exactly which things are whales. 
This would seem to favor the attributive analysis of  whales . But such a conclusion would be premature. (Similar conclusions favor the view that Kaplan s  Newman 1  is not a referring term. But it is a referring term.) 
But, in this context, the relevant point is that, if anything has for its extension the class of those things that are whales in this world, that thing is not the expression-type  whale : rather tokens of that type have that extension. If  whales  is a quantifier, then nothing   not the type  whale  and not tokens of it   has that class for its extension. Either way, there is never any one thing that has both intension and extension. If anything has that extension, it is tokens of  whales  (or  men  or  swans ), and not the type  whale . And if anything has that intension, it is the type  whale  (or  men  or  swans ), not tokens thereof. 
Granted, matters are more complicated than I ve made them out to be. For there different attributive readings of, for example,  whales are mammals , and different referential readings of that sentence. Sometimes when a person says  x s are y s , he means that some x s are y s ( people kill other people ); sometimes he means that all x s are in fact y s ( all antelopes are in Brazil ); sometimes he means that not all x s are y s, but there is some kind of tendency for x s to be y s ( people are mean ); sometimes he means that, as a matter of necessity, nothing can be an x without being a y ( all pieces of metal conduct electricity ,  all triangles are planar figures . I myself do not think that plural nouns have different meanings corresponding to all these different readings. The significant semantic question is: is  whales  ambiguous between referential and attributive readings? It is, I think, safe to assume that the various sub-readings within those two categories are generated by pragmatics. In any case, the principle we ve been arguing for holds up no matter how the actual semantics turns out; there is never any one entity that has both intension and extension. 
A historical point might be made here. Frege said that  whales are mammals  doesn t say anything about whales. People balk at this. But this reasoning is good. According to him, that sentence means: if a thing is a whale, it is a mammal. It doesn t say that this or that particular thing is a mammal. So if we consider the whales that exist   Shamu, Willy -- whales are mammals  does not say of any one of them that it is a mammal. Therefore  whales are mammals  doesn t say anything about any whale. 
So Frege s view is plausible. But it has the counter-intuitive consequence that  whales are mammals  doesn t say anything about any actual whale. It should be pointed out that there is a reading of  whales are mammals  on which it does make a statement about whales. That is the referential reading. In my view, the referential reading is probably the one that is closest to its literal meaning. On the referential reading,  whales are mammals  says of those things that are actually whales that they are mammals. 
But the referential reading has the counter-intuitive consequence that one doesn t know what (a token of)  whales are mammals  means unless one knows exactly which things are whales and which aren t. And no human being does know that. 
[169] Davidson (1990/1967). 
[170] See Neale (2001: 4-8). 
[171] 
There are probably type-theoretic reasons why it is wrong to speak of the class of objects x such that (x=x). In that case, let Omni be the class of all such objects of a given logical type. 
[172] It follows that there is one linguistically expressible fact. 
[173] 
It is a delicate question whether that pair comprises the sentences or propositions. For reasons I will argue later, I think it is pretty clear that it comprises propositions. But in the present context, this is not important. 
[174] 
This term is borrowed from Neale (2001). It is short for Principle of Substitution of Logical Equivalents. 
[175] 
See Barwise and Perry (1990: 398-400): 
 Church gives a form of the slingshot .Church considers these sentences: 
(5) 
Sir Walter Scott is the author of Waverly. 

(6) 
Sir Walter Scott is the man who wrote the twenty-nine Waverly novels altogether. 

(7) 
The number, such that Sir Walter Scott is the man that wrote that many Waverly novels altogether, is twenty-nine. 

(8) 
The number of counties in Utah is twenty-nine. 


Church argues that we as go from each sentence to the next, what the sentences denote is the same. But the first and last seem to have nothing in common except their truth-value; he says,  elaboration of examples of this kind leads us quickly to the conclusion, at least plausible, that all sentences have the same denotation.  
Sentence (6) results from (5) by replacement of one description by another, where both descriptions describe the same person, Scott. Sentence (*) results from (&) by a similar move, with the descriptions describing th same number, twenty-nine. The step form (6) to (7), however, is of a different sort. Church says that (6), though perhaps, not synonymous with (&),  is t least so nearly so as to ensure having the same denotation.  
The argument is like an ambiguous figure or an Escher drawing. If you are aware of situations, you have to keep shifting perspective to let the argument trick you. From one perspective the first and last steps re fine but the middle step is all wrong. From a second perspective the middle step is reasonably good but he fist and last steps are completely unfounded. 
Intuitively, situations are complexes of objects and relations (under which we shall from now on subsume properties). Given this conception, the role of the parts of the sentence to identify objects and relations out of which the complex is constructed, Let us hold this in mind, and go through the steps of the ar4gument from both perspectives. 
To get from (5) to (6), we need to suppose that the great difference between  the author of Waverly  and  th mean who wrote twenty-nine Waverly novels altogether  makes absolutely no difference to the situations described by the two sentences, that is, that the contribution these two descriptions make to the situation is just to identify Scott. Thus, the first perspective is the one where all four definite descriptions are interpreted by the objects they happen to describe, Scott in two cases, the number twenty-nine in the other two. 
But from this perspective, the step from (6) to (7) does not work at all. Recall we are attempting to show that all four sentences must designate the same situations. But from our current perspective [that according to which sentences designate situations], (6) designates a situation whose only constituent object is Scott, whereas, (7) designates one whose only constituent object is the number twenty-nine. 
Now let us focus on the step from (6) to (7). If we attempt to see these sentences as designating the same situation, then it must be that of Scott s having written exactly twenty-nine Waverly novels altogether. To see them as designating this situation, however, we must pay close attention to the properties involved in the definite descriptions. This is not unreasonable. If you take situations seriously, it quite natural to distinguish two ways in which descriptions might contribute to the sentences. The need is for the material to build t a situation, a complex of objects and properties, and why should the description not contribute the individual described or the properties involved in the description of the situation? 
Thus, the second perspective, which is suggested anyway if we take situations seriously, is the one where  the author of Waverly  is not interpreted simply as Scott, but contributes the complex of objects and properties it mentions to the situation the sentence describes. But this perspective is absolutely fatal to the step from (5) to (6) or from (7) to (8). The descriptions of Scott, and those of twenty-nine even more so, contribute radically different objects and properties to the overall situation. Sentence (7) designates twenty-nine s being the number of Waverly novels Scott wrote, but sentence (8) designates twenty-nine s being the number of counties in Utah: distinct situations if ever there were distinct situations. 
So we see that from the first perspective, the one Frege would have us take, wherein the reference of the description all that is specific is obliterated, the first and last steps of the argument are fine but eh middle is all wrong. From the second perspective, more in line with Russell s theory of descriptions, the middles step comes of better but the first and last steps are wrong. Under neither reading are we compelled to accept the argument.  
For right now, let us focus only the very last sentence of this passage:  Under neither reading are we compelled to accept the [slingshot].  
The readings in question are, basically, the one where the definite description contributes only its referent and the one where it contributes a complex of properties: the referential and the attributive. 
Read referentially, the argument fails. Read attributively the argument fails. 
This is the real point that Barwise and Perry are making. And it is correct. 
But in their exposition of this point, they keep on adverting to their situation-semantics; they make it seem as though the argument they are presenting requires us to sign off on the idea that sentences contribute situations. 
Their argument does not really require this. But their exposition makes us think otherwise. And this, presumably, accounts for criticisms like the following (Olson 1998: 96-97): 
 Thus, according to Barwise and Perry, we are free to interpret our descriptions any way we like, so long as we choose one interpretation and stick to it, instead of changing in the middle of an argument. 
This is a persuasive diagnosis, and the accompanying prescription certainly removes the symptoms. But it relies quite explicitly upon the structuralist criterion, taking for granted that where there are different constituents there must be different facts.  
Olson then goes on to say how, according to some viewpoints, one and the same fact can be analyzed into different constituents. Therefore, the  structuralist criterion  is questionable. Therefore, Olson concludes, what Barwise and Perry say against the slingshot is questionable. 
Olson is wrong. What Barwise and Perry say about the slingshot doesn t require that one adopt a  structuralist  or any other conception of facts or propositions or situations or meanings. Their attack on the slingshot is totally neutral on these matters. 
Their thesis that sentences stand for situations is another matter. But that is a different thing from their attack on the slingshot. 
Barwise and Perry (1999: 23-26) give a shorter version of their argument against the Slingshot. The problem is that the argument they give there is far worse than the argument just quoted. In Barwise and Perry (1999) they simply assume that logically equivalent sentences may differ in reference. This obviously makes their argument less than compelling. 
Neale (2001, 1995) devoted an entire book, and a very long article, to the Slingshot. (The article was absorbed into the book practically verbatim.) Astonishingly, he says essentially nothing about Barwise and Perry (1990) or Barwise and Perry (1999). He mentions Barwise and Perry (1990), but somehow doesn t register its importance or even its relevance, except to some minor technical problems. Perry (2000: 290-294) restates the view just quoted from Barwise and Perry (1990/1983). But Perry s (2000) restatement is even more opaque than the 1990 version. 
[176] Russell 1921. 
[177] It is first put forth, to my knowledge, by Kripke 1972. See also Evans 1990/1973. 
[178] 
Contemporary Russellians would say that the  there is  is subject to context-based restrictions. This point is critical in discussions of whether Russell s  theory is correct. But it doesn t have any special importance here. So for the sake of brevity, I am skipping over it. 
[179] Donnellan 1990/1966. 
[180] 
Strawson (1990) talks about  predicative  uses of definite descriptions. He says (rightly, no doubt) that in  Caesar was the greatest general of all time , the definite description attributes a property to Caesar; it is not functioning as a referring term. 
[181] 
As it happens, for reasons I don t give here, I think that, at the level of semantics definite descriptions are referring terms, without exception. Even when they are being used predicatively or attributively, their semantic function is merely to refer. 
[182] 
Church 1956. 
[183] 
Frege 1892a. 
[184] Mill 1991 (10). 
[185] Church 1956. 
[186] 
I say  arguably  because, quite frankly, I really don t think that either Frege or Mill had a sufficiently developed conception of the distinction between semantics and pragmatics   between what is literally meant by an expression and what is pragmatically imparted by it   to warrant saying that they had definite views as to the manner in which  the phi  contributes descriptive content. 
Granted, Frege (1879) did make some important points about the distinction between the  cognitive content  of sentences and their  coloring  or  tone . And this has a certain isomorphism to the distinction between semantics and pragmatics (though, I believe, it is not quite the same distinction). But Frege was, with all due respect, quite foggy on the various different ways in which  the phi  might contribute its sense. 
[187] 
Here, of course, people will bring up Donnellan s point that, even when  the man drinking the martini  is functioning as a referring expression (not a quantifier),  the man drinking the martini smokes  makes a true statement (or, better, can be used to make a true statement) even if there is no man drinking a martini. And this fact might call into question the accuracy of my statement that (REF) captures the semantics of  the phi  for referentialists. 
This is well-trodden territory. It is pretty clear that if  the man drinking a martini  is a referring expression, then at the level of literal meaning  the man drinking the martini smokes  is abortive (neither true nor false) if there is no one drinking a martini. Granted, that sentence may say something true. But that is very easily explained as a pragmatic epiphenomenon. And it would be an egregious violation of Grice s  modified Occam s razor  (never multiply meanings without necessity) to say that semantically  the man drinking the martini  actually referred to (say) the female transvestite drinking the ginger ale. 
[188] 
I am idealizing away from the pragmatic epiphenomena mentioned in the last footnote. I don t think they have any relevance here. 
[189] Russell 1990/1905, Neale 1990. 
[190] 
Pragmatically  Socrates  probably is associated with descriptive content   though that descriptive content will tend to vary. If somebody points to a man wearing a toga and says  that is Socrates  (or    Socrates  is the name of that individual ), my introduction to the semantics of  Socrates  is via the informational content of a specific sense-perception. (The same thing is true mutatis mutandis if my introduction to the semantics of that term is via some statement like:  Socrates is the guy who is the protagonist in most of Plato s dialogues. ) Inevitably, such facts will affect what  Socrates snores  imparts to me, and will (perhaps) give a cognitive content in excess of the bare singular proposition Socrates snores ,even though it is that singular proposition, and nothing besides, that is semantically encoded in that sentence. Nothing Kripke (1972) says rules out this kind of pragmatic association. 
[191] 
Sticklers for Russell-exegesis may balk at my use here of his distinction. But it seems to me that, leaving aside niceties, there can be no doubt that a distinction more or less like the one Russell had in mind has a place here. Indeed, Russell himself makes this exact distinction, and uses the same terminology to describe that distinction, in his paper  Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge by Description . (He is not, perhaps, employing this distinction in connection with quite the same class of sentences I m discussing. but the similarities are unmistakable.) 
[192] See Kripke 1972, Evans 1990/1973. 
[193] 
At least not to most such terms: for most are formed by putting a  that  in front of a sentence expressing that proposition; and any such term has constituent structure. It is, of course, possible to invent a term having no constituent structure that denotes some proposition. We could say: let  A  refer to the proposition snow is white. Conceivably, though I doubt it, the causal theory might apply to terms like A. 
[194] 
I put RING in brackets because, in L, it is not the English word  ring , but the actual ringing of some particular doorbell that occurs in that sentence-token. 
[195] Causal theorists might allow that different causal relations will do. 
[196] 
I put RING in brackets because, in L, it is not the English word  ring , but the actual ringing of some particular doorbell that occurs in that sentence-token. 
[197] 

This extra semantic rule is phenomenally ungainly and useless. But it does apparently qualify as a genuine semantic rule. 
[198] I would guess. 
[199] 
I forget exactly what that word is. An Urdu-speaking friend of mine told it to me. But it is not  Socrates . 
[200] 
Blackburn (1984) argued that Tarski s  The Concept of Truth in Formal Languages  disjunctives the concept of truth: there is trueinEnglish, trueinUrdu. This is perhaps not quite on point. But I though it worth mentioning. 
[201] 
It is, I believe, a completely dispensable part. Consider the following semantic rule. If there some person x who uniquely was a protagonist in most of Plato s dialogues, then let  SOC  refer to x. If there is no such person, then let  SOC  refer to nothing. 
Obviously  SOC  refers to Socrates every bit as much  Socrates  does. But it seems that one s being able to use  SOC  to refer to Socrates doesn t involve having any particular causal connection to Socrates. 
The causal theorist is guilty of the same fallacy as the descriptivist. Both confuse reference-fixing with meaning-giving. The descriptivist says:  Socrates  means  the unique hemlock drinking philosopher . He says that to refer is to describe. Descriptions are certainly exploited by semantic rules, as we just saw. We can invent rules that assign G del to  G del  by way of descriptions. (An example is: if there is some x such that x uniquely proved the incompleteness of arithmetic, then let  G del  refer to x. Here a description is being exploited to assign a referent to a word. But the reference relation   not here, not anyway   is identical with the describing relation. Similarly, causal relations can be exploited by semantic rules. We can say  if there is some entity x such that uniquely stands in R [some causal relation] to tokens of  Igaguk , then let any such token refer to x.  Here a causal relation is being exploited by a semantic rule assigning a referent to a word   just as a description can be. But no causal relation   not here, not anywhere   is ever identical with the reference relation. It were absurd to think otherwise. 
[202] 
I am borrowing a felicitous expression from Kent Bach. 
[203] Frege 1997/1891, Frege 1997/1892b. 
[204] 
I myself have no doubt that quantifiers are referring terms and that they refer to second-order properties. But, strictly speaking, the properties in question are properties, not of propositions or of open-propositions, but of sequences of such things. The quantifier  for all x  refers to a property had by certain sequences of open-propositions.  For all x, x is mortal, if x is a man  says: The sequence <x is a man, x is mortal> is such that anything instantiating the first member instantiates the second. 
So, in that case,  for all x  denotes the property is such that anything instantiating the first member 
instantiates the second. And this is a property of sequences of some kind. 
[205] 
In any case, there is nothing tendentious about it in this dialectical context. Perhaps in discussions of modality or counterfactuality it might be a tendentious assumption. 
[206] The asterices are meant to be quasi-quotes. My computer doesn t do quasi-quotes. 
[207] See Barwise and Perry 1999 (6). 
[208] 
When  that  functions this way, linguists say it is operating as a  complementizer . Many languages permit the dropping of the  complementizer , at least in some contexts. I would like to know, but do not know, whether this is true of all languages. I would conjecture that it is. And this fact (if it is a fact) supports (albeit weakly) my point   the author s point, not the hostile interlocutor s point   that  Bob smokes  and  that Bob smokes  refer to the same thing. 
[209] 

Of course,  that grass is green  is not, at least not phonetically, identical with  grass is green . 
And (though I think this is implausible) one might suppose that dropping the  that  induces a change in 
reference: previously a proposition was referred to; now a truth-value is referred to. But then we are just stuck, once again, with the view that  grass is green  refers to a truth-value in 
(p) and either refers to nothing, or refers to a proposition, in (n). And this is just what we want to avoid saying. 
[210] 

We could imagine a language L just like English except that, in L, one gave assertoric force to 
 that grass is green  by saying it in a certain one of voice or, perhaps, by modulating one s voice in a 
certain way. So L-translation of  grass is green  would be  that grass is green , said in a certain way. 
Speakers of L wouldn t dare say that  that grass is green , said assertorically, and  that grass is green , 
said non-assertorically, would differ in reference.) 
[211] 
But, as Russell once said, grammar is a prima facie good guide to logical form. Logical form and grammatical form pull apart. But a good first clue to a sentence s logical form is its grammatical form. 
[212] 
 And  doesn t always have this function. If you say  Russell and Whitehead wrote the Principia Mathematica  you are not saying  Russell wrote the Principia Mathematica and Whitehead wrote the Principia Mathematica.  You are saying, it seems, that some entity composed of both Russell and Whitehead wrote that work. 
So  and  sometimes joins individuals; it doesn t always join propositions. But it always joins something. So we do not, arguably, have a case of sheer ambiguity. 
To determine whether  and  actually has a different one meaning in  Russell and Whitehead wrote the Principia Mathematica  and another one in  snow is white and grass is green , we d have to get very clear on what  and  is doing in the latter. Some clarity will be attained, I hope, in the present work. 
[213] 
Frege did not, to my knowledge, talk about the operator  possibly . But what we said about other operators, in particular epistemic ones, makes it clear what he would have said or, at any rate, was compelled to say, about  possibly . 
[214] 
It is assumed that I am being sincere, that I know the meanings of those words, and that I am using them in a literal way. 
[215] 
Again, I am confining my attention to sincere, literal, linguistically competent utterances. 
[216] Actually, I think the real satisfaction-condition is: x is a unique contextually salient inventor of 
bifocals. But this doesn t matter in this context. [217] 
Stalnaker 1991. 
[218] Church 1943 (299). 
[219] 1953. 
[220] 1944 (129-130). 
[221] 

On the Fregean view,  1+1=2  and  triangles have three sides  do indeed co-refer. Indeed, on the Fregean view, they co-refer, as a matter of logical necessity. At first this seems to be an advantage over my view. It is not. 
When two sentences are said to be  logically equivalent , S-equivalence is not what is meant. If you ask a competent person,  what is it for two sentences to be logically equivalent? , he absolutely will not say:  it is for the open proposition that a thing must satisfy to be picked out by the one expression to entail, and be entailed by, the open proposition that a thing must satisfy to be picked out by the other.  What he will say is: it is for the proposition meant by the one to entail, and be entailed by, the proposition meant by the other. So the kind of  logical equivalence  that people have in mind when they talk of logically equivalent sentences is not the kind of  logical equivalence  that people have in mind when they talk about expressions like  Plato  and  the unique x such that 1+1=2 and x=Plato . When it said that two sentences are  logically equivalent , S-equivalence is not meant; so the kind of  logical equivalence  that guarantees co-reference is not what is meant. Some completely different kind of logical equivalence is meant. And this other kind of logical equivalence has very little to do with co-reference. So to think that  1+1=2  and  triangles have three sides  must co-refer because they are  logically equivalent  is to make the false and confused assumption that those two sentences are logically equivalent in the sense in which  Plato  and  the unique x such that 1+1=2 and x=Plato  are logically equivalent. We have two very different notions of logical equivalence here, not one. The one kind of logical equivalence involves co-reference. But that leaves it totally open whether the other kind involves co-reference. 
Let us close the argument. It is often thought that 1+1=2  and  triangles have three sides  must co-refer. Frege thought this; so do all proponents of slingshot arguments. The reasoning behind this view is: 
Those two sentences  logically equivalent ; and  logically equivalent expressions    e.g.  Plato  and  the unique x such that 1+1=2 and x=Plato    must co-refer. 
But that view involves a complete failure to distinguish to kinds of  logical equivalence . And the view that a correct semantic theory must make logically equivalent sentences co-refer is based on that very confusion. So, therefore, is the view that Frege s analysis has an advantage over mine, in that his view makes  logically equivalent  sentences co-refer while mine does not. The idea that that is an advantage involves a confusion of two very different meanings of the term  logically equivalent . 
[222] 
Davidson 1984/1965. 
[223] Neale 2001, 1994. 
[224] Chomsky 1965. 
[225] 
Frege 1953/1883: x. Writing in a slightly different context, he also said:  [W]e ought always to keep before our eyes a complete proposition. Only in a proposition have the words really a meaning. It may be that mental pictures float before us all the while, but these need not correspond to the logical elements in the judgment. It is enough if the proposition taken as a whole has a sense; it is this that confers on its parts also their content.  (Ibid: 71). 
[226] Dummett 1973 (192). 
[227] 
In my view, that major accomplishment of that work was not the reduction of numbers to sets. It was the recognition, and defense, of two truths: logical form and grammatical form diverge; and, what is related, statements that seem to be about individuals are in fact statements about objects. When you say  a man smoked , you are making a statement about a concept, not about some odd individual. 
[228] 
Of course, this is not the only way to define  some man . It can also be treated as a referring term; it can be defined by saying that it refers to a function that assigns truth to a class C iff that class comprises a man. But, as I will now show, even if  some man  is treated in that way, it must still be defined contextually; for all referring terms are to be do defined. 
[229] 
Of course, this was not Frege s view; Frege thought that  Plato  had a  sense  for its meaning. But here we are not concerned with what Frege thought  Plato  actually meant; we are concerned with how, according to Dummett, Frege would have interpreted the supposition that the meaning of  Plato  is Plato. 
[230] 
See Neale (2001: 19-32) for a critique of truth-conditional semantics that is similar to the one I m about to give. 
[231] See Neale (2001: 23). 
[232] See Neale (2001: 30). 
[233] Quine 1966b (54). 
[234] 

But, for our purposes, what is important is whether that analysis is correct, not whether Frege held it. So I will ignore the question whether Tughendat has correctly analyzed Frege. 
Strictly speaking, what I am about to say isn t quite what Tughendat says. Tughendat talks not about the meanings of sentences, but about their truth-conditions. And Tughendat does not exactly talk about the contributions that words make to the meanings of sentences; rather, he talks about their contribution words to make to the truth-values of sentences   their  truth-value potential . 
Tughendat s is writing an article about how to interpret Frege; he is not writing an article about how to analyze reference. That may justify his talking about truth-values instead of meanings. But what is relevant here is Tughendat s larger point: for a word x to refer to a thing y just is for x to contribute y to the semantic value of sentences in which x occurs. Tughendat says that the semantic value of a sentence is a truth-value.; I say it is a proposition. But we agree that reference is to be understood in terms of the concept of the semantic value of a sentence. And that is the relevant point here. 
[235] 
Tughendat says that the  significance  of a sentence is its truth-value. I am going to take the  significance  of a sentence to be its meaning   to be the thing that would ordinarily be called its  significance . (I can know the  significance  of  Bush smokes  without knowing its truth-value.) This does, I grant, somewhat distort his argument. But it also helps to expose what is relevant and significant in that argument. Also, Tughendat s thesis is that the meaning of a word is the contribution it makes to the  significance , i.e. the truth-value, of a whole sentence. But not all sentences have truth-values   there are questions and imperatives. And sentences are not always asserted; they can be negated, or occur in sub-ordinate clauses. Perhaps these facts can be reconciled with Tughendat s view that the meaning of a word is its contribution to the truth-value of a sentence. But it seems simpler to stick to the more obvious view that the meaning of a word is its contribution to the meaning of a sentence; and thus not have to make special adjustments for cases of non-asserted sentences. 
[236] 
Tughendat talks not about the meanings of sentences, but about their truth-conditions. I don t know whether this is because that is how Frege talks or for some other reason. In any case, the difference between meanings and truth-conditions doesn t play an important in this discussion. 
[237] 
See Kaplan 1989. I believe that this point is found, in some form, in Strawson 1951. 
Let me explain the  very roughly  qualification. A token of  that I am tired  is not true or false. If I say, simply,  that I am tired , I have not said anything true or false, even though the proposition denoted by my words is true or false. On the other hand, a token of  I am tired  is true or false. So there is a semantic difference between a token of  I am tired  and a token of  that I am tired , even though, plainly, those expressions are closely related in meaning. So the semantic content that a token of  I am tired  is assigned by the corresponding type is different from the semantic content had by  that I am tired . After all, a token of  I am tired  is true or false, whereas a token of  that I am tired  is neither. Thus the type  I am tired  does more than assign propositions to its tokens; it seems to assign propositions plus assertoric force-operators. So it is not entirely accurate to say that the semantic content of  I am tired  is a function that assigns propositions to its tokens: the function in question assigns propositions and it also assigns a force to the propositions. But in this context, it will help discussion if we speak approximately, and say that the semantic content of the type  I am tired  is a function that assigns propositions to its tokens. This slight inaccuracy won t vitiate any of the points argued for here. And it can be corrected by mentally replaced the term  proposition  with  proposition plus assertoric force . 
[238] 
See Barwise and Perry 1999, and also McCawley 1981. This point pervades linguistic literature. 
[239] 
Keep in mind the caveat stated in the first footnote. The meaning of the type  I am tired  is a function that assigns propositions plus forces to its tokens; that function doesn t merely assign propositions to its tokens   though, of course, it does do that. 
[240] 
Given the right circumstances, one could use any term, no matter what its literal meaning, to refer to anything. I could sarcastically use the term  Genghis Kahn  to refer to Bob. Such a usage is non-literal. I can use  Plato  in a literal way to refer to Plato. Obviously this fact is fact is essentially connected to the fact that  Plato  refers to Plato. 
[241] 

Review of Frege on Functions by Max Black. Journal of Symbolic Logic 1956 (21): 201-202. 
[242] 
Actually, I will argue that  John  picks out a third-level function. But we can ignore that here. 
[243] 
Give or take some subtleties relating to force. Strictly speaking, the semantic content of a token of  I am tired  is in part a proposition. But that semantic content also has assertoric force. That is why a token of  am I tired  won t have the same exact semantic content as a token of  I am tired , even though both may encode the very same proposition [244] 

The special cases I have in mind are analytic propositions like  Socrates is identical with Socrates . It isn t even clear that a grasp of the semantic content of these sentences necessarily involves a grasp of their truth. Even if it does, that has nothing to do with semantics; it has to do with epistemology. 
[245] 
There is an obvious   and erroneous --way to deal with this. One can say: 
 You say that  presumably, the referent of a referring term is at least part of its semantic content . But your presumption is wrong. The referent of a referring term is not a part of its semantic content.  The inventor of bifocals  has the same semantic in both w and w*, even though it refers to different things in those worlds. This is perfectly acceptable. What an expression refers to simply doesn t have anything to do with what its semantic content is.  
The position is a non-starter.  Plato  refers to Plato. Its having that referent is, to say the least, an integral part of its semantics. If  Plato  referred to Aristotle it would have a very different semantics. So it really isn t feasible to deny that what a term refers to is an integral part of its semantic content. 
Frege actually did hold that, even if  Plato  referred to Aristotle, it wouldn t necessarily have a different semantic content from what it actually has. For the semantic content of  Plato , in Frege s view, is a sense; and so long as it  Plato  keeps the same sense, it keeps the same semantic content: it doesn t matter whether its referent changes. So a Fregean might deny our claim that reference is essential to semantic content. 
Later on, we ll see that, if Frege were right about  Plato , then  Plato  would actually be a quantifier, and not an expression that referred to some individual. But our defense of this will have to wait. 
But right now we can make a couple of points that render Frege s position innocuous, at least in this context. First of all, given what Kripke said, it is pretty clear that Frege is wrong about  Plato . Kripke s work also makes it clear that, if  Plato  had a different referent, it would have a different semantic content. Putnam s work also makes this clear. If  water  referred to xyz, as opposed to H2O, 
it would have a very different semantic content. 
So, to say the least, it is unnatural to deny that, if a term refers, its reference is integral to its semantic content. 
Conceivably, one could counter by saying: 
 Granted, the referent of a proper name, like  Plato , is part of its semantic content. But this is not the case with other referring terms (e.g.  you ,  the inventor of bifocals ). In some cases, reference is essential to semantic content; in others, it is not.  
But this is an extremely tortured and arbitrary view. It is clear that where some referring terms 
(e.g. proper names) are concerned, reference and semantic contribution are inextricably linked. If we say that this is not the case where other referring terms are concerned, we are in a position like that of someone who says  atomic structure is essential to some elements, but quite inessential to others . So it is surely best not to say  the referent of a referring term is no part of its semantic content . To put it in positive terms, if an expression refers to something, its referring to that thing is an integral part of its semantics. A corollary is that if two expressions refer to different things, then they have different semantics. 
So we still have a conundrum. If two expressions refer to different things, then they have different semantic contents. At the same time, it seems that if  the inventor of bifocals  is a singular term, then it can refer to different things in different worlds, while keeping the same semantics. 
[246] Strawson 1951. 
[247] 
I actually think this does not give quite the right rule. Where definite descriptions are concerned, the context of utterance is defined by much more than just the world in which the tokening occurred. But the niceties are not important here. What is important here is that if  the inventor of bifocals  is taken as a non-quantifier, then what a token of it refers to is semantically dependent on the context of utterance, in some sense of the word  context . 
[248] 

It should be made clear that the foregoing discussion has nothing to do with the actual semantics of definite descriptions. Some hold that  the inventor of bifocals  is not a singular term; it is a 
[248] quantifier, and   the inventor of bifocals   means (roughly ): something x uniquely invented bifocals and x So  the inventor of bifocals snored  means: something x uniquely invented bifocals and x snored. 
Even if this view is right, it in no way confutes our principle that, if a term refers, one must know what it refers to know its semantic content. Quite the contrary. Let us define  ze phi  as follows. If there some x such that x is a unique phi, then  ze phi  refers to x. If there is no such x, then  ze phi  is abortive. Everything we just said about  the phi  applies to  ze phi . Suppose that, in w and w*,  ze inventor of bifocals  has the same semantics. But in w*, it refers to Franklin, whereas in w* it refers to Jefferson. Here we seem to have a case where a single expression has a semantics but variable reference. But, for reasons we ve seen, we don t want to say this; and there is an easy way to avoid saying this. The type  ze inventor of bifocals  has the same semantics in both w and w*. But the semantic content of the type is a function that assigns referents to its tokens. The type itself doesn t refer to anything. So our principle continues to be upheld. (For our principle is: if an expression refers to something, one must know to what it refers if one is to know its semantics.) Tokens of  ze inventor of bifocals  are what refer. The semantic content of such a token is what the function described a moment ago assigns to it; so the semantic content of such a token is its referent. Thus, to know the semantic content of a token of  ze inventor of bifocals , one must know what that referent is. 
[249] 
This is how Richard Montague, along with many other contemporary semanticists, think of  and ,  not , and other connectives. 
[250] 

This line of thought is obviously not an innocuous one, and perhaps requires development. I would like to outline how that development would go. The sentence: 
(sn)  snow is not white  
is equivalent to: 
(sn*) not* <snow is white>, 
where  not*  ascribes falsity to the proposition encoded in the sentence-token falling in its scope. So the  not  in (sn) can be seen as a second-level property   on that ascribes falsity to the proposition encoded in the sentence-token falling in its scope. (Equivalently, it can be seen as encoding a function that assigns truth to a sentence-token exactly if the proposition encoded in that token is false.) The reason that  snow is white  occurs truth-functionally in (sn) and (sn*) is not that it contributes a truth-value; it is that a truth-value (falsity) is ascribed to the proposition it encodes. So we see, once again, that for a sentence-token to occur truth-functionally is not for it to contribute a truth-value; it is for a truth-value to be ascribed to the proposition that it encodes. 
The case is not significantly different when we re dealing with atomic sentences. But here we have to proceed very cautiously. Obviously the truth of 
(sw)  snow is white  
depends on whether the proposition encoded in that sentence (namely that snow is white) has the property of truth. We ve seen that, when it occurs in the scope of  and  or  not ,  snow is white  doesn t contribute a truth-value. It would be highly unnatural to suppose that  snow is white  makes one semantic contribution in (sg) and a different one in (sw). It very much seems to make the same contribution in both. We ve seen that, in (sg),  snow is white  does not contribute a truth-value. 
Given all of this, here is what I would propose. In (sw),  snow is white  isn t flanked by any verbiage. So it is occurring in what is sometimes called a  null  context. Null contexts, as linguists know, are often semantically pregnant. (They are null in a phonetic, not necessarily a semantic sense.) In English, when a sentence-token occurs in a null-context, truth is to be ascribed to the proposition encoded in that sentence-token. The null context is thus a phonetically invisible way of ascribing truth to the proposition encoded in the sentence. But here the relevant point is that what ascribes truth   what contributes the truth-value true   is, strictly speaking, the null context, not the token  snow is white  per se. 
Here is another way of looking at it. Whether the sentence-token: 
(st)  that snow is white is true . 
is true is a function of whether that snow is white is true. As we saw, this is equivalent to saying that (st) attributes truth to that proposition. Obviously (sw) is a function of whether that snow is white is true. So (sw) attributes truth to that proposition. Thus, (st) attributes truth to that snow is white and so does (sw); and neither does anything besides that. (st) is true exactly if that snow is white is true, and the same holds of (sw). So the differences between (st) and (sw) do not lie in what they say. Those differences appear to have nothing to do with content and to be entirely phonetic. In the case of (st), the ascription of truth is phonetically realized. In the case of (sw), it is not phonetically realized. Given this, it seems reasonable to say that, in the case of (sw), the absence of phonetically realized neighboring material performs the very function that, in the case of (st), is performed by phonetically realized material. 
[251] I am innocuously modifying his argument 
[252] Davidson 1967. The technique used in his argument is really due to Church 1943. 
[253] See Davidson 1984, Neale 2001. 
[254] This line of thought is found in Montague s groundbreaking work. 
[255] See Barwise and Perry 1983 (399). They make this exact point. 
[256] Frege 1892a. 
[257] 
See the introduction to Whitehead and Russell 1912. 
[258] 
Strawson 1950. 
[259] 
See Kaplan 1989. 
[260] The asterices are meant to be quasi-quotes. My computer doesn t do quasi-quotes. 
[261] 
The same is true with G del 1944, Quine 1953, and Davidson 1967. 
[262] 
Compare Barwise and Perry 1999 (44-45):  [T]here is something profoundly misleading about the traditional concern over entailments between sentences. For one thing, their concern obscures the efficiency of language, and it is this efficiency that is central to meaning. For example the sentence SOCRATES IS SPEAKING does not follow from the sentences EVERY PHILOSOPHER IS SPEAKING [and] SOCRATES IS A PHILOSOPHER even though this argument as the same  logical form  (on most accounts of logical form) as [ALL MEN ARE MORTAL, SOCRATES IS A MAN, THEREFORE SOCRATES IS MORTAL]. In the first place, there is the matter of tense. At the very least the three sentences would have to be said at more or less the same time for the argument to be valid A rather startling consequence of this is that there can be no syntactic counterpart, of the kind traditionally sought in proof theory and theories of logical form, to the semantic theory of consequence. For consequence is simply not a relation between purely syntactic elements.  
[263] 

For example, Church 1943, G del 1944, Quine 1953, Davidson 1967 all fail for that reason (and for others). 
[264] Quine 1953a. 
[265] 
It is a delicate question whether that pair comprises the sentences or propositions. For reasons I will argue later, I think it is pretty clear that it comprises propositions. But in the present context, this is not important. 
[266] 
This term is borrowed from Neale (2001). It is short for: Principle of Substitution of Logical Equivalents. 
[267] Church1944 (129-130). 
[268] 

On the Fregean view,  1+1=2  and  triangles have three sides  do indeed co-refer. Indeed, on the Fregean view, they co-refer, as a matter of logical necessity. At first this seems to be an advantage over my view. It is not. 
When two sentences are said to be  logically equivalent , S-equivalence is not what is meant. If you ask a competent person,  what is it for two sentences to be logically equivalent? , he absolutely will not say:  it is for the open proposition that a thing must satisfy to be picked out by the one expression to entail, and be entailed by, the open proposition that a thing must satisfy to be picked out by the other.  What he will say is: it is for the proposition meant by the one to entail, and be entailed by, the proposition meant by the other. So the kind of  logical equivalence  that people have in mind when they talk of logically equivalent sentences is not the kind of  logical equivalence  that people have in mind when they talk about expressions like  Plato  and  the unique x such that 1+1=2 and x=Plato . When it is said that two sentences are  logically equivalent , S-equivalence is not meant; so the kind of  logical equivalence  that guarantees co-reference is not what is meant. Some completely different kind of logical equivalence is meant. And this other kind of logical equivalence has very little to do with co-reference. So to think that  1+1=2  and  triangles have three sides  must co-refer because they are  logically equivalent  is to make the false and confused assumption that those two sentences are logically equivalent in the sense in which  Plato  and  the unique x such that 1+1=2 and x=Plato  are logically equivalent. We have two very different notions of logical equivalence here, not one. The one kind of logical equivalence involves co-reference. But that leaves it totally open whether the other kind involves co-reference. 
Let us close the argument. It is often thought that 1+1=2  and  triangles have three sides  must co-refer. Frege thought this; so do all proponents of Slingshot arguments. The reasoning behind this view is: 
Those two sentences  logically equivalent ; and  logically equivalent expressions    e.g.  Plato  and  the unique x such that 1+1=2 and x=Plato    must co-refer. 
But that view involves a complete failure to distinguish two kinds of  logical equivalence . And the view that a correct semantic theory must make logically equivalent sentences co-refer is based on that very confusion. So, therefore, is the view that Frege s analysis has an advantage over mine, in that his view makes  logically equivalent  sentences co-refer while mine does not. The idea that that is an advantage involves a confusion of two very different meanings of the term  logically equivalent . 
[269] 1964 (77). 
[270] See Dummett 1973 (192-193) for similar remarks. 
[271] See Kripke 1972, Evans 1990/1973. 
[272] See Kripke 1971, 1972. 
[273] See Kripke 1971, 1972. 
[274] 
I put RING in brackets because, in L, it is not the English word  ring , but the actual ringing of some particular doorbell that occurs in that sentence-token. 
[275] See Dummett 1973, and Tughendat 1970, for similar remarks. 
[276] 
I put RING in brackets because, in L, it is not the English word  ring , but the actual ringing of some particular doorbell that occurs in that sentence-token. 
[277] 

This extra semantic rule is phenomenally ungainly and useless. But it does apparently qualify as a genuine semantic rule. 
[278] 
Blackburn (1984) argued that Tarski s paper  The Concept of Truth in Formal Languages  disjunctives the concept of truth: there is trueinEnglish, trueinUrdu, and so on. This is perhaps not quite on point. But I though it worth mentioning. 
[279] 
Fodor 1998. 
[280] 
See Fodor 1990a and 1990b for an attempt to deal with what are essentially these problems. Fodor is dealing, not the causal theory of reference, but with the causal theory of conception: for x to be a mental representation of y simply is for x to have a certain causal relation to y. The causal theory of conception is exactly analogous to the causal theory of reference. The problems that face the one are exact analogues of the problems that face the other. Fodor s two papers, though ingenious, show how implausible those theories are. 
[281] Kaplan 1989b (604-607) makes some remarks that are similar to these. 
[282] Kaplan 1989b (604-607) makes some remarks that are similar to these. 
[283] 

Before we move one, there is an objection, due to Nathan Salmon, that we must consider (I 
quote): 
 You say that  grass is green  has the same meaning in both 
(3)  grass is green  
and also 
(4).  Little Timmy believes that grass is green.  
But, contrary to what you say, this is perhaps consistent with its referring to a truth-value in (3) but not in (4). Roughly, it may function as a Millian name of a proposition in (3), and as a description of a truth-value in (4). If I am right about this, then we can hold onto the idea that  grass is green  has the same meaning in both (3) and (4), while also holding that it refers to a truth-value in extensional contexts.  
I m not entirely sure I understand this objection. But what I think it means is this. 
Consider some definite description, say  the teacher of Aristotle . This description can function either referentially or attributively. If you say  Little Timmy believes that the teacher of Aristotle was wise , you may be saying that Little Timmy believes something about Plato (referential reading) or you may be saying that Little Timmy believes that whoever it was that taught Plato was wise (attributive reading). 
There are very good reasons for thinking that  the teacher of Aristotle  is not semantically ambiguous, and that its amenability to both referential and attributive readings is a matter of [283]pragmatics, not semantics. The objector seems to be saying that  grass is green  is, in this respect, like a definite description. In 
(3) it refers to a truth-value (it refers to it by encoding descriptive information that singles it out). So in that context it is functioning  referentially . But in (4),  grass is green  refers to a proposition. So it is functioning  attributively . 
But even though  grass is green  may function in both ways, it doesn t follow that it is semantically ambiguous. The ambiguity might be completely pragmatic, like that of  the teacher of Aristotle . 
So maybe, at the level of semantics,  grass is green  always refers to a truth-value. That it sometimes seems not to do so is some kind of pragmatic epiphenomenon. 
Considerable support for the objection lies in the fact that, in all likelihood,  that grass is green  is a definite description ( the proposition that grass is green ). 
Let us now evaluate Salmon s point. First of all, if  (that) grass is green  describes anything, it probably isn t a truth-value.  That grass is green  is, as we noted, nearly synonymous with  the [ze] proposition that grass is green . And the latter describes, and refers to, a proposition, not a truth-value. [283] 
But let us waive this; for the sake of argument, let us suppose that  grass is green  does describe a truth-value. 
Obviously  grass is green  has different truth-values in different worlds. (Even if it doesn t, just replace  grass is green  with a sentence that does thus vary in truth-value.) Let w be this world, and let w* be some world where English is spoken but grass is purple. 
If the objector is right, then in w,  grass is green  describes the truth-value true. In w*, it describes the truth-value false. 
Since English is spoken in w*,  grass is green  has the same semantics there that it has here in w. 
Obviously the referent of an expression is at least part of its semantic content. 
Therefore, in w*,  grass is green  doesn t have (quite) the same semantic content that it has here in w. 
But obviously  grass is green  has exactly the same semantic content in both cases. A dilemma. 
We ve dealt with this sort of situation before. The way to deal with it is to say: 
 Grass is green  has a two-dimensional semantic structure. In a world where grass is green, tokens of it refer to (by describing) the truth-value true. In a world where grass is not green, tokens of it refer to the truth-value false. So  grass is green  is a non-rigid designator; and whether a token of it picks out the true or the false is a function of the context (world) of utterance. 
If this is right, then it is not  grass is green  per se that picks out a truth-value, but rather tokens of it. The expression  grass is green  per se wouldn t refer to anything; its semantic content would be a function of a certain kind. 
A consequence is that the semantic content of a token of  grass is green  is a truth-value, while the semantic content of the expression-type is the just mentioned function. 
Now we can see the problem with the objector s approach. If he is right, then one cannot know the semantic content of a token of  grass is green  unless one knows its truth-value in the context (world) of utterance (just as one cannot know the semantic content of an indexical unless one knows what it refers to in the context of utterance). In general, one cannot know the semantic content of a token of a sentence unless one knows its truth-value in the context (world) of utterance 
But it is hard to believe that I don t know the semantic content of a token of a sentence-token if I don t know its truth-value. To understand a sentence-token   to understand a token of  that person is tired    is to know what would have to be the case if it were true; it is not to know whether it is true. The most natural position, I think, is to say that one can understand sentence-tokens without knowing their truth-values; and, consequently, that such tokens do not refer to truth-values. 
As we ve seen, it is not easy to make the case that sentence-types refer to truth-values. For 
obviously the truth-value associated with the sentence-type  grass is green  varies from world to 
world, and possibly even from time to time, even though its semantics does not thus vary. So unless 
we are willing to take the heroic measure of saying that the referent of an expression is not part of its 
semantic content, we should distance ourselves from the idea that sentence-types refer to truth-
values. [284] 

Everybody thinks it strange to suppose that  grass is green  means one thing on its own and a different thing in  John believes that grass is green . But most believe this supposition to be coherent. There are a couple of reasons not to concede even this much to Frege s view. 
a Kripkean reason 
Frege says that certain operators cause sentences falling in their scope to undergo a shift in meaning. A consequence of this position is that repeated application of such an operator induces repeated shifts in meaning. 
Frege s position is inconsistent with Kripke s discovery that, at the level of semantics, proper names do not have senses. According to Frege, 
(i) 
 Bertrand Arthur William Russell is Bertrand Arthur William Russell  

(ii) 
 Fred believes that Bertrand Arthur William Russell is Bertrand Arthur William Russell . 


contributes a truth-value. In 
 Bertrand Arthur William Russell is Bertrand Arthur William Russell   contributes a proposition: the proposition it expresses in (i). When it occurs in 
(iii)  Jerry believes that Fred believes that Bertrand Arthur William Russell is Bertrand Arthur William Russell , 
 Bertrand Arthur William Russell is Bertrand Arthur William Russell   contributes a third thing: the proposition it expresses, not the one it refers to, in  Fred believes that Bertrand Arthur William Russell is Bertrand Arthur William Russell . 
Frege s theory requires that, in (ii),  Bertrand Arthur William Russell is Bertrand Arthur William Russell  have both sense and reference. Its reference in (ii) is a proposition: that Bertrand Arthur William Russell is Bertrand Arthur William Russell. Its sense in (ii) is some proposition through which we grasp its referent. 
We know from Kripke that proper names of individuals are not semantically associated with senses. Semantically  Bertrand Arthur William Russell  does not have a sense. 
Frege s theory requires that  Bertrand Arthur William Russell  have a sense. Otherwise, that theory falsely assigns no meaning to oblique occurrences of  Bertrand Arthur William Russell . Since  Bertrand Arthur William Russell  doesn t have the required sense, Frege s theory fails. 
Further, Frege s theory requires that  Bertrand Arthur William Russell  be infinitely ambiguous in two quite distinct ways. First, it requires that it mean one thing in (i), another thing in (ii), a third thing in (iii), and a fourth thing in 
(iv)  Fred believes that Bob believes that Bertrand Arthur William Russell is Bertrand Arthur William Russell . 
So Frege s theory makes  Bertrand Arthur William Russell  infinitely ambiguous in that way. 
But we must remember that any object can be given by infinitely many different modes of presentation or senses. There are infinitely many descriptions that single out anything. So, if Frege s theory is right, then  Bertrand Arthur William Russell  is infinitely ambiguous in (iii), infinitely ambiguous in (iv), and so on. 
But  Bertrand Arthur William Russell  isn t ambiguous at all, let alone doubly infinitely ambiguous. Even if, by some remote chance, two people are named  Bertrand Arthur William Russell , so that it is ambiguous, it still wouldn t be ambiguous in the way required by Frege s theory. The problems with Frege s theory are well documented. But what is not realized is that they bedevil any theory according to which non-truth-functionality involves meaning-shift. 
Suppose you say that, in truth-functional contexts, sentences refer to truth-values. You must deal with the fact that they obviously don t refer to such things in other contexts. The most plausible way to deal with this is by supposing, as Frege did, that certain operators induce meaning-shifts. If you go this route, you must answer the question: What is the nature of that shift? What does the sentence refer to before the shift, and what does it refer to afterwards? 
The most plausible answer is the one Frege gives: after the shift, the sentence refers to the thing that, prior to the shift, it had for its sense. But we ve just seen the problems with this view. 
A Davidsonian Argument 
[284]Donald Davidson put forth a clever argument that challenges Frege s analysis of indirect discourse. I do not know whether Davidson s argument is decisive. But it deserves to be mentioned. 
[284] [284] 
English is obviously a learnable language. Any learnable language has a finitely large primitive lexicon. If the Frege-Church line is correct, then  snow is white  means one thing on its own, a second thing in  Tim said that John believes that snow is white , and so on. 
You cannot understand all of these sentences. But that has nothing to do with your semantic knowledge. It has to do with your ability to exploit your semantic knowledge. It has to do with matters relating to fatigue, limitations of memory, and general cognitive ability. If we considered a being that had exactly your semantic knowledge, but who had unlimited energy, logical prowess and so on, that being would be able to understand an occurrence of  snow is white  that was pre-fixed by 42,345 epistemic operators. If you could fully exploit your knowledge English semantics, you could assign 
[284] meaning to such a sentence. Any semantic theory must be consistent with this fact. Let  snow is white1  be synonymous with the sentence  snow is white  when it occurs on its own, or in an otherwise truth-functional context. Let  snow is white2  be synonymous with  snow is white  when the latter occurs in the scope of a single epistemic operator. Let  snow is white3  be synonymous with  snow is white  when the latter occurs in the scope of two epistemic operators. And so on. Anyone who speaks English has the semantic resources to understand  snow is white7,865 . If Frege is right, for any i, your knowledge of English semantics comprises a knowledge of one semantic rule for  snow is whitei , and a different one for  snow is whitei+1 . So your knowledge of English semantics comprises infinitely many semantic rules, corresponding to  snow is white . By itself, this might seem acceptable. After all, English semantics does comprise infinitely many rules. But most of them are derived; and one can learn those on the basis of the primitive rules. If Frege s theory is right, then English comprises infinitely many primitive semantic rules. Frege s theory, by implication, makes  snow  be infinitely ambiguous. There is  snow1 ,  snow2 ,  snow3 , and so on. According to that theory,  snow  is ambiguous between all these different words. For each i,  snowi  is a primitive entry in our lexicon. It has no constituent structure; no recursive rules give it meaning. But, as we ve seen, every English speaker does know, for any number n, what is meant by  snow  when it is prefixed by n epistemic operators. So Frege s analysis requires that each person who speaks a natural language know infinitely many primitive semantic rules. This is not acceptable. It makes English unlearnable. Besides that, it simply isn t plausible: English doesn t comprise infinitely many primitive semantic rules. Granted, this argument is not airtight. One could make the following objection to it: 
Frege does make  snow  infinitely ambiguous   there is  snow1 ,  snow2 , and so on. But there is not a separate, primitive rule for each of these. There is one recursive rule, namely:  snow1  means snow, and for i,  snowi+1   refers to the sense of  snowi  . 
Oddly, Davidson doesn t consider this. In any case, this objection is easily met. For the sake of argument, let us suppose that, for each i,  snowi  semantically encodes a sense. This supposition is false. But without it, Frege s argument fails. So let us grant it. [284] 
There is  no backwards road  from denotation to sense, Russell once said. Any given thing can be given by infinitely many different senses. After all, any thing can be uniquely singled out by infinitely many different descriptions. 
So, for each i, there are infinitely many possible senses that  snowi   could have. The recursive rule just described would have to choose some one sense. Any such choice would obviously be arbitrary; it 
wouldn t correspond to any fact about the actual semantics of  snow . Further, the semantic rule described would have to select a single member from each one of an infinitely large number of infinitely large classes. It is, to my knowledge, an open question in set theory whether such a rule could exist. 
I conclude that Davidson s argument has some force, and that attempts to meet it redound to the 
discredit of Frege s theory. For reasons discussed earlier, Frege s view is not an anachronism. If we say that sentences refer to truth-values, then we must probably adopt Frege s view. We must say that  snow  is infinitely ambiguous, and that each of its disambiguations is given meaning by a primitive semantic rule. So, if we say that sentences refer to truth-values, we are saying, by implication, that English comprises infinitely many primitive semantic rules. 
[285] David Lewis (1972) takes a similar position: see the next footnote. 
[286] 
Lewis 1972 says that  does Plato snore?  and  Plato, snore!  do differ in propositional content. The former means: I want to know whether Plato snores. The second means: I command that you, Plato, snore. As Davidson 1984c (114-115) points out, this proposal is wildly implausible. And, as we will presently see, it is demonstrably false. 
[287] 
Astonishingly, David Lewis has said that  does Plato snore?  and  I wish to know whether Plato snores  are semantically equivalent. But this simply isn t so, as we ve just seen. Also,  I wish to know whether Plato snores; therefore there is something I wish to know  is, at the level of literal meaning, a valid argument. But  does Plato snore? Therefore there is something I wish to know  is, at the level of literal meaning, absolute nonsense. To say otherwise is to seriously overwork the concept of pragmatics. 
[288] This line of thought pervades Austin s work. For example, see Austin 1962. 
[289] 

Some historical background may put this into context. There are two very different conceptions of what linguistic meaning is. Some see sentence-meaning, and expression-meaning generally, in non-psychological terms. The meaning of  some  is a function from classes to truth-values; the meaning of  Plato  is an individual, or a function from contexts of utterance to that individual. The meaning of an expression is always a non-psychological entity, except in the special case where the expression in question denotes a mental content. 
Let us refer to advocates of this view as  semantic objectivists . 
Others see sentence-meaning in psychological terms. The meaning of a sentence-token is what the speaker means by it. Advocates of this view are sometimes referred to as  speech-act theorists . When you perform a speech-act   for example, when you make an assertion or ask a question   your words mean what you mean. 
Of course, speech-act theorists grant that if someone says  I am cold  but means I am hot, his words don t mean what he means. I am simply outlining it. My statement of his position is meant only to be a bare approximation. 
Speech-act theorists tend to embrace a semantic nihilism. They tend to think that the notion of the meaning of an expression-type is bankrupt: when we talk about the meaning of  snow is white , that is really just an oblique and misleading way of talking about what people mean when they produce those sounds or sounds relevantly similar to them; they think that talk of  meaning , in the platonic sense, is 
[289] really just a confused way of talking about  meaning , in the psychological sense. I don t think that speech-act theory requires any kind of anti-Platonism. (In fact, I think it requires a kind of Platonism.) But, as a matter of historical fact, speech act theorists tend to be anti-Platonistic; they tend to say that meanings, in the non-psychological sense, don t exist. So speech-act theorists tend to say, in effect, that semantics doesn t exist. Semantics is typically 
thought of as an attempt to associate the platonic entities   the right functions, the right sets of worlds, the right properties   with expressions. The speech act theorist tends to reject this approach. So he rejects the discipline of semantics, at least as most semanticists conceive it. 
For some reason, semantic-objectivists talk very little about force. But speech-act theorists talk a great deal about it. Since the only people who talk about force are the ones who reject the very notion of semantics, the impression has been created that force has no place in discussions of semantics. 
This is plainly a mistake. Even those who have an extremely hard-line objectivist conception of meaning, such as the one advocated in this work, must deal with the concept of force. And they can deal with it. Psychology is no more needed to deal with the concept of force than it is needed to deal with the concept of variable-binding. 
(I think psychology does have an important connection to semantics. But the connection is that mental entities hook up platonic entities to expressions, and thus give certain meanings to those expressions. The connection is not that mental entities constitute the meanings of expressions. I don t think there is any real opposition between semantic objectivism and speech-act theory. One is focusing on the psychological mechanisms that assign meanings to expressions. The other is focusing on the meanings themselves.) 
[290] 
Dummett 1973 (316) and Geach (1965) say explicitly that force-operators are entirely  different  from other sentence-constituents, and that it is nonsensical to ask what they refer to or even what  sense  they have. The Dummett-Geach position, we will see, is based on an excessively narrow conception of reference   on a failure to see that any case of semantic contribution, any alteration of literal meaning, is easily and naturally construed as involving reference. But sometimes what is referred to is a function of some kind, and not an individual. Of course, changes (or additions) in sentence-force are changes in literal meaning; pace Austin (1962) they are obviously not just pragmatic or  perlocutionary  differences. (As we just saw, there is a semantic difference between  I wish to know whether Plato snores  and  does Plato snore?  In general, sentences with different forces can never have quite the same literal meaning, even though they can encode the same proposition.) It follows that force-operators do refer. In a moment, we will see what they refer to exactly. 
[291] 
Dummett 1973 (315-316) says that force-operators don t denote anything and also that they don t have any identifiable meanings. (I don t know what he means by the latter.) Dummett provides, at best, minimal substantiation for these views. In any case, Dummett is simply wrong about this, as, I believe, we are seeing. 
[292] 
Davidson 1984c discusses the nature of sentence-force. His main points are simply fallacious. To begin with, Davidson (119) says that  indicatives [i.e. sentences with assertoric force] we may well leave alone, since we have found no intelligible use for the assertion-sign  . So Davidson explicitly says that he will take the notion of indicative force as primitive. But this is totally implausible. Obviously  snow is white  and  that snow is white  are semantically different (one is truth-evaluable, the other is not); also obviously, they both contain some constituent that encodes the proposition that snow is white. Obviously  snow is white  does more than just encode a constituent that encodes that snow is white. And, just as obviously, that extra ingredient is what gives  snow is white  assertoric force. So assertoric force is not primitive and it must be explained. There obviously is an explanation for the difference between  snow is white  and  that snow is white . And by taking assertoric force as primitive, Davidson blocks us from saying what that difference is. 
This brings us to another of Davidson s points. According to Davidson,  go to the store  is semantically equivalent with:  The next utterance has imperatival force. You will go to the store.  Here are Davidson s own words: 
 In English we mark the non-indicative mood in var punctuation or intonation. We may think of non-in an expression that syntactically represents the appr mood-setter. [Davidson s emphasis.] [A] non-ind indicative sentence and a mood setter   
A page later, Davidson gives an example of what he m 
 If we were to represent in linear form the utterance o it would come out s the utterance of a sentence like followed by an utterance of  you will put on your 
But there are many reasons, some of which we ve a truth. First of all, it wrongly takes for granted that viciously circular. Davidson is trying to define the uses that concept in his analysis. He says that  put really means:  my next utterance is imperatival in seen,  put on your hat  is not semantically equival force: you will put on your hat  or, for that matter, hat  is not true or false; thus, at the level of literal the case with  my next utterance is imperatival in indicative sentence. 
[293] Wittgenstein 1958, Dummett 1973. 
[294] See Dummett 1973 (192-193) for similar remar 
[295] 1999, 1990/1983. 
[296] Quine 1966c. 
[297] Quine 1966c. 
[298] Quine 1966c. 
[299] This is what linguists tend to say about it. See M 
[300] I believe Russell 1905 was the first person to m 
[301] See Robinson 2002 (135). 
[302] 
Russell 1903. 
[303] 
Lyons 1977. 
[304] 
Usually SSP s, as I am calling them, are referre 
has become inextricably linked with a subtle, but not 
will use the term  SSP  instead. The confusion I am referring to is this. Consider the 
(H1) Let S be a heap of rice. Removing one grain o general, given any heap of rice, removing one grain w one grain of rice (or even zero grains) is a heap. 



































