                            What does Kant believe God to be?

 

 

 

        What kind of being does Kant believe God to be? The answer is that

Kant accepts pantheism ‘with a twist.’ Like other pantheists, he believes that

God is the universe. But Kant also believes that the universe, beneath the

surface, is conscious.

        Kant believed the ‘noumenal’ part of reality to be animate and that

the universe only seems to consist mostly of dead matter (with the odd bit of

human or animal consciousness thrown in) because we can’t see past the

‘phenomena.’ In other words, Kant believes reality to be a kind of

consciousness and that we believe otherwise only because we can’t see past

the surface. Empirically speaking, reality is just so much inanimate matter;

but transcendentally speaking, reality is consciousness—this consciousness

being God.

        Kant’s views about God are highly coherent, relative to those of

other philosophers and relative to the virtually insuperable obstacles to

constructing a coherent conception of God.

        The obstacles are to be understood in terms the way non-atheistic

non-intellectuals think about God. For such a person, God is not a non-person

but rather a super-person--a Superman, in other words: like a person, but

better: stronger, smarter, tougher, etc.

        When intellectuals claim to regard as a ‘principle’ or an ‘essence’ or

some such, they are not so much describing what they believe God to be as

they are confessing their inability to produce a conception of God that differs

from that of a three-year-old---this being the same God in whom the

fundamentalist and the wretched savage also believe. And that is as it should

be: the three-year old’s God serves the various emotional functions that God

is supposed to serve. The intellectual’s ‘God’, which has been rarefied into

oblivion, serves no real emotional function. It may be that the intellectual’s

God has a better chance of actually existing than the three-year-old’s, but

only because it is so poorly defined that nothing is being said in claiming that

it exists.

        The next point to make is that God must also have created the

universe. After all, if ‘God’ came into existence after the universe came into

existence, then he isn’t really God anymore. Simpleton believers andintellectual believers are in agreement on this point, as they have no choice

but to be.

        Kant’s conception of God arises out of his attempt to answer the

question: How can God have all of these characteristics? For suppose, as any

believer must, that God created the universe. In that case, he’s like somebody

who founds a company: after he creates that company, he is just another

employee and he can be fired just like anyone else. So while it makes sense

to suppose that God created the Universe, his involvement in the universe has

to go deeper.

        Kant sees that God has to do more than create the universe. God

cannot just be a ‘first domino.’ But Kant also sees that God cannot just be the

universe—he cannot just be the totality of rocks and trees and planets and

other debris that is dispersed throughout the cosmos.

        Kant solves this problem by saying that God is identical with the

universe, except that he isn’t identical with ‘matter’; he isn’t identical with

‘phenomena’; he isn’t the aspect of the universe that can be known

‘empirically’, to use his term. Rather, God is the universe’s ‘inner essence’,

its ‘noumenal’ core; in other words, he is the part that can be known

‘transcendentally.’

 

 

 