          Modality and Non-existence



 



 



                  John-Michael Kuczynski, PhD



                          Fellow, Bard College


 


 



 



1.0 Necessity and possibility properties of statements, not objects



2.0 Necessity does not come in degrees



3.0 No necessary a posteriori



4.0 Necessary truth identical with truth in virtue of microstructure



5.0 Quine’s denial of informal analytic truth: preliminary concepts6.0 Why there are necessarily true propositions



7.0 Analytic truth vs. formal truth



 


 


 


 



 


 



 


 



 


 



 


 



  



 


 



1.0 Necessity and possibility properties of statements, not objects


  A modal statement is one that says what could be the case or what must

be the case. Here are some examples of such statements: (i) Triangles must

have three sides. (ii) There’s no way anyone could have survived that fall.

(iii) John cannot possibly have 50 cars unless he's very wealthy. (iv) Military

service is sure to toughen a man up.



  For any proposition P, it’s necessarily the case that P iff it’s not possible

that not-P; and it’s possible that P iff it’s not necessarily the case that not-P.

(“Iff” is short for “if and only if.”) It’s necessarily the case that Jim is in the

barn iff it’s not possible that Jim is not in the barn; and it’s possibly the case

that Jim is in the barn iff it’s not necessarily the case that Jim is not in the

barn.


    There  are  no  non-entities  and,  therefore,  no  impossible  entities.  Non-

existence and impossibility are properties of propositions, not of objects. For

example, (v) square  circles  cannot  possibly  exist says that (vi) there  are

square  circles cannot  possibly  be  correct.  (v)  doesn’t  make  the  self-

contradictory claim that there exists some object x such that x is a square

circle and such that x cannot exist. And (vii) happiness is a possibility for

Jim,  even  though  he’s  still  miserable says  that,  even  though  Jim  is  now

miserable, the proposition (viii) Jim  is  happy could  be  true.  (vii)  doesn’tmake the absurd claim that (viii) there exists some x such that x is Jim’s as of

yet nonexistent happiness and such that x could exist.



1.1 Existence and non-existence properties of propositions, not of objects


  The  points  just  made  concerning  the  concepts  of  possibility  and

impossibility are to be understood in terms of more general points concerning

the concepts of existence and non-existence.



    Nothing  doesn’t  exist.  There  exists  no  x  such  that  x  doesn’t  exist.

Statements  that,  given  their  surface-structures,  appear  to  be  attribute  non-

existence to objects in fact attribute falsity to propositions. A story will make

this clear.


  An unscrupulous person claims to have been attacked. In reality, he wasn’t

attacked; but, for whatever reason, it’s to his advantage for people to believe

otherwise. He describes his non-existent assailant to a police sketch artist. The

resulting sketch is distributed across the nation. If we say that the sketch depicts

a nonexistent person, we’re saying that there exists some person who doesn’t

exist who it depicts. But that would be absurd. The sketch is better thought of as

saying: there  is  somebody  having  such  and  such  features, these  being  the

features that a person would have to have if he were to fit the sketch. Though

false, that statement—that existence-claim obviously exists.



    Similarly, the cartoons that brought Fred Flintstone and Bart Simpson into

our homes can be thought of as making false statements of a similar kind. In the

case of Fred Flintstone, that statement might be something along the lines of:

there exists a boorish man who has pet dinosaur named “Dino,” a wife named

“Wilma,” etc. In the case of Bart Simpson that claim might say something alongthe lines of: “there exists a bratty boy who torments his oafish father with his

loveable shenanigans (etc.)” All of these statements exist; they’re simply not

true; nothing answers the descriptions encoded in them. And that is the real

meaning of “Fred Flintstone/Bart Simpson doesn’t exist.” The real meaning is

clearly not some absurd claim to the effect that there exists some non-existent

thing.



2.0 Necessity does not come in degrees


  Here is a view about modality that is false, as we’ll see in a moment, but is

nonetheless a useful starting point[1]:



        (DN) There are different degrees of necessity. “Squares have four

    sides.” This is necessary in the strongest sense. The very idea of a

    square’s failing to have four sides is an incoherent one.


        “Metal expands when heated.” This is not as necessary as “squares

    have fours sides,” since the idea of a universe in which metal didn’t

    expand when heated is not incoherent. But, given that it describes a law

  of physics, and is therefore utterly unalterable, it clearly has a high

    degree of necessity.



        “After surgery, people are unusually prone to get infections and

    must be given antibiotics to stave them off.” There is clearly some

    sense in which this is necessarily true. An immunologically normal

    person  who wasn’t more  prone  to  get  infections  after  surgery  is  a

    medical impossibility. And, unless he qualified his point very heavily, a

    professor  of  medicine  who  denied  this  would  be  misleading  his

    students. But this statement clearly isn’t as necessary as the others.  DN is false. There are only two degrees of necessity: having it completely

and lacking it completely. When we say that P is “more necessary” than Q,

we’re saying something about the conditions that must hold for those statements

to be true; we’re saying that the conditions that must hold for the first to be true

are weaker than those that must hold if the second is to be true. “Squares have

four  sides”  is  maximally  necessary,  because  it  holds unconditionally. In any

universe at all, no matter how mass-energy is distributed in it, that statement is

 
true.[2]So no condition has to be met for that statement to be true. Or, to think

of it another way, the only conditions that have to be met are maximally weak:

they  could  be  thought  of  as  limiting  cases  of  conditions  that  are  trivially

satisfied by any distribution of mass-energy. And to say that “metal expands

when heated” is “less necessary” than “squares have four sides” is to say that

the former could to be true in a wider class of circumstances than the latter. And,

obviously,  to  say  that  “after  surgery,  people  are  unusually  prone  to  get

infections” is “less necessary” than “metal expands when heated” is to say

that the former could fail in a wider class of circumstances than the latter. So

there aren’t really degrees of necessity. Something is either necessary or it

isn’t. But some statements (e.g., “two is bigger than one”) need less help

from others to be true—those are the “highly necessary” ones. Others (e.g.,

“people who wear hats are bad drivers”) need a little more help—those are

the “less necessary” ones.



3.0 No necessary a posteriori


  In 1969, Saul Kripke gave a now famous series of lectures in which he

argued that there are non-analytic necessary truths. Here (in boldface) is a

summary of Kripke’s argument (KA):



  (KA) The ancients referred to the last celestial body (besides the Sun) todisappear from the morning sky as “Phosphorous” (or, to be precise, they

referred to it with an expression whose Anglicization is “Phosphorous”), and

they  referred  to  the  first  celestial  body  to  appear  in  the  evening  sky  as

“Hesperus” (same qualification). The former is Venus and so is the latter, and

the former is therefore identical with the latter. The ancients didn’t yet know

this;  and  they  went  for  a  very  long  time  having  no  idea  that  some one

celestial body appeared in the evening sky before any other and disappeared

from the morning sky after any other. But eventually they found this out.

What they found out isn’t trivial, of course; it isn’t in the same category as

the fact that Hesperus is identical with Hesperus. What they discovered is a

non-trivial, empirical fact.



    Henceforth,  “FES”  and  “LMS”  will  be  our  abbreviations  for  the

predicates  “first  celestial  body  to  appear  in  the  evening  sky”  will  be

abbreviated as “FES” and, respectively, “last celestial body (besides the Sun)

to  disappear  from  the  morning  sky.”  Contrary  to  what  it  is  extremely

tempting to believe:


        (HIP[3]) “Hesperus is Phosphorous”



  does not have the same meaning as


        (S*) “the LMS is identical with the FES.”



  It will take a moment to make it clear why this is so.


  Let P be the proposition expressed by HIP. As we just saw, empirical

investigation was needed to establish the truth of P; so P is an empirical truth

and is therefore non-analytic. It’s important to keep the distinction betweenHIP and P in mind. The ancients didn’t have any feelings about the English

sentence  “Hesperus  is  identical  with  Hesperus.”  And,  in  making  the

astronomical discovery that we’ve been discussing, what they found out had

nothing to do with HIP—or any other sentence. It was an astronomical, not a

linguistic, discovery. This point is crucial.



  If  HIP  has  the  same  meaning  as  S*,  then  P  is  identical  with  the

proposition meant by S*. And the latter is equivalent with the proposition

that:


        (P*) exactly one thing is an LMS and exactly one thing is an

    FES, and nothing that has the one property lacks the other.



  And the same is true of P, supposing that S* and HIP express the same

proposition.


  In light of these points, consider a world W* satisfying the following

conditions. W* is semantically just like our world. (Two worlds or situations

are “semantically identical” if the rules that govern word-usage in the one

coincide with those that govern it in the other.) So, in W*, people speak

English. But, in W*, Venus isn’t the LMS or the FES. In W*, because of

some  cataclysm  that  didn’t  occur  in  our  world,  Mars  is  the  LMS,  and

Mercury is the FES. So, in W*, “the LMS” picks out Mars, and “the FES”

picks out Mercury. This follows from the fact that W* is semantically just

like our world. (If John McCain had become President in 2008 instead of

Barack Obama, “the U.S. President” would, given the semantic rules that we

use, refer to McCain. But, given those very same rules, “Barack Obama”

would still refer to Barack Obama. In other words, if x is the person who in

our world is referred to as “Barack Obama,” “Barack Obama” would refer tox in W*. Similarly, if Mars were the LMS, as opposed to Venus, “the LMS”

would, given the semantic rules that we use, refer to Mars. But given those

same rules, “Venus” would still refer to Venus. In other words, if x is the

planet that n i our world is referred to as “Venus,” “Venus” would refer to x

in W*.



  “Venus,” like “Barack Obama,” is thus a rigid designator. If x is what

“Venus” in fact refers to, x is what “Venus” would refer to in any world

semantically like ours. But “the LMS,” like “the current U.S. President,” is

not a rigid designator; it refers to different things in semantically identical

situations.  (It  used  to  refer  to  Carter;  now  it  refers  to  Obama.  But  the

semantic rules governing that expression haven’t changed in the least in the

mean time.)


    Proper names are rigid designators. Therefore, unlike “the LMS” and “the

FES,”  "Hesperus"  and  "Phosphorous",  being  proper  names,  are  rigid

designators. So as long as the semantic rules of English haven’t changed,

there is some one object x such that (i) each refers to x; and, therefore, such

that (ii) each of ‹Hesperus has phi› and ‹Phosphorous has phi› is true exactly

if x has phi, a corollary being that (iii) “Hesperus is Phosphorous” (HIP) is

true exactly if x is identical with x.



  It’s obvious that, for any object x, the proposition x is identical with x is

necessarily true. But it’s equally obvious that the proposition expressed by

HIP  is  empirical  and,  therefore,  non-analytic.  Therefore,  HIP  expresses  a

non-analytic necessary truth.


3.1 Kripke’s argument evaluated  This  argument  involves  a  massive  non-sequitur,  which  the  following

story exposes. I meet a man. We shake hands. I obviously see what he looks

like. He tells me that his name is “Hesperus.” (Without worrying about the

details,  let’s  assume  that  I  know  him  to  be  telling  me  the  truth.)  In  this

context, there is some individual x such that I am learning that:



        (HX) “Hesperus” is x’s name.


  But what I  am  learning  must  be  distinguished  from  the  information

through which I am learning it. The information relayed to me by my senses

isn’t confined to HX. It would be absurd to think otherwise. That information

is more along the lines of:



        (BHX) There is some individual x such that x is standing right

  in front of me (in my office in Richmond, VA) at this moment

    (3:00 P.M., March 13, 2009) and such that x has such and such

    characteristics (he has a mustache, he’s over 6-feet tall, etc.) and

    such  that  I  am  being  told,  by  x  himself,  that  “Hesperus”  is  x’s

    name.


  So there is some x such that “Hesperus” merely labels x. “Hesperus”

doesn’t  have  for  any  part  of  its  meaning  anything  having  to  do  with  the

property of being over 6 feet, having a mustache, being in this or that place at

this or that time. But the information through which I learn whom “Hesperus”

labels does concern such properties. That information is descriptive; a certain

person x is visually represented, and thus described, to me as having certain

characteristics (over 6-feet tall, etc.); and, with the help of this information, it

is also being made clear to me that “Hesperus” names x. But that descriptive

information is not itself a part of the semantic rule that, with its help, I amlearning—that is to say, it is not itself any part of HX. HX is extremely

threadbare; it merely puts a label on a certain object. So the just-mentioned

descriptive  information  has  no  place  in  the semantics of  “Hesperus”;  its

relevance  is  confined  to  the  pre-semantic  act  of  assigning  it  to  the  right

object. That information isn’t semantic; it’s pre-semantic.



  The  following  evening,  I  receive  a  phone  call.  I  don’t  recognize  the

caller’s  voice.  The  caller  is  obviously  using  a  voice-modulation  device,

giving it a metallic, threatening sound. And threaten is just what he does; for

he says “if you don’t move out of town, I’m going to kill you. By the way,

my name is Phosphorous.” I look at my caller ID; and, sure enough, the call

is from one “Phosphorous.” In this context, there is some individual y such

that I am learning that:


        (PX) “Phosphorous” is y’s name.



      PX merely registers the fact that a certain name is associated with a

certain object. It doesn’t say anything (else) about that object. It doesn’t say

whether that object is tall or short, friendly or unfriendly. PX is exceedingly

threadbare.  But  the  information through which  I  am  learning  PX  is  very

different from PX itself. That information—that pre-semantic information—

is along the lines of:


        (BPX) There is some individual y such that, a moment ago (7:00

    P.M.,  March  14,  2009),  y  rang  me;  such  that,  using  a  voice-

    modulation  device  to  disguise  his  voice,  y  is  making  threatening

    statements;  and  such  that  I  am  being  told,  by  y  himself,  that

    “Phosphorous” is y’s name.  Thus,  there  is  some  y  such  that  “Phosphorous”  merely  labels  y.

“Hesperus” doesn’t have for any part of its meaning anything having to do

with the property of talking on the phone with me at a certain time, or of

using a voice-modulation device, or of making threats. But the information

through  which I  learn  who  “Phosphorous”  labels does concern  such

properties. That information is descriptive; a certain person y is perceptually

represented,  and  thus  described,  to  me  as  having  certain  characteristics

(calling me at a certain time, making certain statements, etc.) and, with the

help of this information, it is also being made clear to me that “Phosphorous”

names x. But that descriptive information is not itself a part of the semantic

rule that, with its help, I am learning—that is to say, it is not itself any part of

PX. PX is extremely threadbare; it merely puts a label on a certain object. So

the just-mentioned descriptive information has no place in the semantics of

“Phosphorous,” its relevance is confined to the pre-semantic act of assigning

it to the right object.



      Such pre-semantic information can have an incalculably profound

effect  on  what  is  (non-semantically;  i.e.,  non-literally) conveyed by

utterances. A continuation of our story makes this clear. Right after getting

the upsetting phone call, the police call. For some reason, they know about

the phone call. They say to me:


          (A) “Phosphorous is a professor of political science.”
              1



      There is some y such that A affirms only that:
                                        1



          (A) y is a professor of political science.
              2  But under the circumstances, what will be conveyed to me is some much

richer proposition along the lines of:



        (A) There is some individual y such that, a little while ago (at
          3

    around 7:00 P.M., March 14, 2009), y rang me; such that, using a

    voice-modulation  device  to  disguise  his  voice,  y  is  making

    threatening statements; such that I am being told, by y himself, that

    “Phosphorous” is y’s name; and, finally, such that y is a professor of

    political science.


  The pre-semantic information embedded in BPX affects what I take away

from the policeman’s utterance of L, even though it is no part of its literal
                                          1

meaning. For exactly similar reasons, the pre-semantic information embedded

in BHX affects what I would take away from an utterance of:



          (B) “Hesperus is an avid tennis player.”
              1



    There  is  some  x  such  that  B  does  nothing  more  than  affirm  the
                                          1

descriptively impoverished proposition that:



        (B) x is an avid tennis player.
          2



  But under the circumstances, what that utterance conveys to me is some

much richer proposition along the lines of:



        (B)  There  is  some  individual  x  such,  a  couple  of  days  ago
          3

    (March 13, 2009) at about 3:00 P.M., x is standing right in front of me

  (in  my  office  in  Richmond,  VA);  such  that  x  has  such  and  such    characteristics (he has a mustache, he’s over 6-feet tall, etc.); such

    that “Hesperus” is x’s name; and such that x is a political science

    professor.



  We need only add one finishing touch to our story to see what’s wrong

with  Kripke’s  reasoning.  The  police  arrest  Phosphorous.  They  ask  me  to

come down to the station to talk to them. They point to Phosphorous (who is

handcuffed) and say: “that’s Phosphorous.” Phosphorous, I now see, is none

other than Hesperus. The man I see is the mustachioed man I met a few days

earlier.  The  police  then  say:  “Phosphorous  also  goes  by  the  name  of

Hesperus.  His  legal  name  is  ‘Hesperus  Phosphorous.’  But  he  tends  to

introduce  himself  as  either  ‘Hesperus’  or  ‘Phosphorous.’  In  any  case,

Hesperus is Phosphorous.” The italicized sentence is none other than HIP, of

course.


    Given what we’ve already learned, it’s obvious that there is some one

individual z such that this utterance of HIP is true exactly if:



        (K) z is identical with z.


  Any proposition of that form is trivial. It is always trivial to say of an

object that it is identical with itself. But by obvious extensions of what we

said a moment ago, when I hear the policeman’s utterance of HIP, what I take

away from it—what it (non-literally) conveys to me, given the pre-semantic

information at my disposal—won’t be at all trivial, as it will be along the

lines of:



        (K)  There  is  some  individual  x  such,  a  couple  of  days  ago
          2

    (March 13, 2009) at about 3:00 P.M., x is standing right in front of me  (in  my  office  in  Richmond,  VA;  such  that  x  has  such  and  such

    characteristics (he has a mustache, he’s over 6-feet tall, etc.); such

    that “Hesperus” is x’s name; and such that x is a political science

    professor; and there is some individual y such that, a few hours ago

    (at around 7:00 P.M., March 14, 2009), y rang me; such that, using a

    voice-modulation  device  to  disguise  his  voice,  y  is  making

    threatening  statements;  such  that  I  was  told  by  y  himself  that

    “Phosphorous” is y’s name; and such that y is a professor of political

    science; moreover, I have just learned from the police that x is y.



  K is an empirical proposition; it isn’t analytic; a fortiori it isn’t trivial.
    2

But it’s also a contingent truth. K, on the other hand, is a necessary truth. But

it’s also analytic. So we don’t have anything that is both necessary and non-

analytic.


  Kripke  and,  after  him,  many  others  have  professed  to  find  many

examples  of  non-analytic  necessary  truths;  but  in  each  case,  an  exact

analogue of the argument just given shows a confusion similar to the one just

identified to be at work. In each case, semantics is being confused with pre-

semantics, for reasons that are identified in my book Conceptual Atomism

and the Computational Theory of Mind.



4.0 Necessary truth identical with truth in virtue of microstructure


  The  main  modal  concepts  are  necessity,  possibility,  impossibility,  and

contingency. All of these can be understood in terms of the concept of necessity.

P is possible iff not-P isn’t necessary. P is impossible iff not-P is necessary. P is

contingent iff neither P nor not-P is necessary.  Whether all modal concepts can be understood in terms of this one concept

depends  on  how  inclusive  one’s  conception  of  modality  is.  Like  Bas  van

Fraassen (1989), I believe that the property of being probably true is a modal

property—that, indeed, for any number n, the property of being probable to

degree n is a modal property. It’s an open question whether the concept of

probable truth can be understood in terms of that necessary truth. I’m inclined to

think that it can be, given how natural it is to think of necessity as a limiting

case of probable truth. But until this is resolved, it can’t be said that all modal

notions can be understood in terms of the concept of probability. But there’s no

denying that necessity is the most important modal concept.



  But  what is necessity?  One  plausible  answer  is  this:  necessary  truth  is

analytic truth; necessity is analyticity. “Squares have four sides” is “analytic,” or

“analytically true.” Indeed, all analytically true statements are necessarily true.

So it’s obviously worth looking into the idea necessity is analyticity. Many deny

this  (for  reasons  that  we’ll  discuss  in  a  moment);  but  many,  including  the

present author, hold it. But different authors use the word “analytic” to mean

different things, and we must make it clear how we will be using it before we

can evaluate the proposal that necessary truth is analytic truth.


    Sometimes  that  word  denotes  a  property  of  sentences;  other  times,  it

denotes a proposition of propositions. A sentence is analytic if, given only what

it means, it must be true. So “squares have four sides” is analytic. Given only

what it means, it couldn’t possibly be false. A proposition is analytic if it’s non-

empirically true. So the proposition that squares have four sides is analytic. No

conceivable state of affairs could make it false. We will use the word “analytic”

to denote a property of propositions, not sentences.



    When examining the concept of analyticity, one must make it clear at theoutset whether one is talking about sentences or propositions. Otherwise one

won’t be able to produce a coherent analysis of that concept. This is because

there are analytically true sentences (or, strictly speaking, sentence-tokens) that

have contingent propositions for their meanings. If, at this very moment, I were

to say “I am here now,” my utterance couldn’t fail to be true. Given only the

semantic  rules  that  assign  truth-conditions  to  that  utterance,  it’s  a  logical

impossibility that it should be false. But what it is that I’m saying could very

well be false. Given that I am JMK, that I’m in Richmond, and that it’s now

March 13, 2009, I am, in producing such an utterance, attributing to JMK the

property of being in Richmond, VA, on March 13, 2009. And, quite obviously,

it’s not a necessary truth that I be in that place at that time. Similarly, if I say “I

am not here now,” my utterance is analytically false: given only its semantics—

given only what the semantic rules are that assign truths-conditions to it—it’s

logically impossible that it should be true. But what it’s saying could easily have

been false; I might not, after all, have been in Richmond, VA, at this very time.

It isn’t in virtue of what it’s saying that a given token of “I am here now” (“I am

not here now”) must be true (false); it is in virtue of how it is saying it. But it is

in virtue of what it is saying that a token of “any case of knowledge is a case of

true belief” must be true. This shows that there are two very different kinds of

sentence-analyticity.



  It also shows that sentence-analyticity diverges from proposition-analyticity

and,  more  generally,  that  sentence-logic  diverges  from  proposition-logic.  In

other words, the logical relations that propositions bear to one another don’t

always parallel the logical relation that the corresponding sentences bear to one

another. The two sets of interrelations can diverge quite dramatically. (Credit for

this astonishing insight goes entirely to P.F. Strawson.) So it’s important to bear

in  mind  that,  in  what  follows,  the  word  “analytic”  refers  to  a  property  ofpropositions,  not  sentences.  (Later  we’ll  discuss  how  it  is  exactly  that

analytically true (false) sentence-tokens can have contingent truths (falsehoods)

for their meanings.)



  The word “analytic” is ambiguous in another, equally important respect. As

some  philosophers  use  it,  “analytic”  is  synonymous  with  “trivial”  or

“tautologous.” So “there are 3 feet in a yard” is “analytic” because it’s trivial—

because, basically, it says nothing. But as other philosophers use that word,

analytic truths are often decidedly non-trivial—for example, “a class is infinitely

large exactly if it can be into a one-one correspondence with a proper subset of

itself.” When non-trivial truths are described as “analytic,” what is meant is

that they are non-empirically true. This is what we will mean by it, as earlier

stated.


    There is one last ambiguity to deal with. As some philosophers use it, the

word  “analytic”  is  synonymous  with  “formally  true.”  Formal  truth  is  a

 
property of sentences. It’s the property of being “syntactically” true.[4]A

sentence  is  “syntactically  true”  if  any  sentence  having  the  same  syntactic

form is true. So “either John is tall or John is not tall” is formally true, and

thus analytic (in one sense of the word), because every sentence having the

form “either P or not-P” is true. This obviously isn’t how we’ll be using the

term “analytic,” given that, as previously stated, we’re using it to pick out a

property  of  propositions,  not  sentences.  (Propositions  don’t  have  syntax.

Syntax  is  a  property  of  complex expressions. Propositions  aren’t

expressions.)



  A final note: even though sentence-analyticity diverges from proposition-

analyticity,  the  two  ultimately  coalesce.  What  does  it  mean  to  say  that,

although the proposition it encodes is synthetic, a given token of “I am herenow” is analytic? It means that, the semantic rules of English being what they

are,  the  proposition  that  any  given  token  of  “I  am  here  now”  is  true  is

analytic. (Given that any token t of “I” refers to the person who utters t, that
                                    11

any token t of “now” refers to the time at which t was uttered, and so on, it
            22

follows that a token t of “I am here now” couldn’t be false.)



  Analytic propositions are true no matter what. The proposition:


        (GG) either grass is green or grass is not green



    cannot fail to be true. It doesn’t matter what happens or what natural laws

govern  what  happens.  Why  is  this?  What  is  it  about  GG  that  makes  it

incapable of being false? A natural proposal is to say that GG is structurally

true. In other words, given what its constituents are, along with how those

constituents are put together, it cannot fail to be true. All structural truths are

analytic truths. Analytic truth is truth in virtue of structure.


  This proposal is almost correct, but not quite. Analytic truth is truth in

virtue not just of structure but also of substructure. It isn’t merely in virtue of

its structure that:



        (ACK) any case of knowledge is a case of true belief


  is  analytic;  the  structures  of  its constituents are  involved.  Some

propositions structurally just like ACK are false (e.g., any case of knowledge

is a case of false belief). At the same time, there are false propositions that

are substructurally just like ACK (e.g., “any case of true belief is a case of

knowledge”); and it’s obviously because its structure differs from theirs that,unlike those propositions, ACK is analytically true. Analyticity is truth in

virtue of structure along with substructure. Analytic truth is, as we’ll put it,

high-resolution structural truth.



    Before we can see what exactly this means, or why it holds, we must

make a few non-controversial, but also non-trivial, points about language.

Languages are evaluated in terms of how much expressive power they have—

in other words, in terms of how much can be said in them. The expressive

power of a language is to be understood not only in terms of how many

propositions  can  be  expressed,  but  also  in  terms  of  how varied those

propositions are. A language that can express the propositions snow is white,

it is true that snow is white, it is true that it is true that snow is white, and so

on, can express infinitely many propositions. But its expressive resources are

minimal;  and  some  other  language  that  can  express  only  a  thousand

propositions, not a single one of which entails a single one of the others, will

grossly exceed the expressive capabilities of the first. And that’s why, when

assessing the expressive potency of a language, the relevant question isn’t so

much  “how  many  propositions  can  it  express?”  as  it  is  “how  much

redundancy is there within the set of propositions that it can express?”


    These points may be obvious, but they have a non-obvious consequence,

namely:  as  a  rule,  sentential  structure  mirrors  propositional  structure;

propositions  must  have  structures  similar  to  those  of  the  sentences  that

represent  them.  This  doesn’t  mean  that  each  proposition’s  structure  is

perfectly represented by those of all the sentences that express it. (In fact, this

is impossible, given that sentences with different structures can express the

same proposition.) It doesn’t even mean that any proposition’s structure is

perfectly represented by that of any of the sentences that express it. Here’s

what it does mean: to the extent that the sentences of a given language fail tomirror  the  structures  of  the  propositions  they  express,  that  language  is

expressively  frozen.  So  if  L  and  L*  are  any  two  languages,  then ceteris

paribus L’s expressive power exceeds L*s to the extent that the structures of

L-sentences  do  a  better  job  than  those  of  L*-sentences  of  mirroring  the

structures of the propositions they represent.



  Let L* be a language that has only simple symbols. So the L*-sentence

for “snow is colder than water” is some single, syntactically simple symbol,

the same being true of every other L*-sentence. Obviously, there’s no limit to

what  L*  can  express,  since  there’s  no  limit  in  principle  to  how  many

primitive  symbols  can  belong  to  a  language.  But,  since  each  symbol

belonging to L* is simple, it’s necessary to add a new symbol to L* every

time one wants to make a point that isn’t the literal meaning of one of its

simple expressions. Nothing could be said in L* that hadn’t been said before:

it would be impossible to express discoveries. Symbols would have to be

added ad hoc to say anything new. But given a language L that has many

ways of combining its primitive symbols into complex ones, it’s expressive

capabilities  will  dwarf  those  of  L*,  so  long  as  the  number  of  primitive

expressions belonging to L rises above a certain, extremely small minimum

number. L* is totally inflexible. L is highly flexible, and can do a lot with a

little. Other things being equal, the extent to which one language’s expressive

resources exceed those of another is directly proportional to the extent by

which sentences of the one language exceed their counterparts in the other in

respect of syntactic complexity.


    There is only one viable explanation of this last fact: Syntactic structure

mirrors propositional structure. The syntactic devices that endow a language

with expressive flexibility correspond to the relations by which propositions

are  constructed  out  of  their  constituents  and,  in  particular,  by  whichpropositions  are  constructed  out  of  other  propositions.  Thus,  we  can

confidently  say  that  the  (syntactic)  structures  of  sentences  tend  to  mirror

those of the propositions they express.



4.1 Necessity as high-resolution structural truth


  We can now say what it means to say that analytic truth is high-resolution

structural truth. Given the reasoning just presented, the sentence “either grass

is green or grass is not green” must have a structure similar to GG. But, by

that same reasoning, GG’s structure probably differs from the structure of:



        (GA) grass is green and grass is not green.


  But GA is not analytically true. (It’s analytically false.) Given that GA is

false and has the same structure as GG, it cannot possibly be solely in virtue

of its structure that GG is true. But we don’t just want to give up on the idea

that analytic truth is structural truth. An analytically true proposition is ipso

facto  true  no  matter  what  contingencies  obtain.  This  entails,  or  strongly

suggests,  that  it  is  always  in  virtue  of  something inherent in  it  that  a

proposition is analytically true, and it’s hard to see how the relevant property

could fail to be structural in nature. It’s obvious that, in the case of GA,

what’s causing the trouble is that the concept of conjunction (the concept of

and)  is  occupying  the  place  that,  in  GG,  is  occupied  by  the  concept  of

disjunction (the concept of or). Taken together, these points suggest that it is

in virtue of its structure along with the structure of one of its constituents—

viz. the concept of conjunction—that GG is analytically true.



  So it’s not quite right to say that analytic truth is structural truth. At the

same  time,  it  isn’t  quite  right  to  identify  analytic  truth  with substructuraltruth. The proposition:



        (NG) it’s not the case that grass is green or grass is green


  is equivalent with the proposition that grass is not green. Thus, NG is

contingently false. But it has the same constituents as the analytically true

GG, and is thus substructurally identical with it, even though it’s structurally

very different.



  This suggests that for a proposition to be analytically true is for it to be

true in virtue of its structural and its substructural properties. In other words,

given a proposition’s structure along with the structures of its constituents,

it’s settled whether or not that proposition is analytically true. Thus, a high-

resolution representation of a proposition’s structure settles whether or not

it’s analytic. (A “low-resolution” representation would be one that failed to

disclose substructure.) Thus, analytic truth is high-resolution structural truth

—and so, therefore, is necessary truth, given that it’s identical with analytic

truth.


5.0 Quine’s denial of informal analytic truth: preliminary concepts



  In this section, all references to “analytic” truth are to sentential analytic

truths; we will be discussing analytically true sentences, not analytically true

propositions.


    W.V.O. Quine (1951) says that, with a few trivial exceptions, there is no

such thing as sentential analytic truth. To understand exactly what it is that he

holds, and why he holds it, we must first make some background points.

Given the sentence        (ST) “if Smith is tall, then it is not the case that Smith is not

    tall”,



    nonsense results if “Smith” is replaced with “therefore” or “red", and

such replacements are therefore grammatically admissible. But “Smith” can

be replaced with "Jones" or with “that person", in the sense that


        (JT) “if Jones is tall, then it is not the case that Jones is not tall”



  is  a  perfectly  grammatical  sentence.  JT  is  what  results  when  the

occurrences of “Smith” in it are made uniformly. In other words, JT is what

results when, not just one, but all of those occurrences are replaced with the

same thing. The following sentence, by contrast, is what results when only

one of the occurrences of “Smith” in ST is replaced with “Jones” (“NU” is

short for “not uniform”):


        (NU) “if Jones is tall, then it is not the case that Jenkins is not

    tall.”



  Thus, a syntactically well-formed sentence S cannot be false if it is the

result  of  uniformly  replacing  the  occurrences  in  ST  of  “Smith”  (or,  for

reasons analogous to those just given, of “tall”) with some other expression.


  In general, a sentence S is formaly true if there is some expression E

occurring in S such that no syntactically well-formed sentence S* is false if

S* is what results when the occurrences in S of E are uniformly replaced with

occurrences of some other expression.



5.1 Quine’s denial of informal analytic truth  Here, in boldface, is a summary of Quine’s argument :



  If there are any analytically true sentences, (B) "bachelors are unmarried

men" is one of them. Suppose that (B) is in fact analytic, the reason is that

“bachelor”  and  “unmarried  man”  are  synonyms.  All  analytic  truths,

supposing any to exist, hold in virtue of synonymy-relations.


  What is it for two expressions to be synonyms? It is for them to be such

that inter-substitutions of them preserve meaning. “Foe” and “enemy” are

synonymous  because  you  cannot  change  sentence  meaning  by  replacing

“foe” with “enemy.” Put another way, “foe” and “enemy” mean the same

thing  because,  if  a  sentence  S  contains  an  occurrence  of  “foe,”  and  that

occurrence is replaced with an occurrence of “enemy,” the resulting sentence

has the same meaning as S.



    Consider the sentence: “Smith is a foe.” Now replace the word “foe” with

“enemy.” What results is “Smith is an enemy.” The sentence “Smith is an

enemy” has precisely the same meaning as “Smith is a foe.”


  Let S and S* be any two sentences that are exactly alike except for the

fact that, in the place where S contains the word “foe,” S* contains the word

“enemy.” What we just said about “Smith is an enemy” and “Smith is a foe”

is true of S and S*. And that is why “foe” and “enemy” are synonyms. Inter-

substituting  synonyms  doesn’t  change  sentence-meaning—and  for  two

expressions  to  be  synonymous  just is for  them  to  be  such  that  inter-

substituting them doesn’t ever change sentence-meaning.



  But what is it for two sentences to have the same “meaning”? What is it

for “Smith is an enemy” and “Smith is a foe” to mean the same thing? Fortwo  statements  to  have  the  same  meaning  is  for  them  to  be analytically

equivalent. In other words, it is for them to entail, and be entailed by, exactly

the same statements.



  “Smith is an enemy” entails “Smith is somebody who is attempting to do

me ill,” and so does “Smith is a foe.” The statement “Smith is somebody

whose sole objective in life is to make my life as unpleasant as possible”

entails “Smith is an enemy,” and it also entails “Smith is a foe.” Given any

statement S that entails “Smith is an enemy,” S also entails “Smith is a foe”;

and given any statement S* such that “Smith is an enemy” entails S*, “Smith

is a foe” also entails S*. Thus, “Smith is an enemy” and “Smith is a foe”

entail, and are entailed by, exactly the same statements—and that, according

to Quine, is what it is for them to have the same meaning.


  The just stated argument consists of three steps: 1. (B) is analytic because

“bachelor” and “unmarried man” are synonyms: in general, if a sentence is

analytic, that is because it holds true entirely in virtue of some synonymy

relation. 2. For two expressions to be synonymous is for them to be such that

inter-substitutions of them preserve sentence meaning. 3. For two statements

to have the same meaning is for them to be analytically equivalent. In other

words,  it  is  for  them  to  entail,  and  be  entailed  by,  exactly  the  same

statements.



      This argument is obviously viciously circular. 1 defines analyticity in

terms of 2 and, thus, in terms of synonymy. 2 defines synonymy in terms of

3, and thus in terms of analyticity. Thus, analyticity has been defined in terms

of itself. We have gone in a vicious circle. Thus, the concept of analyticity is

viciously  circular  and  therefore  incoherent  and,  consequently,  there  is  no

such thing as analytic truth: all truths are synthetic.5.2 Quine’s argument evaluated



    Contrary  to  what  Quine  alleges,  there  exist  many  analytically  true

sentences that do not hold in virtue of relations of synonymy, for example (T)

"The unique number n such that n = 2 if the interior angles of a Euclidean

triangle add up to 180° and n = 3 otherwise is identical with the unique

                          m 
number m such that 9= 90 minus 9." No empirical knowledge, over and

above such as is needed to know what T means, is required to know whether

or not T is true. So T true in virtue of what it means and is thus analytic.


     To be sure, unlike some analytic sentences, it isn’t formally true. But

since the very thing that Quine is trying to show is that there is no informal

analytic truth, he cannot, without assuming the truth of the very thing he’s

trying to show, claim on those grounds that T is not analytic.) So if Quine is

right, T holds in virtue of some synonymy relation. What, in this case, would

the  relevant  synonyms  be?  Presumably  they  would  be: (*) “the  unique

number n such that n = 2 if the interior angles of a Euclidean triangle add up

                                                                                    m 
to 180° and n = 3 otherwise”and (#) “the unique number m such that 9= 90

minus 9.”



     But, even though they refer to the same thing (namely, the number

two), * and # obviously don’t have the same meaning; and Quine is therefore

wrong to say that, if there are analytic truths, they always hold in virtue of

synonymy relations.


5.3 Analytic truth non-circularly definable as non-empirical truth



    Quine’s larger point seems to be that there is no non-circular definition of

the term “analytic truth.” But that is false: a sentence is analytic if (a) it istrue and (b) it does not hold in virtue of empirical facts. Put simply: analytic

truth is non-empirical truth. “Circles are figures of uniform curvature” is true

and, moreover, it holds, not in virtue of empirical facts (i.e., not in virtue of

how objects are in fact shaped), but in virtue of facts about the structures of

the properties circle, curvature, and so on. Of course, being a nominalist,

Quine would reject the idea that there are non-empirical truths. (After all, a

nominalist believes that everything is spatiotemporal: there are no platonic

entities and thus no properties.) But in attempting to establish that all truths

are synthetic, Quine is, in effect, trying to establish that there are no empirical

truths. For an empirical truth is, by definition, one that can be learned only

through observation and therefore cannot be learned through any non-sensory

modality such as conceptual analysis. So Quine would be guilty of begging

the question were he to say that, since all truth is empirical, it is not an option

to define “analytic” as “non-empirically true.”



5.4 Quine’s position self-defeating


  Also, the view that there are no analytic statements is self-defeating.[5]

 
The statement (^) There are no empirical statementsis equivalent to (^^) for

all  values  of  S,  the  statement  nothing  follows  from  S  follows  from  the

 
statement S is a statement.In other words, if you say that there are no analytic

statements, you are saying that nothing follows from any statement. But if

you say that, then you are saying that the statement nothing follows from S

follows from the statement S is a statement. Thus, the view that there is no

analytic  truth  entails  that there  is analytic  truth,  and  is  therefore  self-

 
defeating.Also if all truths were empirical, then, for any statements S and S,
                                                                                  12

it would be an empirical question, and thus one to be decided on the basis of

some third statement S, whether S confirmed S ; but it would equally be an
                          312empirical question, and thus one to be decided on the basis of some fourth

statement S, whether or not S confirmed that S confirmed S ; and so on ad
            4312

infinitum. Thus, if all truth were empirical, nothing would confirm anything.

 

6.0 Why there are necessarily true propositions

 

  First  a  terminological  point:  If  a  proposition  is  true,  but  it  isn’t

necessarily  true,  it  is  “contingently  true,”  or  just  “contingent”;  and  if  a

proposition is false, but it isn’t necessarily false, it is “contingently false.”

  It seems clear that some truths are contingent. Gore might have become

President in 2001. He didn’t. Bush became President instead. But Bush didn’t

have to  become  President.  So  it’s  a  contingent  truth  that  Bush  became

President. In general, things don’t have to be the way they are; they could be

different. In any case, this is what we think, and it’s what we’ll assume in this

context.



    Given  this  assumption,  we  must  ask  the  following  question:  Are  any

propositions necessarily true? Yes. Why is this? Because the assumption that

no propositions are necessarily true is self-undermining. For argument’s sake,

suppose that: (NN) No propositions are necessarily true.


  Is NN itself necessarily true or not? It has to be one or the other. If NN is

a necessary truth, it’s a counterexample to itself and is therefore false. So

let’s suppose for argument’s sake that NN is contingently true. In that case, it

could be false. In other words, there is some possible world W where some

proposition P is necessarily true. A proposition is necessarily true iff it’s true

in all possible worlds. So given that P is necessarily true in W, it follows that

P is true in every world. Thus, P is true in our world, and P is true in everyworld. Thus, P is necessarily true in our world, and NN is therefore false. To

sum up: NN is self-defeating if it’s necessarily true, and NN is self-defeating

if it’s true but not necessarily so. Therefore, NN is false.



  Also,  if  NN  is  true,  then  the  statement  (i)  “P  isn’t  necessarily  true”

necessarily follows the statement (ii) “P is a proposition,” and it is therefore a

necessary truth that (i) isn’t false if (ii) is true. So NN cannot be true unless

it’s false, and it’s therefore false.


6.1  Knowledge  of  necessary  truth  a  prerequisite  for  knowledge  of

contingent truth



    Nonetheless,  some  philosophers  have  denied  that  there  are  necessary

propositions.  We  just  considered  Quine’s  argument  for  this.  Given  how

contrived that argument is, how lacking in logical integrity and devoid of

intuitive force, it’s hard to believe that Quine’s rejection of necessary truth

was based entirely on it. Quine, one would suspect, must have had some pre-

existing agenda and he constructed that argument in the hopes that it would

legitimate that agenda.


    Such suspicions would be correct. Throughout his long career, Quine was

unrelenting in his advocacy of a particularly extreme form of empiricism.



  To understand Quine’s empiricism, we must note a fact about empiricism

in general. Empiricism says that you know only what your senses are telling

you.  Unless  you  assume  the  truth  of  principles  that  cannot  be  learned

empirically,  you  can’t  show  that  your  perceptions  correspond  to  any

transperceptual  reality.  For  this  reason,  empiricism  tends  to  collapse  into

idealism, this being why Berkeley, who has a hardcore empiricist, was alsoan idealist.



    Quine’s  empiricism  is  in  some  ways  antithetical  to  Berkeley’s

empiricism.  Berkeley  was  led  by  his  empiricism  to  deny  the  non-mental.

Quine was led by his empiricism to deny the mental. According to Quine,

there is no observational evidence of mental states. One sees bodies. One

doesn’t see or otherwise sense-perceive mental states. Quine’s position is that

mental states either don’t exist or are identical with the bodily behaviors that

we ordinarily, and wrongly in Quine’s view, believe to be expressions of

mental states. Thus, Quine was a behaviorist. (In my short book Empiricism

and its Limits, it is shown why behaviorism is false.)


    Quine also held that there is no a priori knowledge. There is, he believed,

no  knowledge  that  is  hardwired  into  us  and  that  regulates  the  intake  and

subsequent processing of sensory information. Quine also believed that our

linguistic behavior can be explained on the assumption that, at birth, we are

blank slates and that it is entirely through a process of Pavlovian conditioning

that we come to use words in the way we do.



  This doctrine is also known as “behaviorism.” Behaviorism in this sense

is a psychological theory that tries to answer the question “how does a human

being  learn  to  speak  a  language?”  Behaviorism  in  the  other  sense  is  a

philosophical  theory  that  tries  to  answer  the  question  “what  are  mental

states?”  To  avoid  confusion,  I’ll  refer  to  the  first  doctrine  as  “linguistic

behaviorism.”


    Linguistic behaviorism is incoherent. To say “that’s a fire” and mean it, I

must  have  beliefs  as  to  what  that  expression  means  and  as  to  what

circumstances would warrant my uttering it. If I reflexively bark it out when Isee  a  fire,  I’m  no  more  affirming  that  there’s  a  fire  than  I  am  if  I  start

sweating in response to the heat given off by a nearby fire.



  Also,  in  1957,  Noam  Chomsky  published  his  groundbreaking  work

Syntactic Structures, which, along with the many other important works that

Chomsky  was  soon  to  publish,  made  it  clear  that  Quine’s  linguistic

behaviorism simply didn’t model the relevant facts. Chomsky proposed an

alternative theory, according to which inborn cognitive structures are largely,

though  obviously  not  entirely,  determinative  of  how  we  learn  and  use

language. Unlike Quine’s theory, Chomsky’s is splendidly borne out by the

facts.


    Quine and others accused Chomsky of putting forth a priori theories that

lacked an adequate empirical grounding. This is both false and confused. It’s

true that according to Chomsky’s theory we have a priori knowledge. But it

doesn’t follow that Chomsky’s theory is itself a priori. Chomsky’s theory is

based on empirical data; and, unlike Quine’s theory, it fits that data. And

even though, according to Quine’s theory, there is no a priori knowledge, it

doesn’t follow that Quine’s theory is itself empirically well-founded. It isn’t.

It’s  rooted  in  the  a  priori,  and  easily  disconfirmed,  presumption  that  all

psychological  phenomena  are  to  be  explained  in  the  same  way  as  the

salivating of Pavlov’s dog.



  One  of  the  great  ironies  of  empiricism  is  that  it’s  one  of  the  most

unempirical theories of all time. People learn languages. Dogs don’t. A dog

wouldn’t even learn the rudiments of a language were it to experience the

sensory simulations that enable a human being to master one. This shows

that, unlike dogs, human beings are endowed with innate cognitive structures

that enable them to derive an integrated and complex body of knowledgefrom  such  stimulations.  The  same  point mutatis  mutandis holds  of  any

cognitive  skill  that  human  beings  can  acquire  that  animals  cannot.

Empiricism  is  therefore  inconsistent  with  empirical  evidence  of  the  most

blatant and widespread kind.



  In  any  case,  despite  the  vast  and  ever-growing  body  of  evidence  in

support of Chomsky’s anti-Quinean views, Quine stuck to his guns, and in

the 45 years that passed between the publication of Syntactic Structures and

his death, Quine didn’t soften his position. Not only did he not concede that

Chomsky was at all right; he didn’t even concede that mental entities even

exist, except to the (non-existent) extent to which they can be identified with

overt behaviors.[6]


  In any case, it’s clear that Quine’s rejection of analytic truth wasn’t the

effect,  but  was  instead  the  cause,  of  his  acceptance  of  the  bizarre  and

unwieldy  argument  of  his  that  we  considered  earlier.  Quine  obviously

produced  that  argument  ad  hoc,  hoping  to  give  his  idiosyncratic  form  of

empiricism a solid foundation. Quine’s real reason for denying the existence

of analytic truth lay in his staunch empiricism. All philosophers, and indeed

non-philosophers, who deny the existence of analytic truth do so because

they are staunch empiricists.



  Thus, when authors deny that there are necessary truths, the underlying

sentiment, if not the immediately operative rationale, is that (NT) Since it is

unscientific  to  believe  that  knowledge  has  any  basis  other  than  sensory

observation, it is unscientific to believe in necessary truth; for a necessary

truth  is  one  that  holds  in  any  possible  scenario,  it  is  one  with  which  all

observational data are equally compatible and, for that reason, is not to be

known on the basis of observation.  6.2 Why NT does not go through



  All knowledge of the spatiotemporal world is rooted in observation. But

there’s more to doing science than making observations. The observations are

only  a  means  to  an  end,  the  end  being  the  acquisition  of  theoretical

knowledge.  We’ll  now  see  that  non-observational  knowledge  is  a

precondition for theoretical knowledge and also that it is always necessary

truths that are known non-observationally.


  Our senses give us raw data. Raw data is the foundation of all empirical

knowledge. But data cannot interpret itself. And even if it could, it wouldn’t

relieve of you of the burden of having to interpret the data for yourself. For

argument’s sake, suppose that the data were self-interpreting, and that its self-

interpretations were disclosed to you in periodic reports. Any such report

would itself be given to you in terms of raw data that you’d have to analyze;

so you couldn’t even understand the report unless you already knew how to

interpret the data. Second, once you did understand the report, you’d have no

good reason to trust it unless you could find some independent corroboration

for it. Finding such corroboration would involve coming up with your own

interpretation of the data and seeing how well it matched the interpretation in

the report. So even if per impossible perceptual data could self-interpret, one

could learn nothing about the external world from those interpretations unless

one could interpret the data for oneself. It is, therefore, totally incoherent to

suppose  that  one  could  know  on  the  basis  of  observation  alone  how  to

interpret the data of observation; and since it’s totally incoherent to suppose

that one could have theoretical or, therefore, scientific knowledge without

interpreting  the  data,  it  is  totally  incoherent  to  suppose  that  any  science

should be strictly observation-based. There is necessarily a non-observational

component to the acquisition of scientific knowledge.    Interpreting  data  involves  being  able  to  discern  abstract  resemblances

between  different  concrete  situations.  Doing  this,  in  its  turn,  involves

knowing necessary truths. Seeing that two objects are alike in respect of (e.g.)

their shape involves seeing that they fulfill conditions that, if not fulfilled by

an object, necessarily preclude it from having the shape in question. Seeing

that otherwise dissimilar objects x and y are both square-shaped involves

knowing that, were an object to have more sides than x or y, it would for that

very reason fail to have the same shape as them, and it also involves knowing

that, if an object had a different color from x or y, it would not for that very

reason fail to have the same shape as them. One can’t know that x and y have

the  same  shape  unless  one  knows  that  an  object’s  having  four  sides

necessarily disqualifies it from being shape-identical with those objects. In

general,  one  cannot  discern any abstract  similarities  between any two

concrete  situations  unless  one  knows,  for  at  least  some  property,  what

conditions must be fulfilled if a given object is to have that property. So

knowledge of necessary truths is a precondition for being able to recognize

resemblances between things. Since knowledge of such resemblances is the

first, and the most rudimentary phase, of scientific endeavor, it is radically

incoherent to suppose that there should be any scientific knowledge without

knowledge of at least some necessary truths.



    W.V.O. Quine tried to provide a rigorous proof of NT. We considered

this proof in Sections 5.0–5.5 of the present paper and found it to be wanting.

But notice that the very idea of trying to prove that contention is a self-

defeating one. For there are no proofs if all truth is contingent, since proving

something is showing that it must be the case. (More accurately, to prove

conclusion C on the basis of premises P is to show it to be necessarily true

that if P, then C.) Thus, to prove NN to be true is to prove it to be false. So acertain incoherence is embedded in the very idea of trying to show that there

are no necessary statements.



7.0 Analytic truth vs. formal truth


    Formal truth isn’t analytic truth. We’ll discuss this in this section, and

we’ll  also  see  what  exactly  it  means  to  describe  a  truth  as  “formal.”  A

statement is analytically true if its negation is incoherent. “Squares have four

sides”  is  analytic.  Why?  Because  “squares  don’t  have  four  sides”  is

incoherent, and so is “anything that is literate is animate.” The reason being

that it makes no sense to suppose that squares might fail to have four sides or

that literate beings might fail to be animate.



  “Right now, in 2009, Barack Obama is the U.S. President” is a non-

analytic truth. This is because “Barack Obama is not President in 2009,”

though false, makes sense. If that sentence didn’t make sense, then in 2007 it

wouldn’t  have  been  reasonable  to  wonder  whether  Obama  would  be

President in 2009. But it was.


    Non-analytic truths are empirical truths. An empirical truth is one that

can be known only through sensory observation. It is only on the basis of

sense-perception that one can know that Barack Obama is currently the U.S.

President.  That  is  why  “Barack  Obama  is  currently  the  U.S.  President”

expresses  an  empirical  truth.  But  it  is  entirely  through  insight  into  its

meaning, and into its entailment-relations, that one knows that nothing could

be to be identical with itself; that being why that truth is analytic.



  In the Critique of Pure Reason, Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) infamously

claimed  that  there  are  non-analytic  (or,  as  he  referred  to  them, synthetic)truths that can be learned in a non-observational manner. He was wrong, as

we’ll see in Section 9.2.



7.1 Empirical vs. pseudo-empirical truth


  One  must  distinguish  genuine  empirical  knowledge  from  analytic

knowledge  the  acquisition  of  which  is triggered by empirical knowledge.

Consider the principle that:



        (DN[7]) if a statement is false, then the negation of its negation is

    false.


  For example, if Smith is in Richmond, then it is false that Smith is not in

Richmond. DN is one of the cornerstones of logic.



    Learning DN may involve hearing or reading, and therefore seeing, some

affirmation of it. But you don’t learn DN empirically—that is, it isn’t through

sensory observation that you learn it. But, if you know DN, it is because you

see  that,  given  its  meaning,  it  would  make  no  sense  to  deny  it.  Sense-

perceptions may well have been needed to initiate or trigger the reflections

on  the  basis  of  which  you  learned  DN.  But  such  sense-perceptions  were

themselves  no  part  of  that  discovery  process.  They  were  part  of  the pre-

discovery process—much as turning the ignition in a car is part of the pre-

journey, and not the journey proper.[8]


    Given a true statement S, there is a simple test for determining whether it

is empirical or analytic. If, in order to justify acceptance of S, you must cite

empirical data, it’s empirical. To justify your acceptance of the statement that

Smith has gained 20 pounds in the last year, you must cite empirical data(e.g., sense-perceptions that you have had of Smith or of affirmations on the

part of reliable sources as to Smith’s weight situation). But your acceptance

of DN can be justified only by insight into its meaning; it cannot possibly be

justified  on  observational  grounds.  Of  course,  one  might  justify  one’s

acceptant of DN by citing the fact that one has heard some authority affirm it;

and, of course, one’s knowledge of that fact is observation-based. But those

observations  justify  DN only to  the  extent  that  the  authority  figures  in

question understand why, for reasons that lie entirely in DN’s content and

having nothing to with anything one perceives, that statement must be true.

Testimony-based knowledge of analytic truths, if it exists, is parasitic on non-

observational knowledge of them.



  And  it’s  doubtful  whether  such  knowledge  really  exists.  If  I  don’t

understand why DN is true, and I accept it only because somebody I trust

does so, then I don’t really know it. What I accept is not, it seems to me, quite

what the authority figure in question accepts. That person really accepts DN.

But what I accept isn’t DN, and is instead some statement along the lines of:

“since  so  and  so  is  authoritative,  and  since  so  and  so  affirmed  DN,  that

statement is probably right”—which, unlike DN itself, is empirical.


    Sense-perception adds to one’s knowledge in two different ways. In some

cases, it does so by transmitting information about the external world. If I see

Jim  playing  soccer,  my  visual  perception  adds  to  my  knowledge  by

transmitting to me the correct message that Jim is playing soccer. In other

cases, sense-perception merely activates some purely ratiocinative process.

The ratiocination-activating role of sense-perceptions must be distinguished

from  its  information-transmitting  role.  Empiricism,  the  doctrine  that  all

knowledge is derived from the senses, is based on a failure to make this

distinction,  for  reasons  that  are  put  forth  in  my  book Empiricism and itsLimits.



7.2 Analytic knowledge vs. linguistic knowledge


  It’s an empirical fact that the sentence “squares have four sides” means

what  it  does.  Those  sounds  could  mean  anything.  They  could  mean  that

squares  don’t  have  four  sides  or  that  everybody  owns  a  Rolls  Royce.  A

brilliant extraterrestrial could reasonably wonder what that sentence means.

But such a being could not reasonably wonder whether squares have four

sides. Thus, it’s an empirical truth that the sentence “squares have four sides”

is to the effect that squares have four sides. But it’s an analytic, non-empirical

fact that squares have four sides.



7.3 Analyticity vs. triviality


  The concept of analytic truth is typically illustrated in connection with

trivial statements (e.g., “any given thing is identical with itself”). But there

are non-trivial analytic  truths.  Some  examples:  (a) Given  only  that  an

institution is flourishing, it cannot be inferred that the individuals composing

it are flourishing; and given that the individuals composing an institution are

flourishing, it cannot be inferred that the institution itself is flourishing. (b)

No finite set can be put into a one-one correspondence with a proper subset

of itself. (c) Any infinite set can be put into a one-one correspondence with a

proper subset of itself. (d) Anything sentient is, at any given point, unaware

of at least some of its mental states. (e) Two objects that cannot enter into

causal relations with each other cannot have spatial or temporal positions

relative to each other. (g) There are continuous functions that are nowhere

differentiable.7.4 No synthetic non-empirical truths: an outline of an argument



  In the Critique of Pure Reason Kant claimed that there are non-analytic

(or,  as  he  called  them, synthetic)  truths  that  can  be  learned  in  a non-

 
observational manner.[9]He was wrong. To say why, we must first define

some terms.


  The negation of a statement P is not-P. (The negation of snow is white is

snow is not white.) A statement is coherent if what it says isn’t ruled out

solely by considerations of how things must be. An analytic statement is one

whose negation is incoherent. (It’s analytic that triangles have three sides,

since a triangle’s having four sides can be ruled out entirely on the basis of

consideration of how things must be.)



  Now for the argument. A statement may be non-analytic either because

its  negation  is  analytically  true  (triangles  don’t  have  four  sides is  non-

analytic for this reason) or because both it and its negation are coherent (JMK

is in Richmond is non-analytic for this reason). A statement that satisfies the

second condition cannot be known to be false (or true) merely on the basis of

how things must be, and can known to be false (or true) only on the basis of

how  things  are.  How  things  are  can  be  known  only  through  observation.

Anything  so  known  is  ipso  facto  empirical.  So  any  non-analytic  truth  is

empirical.


7.5 Formal truth



  The  concept  of formal  truth has  an  important  place  in  philosophical

inquiry. It is sometimes propositions that are described as “formally true.”

But this is quite rare, and it’s almost always expressions that are so described.To the extent that formal truth is a property of expressions, it must be a

property  of  sentence-tokens, not  of  sentence-types,  since  the  latter,  for

reasons explained in Language, by the present author, are never true or false.

And  in  the  pages  to  come,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that,  so  far  as  any

expressions are formally true, it is sentence-tokens, not sentence-types.



       Here are some examples of sentences[10] that would universally be

agreed to be “formally true”: (1) If Bill is tall, then it is not the case that Bill

is not tall. (2) If everything has a given property, then any given thing has

that property. (3) If all F’s are G’s, and no G’s are H’s, then no F’s are H’s.

(4) Either Helsinki is in Finland or Helsinki is not in Finland. (5) “If Smith is

at home, then it’s not the case that Smith is not at home” (6) If x is at home,

then it’s not the case that x is not at home. (7) If Smith is phi, then it’s not the

case that Smith is not phi. (8)              If x is phi, then it’s not the case that x

is not phi. (9)              If P, then it’s not the case that not-P. (10) If it’s

necessarily  the  case  that  Smith  is  a  mammal  if  Smith  is  a  dog,  then  it’s

necessarily the case that Smith is a mammal if it’s necessarily the case that

Smith is a dog


          What  is  “formal  truth”?  What  does  it  mean  to  describe  (1),  for

example, as “formally true”? Here’s the canonical answer (“FT” stands for

“formal truth,” of course):



        (FT) Formal truth is syntactic truth. A sentence is “syntactically

    true” if, given only its syntactic structure, it cannot fail to be true.

    Thus, a sentence is formally true if no sentence having the same

    syntactic structure is false.


  FT cannot be accepted. A linguist would say that (1) “grass is green orgrass is not green” has the same syntax as (2) “grass is green and grass is not

green.” As linguists use the word “syntax,” two expressions have the same

syntax if the way in which the one is built out of its parts is identical with the

way in which the other is built out of its parts. For example, “Bill hates Ted”

and “Laura loves Sally,” though having very different meanings, have the

same syntax, the reason being that they’re structurally identical. The one is

built out of its simple constituents in the very way that the other is built out of

its constituents. Thus, it isn’t because of any structural differences between

them that they have different meanings.



  The relevant difference is substructural. It lies in the fact that the meaning

of “and” is different from that of “or.” So the difference between (1) and (2)

is  like  the  difference  between  “John  is  tall”  and  “Mary  is  short”:  it  lies

entirely in the fact that the primitive, semantically unstructured constituents

of the one have different meanings from their counterparts in the other. Thus,

relative to what linguists mean by “syntax” (and “syntactic,” etc.), it’s a non-

starter to say that “formal truth” is syntactic truth. Logicians and philosophers

obviously  have  in  mind  some  very  different  understanding  of  the  word

“syntax” when they identify “formal” truth with “syntactic” truth. They don’t

have in mind sentential (or phrasal) structure. What do they have in mind?

What do philosophers mean when they say that a formally true sentence is

one that holds entirely in virtue of its “syntax”? What do they mean when

they describe some statement as a “formal truth”?


7.5.1 Quine on formal truth



    W.V.O.  Quine  (1908–2000)  gave  a  characteristically  intelligent  and

straightforward answer to this important question: a sentence S is formally

true if, given any expression in S that isn’t a logical constant, it isn’t possibleto  produce  a  false  sentence  by  replacing  that  expression  with  another

expression of the appropriate grammatical category. A “logical constant” is

an expression on the following list: “if . . . then . . . ,” “either . . . or . . . ,”

“not,” “for all,” “for some,” “=”—and any obvious derivatives of any of these

expressions (e.g., “is identical with,” “given any,” “it is not the case that,”

etc.)[11]



    Consider the sentence “grass is green or grass is not green.” Replacing

“grass” with “fire” or “Bob” results in a truth, as does replacing “green” with

“cool” or “voluminous.” (It’s assumed that the replacements are uniformly

made: if a single occurrence of “grass” is replaced with “fire,” so is every

other such occurrence.) Given any expression in (1) other than the logical

constants in it (viz. “either . . . or . . .” and “not”), replacing that expression

with another belonging to the same grammatical category results in truth.


    There are two problems with Quine’s analysis. First, it doesn’t say what

is so special about those items; it doesn’t say what these so-called “logical

constants” have in common with one another that other expressions not on

the  list don’t have  in  common  with  them.  And  until  that  information  is

provided, there’s nothing to prevent one from extending that list in arbitrary

ways. Unless that list was generated by some rule, anything can be added to it

without diminishing its integrity, since it has no integrity to begin with. But if

it was generated by some rule, then Quine’s answer fails to identify it and

thus fails to say what formal truth is.



  An analogy may help. When asked to define the expression “number,” I

simply list the  various  different  kinds  of  numbers  (“real,”  “whole,”

“rational,”  “imaginary,”  etc.).  Have  I  answered  the  question?  No.  Even

though I’ve listed the various different kinds of numbers, I haven’t said whatnumbers are, and I thus haven’t provided any reason why fractions are on

that list but birds are not. Accordingly, my answer doesn’t give anyone a

reason not to extend that list as he or she pleases—not to decide that birds

and rocks are numbers. Of course, nobody would extend the list in such an

absurd way. But that’s only because our intuitions strongly suggest that there

is some characteristic had in common by reals, rationals, etc., that birds and

rocks don’t have.



    Second, there are truths not covered by Quine’s analysis that don’t appear

to differ in any relevant respect from those covered by that analysis. Many

modal statements are in this category—for example, “if it’s necessarily the

case that Smith is a mammal if Smith is a dog, then if it’s necessarily the case

that Smith is a mammal if it’s necessarily the case that Smith is a dog.” There

doesn’t seem to be any relevant difference between that statement and one

that conforms to Quine’s analysis—for example, “if Smith is a mammal if

Smith is a dog, and Smith is an animal if Smith is mammal, then Smith is an

animal if Smith is a dog.” So there doesn’t seem to be any good reason why

“necessarily,” unlike “if . . . then . . . ,” doesn’t make it onto Quine’s list.


  Of course, one could deal with this by adding “necessarily” to that list.

But  then  we’d  have  to  ask:  “what  makes that extension  of  the  list

legitimate?,” bringing us back to the criticism made a moment ago.



7.5.2 Why formal truth ≠ topic-neutral truth


    Some  have  argued  that  formal  truth  is  maximally  generic,  or  “topic-

neutral,”  truth.  The  idea  is  that  “x  =  x”  is  logically  true  because  it’s

completely  general:  it  doesn’t  belong  to  any  one  discipline  and  is

presupposed by all of them.[12]  But  this  doesn’t  work.  There  are  maximally  generic  truths  that  aren’t

formal—for  example,  “nothing  can  wholly  pre-exist  itself,”  “nothing

spatiotemporal can lack causal properties,” “nothing non-spatiotemporal can

have causal properties,” “inductive inference isn’t an appropriate method of

reasoning for non-empirical disciplines.” Given any one of these sentences,

it’s easy to show that there are false sentences having the same syntactic

form. For example, the first of those sentences has the same form as “nothing

spatiotemporal can have causal properties,” which is obviously false.



  One could argue that these truths aren’t sufficiently generic. But then it

would  be  very  unclear  what  exactly  “sufficiently  generic”  meant  in  this

context, and the suspicion would arise that, so far as it had any coherent

meaning,  “sufficiently  generic”  meant  “not  a  counterexample  to  this

particular theory of formal truth.”


  Also, whether a sentence expresses a generic truth has nothing to do with

its form. The truth expressed by “if everything has a given property, then any

given thing has that property” is surely a maximally generic one. But that

truth could obviously be expressed by a primitive, syntactically unstructured

symbol. In fact, there is no form that sentences must have if they are to

express  that  truth  or  any  other.  So,  if  “formal  truth”  is  taken  to  be  a

characteristic of expressions of some kind, then it’s simply false to identify

“formal truth” with “maximally generic” truth. And if “formal truth” isn’t

meant in this way, then it’s simply irrelevant to our current inquiry.



7.5.3 An alternative analysis of formal truth


  A sentence is formally true if it is an instance of an open-sentence that is

true for all values of its free variables. (An “open-sentence” is an expressionthat contains a free variable, and is therefore neither true nor false, but is

otherwise  just  like  a  sentence.  So  “x  is  tall”  is  an  open-sentence.)  For

example (5) is a formal truth because it’s an instance of the open-sentence “if

x is phi, then it’s not the case that x is not phi,” which is true for all values of

x. (We’ll see that (5) is an instance of many such open-sentences. But its

being an instance of just one is enough for its being formally true.) Given any

formal truth, the same holds.



  If an open-sentence is true for all values of its variables, we’ll say that it’s

“universally true.” So “x = x” is universally true (that being why “Smith =

Smith”  is  “formally”  true).  It  must  be  kept  in  mind  that  this  is  just  an

abbreviation. “x = x” is neither true nor false. No open sentence is true or

false.


  (1) is a true sentence. (2)–(4) are neither true nor false. Given (1), (2) is

what results when “Bill Gates” is replaced with a variable, (3) is what results

when “wealthy” is replaced with a variable, and (4) is what results when both

are replaced with variables. Of course, actual sentences are formed out of

these open-sentences by replacing the variables in (6)–(9) with constants. In

each case, this procedure may yield either a true sentence or a false one. For

example, replacing the variable in (2) with “Bill Gates” yields a truth and

replacing it with “Mike Smith,” the name of an impecunious friend of mine,

yields a falsehood.



  Each of (6)–(9) is formed by replacing one or more expressions in (5)

with a variable. And the following sentences result when, in each case, the

variables are bound by universal quantifiers: (6UG) For any individual x, if x

is  at  home,  then  it’s  not  the  case  that  x  is  not  at  home.  (7UG) For any

property phi, if Smith is phi, then it’s not the case that Smith is not phi. (8UG)For any individual x and any property phi, if x is phi, then it’s not the case

that x is not phi. (9UG) For any proposition P, if P, then it’s not the case that

not-P.



      Thus, a sentence is formally true if it’s an instance of a universally

true open-sentence. Thus, (10) is formally true, because it’s an instance of the

following  open-sentences,  each  of  which  is  true  for  all  values  of  its  free

variables: (11) If it’s necessarily the case that x is a mammal if x is a dog,

then it’s necessarily the case that x is a mammal if it’s necessarily the case

that x is a dog. (12) If it’s necessarily the case that Smith is a mammal if P,

then it’s necessarily the case that Smith is a mammal if it’s necessarily the

case that P. (13) If it’s necessarily the case that Q if P, then it’s necessarily

the case that Q if it’s necessarily the case that P.


7.5.4 What is a logical constant?



    Quine’s  analysis,  we  noted,  is  vitiated  by  his  failing  to  say  what

conditions an expression must satisfy to be a “logical constant.” We are in

position to provide this information. The expressions “not” and “if . . . then . .

.” are on Quine’s list of logical constants, and those expressions occur in (5).


     Before we proceed, we have to make a couple of points about the

word “not.” That word what is known as a “sentence-level operator”: it’s an

expression  that  forms  sentences  out  of  sentences—it  forms  “snow  is  not

white” out of “snow is white.” It isn’t often that sentence-level operators are

replaced with variables. But not only can such replacements be made; they

must  be  made.  Otherwise,  it  would  be  impossible  to  express  any

generalization  about  sentence-level  connectives.  (Logicians  and  linguists

often make statements about whole classes of sentence-level connectives, andsuch statements involve replacements of this kind, since they have the form:

“given any sentence level connective X . . .”)



    In fact, we’re about to state just such a principle right now. Given (5),

if we replace “not” with a variable, the result is: (5X) “If Smith is at home,

then it’s X the case that Smith is X at home.”If we bind the free variable with

a universal quantifier of the appropriate kind, the result is: (5XUG) “Given

any sentence-level operator X, if Smith is at home, then it’s X the case that

Smith is X at home," which is false, the reason being that some sentence-level

operators lack the relevant property. An example of such an operator is the

word “necessarily.” When this word replaces the variable in (5X), the result

is: (5XN) “If Smith is at home, then it’s necessarily the case that Smith is

necessarily at home,” which is false.


    Another expression on Quine’s list that occurs in (5) is “if . . . then . . .”

This expression, like “not,” is a sentence-level operator. But whereas “not” is

a one-placed sentence-connective, “if . . . then . . .” is a two-place sentence

connective. So, whereas “not” assigns sentences to single sentences, “if . . .

then . . .” assigns sentences to ordered pairs of sentences. Given the ordered

pair  <Toby  is  a  dog,  Toby  is  a  mammal>,  “if  .  .  .  then  .  .  .”  yields  the

sentence: “if Toby is a dog, then Toby is a mammal.”



    Everything  just  said  about  “not”  is  true  of  it.  If  it’s  replaced  with  a

variable, which is then bound by a universal quantifier of the appropriate

kind, the result is: (5IT) For any two-place sentence-connective X <Smith is

at home, it’s not the case that Smith is not at home>, which is false. Let C be

a  two-place  sentence-level  operator  defined  as  follows:  Given  two

propositions  (or  sentences)  P  and  Q,  C(P,Q)  is  true  exactly  if  P  is

incompatible with Q. In that case: (5C) C<Smith is at home, it’s not the casethat Smith is not at home>, which is false.



  What we just said about “not” and “if . . . then . . .” is true of all the other

items  on  Quine’s  list  of  “logical  constants.”  And  it’s  true  of  many  other

expressions  that  Quine  did  not  personally  include  on  that  list  but  that,

according to many, nonetheless belong on it. (For example, some hold that

“necessarily” and “possibly” belong on that list.) This suggests that, when

Quine  judged  an  expression  to  be  a  “logical  constant,”  he  did  so  on  the

(cogent)  grounds  that  replacing  occurrences  of  it  with  variables

systematically failed to yield universally true open-sentences.


  This suggests that the following definition of “logical constant” might be

the right one (we’ll soon see that it’s only approximately right): (LC) An

expression E to be a “logical constant” is for there to be some universally-

true open sentence that contains E, which is false. given that (#) ‹If P and Q

and grass is green, then grass is green› is universally true, along with the fact

that "grass is green" isn't a logical constant. But apart from “P,” “Q,” and

“R,” all the expressions occurring in: (##) ‹If P and Q and R, then R› are

logical constants. (##) is universally true, and it contains no expressions that,

when replaced with free-variables, result in some other open sentence that is

universally  true.  If  a  universally  true  open  sentence  contains  no  such

variables, let us say that it is “pure.” This shows that a “logical constant” is

any expression other than a variable that occurs in a pure, universally true

open-sentence.



7.6 analytic truth not the same thing as formal truth


            The  two  main  contentions  of  Wittgenstein’s Tractatus  Logico-

philosophicus (TLP)  are  (i)  that  all  non-empirical  truths  are  tautologous(definitional truths; e.g., “a fortnight is a period of two weeks”) and (ii) that

all non-tautologous truths are observation-reports.



  (i)  is  false,  given  that  many  arithmetical  truths,  e.g.  "243+707=950",

follow from  terminological  conventions,  and  nothing  that follows from  a

convention,  or  from  anything  else,  is  itself  a  convention:  conventions  are

arbitrary  and  therefore  do  not  follow  from  anything.  (ii)  is  false,  given

observation apprises us of what is, not of what must be, and it therefore

doesn't apprise us of logical norms or consequently of relations of logical

dependence. Another reason why (ii) is false is that sense-perception makes

us  aware  of  objects,  not  of  truths,  and  knowledge  is  truth-awareness,  not

object-awareness. My awareness of the uncomfortable tightness of my shoes

is one thing; my knowledge of the truth that my shoes are too tight is a

conceptualization of that awareness.


    Given the points just made, we are in a position to put forth another

reason to reject (i) and, therewith, to reject a third contention of the TLP, viz.

that  all  formal  truth  is  analytic  truth  and,  therefore,  that  all  entailment  is

formal entailment. Both claims are false. The open sentence ‹If P and Q and

R, then R› is true for all values of its variables. This means that (A) For any

propositions P, Q, and R, if P and Q and R, then R. But, (A) is not itself a

formal truth. (A) is true, of course.



  But it is not in virtue of its being an instance of a universally true open-

sentence that it’s true. For it isn’t an instance of such a sentence. Any open-

sentence of which (A) is an instance is one of which: (B) For no propositions

P, Q, and R, if P and Q and R, then R, which is obviously false. Since (B) is

an instance of any open-sentence of which (+) is an instance, the latter is not

formally true.  It is in virtue not only of its form, but also of what is meant by “for any

propositions P, Q, and Q” that (A) is true. (A) and (B) have the same form.

What  distinguishes  them  is  that,  in  the  place  where  (B)  contains  an

occurrence  of  one  expression  (“for no propositions  P,  Q,  and  R”),  (A)

contains an expression with a different meaning (“for any propositions P, Q,

and R”).



  So  the  fact  that  A  is,  whereas  B  is  not,  analytic  cannot  possibly  be

chalked up to the fact that one is, whereas the other is not, formally true.

Thus, not all analytic truth is formal truth.


 
  In the Tractatus, Wittgenstein[13]says that all analytic truth is formal

truth. Wittgenstein is wrong, for the reasons just given.



  Also, even if there were some formally true sentence S such that S was

equivalent with (A), the statement (C) ‹S is equivalent with A› would not

itself be a formal truth. To be a formal truth is to be a consequence of an

informally true universal generalization. The statement that: (%) If grass is

green and snow is white and roses are red, then roses are red is a formal

truth because it is a consequence of (A). Thus, Wittgenstein’s thesis that all

analytic truth is formal truth is not only wrong but incoherent.


7.7 Conceptual analyses never expressed by formal truths



  A conceptual analysis is a non-empirical, non-trivial sentence of the form

‹C  is  fulfilled  if  and  only  if  C›,  where  C  and  C  are  conditions.  (The
  1212

sentence  “condition  C  is  fulfilled”  is  synonymous  with  “property  P  isn’t

instantiated.”) Thus, (CK) x is a circle if and only if x is a closed planarfigure of uniform curvature is a conceptual analysis, as is (CK*) x is a closed

planar figure of uniform curvature iff  for some plane P and some point D on

P, x is the area bounded by every point on P that is a fixed distance from D.



      Neither CK nor CK* is a formal truth. No conceptual analysis is

formally true. Conceptual analyses are expressed by analytic statements, and

analytic  statements  either:  (i)  coincide  with  informal,  analytic  universal

generalizations  or  (ii)  are  instances  of  such  generalizations.  If  (i),  they’re

obviously not formally true. But any statement that is an instance of some

informal,  analytic  universal  generalization  is  trivial,  and  is  therefore  not

analytic. For example, % is a consequence of (A), and % is clearly trivial.  [1].               “DN” is short for “degrees of necessity.”

  [2].               Obviously the sentences used to express it aren’t necessarily

  true. It’s the content of those sentences that cannot fail to be true. The

  linguistic vehicles can easily fail to be true; even in our universe, they’re

  only regionally true.

  [3].               “HIP” is short for “Hesperus identical with Phosphorous.”

  [4].               This is only approximately correct. See Appendix 1, Section

  4.5.

  [5].               The argument about to be given is found in Bonjour (1998)

  and also in Dummett (1973).

  [6].               This is a shame. Quine was a brilliant man. He had a lot to

  say, and he would have had a lot more to say if he had been a bit more

  willing to reconsider some of his views. Sadly, it’s a rare scholar who is

  willing to admit that he’s wrong.

  [7].               “DN” stands for “double negation.”

  [8].               See Jerry Fodor’s superb paper, “The present status of

  innateness controversy,” in Fodor (1981b).

  [9].               Kant (1787).

  [10] In my book Language, it is shown that sentence-tokens are the only

expressions that are true or false—that sentence-types are neither, since their

meanings  are  rules  that  assign  truths  and  falsehoods  to  their  tokens,  and

aren’t truths or falsehoods per se. But to avoid verbosity, we’ll often speak as

though sentence-types per se can be formally true. So we’ll say, for example,

“(1) is formally true,” and we’ll discuss the conditions that “sentences” must

satisfy to be formally true. But it’s crucial to bear in mind that this is only an

expedient way of talking about sentence-tokens—of saying that tokens of (1)

are formally true, etc.

  [11].               Quine (1970).

  [12].               Frege (1956).

  [13].               Wittgenstein (1922).