                      Panic Attacks Have an Objective Basis

                                  J.-M. Kuczynski

 

When I was in grad school, I was buddies with a fellow graduate student of

mine, to whom I will refer as ‘Mac.’ Whenever Mac had to write a paper, he

would have a panic attack and have to go to the hospital. Whenever Mac had

to give a presentation, he would have a panic attack and have to go to the

hospital.

Mac would claim that his inability to do his work was a consequence of his

panic attacks. But it was the other way around. His panic attack attacks were

a consequence of his inability to do the work.

Mac was a complete moron. I read some of the papers that he did manage to

produce, and they were not even papers; they were below the level of an
          th
average 5 grader.

Mac was living a lie, and that is why he had panic attacks. He was living a

lie, and was therefore in a situation that was objectively threatening to him.

So he panicked.

There is a nuance here. Although Mac’s panic attacks were justified by his

circumstances, they were still neurotic in nature. Why is that? Because of the

element of self-deception involved. Had Mac dealt with the situation non-

neurotically, he would simply have told himself, as so many people in similar

situations do, ‘this is not what I am cut out for.’ Had he done that, he

wouldn’t have had panic attacks; he would have just left. In fact, if he had

done that, and he had just stayed for some reason, perhaps because he was

being paid to do so, he still wouldn’t have had panic attacks: he would have

consciously disliked the situation, but he wouldn’t have had panic attacks.

The panic attacks were the result of a confluence of two factors: first, that he

was seriously in over his head; second, that he could not admit that fact to

himself without his self-concept being shattered.

The adaptive response for Mac would have been to change his self-concept

and duly change his life-course. The non-adaptive response was to live the

lie; and that fact, coupled with the fact that the lie had landed him in a

situation that he couldn’t handle, led to panic attacks.People have panic attacks when they are in a situation in which they are

actually threatened but where they cannot admit as much without having to

forfeit an inflated self-concept.

 