Semantics

Philosophy Shorts
Volume 8

J.-M. Kuczynski

 
                                      Semantics


                      John-Michael Kuczynski, PhD

1.0 The meaning of “meaning”

Meaning #1: The evidential meaning of “meaning”

Meaning #2: The psychological meaning of “meaning”

Meaning #3: The linguistic meaning of “meaning”

1.2 Why Meaning #3 ≠ Meaning #2

1.3 Why Meaning #3 ≠ Meaning #1

2.0 Sentences as proposition-isomorphs

2.1 Propositions as digital structures

3.0 The three branches of the philosophy of language: syntax, semantics, and

pragmatics

3.1. Semantics

3.2 Pragmatics

3.3 Syntax

4.0 The need for the discipline of semantics

4.1 Semantics needed to figure out what is literally meant and what is not

4.2 Semantics needed to figure out what is literally meant and what is not

(continued)

5.0 The Nature of Semantic rules

5.1. An important subtlety

5.2 How meaning is assigned to hitherto meaningless and, therefore non-

linguistic, entities

5.3 What are semantic rules?

5.3.1 Why semantic rules are not functions5.3.2 The Gricean approach

5.3.3 More problems with the Gricean approach

5.3.4 How some Griceans deal with the problem just described

5.3.5 Why Grice’s theory is inconsistent with the normative nature of

semantic rules

5.4 The psychological reality of semantic rules

6.0 What is literal meaning?

7.0 Tokens vs. types: some preliminary terminological points

7.1 Two-dimensional semantics

7.1.1 Demonstratives vs. indexicals

7.1.2 Indexicals (continued)

7.2 Definite descriptions

7.2.1 Incomplete definite descriptions

7.3 The expressive limitations of indexical-free languages

7.4 Tokens, types, and context-sensitivity

7.5 Ambiguity and context-sensitivity (revisited) and the typetoken

distinction (revisited)

7.6 Do any expressions have one-dimensional semantics?

7.7 Ambiguity and context-sensitivity (re-revisited) and the type-token

distinction (re-revisited)

8.1 Contextual definition

8.2 Contextual definition: its scope and limits

8.3 Frege’s generalization of the concept of a function

  1.0 The meaning of “meaning”

          There would be no languages if there were no expressions (words,

phrases, sentences, etc.). Nothing meaningless is an expression. For this

reason, the concept of an expression must be understood in terms of theconcept of meaning, the same therefore being true of the concept of language.

  But it isn’t much use to be told that words and sentences “have

meanings,” since the word “meaning” has three different meanings, and only

one of these directly relates to the nature of language.

    Meaning #1: The evidential meaning of “meaning”

       In some cases, to say that x “means” y is to say that x is evidence of y

—that x and y are causally interrelated in such a way that, given x, it can

reasonably be inferred that y. “Smith’s hacking cough means that he has a

violent lung infection” means “Smith’s hacking cough is evidence that he has

a violent lung infection.” And the latter means that coughs like Smith’s are

causally connected to violent lung infections in such a way that it may

reasonably be inferred that Smith has a violent lung infection.

  Smith’s violent lung infection is a cause of Smith’s hacking cough. But

for x to be evidence to of y, it is neither necessary nor sufficient that y cause

x.

  Why isn’t it necessary? First of all, causes can be evidence of their own

effects. (Bill’s current drunkenness is evidence of a poor performance on his

upcoming economics exam.) Second, if some event or state of affairs z is a

cause of both x and y, then x can be evidence of y without being a cause or an

effect of y. (Suppose that Bill is slurring his words. This is evidence that he’ll

do poorly on the upcoming test. But his slurring his words is neither a cause,

nor an effect, of his substandard test-performance. His drunkenness is a cause

of (a) his slurred speech and (b) his imminent, substandard test-performance.

And it’s because his slurred speech has a causal ancestor in common with his

poor test-performance that the former is evidence of the latter.)

  Why isn’t it sufficient? Given only that the cause of Bill’s failing was that

he was drunk, we can’t infer from the fact that he failed that he was drunk.

There are many reasons why a person may fail a test. Supposing that y caused

x to occur, x is evidence of y only if it can’t reasonably be supposed that

anything other than y was the cause. (Only a violent lung infection could be

responsible for Smith’s hacking cough, that being why the latter is evidence

of the former.)

    Meaning #2: The psychological meaning of “meaning”

          When we use sentences, we mean things by them. Meaning in this

sense is a psychological notion. You tell me that Sally is the most wonderful,decent person you’ve ever known. I respond by saying “things aren’t always

as they seem.” What I mean is that Sally is devious. In other words, my

intention in making this statement is to say that Sally is devious. Given that

intentions are psychological entities, meaning in this sense is obviously a

psychological notion.

    Meaning #3: The linguistic meaning of “meaning”

       The sentence “snow is white” says something about something; it

attributes the property of being white to snow. Therefore, it means that snow

is white. This kind of meaning is in a class by itself; it isn’t identical with

either of the two kinds mentioned so far; and there isn’t any obvious way to

understand it in terms of them. Let us now say why.

  Meaning in the psychological sense involves, but does not coincide with,

meaning in the linguistic sense. Once again suppose that, in response to your

telling me that Sally is a wonderful person, I say “things aren’t always as they

seem.” My meaning—what I’m trying to get across—is that Sally is devious.

But in my attempt to get this across, I’m taking advantage of the fact that

“things aren’t always as they seem” has an existing (linguistic) meaning. My

meaning that Sally is devious is parasitic on my utterance’s meaning that

things aren’t always as they seem. Meaning in the psychological sense is

therefore parasitic on meaning in the linguistic sense.

  1.2 Why Meaning #3 ≠ Meaning #2

  Some philosophers and linguists have held that for:

  (1) “Snow is white”

to mean that snow is white is for it to be the case that, in uttering “snow is

white,” what people mean is that snow is white. This view, duly generalized,

is that for a sentence S to have meaning M is for it to be the case that, in

                                  [1]
uttering S, people to mean M.

  This position is false. There are many sentences that have determinate

meanings even though they’ve never been uttered before and, therefore, no

one as of yet has ever meant anything by them. The sentence:

  (2) “The cube root of three is Sir Lawrence Olivier’s favorite irrational

number between one and four”

has a determinate meaning, even though that sentence never probably has

been uttered. Thus, meaning in the linguistic sense is not in all cases identicalwith meaning in the psychological sense.

     But a stronger point is warranted. Let’s say that P and P are the
                                                                  12

propositions meant by (1) and (2), respectively. In saying that (1) means P
                                                                                      1

and that (2) means P, we are not using the word “means” equivocally. Both
                      2

occurrences of “means” in the last sentence denote the same relationship.

Thus, the relationship that (1) bears to its meaning is the same as the

relationship that (2) bears to its meaning. Given that, as we saw, (2)’s having

P for its meaning isn’t identical with P’s being what people mean in
22

uttering (2), it follows that (1)’s having P for its meaning isn’t identical with
                                                1

P’s being what people mean in uttering (1). Of course, what we just said
1

about (1) and (2) can be said of any other sentence. So even if what people

mean in uttering a given sentence happens to coincide with its literal

meaning, what it is for sentence S to have proposition P for its literal meaning

isn’t for people to mean P in uttering S.

    Psychological meaning presupposes linguistic meaning. What a person

means when uttering a given sentence is a function of, among other things,

his beliefs as to what that sentence already means. You must believe that

“snow is white” means snow is white if, intending to speak sincerely and

literally, you say “snow is white” with the intention of getting it across that

snow is white. If you think that “snow is white” means grass is green, you

cannot, if your intention is to speak sincerely and literally, believe that “snow

is white” means snow is white.

  Of course, you could know full well what “snow is white” in fact means,

but use that sentence to get across something that has nothing to do with the

color of snow. Knowing what “snow is white” actually means, you might

utter that sentence with the intention of getting it across that the government

is controlling our thoughts with alpha waves. And, depending on the

circumstances, that could be precisely what an utterance of that sentence

would convey.

  But whatever the message is that, in uttering a certain sentence, you wish

to convey, you must believe that message to have some kind of relationship

to the one meant by that sentence itself. Furthermore, if you are to succeed in

saying what it is you wish to say, what you believe to be meant by the

sentence you are using must be right. If, intending to speak sincerely andliterally, you say “snow is white,” thinking that it means bananas are yellow,

you will fail to say what you wanted to say.

  Thus, setting aside defective utterances, one cannot, in uttering a given

sentence, mean anything by it unless one knows what it already means. So

meaning in the psychological sense is parasitic on meaning in the linguistic

sense, and the two kinds of meaning are therefore entirely distinct.

  1.3 Why Meaning #3 ≠ Meaning #1

     The sense in which “snow is white” means that snow is white isn’t

comparable to the sense in which smoke means fire. The fact that smoke

means fire has nothing to do with conventions on the part of human beings.

[2]
 But the fact that “snow is white” means what it does is, at least in part, a

matter of convention. It’s a matter of convention that “snow” doesn’t refer to

grass and, therefore, that “snow is white” doesn’t mean that grass is white;

it’s a matter of convention that “white” doesn’t mean green and, therefore,

that “snow is white” doesn’t mean that snow is green.

    Although the whiteness of snow sometimes causes people to say “snow is

white,” it doesn’t do so in the way that fire causes there to be smoke. Fire

happens; smoke happens as a result. The presence of smoke doesn’t embody

any judgment about anything. But, when caused by the whiteness of snow,

utterances of “snow is white” do embody judgments of various kinds. People

see or otherwise come to believe that snow is white; and, since they know the

relevant linguistic rules, they know that, were they to say, “snow is white,”

they judge that they’d be making a correct statement. Thus, utterances of

“snow is white” embody judgments about the color of snow and about how,

linguistic conventions being what they are, one can report the color of snow.

Also, people don’t say everything that occurs to them. Before deciding to

utter a given sentence, people typically make context-based judgments about

the appropriateness of uttering that sentence. So various judgments—about

snow, about language, and about human psychology—are involved in the

causal connection between the whiteness of snow and a given gerson’s saying

“snow is white.” There is thus a normative dimension to language use that is

absent where purely natural, non-conventional cause-effect relations are

concerned.

  2.0 Sentences as proposition-isomorphs

      The meaning of a true or false sentence is a proposition. Propositionsare not themselves sentences. That is why different sentences (e.g., “schnee

ist weiss” and “snow is white”) can express the same proposition.

  Propositions, when true, are truths. Thus, propositions have existed as

long as there have been truths; which means that they’ve existed as long as

there has been anything and, consequently, that propositions are not creations

of human creations.

  Though distinct from the sentences that express them, propositions are

structurally similar to them. Two otherwise dissimilar sentences can share the

word “John.” “John loves Mary” and “Sally punched John” are two such

sentences. The meanings of those sentences obviously have something in

common corresponding to the fact that they share the word “John.” Since

they share no other constituents, the thing meant by “John” must be capable

of moving on its own from sentence-meaning to sentence-meaning. This

would not be the case if the thing meant by “John” in the proposition meant

by “John loves Mary” were incapable of being disengaged from the things

meant by “loves” and “Mary.” It follows that propositions consist of discrete

parts; it also follows that those discrete parts correspond to discrete parts of

the sentences that express them. Taken together, these two points entail that

sentences are structurally like the propositions they express.

  2.1 Propositions as digital structures

        Given that propositions consist of discrete, isolable entities, it

follows that, like sentences and unlike visual perceptions and photographs,

propositions are digital structures. The sentence “Sally punched Bob” has a

unique decomposition into a certain “minimal units of significance,” or

“morphemes,” these being “Sally,” “Bob,” etc. Given what we said in Section

2.0, it follows that something similar is true of the corresponding proposition.

Sentences and propositions are digital structures, meaning that they have

unique breakdowns into minimal significant units.

  A visual perception of Sally punching Bob doesn’t have a structure

comparable to that of “Sally punched Bob” or any other sentence. Unlike

sentences, perceptions don’t have to decompose into minimal significant units.

Visual perceptions, unlike sentences and propositions, therefore have a non-

digital or analogue structures. Given that at least some thought involves the

processing of perceptual information,  it follows that thought at least sometimes has

a structure very different from language. (See Section 5.4 for further

discussion of this.)  3.0 The three branches of the philosophy of language: syntax,

semantics, and pragmatics

     The study of language is typically divided into three sub-disciplines—

                                        [3]
semantics, syntax, and pragmatics. In addition to denoting a branch of

linguistic study, each of these three words denotes dimension of language. So

“semantics” refers to a certain discipline and also to a feature of expressions,

the same being true of the other two expressions.

  3.1. Semantics

        The discipline of semantics attempts to make it clear what our

utterances literally mean. It has no interest in what is conveyed through

suggestion or innuendo.

  If a disappointed boss says to a substandard employee, “it might not be a

bad idea for you to start thinking about finding a new position,” the literal

meaning of his utterance is quite innocuous. But the message that is being

sent is not innocuous—that message is: you’re fired; you’re a disgrace; go

away; etc. The utterance’s semantic coincides with its literal (innocuous)

meaning.

  3.2 Pragmatics

      Pragmatics studies the use of language. Sometimes language is used

literally. Asked whether I’m over thirty years of age, I say “yes, I’m over

thirty years of age.” What I mean coincides with what my utterance literally

means.

  Language is often used non-literally. If, while addressing a pan-handler, I

say “you’ve made a fine life for yourself,” what I mean is the antitheses of

what my utterance means. But usually the propositions literally meant by our

utterances are neither opposed to, nor exhaustive of, the propositions we wish

to affirm in producing those utterances. Asked whether there’s a place to get

food, I say “there’s a McDonalds down the road.” The proposition I’m

affirming is: there is a nearby place to get food, the reason being that there’s a

McDonalds down the road. Thus, the proposition literally meant by my

utterance is a only a part of what it is that I’m saying. Thus, what a sentence

literally means is only one of many factors governing what it is used to mean.

The discipline of pragmatics tries to identify the remaining factors.

  3.3 Syntax      The disciplines of syntax studies the structures of the meanings of

complex expressions. A complex expression is one that consists of other

expressions. (Thus, “the man who ate my cookie” is a complex expression,

since it consists of “man,” “ate,” etc., each of which is meaningful. By

contrast, “red” is not a complex expression, since it doesn’t have any

meaningful proper parts.) The discipline of syntax tries to make it clear how

the meanings of complex expressions depend on those of their parts.

  Thus, the discipline of syntax doesn’t study the meanings of complex

expressions per se. It studies the relationships that such meanings have to

those of their constituents. Consider the sentence “Sally hates Bob.” The

word “hates” occurs in that sentence. If that occurrence is replaced with an

occurrence of “loves” or “is amused by,” the resulting sentence has a very

different meaning from the first. This shows that what “Sally hates Bob”

means depends on what “hates” means.

  Bearing this point in mind, consider the sentence “Larry loves Julie.”

Obviously this sentence doesn’t mean the same thing as “Sally hates Bob.”

But the relationship borne by the meaning of “Sally hates Bob” to the

meaning “hates” is identical with the relationship borne by the meaning of

“Larry loves Julie” to that of “loves.” Exactly similar points hold in

connection with each of the remaining two constituents of each of those

sentences.

  The discipline of syntax studies the relation that the meanings of complex

expressions bear to the meanings of the simple expressions composing them.

Thus, syntax doesn’t study the semantics (meanings) of complex expressions.

It studies the structures of the semantics of complex expressions. Syntax

studies semantic structure.

  4.0 The need for the discipline of semantics

      Even though we all know what is meant by:

  (1) “John wants to catch a 20-pound striped bass,”

we don’t know what it is that we know in knowing this. Semanticists supply

us with the missing metaknowledge. Consider the sentence:

  (2) “John wants to punch Bob.”

        (2) Attributes a certain property to John—that of wanting to punch

Bob. Given that (1) and (2) are grammatically isomorphic, it’s natural to

assume that there exists some 20-pound striped bass x such that theproposition expressed by (1) is:

  (3) John wants to catch x.

  But this isn’t the right analysis. There isn’t some one fish such that, if the

desire ascribed to John by (1) is to be gratified, John must catch that very

fish. There is thus no fish x such that, if (1) is to be true, John must want to

catch x.

  The meaning of (1) is:

  (1) John wants it to be the case that: there exists some fish x such that x
    R

is 20-pound striped bass and such that John catches x.

      Thus, (1) doesn’t describe a relationship between John and some non-

existent or quasi-existent fish. It affirms the existence of a relationship

between John and a proposition. The proposition in question is one that, in

English, is expressed by the sentence:

  (4) “There exists some fish x such that x is a 20-pound striped bass and

such that John catches x.”

        If John’s fishing-trip is a success, that proposition will be true;

otherwise it will be false. But that proposition exists either way.

  But we still haven’t solved the problem. In (4), the expression “some

fish” occurs. Grammatically, that expression is a noun-phrase. But, unlike

other noun-phrases, it doesn’t refer to anything. (“Some fish” doesn’t refer to

some fish. There is no fish x such that “some fish” refers to x. That’s why,

given any particular fish F, if you say “some fish is wet, but x is not,” what

you are saying isn’t self-contradictory.) So the problem we were trying to

solve remains.

        But to solve the problem, we need only reword (4). The needed

rewording is this:

  (5) The property of being a 20-pound striped bass that John catches is

instantiated.

  The property of being such a fish exists. So (1), which seemed to be about

a non-existent fish, is about an existent property. (5) says of that property that

it’s instantiated. Thus, a complete analysis of (1) is given by:

  (1) John wants it to be the case that the property of being a 20-pound
    CA

striped bass that John catches is instantiated.  So even though just about every English speaker understands (1),

knowing what it is that one knows in understanding it isn’t such a trivial

thing.

  4.1 Semantics needed to figure out what is literally meant and what is

not

       Despite everything just said, there is clearly a sense in which every

English speaker knows what (1) means. What the semanticist is doing in

connection with (1) isn’t comparable to what you (who, we’ll assume, speak

Spanish) are doing in connection with it when you tell a monolingual Spanish

speaking friend of yours what it means. The semanticist is needed to clarify

the structure of the meaning that (1) is already known to have, but he isn’t

needed to identify that meaning. The semanticist isn’t a translator. But there

are many cases where the semanticist is needed to identify literal meaning. In

fact, as paradoxical as it may sound, there are cases where he is needed to

identify the meanings of sentences that are perfectly well understood.

  First of all, we must distinguish what is literally meant by an utterance

from what it is that the speaker wishes to convey. To give a trivial example:

You and I are robbing a bank. I yell: “the cops are coming!” What I wish to

convey is that we should hurry up. In this particular case, it’s easy to

distinguish what is literally meant from what is non-literally suggested, and

semantics would therefore have no interest in it. But in other cases, it’s

exceedingly hard to do this, and it’s with these other cases that semantics is

concerned.

  A story will help us move forward. Somebody who is wearing a ski-

mask, and who I therefore don’t recognize, deftly snatches my pocket from

my wallet. As he’s running off, I point at him and yell: “that man is a thief!”

Let U be this utterance.
    1

  Before moving on, let’s take a moment to make it clear what U’s literal
                                                                              1

meaning is. Somebody just stole my wallet. I don’t know who that person is.

But whoever it is, I am attributing a certain property to him. If that person has

that property, I have spoken truly; if not, not. U is correct if, and only if, the
                                                      1

person referred to by “that man” has the property expressed by “is a thief.”

Thus, there is some individual x such that x has just stolen my wallet and

such that what I’ve just said is true exactly if x is a thief. (The underlined part

is U’s literal meaning.)
  1  The next day, my lovable office-mate Steve eats one of the cupcakes that

was on my desk. I jokingly point at him and say: “that man is a thief.” Let U
                                                                                          2

be this utterance. There is some x such that x just ate my cupcake and such

that U is true exactly if: x is a thief.
      2

    Unbeknownst to me, Steve is the pick-pocket, and there is some

individual x, namely Steve, such that each of U and U is true if and only if
                                                      12

                                                                            [4]
x is a thief. Thus, U and U have the very same literal meanings. But I
                      12

don’t know this, even though I speak English perfectly and, on each occasion,

obviously understand perfectly well what it is that I’m saying.

                            [5]
  How this is possible? Our sense-perceptions describe things. My

uttering U was a response to my being given a visual description of Steve.
          1

That description was to the effect that:

  (i) There is some man x such that x is wearing a ski-mask and such that x

is running off into the distance.

     But U’s literal meaning is not that that effect. There is some man x
              1

such that x is a wearing a ski-mask (etc.), such that in uttering U I was
                                                                          1

saying that:

  (ii) x is a thief.

  The meaning of U, being identical with (ii), is quite threadbare. But I
                        1

grasped that threadbare meaning through my descriptively rich visual

perception, whose content is given by (i).

  My uttering U was a response to my being given a different description
                    2

of Steve. That description was to the effect that:

  (iii) there is some man x such that x is a portly amicable fellow who is

sitting over in that chair.

  But U’s literal meaning is not that that effect. There is some man x such
          2

that x is a portly amicable fellow (etc.) such that in uttering U I was saying
                                                                        2

that:

  (ii) x is a thief.


      Echoing what we said a moment ago, the meaning of U, being
                                                                          2identical with (ii), is quite threadbare. But I grasped that threadbare meaning

through my descriptively rich visual perception, whose content is given by

(iii).

  Because I grasped (ii) by way of different bodies of perceptual

(descriptive) information, I didn’t know, when uttering U, that what I was
                                                                  2

affirming was the same thing I was affirming in uttering U. Oftentimes,
                                                                    1

literal meaning is cloaked by the pre-semantic information through which it

is grasped, and semanticists are needed to uncloak it.

  4.2 Semantics needed to figure out what is literally meant and what is

not (continued)

        Fido is the smartest dog on the planet. I know this well, but some of

my friends don’t yet know this. I point to Fido and say: “That dog is very

smart.”

  The proposition that it was my intention to affirm and communicate is

indeed true. For a dog, Fido is indeed smart. Of course, Fido is vastly less

intelligent than a human being, such as my friend Timmy, who is of mediocre

intelligence. But if I say “Timmy is very smart,” what I’m saying is false.

Judging by the words I’ve used, the property I’ve attributed to Timmy is

identical with the property I’ve attributed to Fido. Given that Timmy has that

property to a vastly greater degree than Fido, it would seem to follow that,

since “Fido is smart” is true, “Timmy is smart” must also be true. And yet

“Timmy is smart” is false. How can this be?

  Some deal with this by saying that “smart” is ambiguous, like the word

“dumb.” So “Timmy is smart” and “Fido is smart” have different meanings,

like “Timmy is dumb [unintelligent]” and “Timmy is dumb [mute].”

  This solution is pretty clearly false. A more plausible one is that the

property of being smart for a dog is distinct from the property of being smart

for a human. Fido has the first but not the second. And many humans have

the second, but almost all of those lack the first.

  A similar, possibly coincident, view is that “smart” is implicitly

relational. When, for some object x, you say ‹x is smart›, you are saying that

x is smart relative to some benchmark, the identity of which the context

makes clear. So “Fido is smart” says that Fido is smarter than most dogs,

which is true, and “Timmy is smart” says that Timmy is smarter than most

human beings, which is false.                          [6]
  I published a paper arguing that, for any degree-property phi, ‹x has

phi› expresses a proposition of the form: the degree to which x has phi

exceeds standard S, where S is some standard that, given the context, is

clearly the relevant one. (A “degree property” is one that can be had to

varying degrees.) But even if this is right, it doesn’t follow that such

judgments are the literal meanings of such sentences. And there is no

independent evidence that ‹x is smart› has the syntactic properties of

sentences that clearly do have for their literal meanings propositions of the

just-described kind. This suggests that, so far as ‹x has phi› communicates

such a proposition, it isn’t because it semantically encodes it.

  In any case, it not obvious what ‹x is smart› means or, in general, what ‹x

has phi› means, where phi is any degree property. Thus, the literal meanings

of such sentences are sufficiently recondite that the intervention of

professional semanticists is needed to identify them.

  5.0 The Nature of Semantic rules

        The English language assigns a certain meaning to the sound “that

dog has rabies”; and given the spectacle of a rabid dog, it furnishes one with

a sentence with which to describe what one sees. In general, the English

language assigns meanings to sentences and sentences to meanings. This is

true of all languages. A language is a systematic way of pairing off sentences

with meanings. Any rule that assigns a meaning to an expression is known as

a “semantic rule.” Languages are sets of semantic rules.

  5.1. An important subtlety

     There are a couple of subtle but, in some contexts, important

inaccuracies in what I just said. First of all, something isn’t a sentence until a

meaning has been assigned to it. In a world where there were no animate

beings, but in which the forthcoming parenthetical ink deposit (1 + 1 = 2) was

formed out of twigs, that twig deposit wouldn’t be an expression of any kind.

That twig deposit would be an expression if and only if it were endowed with

meaning. This shows that something has to have meaning in order to be an

expression. Thus, expressions aren’t assigned meanings. They already have

them and don’t need to be assigned them. Therefore a semantic rule can’t be

defined as a rule that assigns a meaning to an expression.

    5.2 How meaning is assigned to hitherto meaningless and, therefore

non-linguistic, entities        Thus, semantic rules assign meanings to non-expressions. But which

non-expressions? A story will give us the answer.

  You and I want to invent a code that only we two know. We both know a

guy whose real is name is Larry. We decide that our code name for Larry is

to be “Ichabod.” So what’s going on is that we’re creating a semantic rule:

one that to the effect that “Ichabod” is to pick out Larry. How exactly is this

rule enacted?

  In order to implement this rule, I say: Let’s refer to Larry as “Ichabod.”

The burst of noise that I produce is a sentence-token. And what you hear is

some token of “Ichabod”—you do not, since one could not, hear the name

type itself.

  When you hear this burst of noise, along with my proposal concerning

our new name for Larry, you know that what I’m saying is to the effect that

any other physical object that is similar in the relevant ways to this burst of

noise is itself henceforth to refer to Larry. Thus, I am in effect proposing that

all and only those bursts of noise that are similar, in the relevant respect, to

this particular burst of noise are to refer to Larry. (By implication, I’m

proposing the same thing mutatis mutandis to hold of all and only ink-

deposits that, given certain conventions, are paired off with such bursts of

noise.) The thing that, according to my proposal, is henceforth to pick out

Larry is the thing of which all and only such bursts of noises (etc.) are

instances. That thing, like anything else of which there are instances, is a

property. It is the property had in common by all and only bursts of noise

(etc.) of the relevant type.

  That property doesn’t (yet) have a meaning; it isn’t (yet) an expression.

It’s a property that existed, and was instantiated, before either or any

instances meant anything. So the semantic rule that I’m proposing we adopt

assigns a referent to a property that does not itself have a meaning. The same

thing mutatis mutandis holds of any other semantic rule.

  Thus semantic rules assign meanings to properties of physical objects—to

morphological or acoustical properties (in other words, to properties that a

things has in virtue of having a certain shape or sounding a certain way). A

semantic rule is therefore something which assigns a meaning to a property,

and language is a set of such rules.

    (Technically, this is only an approximation to the truth. The relevant

qualifications are found in Section 7.5.)  5.3 What are semantic rules?

      Many believe that linguistic meaning is to be understood in function-

theoretic terms—that, in other words, semantic rules are mathematical

functions.

  Let us start by defining the word “function.” Given any pair of whole

numbers, the expression “+” assigns exactly one whole number to that pair.

In general, a function is a rule that, given some class of objects, assigns no

more than one object to any given member of that class.

    Although the rule expressed by “plus” assigns the number 8 to the pair

<4,4>, it doesn’t assign that number to that pair in the way in which a person

assigns a task to an underlying. In the former case, the word “assigns” has a

psychological meaning; in the latter, it has a non-psychological, purely

logical meaning. A related point is that the rule that assigns 8 to <4,4> isn’t a

social rule, and it therefore isn’t something that can be obeyed or disobeyed.

    According to the function-theoretic view, semantic rules are rules in the

strictly logical sense; that is, they are mathematical functions. The semantic

rule for “Socrates” is a function that assigns a certain individual (Socrates) to

that word (or to occurrences thereof). The semantic rule for “snow is white”

is a function that assigns truth-conditions to that utterance (or to occurrences

                      [7]
thereof). And so on.

  5.3.1 Why semantic rules are not functions

     The just-described view is false. The rule denoted by “+” has always

existed and always will. Of course, the expression “+” hasn’t always existed.

But that’s irrelevant, since things pre-exist the expressions we use to denote

them. “Socrates” is an Anglicization of the name with which Socrates

referred to him. Since Socrates lived well before the English language came

into existence, “Socrates” (the name, not the person) didn’t come into

existence until well after its referent went out of it.

  The semantic rule that assigns Socrates to ink deposits having certain

shapes would exist even if the English language had never come into

existence. Like the rule denoted by “+”, that rule has always existed, and

always will. So has the rule that assigns Abraham Lincoln to such ink

deposits. The mathematical function that assigns the proposition snow is

white to ink deposits like the italicized one has always existed, as has the

mathematical function that assigns the proposition all horses weigh 18,000lbs to those same ink deposits.

  But the English language hasn’t always existed. Since the English

language is a set of semantic rules, those semantic rules haven’t always

existed. Therefore, they haven’t always existed. They came into existence

quite recently. Therefore, those rules aren’t mathematical functions.

  Also, if the semantic rules of English were such functions, there would

exist a language in which “Socrates” referred to Lincoln and in which “snow

is white” meant all horses weigh 18,000 lbs, the reason being that the

corresponding mathematical functions exist. But there is no such language.

Of course, there could be such a language. And maybe there will be; maybe

somebody will invent a code in which those things have those meanings. But

right now they don’t. Such a language is merely possible and, therefore,

doesn’t exist. Thus, semantic rules are not rules in the mathematical sense.

  5.3.2 The Gricean approach

          Understandably, many philosophers of language believe that

semantic rules must be understood in psychological, not mathematical, terms.

There are different versions of this view. I accept one version of it. But the

version I accept bears little resemblance to the versions of it that are usually

held, each of which is some variant of the view held by H.P. Grice.

    According to Grice (1957), for expression E to have literal meaning M is

for it to be the case that, when they utter E, M is what they mean. So “snow is

white” has the proposition snow is white for its literal meaning because what

people generally mean when they say “snow is white” is that snow is white.

People generally mean snow is white in uttering that expression.

  Literal meaning is to be understood in terms of speaker’s meaning. That’s

the main idea. Neo-Griceans hold that, even though literal meaning cannot in

all cases be identified with speaker’s meaning, it is always, ultimately, to be

understood in terms of it.

    Wittgenstein (1958) advocated a version of this view. “Roughly

speaking,” he said, “meaning is use.” Expressions mean what we use them to

mean—they mean what we mean by them. Wittgenstein nowhere makes it

clear what he means by the words “roughly speaking.”

  But it doesn’t matter, since his statement isn’t even roughly true. Literal

meaning is isn’t identical with speaker’s meaning and isn’t to be understood

in terms of it. It’s the other way around. We saw why in Section 1.3.  Also, Grice’s theory fails to deal with the fact that the meaning of a

subsentential expression isn’t something that could be possibly be meant. “Of

” has a meaning; so does “skip,” “snorkel,” “or,” “gladly,” etc. But whatever

it is that “or” means, it cannot, at least not by itself, be what a person means.

Obviously I can say “snorkel” and mean it—but only if I’m using it as an

abbreviation for some whole sentence (e.g., “my favorite activity is to

snorkel”) and, therefore, to convey something other than its literal meaning.

  5.3.3 More problems with the Gricean approach

        If Grice were right, the meaning of the sentence:

  (SF) “Smith is now living in France”

would be fixed by the intentions people have in using it.

  But its meaning is not fixed by those intentions. It is fixed by the

meanings of its parts (“Smith,” “France,” etc.), together with the way those

expressions are ordered in that sentence. The semantic and syntactic rules of

English being what they are, SF would have its current meaning even if it had

never been used. So whatever the intentions of people using that sentence are,

those intentions do nothing in the way of assigning it that meaning. In

general, Grice’s view is inherently incapable of accommodating the fact

meaning is compositional.

  5.3.4 How some Griceans deal with the problem just described

      Some Griceans respond by saying that, although speaker-meaning

doesn’t directly fix sentence-meaning, it does so indirectly. In their view, it is

because of what we mean by sentences of the form ‹....France...› that such

sentences are to the effect that...France...and not to the effect that, for

example,...Germany....

  In addition to being an abandonment of Grice’s core idea, this move is a

failure. Let P be the proposition meant by SF. So far as people utter SF with

the intention of affirming P, it’s because they believe (correctly, as it

happens) that each of the expressions composing it already has a certain

meaning.

  It’s irrelevant that how we use sentences of the form ‹...France...› causally

determines what “France” means. There are many ways to cause meaning-

shifts—many ways to get a given expression to have a certain meaning. But

the question we’re asking isn’t “how did ‘France’ acquire its current

meaning?”, and is instead “whatever it is that ‘France’ means, what is it for itto have that meaning?” And it’s no answer to this question to say that it may

have acquired that meaning because of what, at some point in time, people

meant by sentences of the form ‹...France...›.

  5.3.5 Why Grice’s theory is inconsistent with the normative nature of

semantic rules

     A billiard ball isn’t right to move after being struck; it just does. The

relevant scientific laws merely register that fact; they aren’t normative—that

is, they don’t characterize it as good or bad. Unlike scientific laws, semantic

rules are normative. If, intending to affirm that Smith is female, you say

“Smith is male,” you’ve done something wrong. If Grice is right, literal

meaning is speaker’s meaning. This means that, if Grice were right, speaker’s

meaning wouldn’t be accountable to existing semantic rules. Since it is, Grice

is wrong.

  5.4 The psychological reality of semantic rules

      One view as to the nature of semantic rules is that they are idealized

descriptions of the activities of speakers. Proponents of this view seldom if

ever identify the facts about the speaker-behavior of which semantic rules are

supposedly descriptions. The most natural assumption is that they are

idealized descriptions of what people mean when they speak and write (etc.).

If this assumption is right, then, given the points just made, the view in

question is wrong.

  But even if this isn’t what proponents of this view have in mind, their

view is very clearly wrong. If semantic rules are just idealizations of speaker-

behavior, then speaker-behavior must pre-exist the semantic rules embodied

in it. But if that’s the case, then the activity described by semantic rules isn’t

guided by them. An awareness of those rules is no part of what leads people

to say the things they do. Those rules are psychologically inert. They have no

“psychological reality.” This view is held by Nathan Salmon (2007) and also

by Scott Soames (2002).

  This view is inconsistent with some obvious facts. I know that Smith is

now living in France. Wanting to tell you this, I say: “Smith is now living in

France.” Why do I choose this particular sentence? Because, first of all, I

know the relevant semantic rules (viz. that “Smith” refers to Smith, that

“living” refers to a certain property) and, secondly, because I believe that,

given these facts about semantics, the sentence in question is the right one toexpress my belief. A knowledge of semantics underlies my speech-act and,

by obvious extensions of these points, all non-defective speech-acts.

  Another problem with the Salmon-Soames view is that it’s inconsistent

with the normative character of semantic rules. If semantic rules merely

describe existing semantic activity, then that activity isn’t answerable to

semantic norms. It is; so the Salmon-Soames view is wrong.

  5.5 Conceptual role semantics

          A little while ago, we discussed Wittgenstein’s claim that “meaning

is use,” i.e., that for an expression to have a given meaning is for it to be used

in a certain way. This doctrine is incoherent in many ways. We’ve already

discussed one of those ways; now we’ll discuss some of the others.

    Expressions have meanings. A meaningless burst of noise isn’t an

expression. If I cough or guffaw, the burst of noise I’ve produced doesn’t

have the sort of meaning had by bona fide expressions. It has, at most,

meaning in irrelevant, purely evidential sense, e.g., the sense in which a

cough may be evidence of a cold. Since anything that is a linguistic

expression ipso facto has a meaning (in the relevant, linguistic sense), there

are no expressions to be used before noises, ink-marks, etc., have been

assigned meanings. So, since there can be no expression-use until after there

is expression-meaning, it makes no sense at all to say that expression-use

                                                                                      [8]
determines expression-meaning. “Meaningful expression” is a pleonasm.

So, contrary to what Wittgenstein said, meaning isn’t use.

  Of course, how a given expression is used may well assign it a new

meaning. But there is all the difference in the world between saying:

  (1) Expression E’s having meaning M is causally determined by E’s being

used in such and such a manner,

and

  (2) Expression E’s having meaning M is identical with E’s being used in

such and such a manner.

  An expression E’s having meaning M cannot possibly be constituted by

its being used in such and such a manner, since E isn’t an expression and,

therefore, isn’t an expression to be used until it has a meaning.

          According to a doctrine known as “conceptual role semantics”

(CRS), whose exponents include Hartry Field (1977) and Robert Brandom(1994), for an expression to have a given meaning is simply for it to be used

in a certain way. But this isn’t correct as we just saw.

  CRS is incoherent for reasons other than the one just given. According to

that doctrine, what a sentence means is determined by what people infer from

it and what people infer it from. Whereas commonsense holds that one infers

“an even number is less five” from “two is less than five” because the latter

already has a given meaning, advocates of CRS say that, on the contrary, it’s

because people infer “an even number is less than five” and other similar

statements from “two is less than five” that the latter has the meaning it has.

  This is not a viable view. If we learn tomorrow that, contrary to what we

previously thought, Aristotle wrote several plays, we’ll infer “somebody who

wrote several plays wrote the Nichomachean Ethics“ from “Aristotle wrote

the Nichomachean Ethics.” But it doesn’t follow that “Aristotle wrote the

Nichomachean Ethics” would have undergone some change in its semantic

meaning. Changes in what we believe affect what we infer from statements;

but they don’t categorically change the meanings of those statements. CRS

entails that every inference is an analytic inference. Once it’s learned that

Aristotle wrote plays, it becomes, according to CRS, constitutive of the

meaning of “Aristotle wrote the Nichomachean Ethics” that one can infer

from it that a playwright wrote the Nichomachean Ethics. But surely the

inference from “Aristotle wrote the Nichomachean Ethics” to “a playwright

                                                      [9]
wrote the Nichomachean Ethics” isn’t analytic.

  What we may infer from a sentence is answerable to its existing meaning.

CRS says that a sentence’s meaning is answerable to what we infer from it. If

correct, that would have the consequence that one couldn’t possibly draw a

false inference from any sentence. Which, in its turn, would have the

consequence that no sentence would mean anything. Which, since nothing

meaningless is a sentence, would have the absurd consequence that there

neither are, nor could be, sentences.

    Consider the sentence “Bill plagiarized his first novel.” If one knows that

sentence to be true, one can make inferences about Bill’s character, his past

activities, his ambitions, his values, and so on, that one couldn’t make if,

other things being equal, one didn’t know that sentence to be true. But it’s

only because of what the sentence already means that one can make those

inferences. Given any other sentence, the same thing mutatis mutandis is true

of it. CRS says that what a sentence means is determined by what we inferfrom it. Since it’s the other way around, as we’ve just seen, CRS is false.


6.0 What is literal meaning?

      Where complex expressions are concerned, there is no limit to how

much literal and understood meaning may diverge from each other. But

where simple expressions are concerned, literal and understood meaning

must coalesce. It makes no sense to suppose that people could be

systematically wrong as to what “red” meant. If people thought that “red”

meant what is in fact meant by “blue,” then “red” would have that meaning.

Systematic, widespread error is impossible where semantically simple

expressions are concerned. This gives us a way of understanding what literal

meaning is.

  Even though there can be widespread, systematic misinterpretations of

sentences, those misinterpretations do not arise as a result of people failing to

know what the simple parts of sentences mean. They arise as a result of

people not knowing how to put those meanings together. So to the extent that

its meaning is fixed by the fact that it has the form ‹...Socrates...›, people

(English speakers) do systematically understand “Socrates was more wise

than Plato, but he was less sharp then Aristotle”; and to the extent that its

meaning was determined by its having the form ‹...wise...›, people do

understand that sentence; and so on. So far as that sentence is systematically

misunderstood, it is because people are having trouble putting the meanings

of its constituents together—it is because they’re having trouble figuring out

how those meanings ought to be put together.

  What a simple expression literally means is determined by what it is that a

sentence means by virtue of containing it. Since, where simple expressions are

concerned, what people take literal meaning to be coincides with what it really is,

a simple expression’s literal meaning coincides with what it is that, in virtue of

containing that expression, sentences are taken to mean. So a simple expression’s

literal meaning is given by a statement saying what it is that, by virtue of

containing it, sentences are taken to mean; and a complex expression’s literal

meaning is a function, in the mathematical sense, of the meanings of its parts.

  Here’s an illustration. “Socrates” is a simple expression. So what people

think it means must ultimately coincide with what it actually means. So it

refers to Socrates only because people think it refers to Socrates and,

therefore, only because people think that “Socrates is intelligent” attributesintelligence to Socrates and, in general, that ‹...Socrates...› attributes...x...to

Socrates.

  Of course, people don’t always take utterances of ‹...Socrates... › to be

attempts to say that Socrates has...x... It might be clear from the speaker’s

tone that what he really meant when in saying “Socrates was wise” was that

Socrates was not wise. But to the extent that their belief that “Socrates” refers

to Socrates is determinative of what people take the meanings of utterances of

the form ‹...Socrates...› to be saying, what they take it to be saying is that

Socrates has...x... That is what it is for them to take “Socrates” to refer to

Socrates. And their taking “Socrates” to refer to Socrates is for “Socrates” to

refer to Socrates, given that “Socrates,” being a simple expression, has the

semantics that people think it has. The same thing mutatis mutandis is true of

every other simple expression.

  Bearing these points in mind, let CE be any complex expression, and let

e...e be the simple expressions composing it. How people interpret CE may
1n

diverge from its literal meaning. But when this happens, it’s because what it

is taken to mean diverges from what, given what people believe its simple

parts to literally mean, people are disposed to take it to mean.

  Since what people take simple expressions to mean is what they mean,

this is the same as saying the following. A divergence between

  (i) A sentence’s literal meaning

and

  (ii) That sentence’s understood meaning

is the same thing as a divergence between

  (a) That sentence’s literal meaning

and

  (b) What it is that, given their (correct) beliefs as to what its simple parts

  literally mean, people are disposed to take that sentence’s literal meaning

  to be.

  The literal meaning of a complex expression is a function of two things:

(i) the meanings of its simple parts, and (ii) the order in which those parts are

arranged. To say what literal meaning is in general, we need to say what it is

for a simple expression to have a given literal meaning. Given the points just

made, we can do this. Where simple expressions are concerned, literal andcommunicated meaning coincide (ultimately)—in other words, such

expressions mean what people take them to mean. And where complex

expressions are concerned, literal and communicated meaning may diverge,

but literal meaning nonetheless coincides with what, given what the simple

components of the expression in question literally mean, people are disposed

to take it to mean.


7.0 Tokens vs. types: some preliminary

terminological points

      No word is identical with any utterance of it. My utterance of the

word “snow” lasts for a fraction of a second. But the word “snow” itself

endures.

    Utterances and inscriptions of expressions are referred to as “expression-

tokens” (or just “tokens”). So there are three tokens of some one word to the

right of the upcoming colon: snow, snow, snow. The things being uttered or

inscribed are referred to as “expression-types” (or just “types”).


7.1 Two-dimensional semantics

        Some expressions appear to have a two-tiered semantic structure.

For example, an occurrence of the pronoun “I” has a referent, this being the

person who uttered it, and it picks out that referent in a certain way (i.e., by

way of a certain concept).

          Thus, the semantics of “I” is given by the rule that an utterance of

“I” refers to a given person if and only if that person has the property of

being the one that produced that utterance.

  So, if I say “I am tired,” the concept through which my utterance of “I”

refers to me is the concept person who produced the utterance in question.

This, then, is the concept through which reference is secured; it is, as we’ll

                                              [10]
henceforth put it, the mediating concept. When Smith says “I am tired,”

his utterance of “I” refers to himself, not to me. But the mediating concept

remains the same.

  If somebody points to me and says “that guy is tall,” the person picked

out by “that guy” is me. But in this case, the mediating-concept is different.

The semantics rule for “that guy” is given by the rule that, if “that guy” isuttered in a context where there is a unique, salient guy, that utterance refers

to that individual.

  “I” and “that guy” are context-sensitive expressions: what such an

expression refers to depends in a systematic manner on facts about the

context of utterance. (We’ll soon refine this vague statement shortly.) Such

expressions are known as “indexicals.” Other examples of indexicals are

“you,” “he,” “those animals,” “this monkey,” “tomorrow,” “yesterday.”

Some indexicals are single words (e.g., “tomorrow,” “he”); others consist of

more than one (e.g., “that tall man”). The latter are known as “complex

indexicals.”


7.1.1 Demonstratives vs. indexicals

      Some indexicals often cannot be successfully used without an

accompanying demonstration on the speaker’s part, the purpose of which is

to eliminate any doubt as to what the intended referent is. If Jim and Larry are

both equally salient in the context in question, an utterance of “that guy”

won’t single anyone out. But it will do so if an act of pointing accompanies it.

Indexicals that fall into this category are known as “demonstratives.” Not all

indexicals are demonstratives. For example, “tomorrow,” “now,” and “here,”

aren’t demonstratives. Given an utterance of “tomorrow,” no gesture is

needed to make it clear what the intended referent is. If I say “tomorrow I’m

going hiking,” it’s clear what the referent of “tomorrow” is; no demonstrative

act is necessary, and none could possibly do any good.


7.1.2 Indexicals (continued)

       Indexicals have a “two-dimensional” semantic structure. Consider the

expression “today.” If I say it right now, that utterance will refer to April, 27,

2009, since that is today’s date. If I say it tomorrow, that utterance will refer

to April 28, 2009. But the rule that assigns April 27, 2009, to the first

utterance is identical with the rule that assigns April 28, 2009, to the second

utterance. That rule is this: if “today” is uttered on a given day D, that

utterance refers to D.

  The meaning of an utterance “today” is the day it picks out. The meaning

of the corresponding word-type is the rule just described. Given any

indexical, the meaning of a token of that indexical is its referent; the meaningof the corresponding indexical-type is the rule that assigns that referent to that

token.


7.2 Definite descriptions

      In other works of mine, reasons are given for thinking that definite

descriptions are not devices of reference. But there are also reasons to think

                                      [11]
that they are devices of reference. (It’s very hard to believe that “the

whole number that comes right after one” doesn’t refer to the number

two.)And in this section we will suppose them to be just that.

          Definite descriptions, like indexicals, have a two-dimensional

semantic structure. A given utterance of “the current U.S. President” refers to

some individual. Right now such an utterance would refer to Barack Obama.

A few years ago, such an utterance referred to Bill Clinton.

        But even though an utterance in 2009 of “the U.S. president” doesn’t

have the same referent as an utterance in 1999 of that same expression, both

utterances are assigned their respective referents by the same semantic rule.

The circumstances have changed—hence the change in referent—but the

semantic rule has stayed the same.

  That rule is: if, at time t, x uniquely has the property of being a U.S.

president, then an utterance at t of “the U.S. President” refers to x.


7.2.1 Incomplete definite descriptions

     Some definite descriptions appear to be “incomplete”—that is, they

fail to pick out a single object. So, for example, “the bald guy” could pick out

any one of many different people. But, like all expressions, definite

descriptions are not used in a vacuum; and the context usually supplies the

information needed to enrich the mediating concept enough to enable it to

single out a single person. So if you and I are in a room and I say “the bald

guy is wealthy,” it’s clear that, so far as I making a determinate statement,

what I mean is that the contextually salient bald guy is wealthy.

          If phi is a property that obviously has no more than one instance

(e.g., the property of being the whole number successor of one or of being the

U.S. President), phi’s sole instance is contextually salient by default.7.3 The expressive limitations of indexical-free

languages

      Indexical-free languages are expressively impoverished; much of

what there is to say can’t be said in them. The reason is that much

information is perspectival, and nothing perspectival can be stated in a

language that doesn’t contain indexicals. Suppose that I spoke a language that

didn’t contain any indexicals, but was otherwise just like English. In order to

express what I believe concerning the weather in my area, I’d have to say

“it’s 60° in Richmond on Feb. 07, 2009.” (And the “is” couldn’t be taken as

the present tense of the verb “to be,” since, thus interpreted, it would be an

indexical that picked out the time of utterance. The “is” would have to be

stripped of any temporal meaning and, thus, be downgraded to an empty

grammatical place-holder, like the “it” in “it’s raining.”) But that utterance

wouldn’t necessarily express the belief I wanted to express. My believing it’s

60° in Richmond on Feb. 07, 2009, is different from my thinking it’s now 60°

in Richmond, even though I am in fact in Richmond at the time in question. I

could have the one thought and not have the other. I could, after all, not know

that I was in Richmond. And my believing either of those things is different

from my thinking it’s now 60° here. One could have any given one of those

beliefs without having any of the others. Further, one could rationally have

any given one of those beliefs without having any of the others. A person

who is in Richmond at the time in question can rationally believe it’s now

60° here while rejecting it’s 60° in Richmond on Feb. 07, 2009. For the data

at one’s disposal may warrant the first judgment, but not the second.

  So nothing perspectival—nothing that embodies any information relating

to the speaker’s perspective on the world—can be expressed without using an

indexical. Nothing could be said about what’s going on here, at this time; and

there would be no me-thoughts (e.g., I’m thirsty) could be expressed; one

could only express their third-person counterparts (e.g., “JM is thirsty”).

Thus, one could not, in an indexical-free language, express the thought I am

JM or I am that guy in the mirror. And such a language would therefore be

                            [12]
extremely impoverished.


7.4 Tokens, types, and context-sensitivity      No sentence-type containing a context-sensitive component is either

true or false; for no such sentence-type says anything. It is tokens of “I am

now tired” that make statements; the corresponding sentence-type does not

do so. What a token of “I am tired now” affirms depends on facts about the

context of utterance. If Smith’s the one who’s speaking, and it’s 3:00 P.M.,

such an utterance is true just in case Smith is tired at 3:00 P.M. If Jones is the

speaker and it’s 4:00 P.M., such an utterance is true just in case Jones is tired

at 4:00 P.M.

  Thus the semantic rule that assigns a proposition to such a token does so

on the basis of the facts about the context of utterance. And the rule in

question is clearly this: “If, at time t, person p tokens the sentencetype “I am

tired,” then the proposition thereby affirmed is true exactly if p is tired at p.”

The same thing mutatis mutandis is true of all context-sensitive expressions.

So the rule that assigns a proposition to an utterance of “that man is married

to that woman” is: if, in the context of utterance, x is a uniquely salient man

and y is a uniquely salient woman, a token of the sentence-type “that man is

married to that woman” affirms a proposition that is true if and only if x is

married to y.

  So context-sensitive sentence-types aren’t true or false; they don’t, in and

of themselves, bear propositions. But they have an important semantic role:

the identity of the proposition meant by a token of such a type depends on the

identity of the type. A token of “I am tired” means one thing; a token of “you

are tired,” uttered by the same person at the same time, means something

else; and that difference obviously stems from the fact that, because different

sentence-types were tokened, the semantic rule that assigns a proposition to

the one token is different from the rule that assigns a proposition to the other.

  This can all be distilled into the following principle: where context-

sensitive sentences are concerned, the meaning of a token is a proposition,

and the meaning of type is a rule that assigns a proposition to one of its

tokens on the basis of facts about the context in which that token occurred.

  Long story short: the meanings of sentence-tokens are propositions and

the meanings of sentence-types are rules that assign propositions to their

tokens, usually on the basis of facts about the context of tokening.


7.5 Ambiguity and context-sensitivity (revisited)and the typetoken distinction (revisited)

        Consider the sentence-type “that person is a professor.” Is that

sentence true or false? No. Some tokens of it are true and some are false. This

is because what a given token of that sentence says is a function of the

circumstances. If I utter it while pointing at Bob, I’m attributing the property

of being a professor to Bob. If I utter it while pointing to Sally, I’m

attributing that property to Sally, not Bob. So what it is that I’m affirming in

the one case is different from what it is that I’m affirming in the other case.

But that isn’t because the sentence “that person is a professor is ambiguous.”

That sentence is not ambiguous: it has just one meaning. But that meaning is

not a proposition; it isn’t something that is true or false. That meaning is a

rule. That rule in its turn assigns meanings to tokens of that sentence. Those

meanings are true or false; those meanings are propositions.

    Remember that expression-types are what result when properties per se,

as opposed to their instances, are assigned meanings. Of course, the rules that

assign meanings to properties are semantic rules, since anything that assigns

meaning to anything is ipso facto a semantic rule. So the sentence-type of

which the following ink deposit—“that guy is a professor”—is a token is

what results when some semantic rule assigns a meaning to some property.

Let R be the semantic rule in question. Let R be the meaning that R
    121

assigns to the just-mentioned property. R is itself a semantic rule. But,
                                              2

whereas R assigns a meaning (a rule) to some property, R assigns meanings
          12

to instances of that property. So R assigns meanings to particular instances
                                      2

of the morphology had by the following ink deposit (“that guy is a

professor”). The meanings that R assigns to those tokens are not themselves
                                      2

rules; they are propositions—they are things that are true or false.

  There are thus very different sorts of semantic rules. There are those that

assign meanings to properties, and there are those that assign meanings to

instances of those properties. The meaning that was assigned to the property we

were just discussing is itself a semantic rule. As we’ll now see, every meaning

that is assigned to a property (as opposed to a property-instance) is itself a

semantic rule. Consider the following ink deposit: “Barack Obama.” There is a

semantic rule that assigns a meaning to the property of having a morphology

similar to that ink deposit. The meaning assigned to that property is itself a

semantic rule. That rule assigns a meaning to each instance of the property inquestion. It assigns Barack Obama, the person, to any such instance. Thus, any

such instance is an expression that picks out Barack Obama.

  In the previous section, we said that semantic rule is something which

assigns a meaning to a property. That’s correct, but incomplete. The right

definition is this: a semantic rule is something which assigns a rule to a property

that in its turn assigns meanings to instances of that property. Let us now move

onto slightly less abstruse material.


7.6 Do any expressions have one-dimensional

semantics?

          The question arises: What about sentence-types that don’t contain

context-sensitive components? Where they are concerned, does token-

meaning coincide with type-meaning?

  First of all, in natural languages, there are no such sentence-types. Every

sentence contains a tense-marker. And in virtue of containing a tense-marker,

a sentence is such that the proposition expressed by any given one of its

tokens is a function of (inter alia) when that token occurs. If you say “the

U.S. economy is fairly stable,” whether you are speaking the truth or not

depends on when you say it.

  There are some apparent counterexamples to this. For all intents and

purposes, any two tokens of

      [13]
  (IA) “The interior angles of a Euclidean triangle add up to 180°”

express the same proposition. But, from a strictly semantic perspective, IA is

context-sensitive, and tokens of it uttered at different times don’t encode the

same proposition. If it were believed that mathematical reality were as

volatile as the stock-market, we would without hesitation regard IA as being

in the same category as patently context-sensitive sentences such as:

  (BH) “Bill’s holdings add up to $180,000,000.”

        And we’d have no more temptation to regard the tense-marker in IA

as inert than we’d have to regard its counterpart in BH as inert. What this

shows is that, to the extent that the tense-marker in tokens of IA are doing

nothing, it’s only because, our beliefs about mathematics being what they are,

we choose to see such utterances as expressing atemporal propositions.

    Nonetheless, many semanticists hold that, at the level of literal meaning,IA is context-insensitive. They hold, in other words, that IA is what Quine

(himself such a semanticist) refers to as an “eternal sentence.” (S is an eternal

sentence if there is some one proposition P such that any two of S’s tokens

express P.) If only for argument’s sake, let’s suppose that there are eternal

sentences.

  It’s tempting to hold that an eternal sentence’s meaning is identical with

those of its tokens. After all, the distinction between type-meaning and token-

meaning seems quite hollow except where context-sensitive expressions are

concerned.

  But this reasoning is spurious. The tense-marker on the occurrence of

“add” in (IA) has the same semantics that it does in

        [14]
  (BH) “Bill’s various holdings add up to $180,000,000.”

        In BH the tense-marker is obviously doing real work in IA. That’s

why utterances of BH are true on Monday (before the market crashed) and

false on Wednesday (after the market crashed). Therefore, different tokens of

BH express different propositions. Therefore, the meaning of BH—the

sentence-type—isn’t some proposition, and is instead the rule:

  (BHSR) If t is a token of BH that is uttered at time T, t is true iff, at T,

Bill’s various holdings add up to $180,000,000.

  But, of course, for any time t, the meaning of a token of BH that is

produced at t is a proposition that is true just in case.

  (BHT) At t, Bill’s various holdings add up to $180,000,000.

  Given that occurrence of “add” in any given token of IA has the same

literal meaning as its counterpart in any given token of BHT, it follows that,

from a narrowly semantic perspective, IA is quite as context-sensitive as

BHT. To be sure, there is obviously a sense in which IA is, whereas BHT is

not, context-insensitive.

       But IA’s context-insensitivity, we must conclude, is a thoroughly

pragmatics-based affair. Obvious extensions of this reasoning show that all

expression-types have rules that assign meanings (or referents) to their tokens

and, therefore, that where any expression is concerned, type-meaning

diverges from token-meaning. The meaning of the expression-type “that

man” is: a token of “that man,” uttered in context C, refers to x if, in C, x is

uniquely a salient man. If, in a given context, Smith is such a man, then atoken in that context of “that man” refers to Smith; if instead Jones is such a

man, it refers to Jones; etc. The same is true of “the current President.” In one

context (the year 1992), tokens of that expression refer to Bill Clinton; in a

different context (the year 2009) it refers to Barack Obama.

  Some would be tempted to say that, because they have fixed referents,

proper names (e.g., “Bill Clinton”) don’t have a two-dimensional semantic

structure. This would be a mistake. Expression-tokens are physical entities—

bursts of noise, deposits of ink, etc. Expression-tokens are therefore

perceptible entities and are thus capable of transmitting information.

Expression-types, on the other hand, are abstract entities and are thus

inherently unsuited to be vehicles of communication. Let us develop these

points.

    Expression-types are properties. Why are they properties? Tokens of a

type are instances of it. Anything of which there are instances is ipso facto a

property. So expression-types, unlike expression-tokens, are properties and

are therefore non-spatiotemporal entities. And, as we just noted, it makes no

sense to suppose a nonspatiotemporal entity could mediate information or,

therefore, could in any significant sense be a symbol. Also, given the

profound metaphysical differences between tokens and types, it would be

theoretical arbitrariness of the worst kind to suppose that types could

discharge the same semantic functions as their tokens. We must therefore

assume that, whereas tokens of “Bill Clinton” refer to Bill Clinton, the

corresponding type does not refer to Bill Clinton; and we must also assume

that “Bill Clinton,” the expression-type, has for its meaning a (constant)

function that assigns Bill Clinton to any given one of its tokens. In general,

proper names, no less than indexicals and definite descriptions have two-

dimensional semantics.

  The semantic rule corresponding to a proper name is a constant function,

whereas the semantic rule corresponding to an indexical or definite

description is not a constant function. All utterances of “Bill Clinton” refer to

Bill Clinton, but not every utterance of “the current U.S. president,” or of

“that guy over there,” so refer. This has encouraged the erroneous view that

                                                                          [15]
“Bill Clinton” itself, the expression-type, refers to Bill Clinton.


7.7 Ambiguity and context-sensitivity (re-revisited)and the type-token distinction (re-revisited)

      Remember that expression-types are what result when properties per

se, as opposed to their instances, are assigned meanings. Of course, the rules

that assign meanings to properties are semantic rules, since anything that

assigns meaning to anything is ipso facto a semantic rule. So the sentence-

type of which the following ink deposit—“that guy is a professor”—is a

token is what results when some semantic rule assigns a meaning to some

property. Let R be the semantic rule in question. Let R be the meaning that
                12

R assigns to the just mentioned property. R is itself a semantic rule. But,
12

whereas R assigns a meaning (a rule) to some property, R assigns meanings
          12

to instances of that property. So R assigns meanings to particular instances
                                      2

of the morphology had by the ink deposit (“that guy is a professor”). The

meanings that R assigns to those tokens are not themselves rules; they are
                  2

propositions—they are things that are true or false.

  There are thus very different sorts of semantic rules. There are those that

assign meanings to properties, and there are those that assign meanings to

instances of those properties. Consider the following ink deposit: “Barack

Obama.” There is a semantic rule that assigns a meaning to the property of

having a morphology similar to that ink deposit. Let PBO be that property.

The meaning assigned to PBO is itself a semantic rule. In other words, the

meaning of PBO is given by the statement that:

  B: Any given token of PBO refers to to Barack Obama.
    1

  Given some specific token t of “Barack Obama”, the semantic rule for t

is:

  B: t refers to Barack Obama.
    2

  B and B are very different rules. Unlike B, B doesn’t say anything
    1221

about any specific token of “Barack Obama” or any other expression. The

need for a two-dimensionalist approach to semantics is embedded in the very

concept of what an expression is.

                        [16]
  8.0 Logical form

        Some statements that, given their grammatical forms, appear to be

about objects are in fact about properties. Frege was the first to see clearlythat logical and grammatical may diverge—he was the first to grasp the very

idea of such a divergence. This insight of his is embodied in his statement

that the sentence

  (WM) “whales are mammals”

isn’t about whales. As paradoxical as it may seem, he was right. WM says

that if an object is a whale, then it’s a mammal. But there is no specific object

x such that WM says that x is a mammal. A fortiori there is no specific whale

x such that WM says that x is a mammal; and for any number n, no matter

how high, there are no whales x....x such that WM says that x (1 ≤ i ≤ n) is
                                    1ni

a whale. So just as Frege said, WM isn’t about whales.

  WM makes a statement, not about whales, but about the property of being

a whale. It says that

  (WM*) the property of being a whale has the property of being

instantiated only by mammals.

  WM* perspicuously represents WM’s meaning. In other words, WM*

represents WM’s logical form. WM*’s grammatical form diverges from

WM’s grammatical form.

     The reason is that WM’s logical and grammatical forms pull apart is

that WM contains a quantifier. (Examples of quantifiers are “all birds,” “no

man,” “most whales,” “three birds,” and “some individuals.” We’ll define the

term “quantifier” in a moment.) Given any statement of English, or any other

non-artificial language, that contains quantifiers, the logical and grammatical

forms of that sentence diverge. A quantifier is an expression having the

property that, if a sentence contains it, that sentence is ipso facto to the effect

that the extension of one property has a certain degree of overlap, ranging

anywhere from no overlap to total overlap, with the extension of some other

property. “All birds have beaks” says that the extension of the property of

being a bird is a subset of the extension of the property of having a beak.

“Only birds have beaks” says (falsely) that the extension of the property of

having a beak is a subset of the extension of the property of being a bird.

  In virtue of a containing a quantifier, a sentence about properties, not

about specific objects. Of course, a quantified (quantifier-containing)

statement can also be about individuals. But it isn’t in virtue of containing a

quantifier that a sentence concerns individuals; and it is in virtue of

containing a quantifier that a sentence concerns properties.  In natural language, quantified sentences are pseudo-objectual statements.

They appear to be about objects, but are really about properties. That is why

they must be reparsed if their logical forms are to be exposed. It immediately

follows that a statement’s grammatical form may diverge from its logical

form. Frege discovered both facts and, therewith, created modern analytic

philosophy.


8.1 Contextual definition

          The fact that grammatical and logical form sometimes diverge is

related to the fact some expressions are to be defined contextually. To define

an expression contextually is to how, in virtue of containing it, a sentence’s

meaning is affected. So, for example, “someone” doesn’t refer to anyone. It

doesn’t refer to John or Sally or Jane. That is why, given any proper name N,

the statement

  (NS) ‹N doesn’t snore ›

                    [17]
is compatible with

  (SS) “someone snores.”

  Thus, the meaning of “someone” isn’t given by some rule that pairs it off

with this or that individual. In other words, there is no individual N such that

the semantic rule for “someone” is:

          [18]
    (WRS)‹Someone has psi› is true just in case N has psi.

        Rather, the meaning of “someone” is given by the statement that:

  (RS) ‹Someone has psi› is true just in case the property of being a psi is

            [19]
instantiated.

          Thus, the logical form SS is clearly displayed by the sentence:

      [20]
  (PS) “the property of being a snorer is instantiated.”

        PS’s logical form therefore coincides with its grammatical form.

Since SS has a different grammatical form from PS, it follows that SS’s

logical form diverges from its logical form. The divergence between SS’s

grammatical and logical forms is obviously a consequence of the fact that

“someone” must be defined contextually.8.2 Contextual definition: its scope and limits

      Nonetheless, it would be an overstatement to say that whenever a

sentence contains an expression that must be defined contextually, it’s

grammatical form pulls apart from its logical form. As we’re about to see,

every expression is to be defined contextually. Obviously grammatical form

doesn’t always pull apart from logical form. Therefore, it isn’t always the

case that, in virtue of containing an expression that must be defined

contextually, a sentence’s logical and grammatical forms diverge.

  How can it be said that all definitions are contextual definitions? Aren’t

there also denotative definitions? (A denotative definition of an expression E

says what E means by saying what it denotes.) Isn’t “Socrates” defined

denotatively? Yes, it is. There is some object x such that one says what

“Socrates” means if, and only if, one says that “Socrates“ refers to x.

  But in saying of some object x that “Socrates” picks out x, one is saying

that, in virtue of having the form ‹Socrates has psi›, a sentence S is to the

effect that x has psi. “Socrates” refers to Socrates because, the remaining

semantic rules of English being what they are, if you wish to attribute the

property of being wise to Socrates, you can do so by saying “Socrates is

wise”—because, in general, for any property psi, if you wish to attribute psi

to Socrates you can do so saying ‹Socrates has psi.› If, in saying “Socrates

was wise,” you were really saying that it was Aristotle, not Socrates, who

was wise, then “Socrates” wouldn’t refer to Socrates, at least not in that

context. In general, to say that E refers to O is to make a statement about

effect a sentence’s containing E has on its truth-conditions. More precisely, it

is to say that, in virtue of having the form ‹E has psi›, a sentence attributes psi

to O, for any property psi.

  But the logical forms of sentences of the form ‹E has psi› don’t

necessarily pull apart from their logical forms. Since there is some object x

(namely, Socrates) such that ‘Socrates is tall’ says that x is tall, and since ‹x

is tall› has the same form as “Socrates is tall,” the fact that “Socrates” is to be

defined contextually does not entail that logical and grammatical form ever

diverge.

  So it is only because certain expressions are to be defined contextually

that such divergences occur. But which expressions? Those that cannot also

be defined denotatively. Whenever an expression can be defined denotatively,a sentence’s logical form will not, by virtue of that sentence’s containing that

expression, diverge from its logical form. (But, of course, that sentence’s

logical form may diverge from its logical form for some other reason. Thus,

the logical form of “Socrates saw someone” diverges from its grammatical

form; but the reason for this is that it contains the word “someone.” The

occurrence of “Socrates” in that sentence isn’t what induces that divergence.)

  Let E be an arbitrary expression that can be defined denotatively. In other

words, suppose there to be some object x such that E is defined by saying that

it refers to x. The logical form of ‹E has psi› is: x has psi. In general, to the

extent that the logical form a sentence containing E is determined by its

containing that expression, that sentence’s logical and grammatical forms

coincide. But, since such a sentence’s logical form isn’t determined only by

its containing E, and is also a function of the semantics of the other

expressions occurring it, its grammatical form may still diverge from its

logical form. After all such a sentence may contain an occurrence of

“someone” or “nobody” or some other expression that induces such a

divergence.


8.3 Frege’s generalization of the concept of a

function

      What made it possible for Frege to revolutionize logic was his insight

that grammatical and logical form diverge; and what made the latter insight

possible was his generalization of the concept of a mathematical function.

  A mathematical function is a rule that assigns no more than one object to

each object falling in a given class. (So “+1” can be thought of as expressing

a function or rule that assigns 2 to 1, 3 to 2, etc.)

    According to Frege, the occurrence of “snores” in

  (PS) “Plato snores”

is best represented as the open sentence ‹x snores›; and that open sentence is

best thought of as expressing a function that assigns the truth-value true to

each snorer and the truth-value false to each thing that doesn’t snore. (For

brevity’s sake, I’ll henceforth use the words “truth” and “falsehood” instead

of, respectively, “the truth-value true” and “the truth-value false.”)

  Here’s the idea. A true sentence results if the variable in ‹x is even› isreplaced with an expression denoting an even number and false if it’s

replaced with a number that doesn’t denote such a number. (“2 is even” is

true and “3 is even” is false.) So we can think of ‹x is even› as assigning truth

to two, four, etc., and falsity to one, three, etc. For similar reasons, we can see

‹x snores› as assigning truth to snorer Bob and falsehood to non-snorer

Wilma, and so on.

  Frege sees the occurrence of “is taller than” in

  (BTM) “Bill is taller than Mary”

as being identical with the open sentence ‹x is taller than y›, and he sees that

open sentences as expressing a function that assigns truth-values to ordered

pairs of objects. So ‹x is taller than y› assigns truth to the ordered pair <x, y>

if x is taller than y and otherwise assigns falsehood to that pair.

  Frege treats:

  (BJMP) “Bill is standing between Mary and John”

as comprising the open-sentence ‹x is standing between y and z›; and he sees

that open sentence as expression a function that assigns truth to ordered

triples of objects—as assigning that truth value to <Bill, Mary, John> just in

case Bill is standing between Mary and John.

  In this way, Frege was able to assign a single form to all atomic

sentences. An atomic sentence is one that, unlike “Bill is tall and Sally is

smart,” doesn’t consist of other sentences and that, unlike “someone snores,”

doesn’t contain quantifiers. Non-atomic sentences are molecular. A

molecular sentence is one that either consists of other sentences or contains a

quantifier. Frege was able to show that, ultimately, all atomic sentences have

the form ‹O has psi. › Contrary to first appearances, BTM has the form: the

ordered pair <Bill, Mary> has psi, where psi is the property had by such a

pair just in case its first member is taller than its second.

    Pre-Fregean logicians saw each of PS, BTM, and BJMP as having a

different form from each of the other two, and this made it impossible for

them to do anything meaningful in the way of formalizing inferences

involving atomic sentences. But Frege didn’t have this problem, since he,

unlike them, wasn’t made blind by grammatical surface structure to the

underlying structural similarities.[1].   See Grice’s classic (1957) article “Meaning.”

[2].   In this context, the word “people” is meant to refer to sentient creatures of any kind—Martians,
  dolphins, etc. I wish to leave it open whether non-human creatures have conventions or, therefore,
    languages.

[3].   I say “typically” because not all linguists or philosophers of language consider this division to be
  a legitimate one. Wittgenstein (1958), for example, thought that semantics collapsed into
    pragmatics.

[4].   Given that I’m only indicating in broad terms what the discipline of semantics is about, I’ve
  omitted some steps from this argument. See Kaplan (1989) for a more thorough analysis of
    sentence-utterances like the one being discussed (viz. sentence-utterances that contain
    demonstratives—words like “this” and “that.”) There’s a second reason why my adding the
  missing steps unnecessary. The point I’m trying to make (viz. that it isn’t always obvious what is
  literally meant by an expression) is itself illustrated by the fact that it may be debated whether U1
  and U2 have the same meaning.

[5].   Although he does an, in some ways, creditable job of defending this analysis of utterances
    containing demonstratives, Kaplan doesn’t answer this very question. And this question, it seems
  to me, is much more important than the narrowly semantic question of what the literal meanings of
    utterances of “that man,” “this world,” etc., are. Kaplan notes the difficult (viz. that sentence-
  tokens that have the very same literal meaning can differ dramatically in what they communicate),
  and responds by saying (I quote, without omitting relevant contextual material): “Uh oh!” (See
  Kaplan (1989).)Which pretty much exhausts what he has to say about the matter. It also exhausts
  what Kaplan-disciples, such as Nathan Salmon, have to say about the matter. (See Salmon (1986),
  (2005), (2007).)

[6].   In 2004, in the journal History and Philosophy of Logic.

[7].   Lewis (1975).

[8].   One of the problems with logical positivism was that it assumed, incoherently, that expressions
  could be meaningless. There can be meaningless expression-like entities—but no meaningless
    expressions. And if, as the logical positivists contended, “there is no free will in a deterministic
  universe” is truly meaningless, then it isn’t a sentence at all; it is, at best, a sentence-like entity.
  But it plainly is a sentence. It may be (though I do not myself believe this) that “there is no free
  will in a deterministic universe” is in some way or other an incoherent statement. But an
    incoherent sentence is one that bears a self-undermining meaning. And there’s a big difference
  between bearing a self-undermining meaning and bearing no meaning. The logical positivists
  didn’t make this distinction.

[9].   Jerry Fodor and Ernie Lepore do a beautiful job of stating this argument and others like it in The
    compositionality Papers.

[10]. Mediating concepts are obviously similar to what Frege refers to as ‘senses.’  But, not wanting to
  prejudge the delicate question of whether they’re identical with Fregean senses, I’ve decided to
  give them a different name.

[11]. My personal view is that ultimately definite descriptions are devices of reference. But they are not
  to be understood in remotely the way that Frege thought. My official policy in this book is that
  they are to be understood in the way that Russell proposed. Russell’s analysis, though not (in my
  view) a correct answer to the narrowly semantic question ‘are definite descriptions referring
  terms?’ makes it much easier to absorb the larger, more important epistemological, logical, and    metaphysical points that it was his real purpose in putting forth the Theory of Descriptions to
  defend.

[12]. See Barwise and Perry (1983) and Kuczynski (2006).

[13]. “IA” is short for “interior angles.”

[14]. “BH” is short for “Bill’s holdings.”

[15]. Barwise and Perry (1983) make similar points. See Kuczynski (2007) for a thorough defense of
  this position. P.F. Strawson (1950) was the first author to put forth a viewpoint of this general
  kind.

[16]. Frege (1954).

[17]. Two statements are compatible if neither entails the negation of the other.

[18]. “WRS” stands for “wrong rule for ‘someone.’ ”

[19]. Arguably, not all sentences containing ‘someone’ have the form ‹someone has psi.› For example,
  “Plato kicked someone” seems not to have that form. For this reason, RFS, at least arguably, isn’t
  adequate. A more accurate, because more general, definition of “someone” is:

      RFS*) In virtue of having the form ‹...someone...›, a sentence says that the property ...x... is
    instantiated. Thus, “Plato kicked someone” says that the property being a thing that is kicked by
  Plato is instantiated. RFS* collapses into RFS, the reason being that any sentence of the form
    ‹...someone...› can be represented as having the form ‹someone has psi.› For example, “Plato
  kicked someone” says the same thing as “someone is such that Plato kicked that person.”

      What we just said about ‘someone’ is true mutatis mutandis of all other expressions that are to be
  defined contextually, which, given the fact that all expressions are to be defined contextually,
  means that it’s true of all expressions.

[20]. ‘PS’ stands for “the property of snoring.”