Money  and  the  Mechanism  of  Exchange  William

Stanley Jevons

 

D.  Appleton  and  Company.  New  York,  1876.

Westminster(authorized)  edition.  (First  published:

1875)

 



Preface

I. Barter

II. Exchange

III. The Functions of Money


IV.

    Early History of Money


V.

    Qualities of the Material of Money

VI. The Metals as Money

VII. Coins

VIII. The Principles of Circulation


IX.

    Systems of Metallic Money


X.

    The English System of Metallic Currency

XI. Fractional CurrencyXII. The Battle of the Standards

XIII. Technical Matters Relating to Coinage

XIV. International Money

XV. The Mechanism of Exchange

XVI. Representative Money

XVII. The Nature and Varieties of Promissory Notes

XVIII. Methods of Regulating a Paper Currency

XIX. Credit Documents

XX. Book Credit and the Banking System

XXI. The Clearing-House System

XXII. The Cheque Bank

XXIII. Foreign Bills of Exchange

XXIV. The Bank of England and the Money Market

XXV. A Tabular Standard of Value

XXVI. The Quantity of Money Needed by a

NationFootnotes

 






Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Date: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 Advanced Search

 









Preface

 



In preparing this volume, I have attempted to write a

descriptive essay on the past and present monetary

systems of the world, the materials employed to make

money, the regulations under which the coins are

struck and issued, the natural laws which govern their

circulation, the several modes in which they may be

replaced by the use of paper documents, and finally,

the method in which the use of money is immensely

economized by the cheque and clearing system now

being extended and perfected.

This is not a book upon the currency question, as that

question is so often discussed in England. I have only a

little to say about the Bank Charter Act, and upon that,

and other mysteries of the money market, I refer my

readers to the admirable essay of Mr. Bagehot on

"Lombard Street," to which this book may perhaps

serve as an introduction. 










There is much to be learnt about money before entering

upon those abstruse questions, which barely admit of

decided answers. In studying a language, we begin

with the grammar before we try to read or write. In

mathematics, we practice ourselves in simple

arithmetic before we proceed to the subtleties of

algebra and the differential calculus. But it is the grave

misfortune of the moral and political sciences, as well

shown by Mr. Herbert Spencer, in his "Study of

Sociology," that they are continually discussed by

those who have never laboured at the elementary

grammar or the simple arithmetic of the subject. Hence

the extraordinary schemes and fallacies every now and

then put forth.

       Currency is to the science of economy what the

    squaring of the circle is to geometry, or perpetual

      motion to mechanics. If there were a writer on

      Currency possessing some of the humour and

learning of the late Professor De Morgan, he could

easily produce a Budget of Currency Paradoxes more

than rivalling De Morgan's Circle-Squaring Paradoxes.

There are men who spend their time and fortunes in

endeavouring to convince a dull world that poverty can

be abolished by the issue of printed bits of paper. I

know one gentleman who holds that exchequer bills are

the panacea for the evils of humanity. Other

philanthropists wish to make us all rich by coining the

national debt, or coining the lands of the country, or

coining everything. Another class of persons have long

been indignant that, in this age of free trade, the Mint

price of gold should still remain arbitrarily fixed by

statute. A member of Parliament lately discovered a

new grievance, and made his reputation by agitating

against the oppressive restrictions on the coinage of

silver at the Mint. No wonder so many people are

paupers when there is a deficiency of shillings and

sixpences, and when the amount merely of the rates

and taxes paid in a year exceeds the whole sum of

money circulating in the kingdom.

 The subject of money as a whole is a very extensive

one, and the literature of it would fill a very great

library. Many changes are now taking place in the

currencies of the world, and important inquiries have

been lately instituted concerning the best mode of

constituting the circulating medium. The information

on the subject stored up in evidence given before

Government Commissions, in reports of International

Conferences, or in researches and writings of private

individuals, is quite appalling in extent. It has been my

purpose to extract from this mass of literature just such

facts as seem to be generally interesting and useful in

enabling the public to come to some conclusion upon

many currency questions which press for solution.

Shall we count in pounds, or dollars, or francs, or

marks? Shall we have gold or silver, or gold and silver,

as the measure of value? Shall we employ a paper

currency or a metallic one? How long shall we in

England allow our gold coinage to degenerate in

weight? Shall we recoin it at the expense of the State or

of the unlucky individuals who happen to hold lightsovereigns?

 










In America the questions are still more important and

pressing, involving the return to specie payments, the

future regulation of the paper currency, its partial

replacement by coin, and the exact size and character

of the American dollar, regarded in relation to

international currency. Germany is in the midst of a

great, and probably a sound and successful,

reorganization of the currency, both metallic and paper.

In France the great debate upon the double versus the

single standard is hardly yet terminated, and active

measures are being taken to place the paper issues on a

convertible basis. Among the other countries of

Europe-Italy, Austria, Holland, Belgium, Switzerland,

the Scandinavian kingdoms and Russia-there is hardly

one which is not at present reforming its currency, or

has lately done so, or is discussing the proper method

of attempting the task. As regards all such changes, we

should remember that in the present we are ever

moulding the future, and that a world-wide system ofinternational money, though it may seem impracticable

at the moment, is an object at which all those should

aim who wish to leave the world better than they found

it.


1. I wish to acknowledge the assistance which I have

    derived from the works of Mr. Seyd, especially his

    treatise on "Bullion and the Foreign Exchanges,"

    from Professor Sumner's "History of the American

    Currency," M. Chevalier's work "La Monnaie," M.

    Wolowski's various important publications upon

    money, and many valuable articles in the Journal

    des Economistes. I must express my thanks to many

    bankers and gentlemen for information and

    assistance kindly rendered to me, especially to Mr.

    John Mills, Mr. T. R. Wilkinson, Mr. Roberts, the

    chemist of the Royal Mint, and Mr. E. Helm.

 









2. I should also like to take this opportunity of

    thanking those gentlemen who have from time to

    time sent me documents and publications bearing

    upon the subject of money, which have proved very    valuable. I may mention especially a series of

    reports and documents concerning the American

    mint and currency received through the kindness of

    the Director of the Mint, and of Mr. Walker and

    Mr. E. Dubois.

3. I am much indebted to Mr. W. H. Brewer, M.A., for

    carefully reading the whole of the proofs, and to

    Professor T. E. Cliffe Leslie, Mr. R. H. Inglis

    Palgrave, and Mr. Frederick Hendriks for

    examining particular portions.

 




May 31st, 1875.

 

P.9

 







Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 Advanced Search Chapter I Barter

 



Some years since, Mademoiselle Zélie, a singer of the

Théâtre Lyrique at Paris, made a professional tour

round the world, and gave a concert in the Society

Islands. In exchange for an air from Norma and a few

other songs, she was to receive a third part of the

receipts. When counted, her share was found to consist

of three pigs, twenty-three turkeys, forty-four chickens,

five thousand cocoa-nuts, besides considerable

quantities of bananas, lemons, and oranges. At the

Halle in Paris, as the prima donna remarks in her lively

letter, printed by M. Wolowski, this amount of live

stock and vegetables might have brought four thousand

francs, which would have been good remuneration for

five songs. In the Society Islands, however, pieces of

money were very scarce; and as Mademoiselle could

not consume any considerable portion of the receipts

herself, it became necessary in the mean time to feed

the pigs and poultry with the fruit.

 



When Mr. Wallace was travelling in the Malay

Archipelago, he seems to have suffered rather from the

scarcity than the superabundance of provisions. In hismost interesting account of his travels, he tells us that

in some of the islands, where there was no proper

currency, he could not procure supplies for dinner

without a special bargain and much chaffering upon

each occasion. If the vendor of fish or other coveted

eatables did not meet with the sort of exchange desired,

he would pass on, and Mr. Wallace and his party had to

go without their dinner. It therefore became very

desirable to keep on hand a supply of articles, such as

knives, pieces of cloth, arrack, or sago cakes, to

multiply the chance that one or other article would suit

the itinerant merchant.


1. In modern civilized society the inconveniences of

    the primitive method of exchange are wholly

    unknown, and might almost seem to be imaginary.

    Accustomed from our earliest years to the use of

    money, we are unconscious of the inestimable

    benefits which it confers upon us; and only when

    we recur to altogether diferent states of society can

    we realize the difficulties which arise in its absence.

    It is even surprising to be reminded that barter is

    actually the sole method of commerce among many

    uncivilized races. There is something absurdly

    incongruous in the fact that a joint-stock company,

    called "The African Barter Company, Limited,"    exists in London, which carries on its transactions

    upon the West Coast of Africa entirely by bartering

    European manufactures for palm oil, gold dust,

    ivory, cotton, coffee, gum, and other raw produce.

 

2. The earliest form of exchange must have consisted

    in giving what was not wanted directly for that

    which was wanted. This simple traffic we call

    barter or truck, the French troc, and distinguish it

    from sale and purchase in which one of the articles

    exchanged is intended to be held only for a short

    time, until it is parted with in a second act of

    exchange. The object which thus temporarily

    intervenes in sale and purchase is money. At first

    sight it might seem that the use of money only

    doubles the trouble, by making two exchanges

    necessary where one was sufficient; but a slight

    analysis of the difficulties inherent in simple barter

    shows that the balance of trouble lies quite in the

    opposite direction. Only by such an analysis can we

    become aware that money performs not merely one

    service to us, but several different services, each

    indispensable. Modern society could not exist in its

    present complex form without the means which

    money constitutes of valuing, distributing, and

    contracting for commodities of various kinds.3. 

 


Want of Coincidence in Barter.

 



The first difficulty in barter is to find two persons

whose disposable possessions mutually suit each

other's wants. There may be many people wanting, and

many possessing those things wanted; but to allow of

an act of barter, there must be a double coincidence,

which will rarely happen. A hunter having returned

from a successful chase has plenty of game, and may

want arms and ammunition to renew the chase. But

those who have arms may happen to be well supplied

with game, so that no direct exchange is possible. In

civilized society the owner of a house may find it

unsuitable, and may have his eye upon another house

exactly fitted to his needs. But even if the owner of this

second house wishes to part with it at all, it is

exceedingly unlikely that he will exactly reciprocate

the feelings of the first owner, and wish to barter

houses. Sellers and purchasers can only be made to fit

by the use of some commodity, some marchandise

banale, as the French call it, which all are willing to

receive for a time, so that what is obtained by sale in

one case, may be used in purchase in another. Thiscommon commodity is called a medium, of exchange,

because it forms a third or intermediate term in all acts

of commerce.

 

            I.5 Within the last few years a curious attempt

has been made to revive the practice of barter by the

circulation of advertisements. The Exchange and Mart

is a newspaper which devotes itself to making known

all the odd property which its advertisers are willing to

give for some coveted article. One person has some old

coins and a bicycle, and wants to barter them for a

good concertina. A young lady desires to possess

"Middlemarch," and offers a variety of old songs of

which she has become tired. Judging from the size and

circulation of the paper, and the way in which its

scheme has been imitated by some other weekly

papers, we must assume that the offers are sometimes

accepted, and that the printing press can bring about, in

some degree, the double coincidence necessary to an

act of barter.

 

I.6

 

Want of a Measure of Value.

 A second difficulty arises in barter. At what rate is any

exchange to be made? If a certain quantity of beef be

given for a certain quantity of corn, and in like manner

corn be exchanged for cheese, and cheese for eggs, and

eggs for flax, and so on, still the question will arise-

How much beef for how much flax, or how much of

any one commodity for a given quantity of another? In

a state of barter the price-current list would be a most

complicated document, for each commodity would

have to be quoted in terms of every other commodity,

or else complicated rule-of-three sums would become

necessary. Between one hundred articles there must

exist no less than 4950 possible ratios of exchange, and

all these ratios must be carefully adjusted so as to be

consistent with each other, else the acute trader will be

able to profit by buying from some and selling to

others.

 

            I.7 All such trouble is avoided if any one

commodity be chosen, and its ratio of exchange with

each other commodity be quoted. Knowing how much

corn is to be bought for a pound of silver, and also how

much flax for the same quantity of silver, we learn

without further trouble how much corn exchanges for

so much flax. The chosen commodity becomes a

common denominator or common measure of value, interms of which we estimate the values of all other

goods, so that their values become capable of the most

easy comparison.

 

I.8

 

Want of Means of Subdivision.

 



A third but it may be a minor inconvenience of barter

arises from the impossibility of dividing many kinds of

goods. A store of corn, a bag of gold dust, a carcase of

meat, may be portioned out, and more or less may be

given in exchange for what is wanted. But the tailor, as

we are reminded in several treatises on political

economy, may have a coat ready to exchange, but it

much exceeds in value the bread which he wishes to

get from the baker, or the meat from the butcher. He

cannot cut the coat up without destroying the value of

his handiwork. It is obvious that he needs some

medium of exchange, into which he can temporarily

convert the coat, so that he may give a part of its value

for bread, and other parts for meat, fuel, and daily

necessaries, retaining perhaps a portion for future use.

Further illustration is needless; for it is obvious that we

need a means of dividing and distributing valueaccording to our varying requirements.

 

            I.9 In the present day barter still goes on in

some cases, even in the most advanced commercial

countries, but only when its inconveniences are not

experienced. Domestic servants receive part of their

wages in board and lodging: the farm labourer may

partially receive payment in cider, or barley, or the use

of a piece of land. It has always been usual for the

miller to be paid by a portion of the corn which he

grinds. The truck or barter system, by which workmen

took their wages in kind, has hardly yet been

extinguished in some parts of England. Pieces of land

are occasionally exchanged by adjoining landowners;

but all these are comparatively trilling cases. In almost

all acts of exchange money now intervenes in one way

or other, and even when it does not pass from hand to

hand, it serves as the measure by which the amounts

given and received are estimated. Commerce begins

with barter, and in a certain sense it returns to barter;

but the last form of barter, as we shall see, is very

different from the first form. By far the greater part of

commercial payments are made at the present day in

England apparently without the aid of metallic money;

but they are readily adjusted, because money acts as

the common denominator, and what is bought in onedirection is balanced off against what is sold in another

direction.

 

I.10

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search Chapter II Exchange

 



Money is the measure and standard of value and the

medium of exchange, yet it is not necessary that I

should enter upon more than a very brief discussion

concerning the nature of value, and the advantage of

exchange. Every one must allow that the exchange of

commodities depends upon the obvious principle that

each of our wants taken separately requires a limited

quantity of some article to produce satisfaction. Hence

as each want becomes fully satiated, our desire, as

Senior so well remarked, is for variety, that is, for thesatisfaction of some other want. The man who is

supplied daily with three pounds of bread, will not

desire more bread; but he will have a strong inclination

for beef, and tea, and alcohol. If he happen to meet

with a person who has plenty of beef but no bread,

each will give that which is less desired for that which

is more desired. Exchange has been called the barter of

the superfluous for the necessary, and this definition

will be correct if we state it as the barter of the

comparatively superfluous for the comparatively

necessary.

 



It is impossible, indeed, to decide exactly how much

bread, or beef, or tea, or how many coats and hats a

person needs. There is no precise limit to our desires,

and we can only say, that as we have a larger supply of

a substance, the urgency of our need for more is in

some proportion weakened. A cup of water in the

desert, or upon the field of battle, may save life, and

become infinitely useful. Two or three pints per day for

each person are needful for drinking and cooking

purposes. A gallon or two per day are highly requisite

for cleanliness; but we soon reach a point at which

further supplies of water are of very minor importance.

A modern town population is found to be satisfied withabout twenty-five gallons per head per day for all

purposes, and a further supply would possess little

utility. Water, indeed, may be the reverse of useful, as

in the case of a flood, or a damp house, or a wet mine.

 

II.2

 

Utility and Value are not intrinsic.

 



It is only, then, when supplied in moderate quantities,

and at the right time, that a thing can be said to be

useful. Utility is not a quality intrinsic in a substance,

for, if it were, additional quantities of the same

substance would always be desired, however much we

previously possessed. We must not confuse the

usefulness of a thing with the physical qualities upon

which the usefulness depends. Utility and value are

only accidents of a thing arising from the fact that

some one wants it, and the degree of the utility and the

amount of resulting value will depend upon the extent

to which the desire for it has been previously gratified.

 

            II.3 Regarding utility, then, as constantly

varying in degree, and as variable even for each

different portion of commodity, it is not difficult to seethat we exchange those parts of our stock which have a

low degree of utility to us, for articles which, being of

low utility to others, are much desired by us. This

exchange is continued up to the point at which the next

portion given would be equally useful to us with that

received, so that there is no gain of utility: there would

be a loss in carrying the exchange further. Upon these

considerations it is easy to construct a theory of the

nature of exchange and value, which has been

explained in my book*1 called "The Theory of

Political Economy." It is there shown that the well-

known laws of supply and demand follow from this

view of utility, and thus yield a verification of the

theory. Since the publication of the work named, M.

Léon Walras, the ingenious professor of political

economy at Lausanne, has independently arrived at the

same theory of exchange,*2 a remarkable confirmation

of its truth.

 

II.4

 

Value expresses Patio of Exchange.

 



We must now fix our attention upon the fact that, in

every act of exchange, a definite quantity of onesubstance is exchanged for a definite quantity of

another. The things bartered may be most various in

character, and may be variously measured. We may

give a weight of silver for a length of rope, or a

superficial extent of carpet, or a number of gallons of

wine, or a certain horsepower of force, or conveyance

over a certain distance. The quantities to be measured

may be expressed in terms of space, time, mass, force,

energy, heat, or any other physical units. Yet each

exchange will consist in giving so many units of one

thing for so many units of another, each measured in its

appropriate way.

 

            II.5 Every act of exchange thus presents itself

to us in the form of a ratio between two numbers. The

word value is commonly used, and if, at current rates,

one ton of copper exchanges for ten tons of bar iron, it

is usual to say that the value of copper is ten times that

of the iron, weight for weight. For our purpose, at least,

this use of the word value is only an indirect mode of

expressing a ratio. When we say that gold is more

valuable than silver, we mean that, as commonly

exchanged, the weight of silver exceeds that of the gold

given for it. If the value of gold rises compared with

that of silver, then still more silver is given for the

same quantity of gold. But value like utility is nointrinsic quality of a thing; it is an extrinsic accident or

relation. We should never speak of the value of a thing

at all without having in our minds the other thing in

regard to which it is valued. The very same substance

may rise and fall in value at the same time. If, in

exchange for a given weight of gold, I can get more

silver, but less copper, than I used to do, the value of

gold has risen with respect to silver, but fallen with

respect to copper. It is evident that an intrinsic property

of a thing cannot both increase and decrease at the

same time; therefore value must be a mere relation or

accident of a thing as regards other things and the

persons needing them.

 









Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search Chapter III The Functions of Money 



We have seen that three inconveniences attach to the

practice of simple barter, namely, the improbability, of

coincidence between persons wanting and persons

possessing; the complexity of exchanges, which are not

made in terms of one single substance; and the need of

some means of dividing and distributing valuable

articles. Money remedies these inconveniences, and

thereby performs two distinct functions of high

importance, acting as-

 


(1)

    A medium of exchange.


(2)

 



    A common measure of value.

 



In its first form money is simply any commodity

esteemed by all persons, any article of food, clothing,

or ornament which any person will readily receive, and

which, therefore, every person desires to have by him

in greater or less quantity, in order that he may have

the means of procuring necessaries of life at any time.Although many commodities may be capable of

performing this function of a medium more or less

perfectly, some one article will usually be selected, as

money par excellence, by custom or the force of

circumstances. This article will then begin to be used

as a measure of value. Being accustomed to exchange

things frequently for sums of money, people learn the

value of other articles in terms of money, so that all

exchanges will most readily be calculated and adjusted

by comparison of the money values of the things

exchanged.

 

III.1

 

A Standard of Value.

A third function of money soon develops itself.

Commerce cannot advance far before people begin to

borrow and lend, and debts of various origin are

contracted. It is in some cases usual, indeed, to restore

the very same article which was borrowed, and in

almost every case it would be possible to pay back in

the same kind of commodity. If corn be borrowed, corn

might be paid back, with interest in corn; but the lender

will often not wish to have things returned to him at an

uncertain time, when he does not much need them, or

when their value is unusually low. A borrower, too,may need several different kinds of articles, which he

is not likely to obtain from one person; hence arises the

convenience of borrowing and lending in one generally

recognized commodity, of which the value varies little.

Every person making a contract by which he will

receive something at a future day, will prefer to secure

the receipt of a commodity likely to be as valuable then

as now. This commodity will usually be the current

money, and it will thus come to perform the function of

a standard of value. We must not suppose that the

substance serving as a standard of value is really

invariable in value, but merely that it is chosen as that

measure by which the value of future payments is to be

regulated. Bearing in mind that value is only the ratio

of quantities exchanged, it is certain that no substance

permanently bears exactly the same value relatively to

another commodity; but it will, of course, be desirable

to select as the standard of value that which appears

likely to continue to exchange for many other

commodities in nearly unchanged ratios.

 

III.2

 

A Store of Value.

It is worthy of inquiry whether money does not also

serve a fourth distinct purpose-that of embodying valuein a convenient form for conveyance to distant places.

Money, when acting as a medium of exchange,

circulates backwards and forwards near the same spot,

and may sometimes return to the same hands again and

again. It subdivides and distributes property, and

lubricates the action of exchange. But at times a person

needs to condense his property into the smallest

compass, so that he may hoard it away for a time, or

carry it with him on a long journey, or transmit it to a

friend in a distant country. Something which is very

valuable, although of little bulk and weight, and which

will be recognised as very valuable in every part of the

world, is necessary for this purpose. The current money

of a country is perhaps more likely to fulfil these

conditions than anything else, although diamonds and

other precious stones, and articles of exceptional

beauty and rarity, might occasionally be employed.

 

            III.3 The use of esteemed articles as a store or

medium for conveying value may in some cases

precede their employment as currency. Mr. Gladstone

states that in the Homeric poems gold is mentioned as

being hoarded and treasured up, and as being

occasionally used in the payment of services, before it

became the common measure of value, oxen being then

used for the latter purpose. Historically speaking, sucha generally esteemed substance as gold seems to have

served, firstly, as a commodity valuable for ornamental

purposes; secondly, as stored wealth; thirdly, as a

medium of exchange; and, lastly, as a measure of

value.

 

III.4

 

Separation of Functions.

It is in the highest degree important that the reader

should discriminate carefully and constantly between

the four functions which money fulfils, at least in

modern societies. We are so accustomed to use the one

same substance in all the four different ways, that they

tend to become confused together in thought. We come

to regard as almost necessary that union of functions

which is, at the most, a matter of convenience, and may

not always be desirable. We might certainly employ

one substance as a medium of exchange, a second as a

measure of value, a third as a standard of value, and a

fourth as a store of value. In buying and selling we

might transfer portions of gold; in expressing and

calculating prices we might speak in terms of silver;

when we wanted to make long leases we might define

the rent in terms of wheat, and when we wished to

carry our riches away we might condense it into theform of precious stones. This use of different

commodities for each of the functions of money has in

fact been partially carried out. In Queen Elizabeth's

reign silver was the common measure of value; gold

was employed in large payments in quantities

depending upon its current value in silver, while corn

was required by the Act 18th Elizabeth, c. VI. (1576),

to be the standard of value in drawing the leases of

certain college lands.

 

            III.5 There is evident convenience in selecting,

if possible, one single substance which can serve all the

functions of money. It will save trouble if we can pay

in the same money in which the prices of things are

calculated. As few people have the time or patience to

investigate closely the history of prices, they will

probably assume that the money in which they make

all minor and temporary bargains, is also the best

standard in which to register debts and contracts

extending over many years. A great mass of payments

too are invariably fixed by law, such as tolls, fees, and

tariffs of charges: many other payments are fixed by

custom. Accordingly, even if the medium of exchange

varied considerably in value, people would go on

making their payments in terms of it, as if there had

been no variation, some gaining at the expense ofothers.

 

            III.6 One of our chief tasks in this book will be

to consider the various materials which have been

employed as money, or have been, or may be,

suggested for the purpose. It must be our endeavour, if

possible, to discover some substance which will in the

highest degree combine the characters requisite for all

the different functions of money, but we must bear in

mind that a partition of these functions amongst

different substances is practicable. We will first

proceed to a brief review of the very various ways in

which the need of currency has been supplied from the

earliest ages, and we will afterwards analyse the

physical qualities and circumstances which render the

substances employed more or less suited to the purpose

to which they were applied. We may thus arrive at

some decision as to the exact nature of the commodity

which is best adapted to meet our needs in the present

day.

 

III.7

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and theMechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search Chapter IV Early History of Money

 



Living in civilized communities, and accustomed to the

use of coined metallic money, we learn to identify

money with gold and silver; hence spring hurtful and

insidious fallacies. It is always useful, therefore, to be

reminded of the truth, so well stated by Turgot, that

every kind of merchandise has the two properties of

measuring value and transferring value. It is entirely a

question of degree what commodities will in any given

state of society form the most convenient currency, and

this truth will be best impressed upon us by a brief

consideration of the very numerous things which have

at one time or other been employed as money. Though

there are many numismatists and many political

economists, the natural history of money is almost a

virgin subject, upon which I should like to dilate; but

the narrow limits of my space forbid me from

attempting more than a brief sketch of the manyinteresting facts which may be collected.

 

IV.1

 

Currency in the Hunting State.

 



Perhaps the most rudimentary state of industry is that

in which subsistence is gained by hunting wild

animals. The proceeds of the chase would, in such a

state, be the property of most generally recognised

value. The meat of the animals captured would, indeed,

be too perishable in nature to be hoarded or often

exchanged; but it is otherwise with the skins, which,

being preserved and valued for clothing, became one of

the earliest materials of currency. Accordingly, there is

abundant evidence that furs or skins were employed as

money in many ancient nations. They serve this

purpose to the present day in some parts of the world.

 

            IV.2 In the book of Job (ii. 4) we read, "Skin

for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for his

life;" a statement clearly implying that skins were taken

as the representative of value among the ancient

Oriental nations. Etymological research shows that the

same may be said of the northern nations from theearliest times. In the Esthonian language the word râha

generally signifies money, but its equivalent in the

kindred Lappish tongue has not yet altogether lost the

original meaning of skin or fur. Leather money is said

to have circulated in Russia as late as the reign of Peter

the Great, and it is worthy of notice, that classical

writers have recorded traditions to the effect that the

earliest currency used at Rome, Lacedæmon, and

Carthage, was formed of leather.

 

            IV.3 We need not go back, however, to such

early times to study the use of rude currencies. In the

traffic of the Hudson's Bay Company with the North

American Indians, furs, in spite of their differences of

quality and size, long formed the medium of exchange.

It is very instructive, and corroborative of the previous

evidence to find that, even after the use of coin had

become common among the Indians the skin was still

commonly used as the money of account. Thus

Whymper says,*3 "a gun, nominally worth about forty

shillings, bought twenty 'skins.' This term is the old one

employed by the company. One skin (beaver) is

supposed to be worth two shillings, and it represents

two marten, and so on. You heard a great deal about

'skins' at Fort Yukon, as the workmen were also

charged for clothing, etc., in this way." 

IV.4

 

Currency in the Pastoral State.

 



In the next higher stage of civilization, the pastoral

state, sheep and cattle naturally form the most valuable

and negotiable kind of property. They are easily

transferable, convey themselves about, and can be kept

for many years, so that they readily perform some of

the functions of money.

 

            IV.5 We have abundance of evidence,

traditional, written, and etymological, to show this. In

the Homeric poems oxen are distinctly and repeatedly

mentioned as the commodity in terms of which other

objects are valued. The arms of Diomed are stated to

be worth nine oxen, and are compared with those of

Glaucos, worth one hundred. The tripod, the first prize

for wrestlers in the 23rd Iliad, was valued at twelve

oxen, and a woman captive, skilled in industry, at

four.*4 It is peculiarly interesting to find oxen thus

used as the common measure of value, because from

other passages it is probable, as already mentioned, that

the precious metals, though as yet uncoined, were usedas a store of value, and occasionally as a medium of

exchange. The several functions of money were thus

clearly performed by different commodities at this

early period.

 

            IV.6 In several languages the name for money

is identical with that of some kind of cattle or

domesticated animal. It is generally allowed that

pecunia, the Latin word for money, is derived from

pecus, cattle. From the Agamemnon of Æschylus we

learn that the figure of an ox was the sign first

impressed upon coins, and the same is said to have

been the case with the earliest issues of the Roman As.

Numismatic researches fail to bear out these traditions,

which were probably invented to explain the

connection between the name of the coin and the

animal. A corresponding connection between these

notions may be detected in much more modern

languages. Our common expression for the payment of

a sum of money is fee, which is nothing but the Anglo-

Saxon feoh, meaning alike money and cattle, a word

cognate with the German vieh, which still bears only

the original meaning of cattle. As I am informed by my

friend, Professor Theodores, the same connection of

ideas is manifested in the Greek word for property,

which means alike possession, flock, or cattle, and isreferred by Grimm to an original verb or , to feed

cattle. It is even supposed by Grimm that the same root

reappears in the Teutonic and Scandinavian languages,

in the Gothic, skatts, the modern High German schatz,

the Anglo-Saxon, scät or sceat, the ancient Norsk skat,

all meaning wealth, property, treasure, tax, or tribute,

especially in the shape of cattle. This theory is

confirmed by the fact that the Frisian equivalent, sket,

has retained the original meaning of cattle to the

present day. In the Norsk, Anglo-Saxon, and English,

scat or scot has been specialized to denote tax or

tribute.

 


IV.7

In the ancient German codes of law, fines and penalties

are actually defined in terms of live-stock. In the Zend

Avesta, as Professor Theodores further informs me, the

scale of rewards to be paid to physicians is carefully

stated, and in every case the fee consists in some sort

of cattle. The fifth and sixth lectures in Sir


H.

    S. Maine's most interesting work on "The Early

    History ofInstitutions," which has just been

    published, are full of curious

information showing the importance of live-stock in aprimitive state of society. Being counted by the head,

the kine was called capitale, whence the economical

term capital, the law term chattel, and our common

name cattle.

 

            IV.8 In countries where slaves form one of the

most common and valuable possessions, it is quite

natural that they should serve as the medium of

exchange like cattle. Pausanias mentions their use in

this way, and in Central Africa and some other places

where slavery still flourishes, they are the medium of

exchange along with cattle and ivory tusks. According

to Earl's account of New Guinea, there is in that island

a large traffic in slaves, and a slave forms the unit of

value. Even in England slaves are believed to have

been exchanged at one time in the manner of money.

 

IV.9

 

Articles of Ornament as Currency.

 



A passion for personal adornment is one of the most

primitive and powerful instincts of the human race, and

as articles used for such purposes would be durable,

universally esteemed, and easily transferable, it isnatural that they should be circulated as money. The

wampumpeag of the North American Indians is a case

in point, as it certainly served as jewellery. It consisted

of beads made of the ends of black and white shells,

rubbed down and polished, and then strung into belts or

necklaces, which were valued according to their length,

and also according to their colour and lustre, a foot of

black peag being worth two feet of white peag. It was

so well established as currency among the natives that

the Court of Massachusetts ordered, in 1649, that it

should be received in the payment of debts among

settlers to the amount of forty shillings. It is curious to

learn, too, that just as European misers hoard up gold

and silver coins, the richer Indian chiefs secrete piles of

wampum beads, having no better means of investing

their superfluous wealth.

 

            IV.10 Exactly analogous to this North

American currency, is that of the cowry shells, which,

under one name or another-chamgos, zimbis, bouges,

porcelanes, etc.-have long been used in the East Indies

as small money. In British India, Siam, the West Coast

of Africa, and elsewhere on the tropical coasts, they are

still used as small change, being collected on the shores

of the Maldive and Laccadive Islands, and exported for

the purpose. Their value varies somewhat, according tothe abundance of the yield, but in India the current rate

used to be about 5000 shells for one rupee, at which

rate each shell is worth about the two-hundredth part of

a penny. Among our interesting fellow-subjects, the

Fijians, whale's teeth served in the place of cowries,

and white teeth were exchanged for red teeth somewhat

in the ratio of shillings to sovereigns.

 

            IV.11 Among other articles of ornament or of

special value used as currency, may be mentioned

yellow amber, engraved stones, such as the Egyptian

scarabæi, and tusks of ivory.

 

IV.12

 

Currency in the Agricultural State.

 



Many vegetable productions are at least as well suited

for circulation as some of the articles which have been

mentioned. It is not surprising to find, then, that among

a people supporting themselves by agriculture, the

more durable products were thus used. Corn has been

the medium of exchange in remote parts of Europe

from the time of the ancient Greeks to the present day.

In Norway corn is even deposited in banks, and lentand borrowed. What wheat, barley, and oats are to

Europe, such is maize in parts of Central America,

especially Mexico, where it formerly circulated. In

many of the countries surrounding the Mediterranean,

olive oil is one of the commonest articles of produce

and consumption; being, moreover, pretty uniform in

quality, durable, and easily divisible, it has long served

as currency in the Ionian Islands, Mytilene, some

towns of Asia Minor, and elsewhere in the Levant.

 

            IV.13 Just as cowries circulate in the East

Indies, so cacao nuts, in Central America and Yucatan,

form a perfectly recognised and probably an ancient

fractional money. Travellers have published many

distinct statements as to their value, but it is impossible

to reconcile these statements without supposing great

changes of value either in the nuts or in the coins with

which they are compared. In 1521, at Caracas, about

thirty cacao nuts were worth one penny English,

whereas recently ten beans would go to a penny,

according to Squier's statements. In the European

countries, where almonds are commonly grown, they

have circulated to some extent like the cacao nuts, but

are variable in value, according to the success of the

harvest.

             IV.14 It is not only, however, as a minor

currency that vegetable products have been used in

modern times. In the American settlements and the

West India Islands, in former days, specie used to

become inconveniently scarce, and the legislators fell

back upon the device of obliging creditors to receive

payment in produce at stated rates. In 1618, the

Governor of the Plantations of Virginia ordered that

tobacco should be received at the rate of three shillings

for the pound weight, under the penalty of three years'

hard labour. We are told that, when the Virginia

Company imported young women as wives for the

settlers, the price per head was one hundred pounds of

tobacco, subsequently raised to one hundred and fifty.

As late as 1732, the legislature of Maryland made

tobacco and Indian corn legal tenders; and in 1641

there were similar laws concerning corn in

Massachussets. The governments of some of the West

India Islands seem to have made attempts to imitate

these peculiar currency laws, and it was provided that

the successful plaintiff in a lawsuit should be obliged

to accept various kinds of raw produce, such as sugar,

rum, molasses, ginger, indigo, or tobacco.*5 Such

endeavours to establish a kind of multiple currency will

be found to possess considerable interest for us in a

later chapter. 

            IV.15 The perishable nature of most kinds of

animal food prevents them from being much used as

money; but eggs are said to have circulated in the

Alpine villages of Switzerland, and dried codfish have

certainly acted as currency in the colony of

Newfoundland.

 

IV.16

 

Manufactured and Miscellaneous Articles as Currency.

 



The enumeration of articles which have served as

money may already seem long enough for the purposes

in view. I will, therefore, only add briefly that a great

number of manufactured commodities have been used

as a medium of exchange in various times and places.

Such are the pieces of cotton cloth, called Guinea

pieces, used for traffic upon the banks of the Senegal,

or the somewhat similar pieces circulated in Abyssinia,

the Soulou Archipelago, Sumatra, Mexico, Peru,

Siberia, and among the Veddahs. It is less easy to

understand the origin of the curious straw money

which circulated until 1694 in the Portuguese

possessions in Angola, and which consisted of smallmats, called libongos, woven out of rice straw, and

worth about 11/2d. each. These mats must have had, at

least originally, some purpose apart from their use as

currency, and were perhaps analogous to the fine

woven mats so much valued by the Samoans, and also

treated by them as a medium of exchange.

 

            IV.17 Salt has been circulated not only in

Abyssinia, but in Sumatra, Mexico, and elsewhere.

Cubes of benzoin gum or beeswax in Sumatra, red

feathers in the Islands of the Pacific Ocean, cubes of

tea in Tartary, iron shovels or hoes among the

Malagasy, are other peculiar forms of currency. The

remarks of Adam Smith concerning the use of

handmade nails as money in some Scotch villages will

be remembered by many readers, and need not be

repeated. M. Chevalier has adduced an exactly

corresponding case from one of the French coalfields.

 

            IV.18 Were space available it would be

interesting to discuss the not improbable suggestion of

Boucher de Perthes, that, perhaps, after all, the finely

worked stone implements now so frequently

discovered were among the earliest mediums of

exchange. Some of them are certainly made of jade,

nephrite, or other hard stones, only found in distantcountries, so that an active traffic in such implements

must have existed in times of which we have no

records whatever.

 

            IV.19 There are some obscure allusions in

classical authors to a wooden money circulating among

the Byzantines, and to a wooden talent used at Antioch

and Alexandria, but in the absence of fuller

information as to their nature, it is impossible to do

more than mention them.

 

IV.20

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 Chapter V Qualities of the Material of Money

 



Many recent writers, such as Huskisson, MacCulloch,

James Mill, Garnier, Chevalier, and Walras, have

satisfactorily described the qualities which should be

possessed by the material of money. Earlier writers

seem, however, to have understood the subject almost

as well. Harris explained these qualities with

remarkable clearness in his "Essay upon Money and

Coins," published in 1757, a work which appeared

before the "Wealth of Nations," yet gave an exposition

of the principles of money which can hardly be

improved at the present day. Eighty years before,

however, Rice Vaughan, in his excellent little "Treatise

of Money," had written a brief but satisfactory

statement of the qualities requisite in money. We even

find that William Stafford, the author of that

remarkable dialogue of the Elizabethan age (1581),

called "A Brief Conceipte of English Policy," showed

perfect insight into the subject. Of all writers, M.

Chevalier, however, probably gives the most accurate

and full account of the properties which money should

possess, and I shall in many points follow his views.

 The prevailing defect in the treatment of the subject is

the failure to observe that money requires different

properties as regards different functions. To decide

upon the best material for money is thus a problem of

great complexity, because we must take into account at

once the relative importance of the several functions of

money, the degree in which money is employed for

each function, and the importance of each of the

physical qualities of the substance with respect to each

function. In a simple state of industry money is chiefly

required to pass about between buyers and sellers. It

should, then, be conveniently portable, divisible into

pieces of various size, so that any sum may readily be

made up, and easily distinguishable by its appearance,

or by the design impressed upon it. When money,

however, comes to serve, as it will at some future time,

almost exclusively as a measure and standard of value,

the system of exchange, being one of perfected barter,

such properties become a matter of comparative

indifference, and stability of value, joined perhaps to

portability, is the most important quality. Before

venturing, however, to discuss such complex questions,

we must proceed to a preliminary discussion of the

properties in question, which may thus perhaps be

enumerated in the order of their importance:-1. Utility and value. 5. Divisibility.

2. Portability. 6. Stability of value.

3. Indestructibility. 7. Cognizability.

4. Homogeneity.

 







1. Utility and Value.

 



Since money has to be exchanged for valuable goods, it

should itself possess value, and it must therefore have

utility as the basis of value. Money, when once in full

currency, is only received in order to be passed on, so

that if all people could be induced to take worthless

bits of material at a fixed rate of valuation, it might

seem that money does not really require to have

substantial value. Something like this does frequently

happen in the history of currencies, and apparently

valueless shells, bits of leather, or scraps of paper, are

actually received in exchange for costly commodities.

This strange phenomenon is, however, in most cases

capable of easy explanation, and if we were acquainted

with the history of every kind of money the like

explanation would no doubt be possible in other cases.The essential point is that people should be induced to

receive money, and pass it on freely at steady ratios of

exchange for other objects; but there must always be

some sufficient reason first inducing people to accept

the money. The force of habit, convention, or legal

enactment may do much to maintain money in

circulation when once it is afloat, but it is doubtful

whether the most powerful government could oblige its

subjects to accept and circulate as money a worthless

substance which they had no other motive for

receiving.


1. Certainly, in the early stages of society, the use of

    money was not based on legal regulations, so that

    the utility of the substance for other purposes must

    have been the prior condition of its employment as

    money. Thus the singular peag currency, or

      wampumpeag, which was found in circulation

    among the North American Indians by the early

    explorers, was esteemed for the purpose of

    adornment, as already mentioned, (p. 24). The

    cowry shells, so widely used as a small currency in

    the East, are valued for ornamental purposes on the

    West Coast of Africa, and were in all probability

    employed as ornaments before they were employed

    as money. All the other articles mentioned in    Chapter IV., such as oxen, corn, skins, tobacco,

    salt, cacao nuts, etc., which have performed the

    functions of money in one place or other, possessed

    independent utility and value. If there are any

    apparent exceptions at all to this rule, they would

    doubtless admit of explanation by fuller knowledge.

    We may, therefore, agree with Storch when he

    says:-"It is impossible that a substance which has

    no direct value should be introduced as money,

    however suitable it may be in other respects for this

    use."

 

2. When once a substance is widely employed as

    money, it is conceivable that its utility will come to

    depend mainly upon the services which it thus

    confers upon the community. Gold, for instance, is

    far more important as the material of money than in

    the production of plate, jewellery, watches, gold-

    leaf, etc. A substance originally used for many

    purposes may eventually serve only as money, and

    yet, by the demand for currency and the force of

    habit, may maintain its value. The cowry

    circulation of the Indian coasts is probably a case in

    point. The importance of habit, personal or

    hereditary, is at least as great in monetary science

    as itis, according to Mr. Herbert Spencer, in morals and

sociological phenomena generally.

 


1. There is, however, no reason to suppose that the

    value of gold and silver is at present due solely to

    their conventional use as money. These metals are

    endowed with such singularly useful properties

    that, if we could only get them in sufficient

    abundance, they would supplant all the other metals

    in the manufacture of household utensils,

      ornaments, fittings of all kinds, and an infinite

    multitude of small articles, which are now made of

    brass, copper, bronze, pewter, German silver, or,

    other inferior metals and alloys.

 

2. In order that money may perform some of its

    functions efficiently, especially those of a medium

    of exchange and a store of value, to be carried

    about, it is important that it should be made of a

    substance valued highly in all parts of the world,

    and, if possible, almost equally esteemed by all

    peoples. There is reason to think that gold and

    silver have been admired and valued by all tribes

    which have been lucky enough to procure them.

    The beautiful lustre of these metals must have    drawn attention and excited admiration as much in

    the earliest as in the present times.

 

3. 

 


2. Portability.

 



The material of money must not only be valuable, but

the value must be so related to the weight and bulk of

the material, that the money shall not be inconveniently

heavy on the one hand, nor inconveniently minute on

the other. There was a tradition in Greece that

Lycurgus obliged the Lacedæmonians to use iron

money, in order that its weight might deter them from

overmuch trading. However this may be, it is certain

that iron money could not be used in cash payments at

the present day, since a penny would weigh about a

pound, and instead of a five-pound note, we should

have to deliver a ton of iron. During the last century

copper was actually used as the chief medium of

exchange in Sweden; and merchants had to take a

wheelbarrow with them when they went to receive

payments in copper dalers. Many of the substances

used as currency in former times must have been sadly

wanting in portability. Oxen and sheep, indeed, wouldtransport themselves on their own legs; but corn, skins,

oil, nuts, almonds, etc., though in several respects

forming fair currency, would be intolerably bulky and

troublesome to transfer.

 


1. The portability of money is an important quality not

    merely because it enables the owner to carry small

    sums in the pocket without trouble, but because

    large sums can be transferred from place to place,

    or from continent to continent, at little cost. The

    result is to secure an approximate uniformity in the

    value of money in all parts of the world. A

    substance which is very heavy and bulky in

    proportion to value, like corn or coal, may be very

    scarce in one place and over abundant in another;

    yet the supply and demand cannot be equalized

    without great expense in carriage. The cost of

    conveying gold or silver from London to Paris,

    including insurance, is only about four-tenths of

    one per cent.; and between the most distant parts of

    the world it does not exceed from two to three per

    cent.

 

2. Substances may be too valuable as well as too

    cheap, so that for ordinary transactions it would be    necessary to call in the aid of the microscope and

    the chemical balance. Diamonds, apart from other


objections, would be far too valuable for small

transactions. The value of such stones is said to vary as

the square of the weight, so that we cannot institute any

exact comparison with metals of which the value is

simply proportional to the weight. But taking a one-

carat diamond (four grains) as worth £15, we find it is,

weight for weight, 460 times as valuable as gold. There

are several rare metals, such as iridium and osmium,

which would likewise be far too valuable to circulate.

Even gold and silver are too costly for small currency.

A silver penny now weighs 71/4 grains, and a gold

penny would weigh only half a grain. The pretty

octagonal quarter-dollar tokens circulated in California

are the smallest gold coins I have seen, weighing less

than four grains each, and are so thin that they can

almost be blown away.

 

V.10

 

3. Indestructibility.

 



If it is to be passed about in trade, and kept in reserve,

money must not be subject to easy deterioration or loss.It must not evaporate like alcohol, nor putrefy like

animal substances, nor decay like wood, nor rust like

iron. Destructible articles, such as eggs, dried codfish,

cattle, or oil, have certainly been used as currency; but

what is treated as money one day must soon afterwards

be eaten up. Thus a large stock of such perishable

commodities cannot be kept on hand, and their value

must be very variable. The several kinds of corn are

less subject to this objection, since, when well dried at

first, they suffer no appreciable deterioration for

several years.

 

V.11

 

4. Homogeneity.

All portions of specimens of the substance used as

money should be homogeneous, that is, of the same

quality, so that equal weights will have exactly the

same value. In order that we may correctly count in

terms of any unit, the units must be equal and similar,

so that twice two will always make four. If we were to

count in precious stones, it would seldom happen that

four stones would be just twice as valuable as two

stones. Even the precious metals, as found in the native

state, are not perfectly homogeneous, being mixed

together in almost all proportions; but this produceslittle inconvenience, because the assayer readily

determines the quantity of each pure metal present in

any ingot. In the processes of refining and coining, the

metals are afterwards reduced to almost exactly

uniform degrees of fineness, so that equal weights are

then of exactly equal value.

 

V.12

 

5. Divisibility.

 



Closely connected with the last property is that of

divisibility. Every material is, indeed, mechanically

divisible, almost without limit. The hardest gems can

be broken, and steel can be cut by harder steel. But the

material of money should be not merely capable of

division, but the aggregate value of the mass after

division should be almost exactly the same as before

division. If we cut up a skin or fur the pieces will, as a

general rule, be far less valuable than the whole skin or

fur, except for a special intended purpose; and the same

is the case with timber, stone, and most other materials

in which reunion is impossible. But portions of metal

can be melted together again whenever it is desirable,

and the cost of doing this, including the metal lost, is inthe case of precious metals very inconsiderable,

varying from 1/4d. to 1/2d. per ounce. Thus,

approximately speaking, the value of any piece of gold

or silver is simply proportional to the weight of fine

metal which it contains.

 

V.13

 

6. Stability of Value.

 



It is evidently desirable that the currency should not be

subject to fluctuations of value. The ratios in which

money exchanges for other commodities should be

maintained as nearly as possible invariable on the

average. This would be a matter of comparatively

minor importance were money used only as a measure

of values at any one moment, and as a medium of

exchange. If all prices were altered in like proportion

as soon as money varied in value, no one would lose or

gain, except as regards the coin which he happened to

have in his pocket, safe, or bank balance. But,

practically speaking, as we have seen, people do

employ money as a standard of value for long

contracts, and they often maintain payments at the

same invariable rate, by custom or law, even when thereal value of the payment is much altered. Hence every

change in the value of money does some injury to

society.

 

            V.14 It might be plausibly said, indeed, that

the debtor gains as much as the creditor loses, or vice

versâ, so that on the whole the community is as rich as

before; but this is not really true. A mathematical

analysis of the subject shows that to take any sum of

money from one and give it to another will, on the

average of cases, injure the loser more than it benefits

the receiver. A person with an income of one hundred

pounds a year would suffer more by losing ten pounds

than he would gain by an addition of ten pounds,

because the degree of utility of money to him is

considerably higher at ninety pounds than it is at one

hundred and ten. On the same principle, all gaming,

betting, pure speculation, or other accidental modes of

transferring property involve, on the average, a dead

loss of utility. The whole incitement to industry and

commerce and the accumulation of capital depends

upon the expectation of enjoyment thence arising, and

every variation of the currency tends in some degree to

frustrate such expectation and to lessen the motive; for

exertion.

 V.15

 

7. Cognizability.

 



By this name we may denote the capability of a

substance for being easily recognized and distinguished

from all other substances. As a medium of exchange,

money has to be continually handed about, and it will

occasion great trouble if every person receiving

currency has to scrutinize, weigh, and test it. If it

requires any skill to discriminate good money from

bad, poor ignorant people are sure to be imposed upon.

Hence the medium of exchange should have certain

distinct marks which nobody can mistake. Precious

stones, even if in other respects good as money, could

not be so used, because only a skilled lapidary can

surely distinguish between true and imitation gems.

 

            V.16 Under cognizability we may properly

include what has been aptly called impressibility,

namely, the capability of a substance to receive such an

impression, seal, or design, as shall establish its

character as current money of certain value. We might

more simply say, that the material of money should be

coinable, so that a portion, being once issued accordingto proper regulations with the impress of the state, may

be known to all as good and legal currency, equal in

weight, size, and value to all similarly marked

currency. We shall afterwards consider more minutely

what is involved in the manufacture of a good coin.

 

V.17

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 









Chapter VI The Metals as Money

 



It need not be pointed out in detail that, though thenumerous commodities mentioned in Chapter IV.

possess, in a greater or less degree, the qualities

essential to the material of money, they cannot for a

moment compare in this respect with many of the

metal. Some of the metals seem to be marked out by

nature as most fit of all substances for employment as

money, at least when acting as a medium of exchange

and a store of value. Accordingly, we find that gold,

silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron have been more or

less extensively in circulation in all historical ages. So

closely have silver and copper become associated in

people's minds with their use as money, that we find

their names adopted as the names of money. In Greek,

means equally silver, silver coin, and money generally;

in Latin, aes is copper, bronze, or brass, and also

money and wages; in French, argent is both silver and

money. The same association of meanings could be

pointed out in many other languages, including our

own. Though our pence are now of bronze we still

speak of them as coppers.

 

            VI.1 With the exception of iron, the principal

metals are peculiarly indestructible, and undergo little

or no deterioration when hoarded up or handed about.

Each kind of metal is approximately homogeneous,

piece differing from piece in nothing but weight, thedifferences of fineness being ascertained and allowed

for in the case of gold and silver. The metals are also

perfectly divisible, either by the chisel or the crucible,

and yet a second melting will always reunite the pieces

again with little cost or loss of material. Almost of

them possess the properties of cognizability and

impressibility in the highest degree. Each metal has its

characteristic colour, density, and hardness, so that it is

easy for a person with very slight experience to

distinguish one metal from another. Their malleability

enables us to roll, cut, and hammer them into any

required form, and to impress a permanent design by

means of dies. With the exception of porcelain coins,

which have been used in Siam, I am not aware that

coins have ever been made of any substance except

metal.

 

VI.2

In respect to steadiness of value the metals are

probably less satisfactory, regarded as a standard of

value, than many other commodities, such as corn.

From the earliest ages metals must have been most

highly valued, as we may learn from the way in which

they are esteemed by savages in the present day. But

their value has suffered and is suffering an almost

continuous decline, owing to the progress of industry,and the discovery of new mechanical and chemical

means for their extraction. Even the order of their

values becomes changed. According to Mr. Gladstone,

iron was, in the Homeric age, much more valued than

chalkos, or copper, which latter was then the most

common and useful metal. Lead was little known or

valued, but gold, silver, and tin held the same place at

the head of the list which they hold at the present, day.

 

VI.3

 

Iron.

 



Proceeding to consider briefly each of the more

important metals, the statements of Aristotle, Pollux,

and other writers prove that iron was extensively

employed as money in early times. Not a single

specimen of such money is now known to exist, but

this is easily accounted for by the rapidity with which

the metal rusts. In the absence of specimens, we do not

know the form and size of the money, but it is probable

that it consisted of small bars, ingots, or spikes,

somewhat similar to the small bars of iron which are

still used in trading with the natives of Central Africa.

Iron money is still, or was not long since, used in Japanfor small values; but its issue from the mint has been

discontinued.

 

VI.4

The use of pure iron coins in civilized countries at the

present day is out of the question, both because of the

cheapness of the metal, and because the coins would

soon lose the sharpness of their impressions by rusting,

and become dirty and easily counterfeited. But it is

quite possible that iron or steel might still be alloyed

with other metals for the coining of pence.

 

VI.5

 

Lead.

 



Lead has often been used as currency, and is

occasionally so mentioned by the ancient Greek and

Latin poets. In 1635 leaden bullets were used for

change at the rate of a farthing a piece in

Massachusetts. At the present day it is still current in

Burmah, being passed by weight for small payments.

The extreme softness of the metal obviously renders it

quite unfit for coining in the pure state. It is one of the

components of pewter, which has frequently beencoined.

 

VI.6

 

Tin.

 



Tin has also been employed as money at various times.

Dionysius of Syracuse issued the earliest tin coinage of

which anything is certainly known; but as tin was in

early times procured from Cornwall, it can hardly be

doubted that the first British currency was composed of

tin. In innumerable cabinets may be found series of tin

coins issued by the Roman emperors; the kings of

England also often coined tin. In 1680 tin farthings

were struck by Charles II., a stud of copper being

inserted in the middle of the coin to render

counterfeiting more difficult. Tin halfpence and

farthings were also issued in considerable quantities in

the reign of William and Mary (1690 to 1691). Tin

coins were formerly employed among the Javanese,

Mexicans, and many other peoples, and the metal is

said to be still current by weight in the Straits of

Malacca.

 

            VI.7 Tin would be in many respects admirablysuited for making pence, possessing a fine white

colour, perfect freedom from corrosion, and a much

higher value than copper. Unfortunately its softness

and tendency to bend and break when pure are

insuperable obstacles to its employment as money.

 

VI.8

 

Copper.

 



This metal is in many respects well suited for coining.

It does not suffer from exposure to dry air, possesses a

fine distinct red colour, and takes a good impression

from the dies, which impression it retains better than

the majority of other metals. Accordingly, we find that

it has been continually employed as currency, either

alone or in subordination to gold and silver. The

earliest Hebrew coins were composed chiefly of

copper, and the metallic currency of Rome consisted of

the impure copper, called aes, until B.C. 269, when

silver was first coined. In later times copper has not

only been generally used for coins of minor value, but,

in Russia and in Sweden, a hundred years ago, it

formed the principal mass of the currency. Its low

value now stands in the way of its use. A penny, ifmade so as to contain metal equivalent to its nominal

value, would weigh 870 grains, or more than an ounce

and three-quarters troy. Its value is also subject to

considerable fluctuations. Moreover, it is unlikely that

copper in a pure state will be coined for the future,

since bronze is now known to be so much more

suitable for coinage.

 

VI.9

 

Silver.

 



I need hardly say that silver is distinguished by its

exquisite white lustre, which is not rivalled by that of

any other pure metal. Certain alloys, indeed, such as

speculum metal, or Britannia metal, have been made of

almost equal lustre, but they are either brittle, or so soft

as not to give the metallic ring of silver. When much

exposed to the air silver tarnishes by the formation of a

black film of silver sulphide; but this forms no obstacle

to its use as currency, since the film is always very

thin, and its peculiar black colour even assists in

distinguishing the pure metal from counterfeit. When

suitably alloyed, silver is sufficiently hard to stand

much wear, and next after gold it is the most malleableand impressible of all the metals.

 

            VI.10 A coin or other object made of silver

may be known by the following marks:-(1) a fine pure

white lustre, where newly rubbed or scraped; (2) a

blackish tint where the surface has long been exposed

to the air; (3) a moderate specific gravity; (4) a good

metallic ring when thrown down; (5) considerable

hardness; (6) strong nitric acid dissolves silver, and the

solution turns black if exposed to light.

 

            VI.11 Silver has been coined, it need hardly be

said, in all ages since the first invention of the art, and

its value relatively to gold and copper suits it for taking

the middle place in a monetary system.

Its value too remains very stable for periods of fifty or

a hundred years, because a vast stock of the metal is

kept in the form of plate, watches, jewellery, and

ornaments of various kinds, in addition to money, so

that a variation in the supply for a few years cannot

make any appreciable change in the total stock.

Productive silver mines exist in almost all parts of the

world, and wherever lead is produced, a small but

steady yield of silver is obtained from it by the

Pattinson method of extraction.

 VI.12

 

Gold.

 



Silver is beautiful, yet gold is even more beautiful, and

presents indeed a combination of useful and striking

properties quite without parallel among known

substances. To a rich and brilliant yellow colour, which

can only be adequately described as golden, it joins

astonishing malleability and a very high specific

gravity, exceeded only by that of platinum and a few of

the rarest or almost unknown metals. We can usually

ascertain whether a coin consists of gold or not, by

looking for three characteristic marks:

(1) the brilliant yellow colour; (2) the high specific

gravity; (3) the metallic ring of the coin when thrown

down, which will prove the absence of lead or platinum

in the interior of the coin.

 

            VI.13 If there remain any doubt about a metal

being gold, we have only to appeal to its solubility.

Gold is remarkable for its freedom from corrosion or

solution, being quite unaffected and untarnished after

exposure of any length of time to dry, or moist, or

impure air, and being also insoluble in all the simpleacids. Strong nitric acid will rapidly attack any

coloured counterfeit metal, but will not touch standard

gold, or will, at the most, feebly dissolve the copper

and silver alloyed with it.

 

            VI.14 In almost all respects gold is perfectly

suited for coining. When quite pure, indeed, it is almost

as soft as tin, but when alloyed with one-tenth or one-

twelfth part of copper, becomes sufficiently hard to

resist wear and tear, and to give a good metallic ring;

yet it remains perfectly malleable and takes a fine

impression. Its melting point is moderately high, and

yet there is no perceptible oxidation or volatilization of

the metal at the highest temperature which can be

produced in a furnace. Thus old coin and fragments of

the metal can be melted into bullion at a very slight

loss, and at a cost of not more than one halfpenny per

ounce troy, or little more than one-twentieth of one per

cent.

 

VI.15

 

Platinum.

 



This is one of those comparatively rare metals whichhave been known only in recent times. Its extremely

high melting-point, and low affinity for oxygen, render

it one of the most indestructible of all substances,

whilst its white colour, joined to its excessively high

specific gravity, are marks which cannot be mistaken.

As it seemed in these respects well suited for currency,

the Russian government, which owns the principal

platinum mines in the Ural mountains, commenced to

coin it, in 1828, into pieces intended to have the values

of twelve, six, and three roubles. Several objections to

this use of the metal soon presented themselves. The

appearance of platinum being inferior to that of silver

or gold, it is seldom or never employed for purposes of

ornament, and its only extensive use is in the

construction of chemical apparatus. Hence there is no

large stock of the metal kept on hand, and the localities

where it is found being few, the supply is incapable of

being much increased, so that any variation of demand

is sure to cause a great change in its value. Moreover,

the cost of making the coins was very great, owing to

the extreme difficulty of melting platinum, and the

worn coins could not be withdrawn and recoined

without much additional cost. Platinum being thus

found to be quite unfitted for currency, the scheme was

abandoned in 1845, and the existing coins withdrawn

from circulation. 

            VI.16 Great improvements having been lately

made in the modes of working platinum, it was

proposed by M. de Jacobi, the representative of Russia

at the International Monetary Conference held at Paris,

in 1867, that platinum should be employed for the

coinage of five-franc pieces. It is not likely that such a

suggestion will be adopted.

 

VI.17

 

Nickel.

 



This metal was formerly regarded as the bane of the

metallurgist, but has recently assumed an important

place in manufacturing industry, and even in monetary

science. It is used only in alloy with other metals, and

for the purposes of coinage it is usual to melt up one

part of nickel with three of copper. Some of the coins

of Belgium, and the one-cent pieces of the United

States have been made of this material and seem to be

very convenient. In 1869 and 1870-1, pence and

halfpence, to the value of £3000, were executed in the

same alloy, at the English mint, for the colony of

Jamaica. These are some of the most beautiful coinswhich have ever been issued from Tower Hill, and are

in most respects admirably suited for circulation. But

they were unfortunately made much too large and

heavy; not only were they thus rendered less

convenient, but when in 1873, the Deputy Master of

the Mint was requested to supply a further quantity of

the same coins, he found that the price of nickel had

risen very much, so that the materials for the coinage

alone would cost more than the nominal value of the

coins to be produced. This rise in price was due partly

to the small number of nickel mines yet worked, and

partly to the great demand for the metal occasioned by

the German government, which has chosen the same

alloy for the ten and five-pfennig pieces of its new

monetary system. These coins, which are now being

issued, are of a convenient size, rather less than a

shilling and sixpence respectively, and appear to be in

every way admirably suited to their purpose. The

German empire will soon possess the best instead of

the worst fractional currency in the world. The

variableness in the price of nickel, which is at present a

cause of embarrassment, may after a time become less

serious, when the stock in use and the annual produce

become larger.

 

VI.18 

Other Metals.

 



The metals yet mentioned are but a small number of

those now known by chemists to exist, and it would be

unwise to assume as certain that money must always be

made in the future of the same materials as in the past.

It is just conceivable, on the one hand, that in the

course of time, some metal still more valuable than

gold may be introduced. Roughly speaking, the order

in which the metals have hitherto acted, as the principal

medium of exchange, is (1) copper, (2) silver, (3) gold;

as a general decline in the values of the metals took

place, the more valuable replaced the less valuable, and

the more portable gold is now rapidly taking the place

of silver. Some still more valuable metal, such as the

scarce and intractable iridium or osmium, or the

remarkable metal palladium, might possibly take the

place of gold. This, however, is barely more than a

matter of scientific fancy.

 

            VI.19 On the other hand, many metals exist

which might be produced more cheaply than silver,

such as aluminium or manganese. It may be well

worthy of inquiry whether in such metals may not befound the best solution of the fractional currency

difficulty, to be afterwards more fully discussed (p.

132).

 

VI.20

 

Alloys of Metals.

 



At one time or another an immense number of different

alloys or mixtures of metals have been coined. It would

be strictly correct to say, indeed, that metals have

seldom been issued except in the state of alloy. Even

gold and silver, as usually coined, are either alloyed

with each other or with copper. The latter metal, too,

has generally been employed in union with other

metals. The Roman as consisted, not of pure copper,

but of the mixed metal aes, an alloy of copper and tin,

partially resembling the bronze which has quite

recently been introduced for small money in France,

England, and other countries. Brass was largely coined

by some of the Roman emperors. In many cases, no

doubt, the early metallurgists in smelting an ore

obtained a natural alloy of all the metals contained

therein, and being unable to separate them were

obliged to use the mixture. Thus we may explain thecurious metal containing from sixty to seventy parts of

copper, twenty to twenty-five of zinc, five to eleven of

silver, with small quantities of gold, lead, and tin,

which was employed to make the stycas, or small

money, of the early, kings of Northumbria.

 

            VI.21 Monarchs or states in difficulty have

often coined the metal which they could most easily

obtain. The Irish money issued by James

II. was said to have been coined from a mixture of old

guns,broken bells, waste copper, brass, and pewter, old

kitchen furniture, and in fact any refuse metal which

his officers could lay their hands upon. He attempted to

make pewter crowns circulate for the value of silver

ones.

 

VI.22

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 Advanced Search

 









Chapter VII Coins It is clear that the metals far surpass

all other substances in suitability for the purpose of

circulation, and it is almost equally clear that certain

metals surpass all the other metals in this respect. Of

gold and silver especially we may say, with Turgot,

that, by the nature of things, they are constituted the

universal money independently of all convention and

law. Even if the art of coining had never been invented,

gold and silver would probably have formed the

currency of the world; but we have now to consider

how, by shaping weighed pieces of these metals into

coins, we can make use of their valuable properties to

the greatest advantage.

 

            VII.1 The primitive mode of circulating the

metals, indeed, was simply that of buying and selling

them against other commodities, the weights or

portions being made rudely estimated. Some of the

earliest specimens of money consist of the aes rude, or

rough, shapeless lumps of native copper employed asmoney by the ancient Etruscans. In the Museum of the

Archiginnasio at Bologna may be seen the skeleton of

an Etruscan, half embedded in earth, with the piece of

rough copper yet within the grasp of the bony hand,

placed there to meet the demands of Charon. Pliny,

moreover, tells us that, before the time of Servius

Tullius, copper was circulated in the rude state.

Afterwards copper, brass, or iron were, it is probable,

employed in the form of small bars or spikes, and the

name of the Greek unit of value, drachma, is supposed

to have been derived from the fact that six of these

metal spikes could be grasped in the hand, each piece

being called an obolus. Such is supposed to have been

the first system of money which was passed purely by

tale, or number of pieces.

 

VII.2

Gold is most readily obtained from alluvial deposits,

and then has the form of grains or dust. Hence this is

the primitive form of gold money. The ancient

Peruvians enclosed the gold dust for the sake of

security in quills, and thus passed it about more

conveniently. At the gold diggings of California,

Australia, or New Zealand, gold dust is to the present

day sold directly against other goods by the aid of

scales. The art of melting gold and silver, andfashioning them by the hammer into various shapes

was early invented. Even in the present day the poor

Hindoo, who has saved up a few rupees, employs a

silversmith to melt them up and beat them into a simple

bracelet, which he wears in the double character of an

ornament and a hoard of wealth.

 

            VII.3 Similarly, the ancient Goths and Celts

were accustomed to fashion gold into thick wires,

which they rolled up into spiral rings and probably

wore upon their fingers until the metal was wanted for

trading purposes. There can be little doubt that this ring

money, of which abundant specimens have been found

in various parts of Europe and Asia, formed the first

approximation to a coinage. In some cases the rings

may have been intentionally made of equal weight; for

Cæsar speaks of the Britons as having iron rings,

adjusted to a certain weight, to serve as money. In

other cases the rings, or amulets, were bought and sold

by aid of the balance; and in certain Egyptian paintings

men are represented as in the act of weighing rings. It

is probable that the necessity for frequent weighings

was avoided by making up sealed bags containing a

certain weight of rings, and such perhaps are the bags

of silver given by Naaman to Gehazi in the Second

Book of Kings (v. 23). Ring money is said to be stillcurrent in Nubia.

 

            VII.4 Gold and silver have been fashioned into

various other forms to serve as money. Thus the

Siamese money consists of very small ingots or bars

bent double in a peculiar manner. In Pondicherry and

elsewhere gold is circulated in the form of small grains

or buttons.

 

VII.5

 

The Invention of Coining.

 



The date of the invention of coining can be assigned

with some degree of probability. Coined money was

clearly unknown in the Homeric times, and it was

known in the time of Lycurgus. We might therefore

assume, with various authorities, that it was invented in

the mean time, or about 900 B.C. There is a tradition,

moreover, that Pheidon, King of Argos, first struck

silver money in the island of Ægina about 895 B.C.,

and the tradition is supported by the existence of small

stamped ingots of silver, which have been found in

Ægina. Later inquiries, however, lead to the conclusion

that Pheidon lived in the middle of the eighth centuryB.C., and Grote has shown good reasons for believing

that what he did accomplish was done in Argos, and

not in Ægina.

 

            VII.6 The mode in which the invention

happened is sufficiently evident. Seals were familiarly

employed in very early times, as we learn from the

Egyptian paintings or the stamped bricks of Nineveh.

Being employed to signify possession, or to ratify

contracts, they came to indicate authority. When a ruler

first undertook to certify the weights of pieces of metal,

he naturally employed his seal to make the fact known,

just as, at Goldsmiths' Hall, a small punch is used to

certify the fineness of plate. In the earliest forms of

coinage there were no attempts at so fashioning the

metal that its weight could not be altered without

destroying the stamp or design. The earliest coins

struck, both in Lydia and in the Peloponnesus, were

stamped on one side only. The Persian money, called

the larin, consists of a round silver wire, about six

centimetres long, bent in two, and stamped on one part

which is flattened for the purpose. It is probably a relic

of ring money. The present circulation of China is

composed to a considerable extent of the so-called

Sycee silver, which consists of small shoeshaped

ingots, assayed and stamped, according to someaccounts, by the government.

 

VII.7

 

What is a Coin?

 



Although, in rings, grains, or stamped ingots, we have

an approximation to what we call coin, it is plain that

we must do something more to make convenient

money. The stamp must be so impressed as to certify,

not only the fineness and the original weight, but also

the absence of any subsequent alteration. To coin

metal, as we now understand the art, is to form it into

flat pieces of a circular, oval, square, hexagonal,

octagonal, or other regular outline, and then to impress

designs from engraved dies upon both sides, and

sometimes upon the edges. Not only is it very costly

and difficult to counterfeit coins well executed in this

manner, but the integrity of the design assures us that

no owner of the coin has tampered with it. Even the

amount of ordinary wear and tear, which the coin has

suffered, may be rudely inferred from the sharpness or

partial effacement of the designs, and the roundness of

the edges. "Pieces of money," says M. Chevalier, "are

ingots of which the weight and the fineness arecertified." There is nothing in this definition to

distinguish coins from Sycee silver, or from the

ordinary stamped bars and ingots of bullion. I should

prefer, therefore, to say, coins are ingots of which the

weight and fineness are certified by the integrity of

designs impressed upon the surfaces of the metal.

 

VII.8

 

Various Forms of Coins.

 



From time to time coins have been manufactured in

very many forms, although circular coins vastly

predominate in number. Among the innumerable issues

of the German states may be found octagonal and

hexagonal coins. A singular square coin, with a circular

impress in the centre, was issued from Salzburg by

Rudbert in 1513. Siege-pieces have been issued in

England and elsewhere in the form of squares,

lozenges, etc. Some of the most extraordinary

specimens of money ever used are the large plates of

pure copper which circulated in Sweden in the

eighteenth century. These were about three-eighths of

an inch in thickness, and varied in size, the half-daler

being 31/2 inches square, and the two-daler piece asmuch as 71/2 inches square, and 31/2 pounds in

weight. As the whole surface could not be covered with

a design, a circular impress was struck near to each

corner, and one in the centre, so as render alteration as

difficult as possible.

 

            VII.9 Among Oriental nations the shapes of

coins are still more curious. In Japan, the principal part

of the circulation consists of silver itzibus, which are

oblong, flat pieces of silver, covered on both sides with

designs and legends, the characters being partly in

relief and partly incised. The smaller silver coins have

a similar form. Among the minor Japanese coins are

found large, oval, moulded pieces of copper or mixed

metal, each with a square hole in the centre. The

Chinese cash are well known to be round discs of a

kind of brass, with a square hole in the centre to allow

of their being strung together. The coins of Formosa

are similar, except that they are much larger and

thicker. All the copper and base metal coins of China,

Japan, and Formosa are distinguished by a broad flat

rim, and they have characters in relief upon a sunk

ground, somewhat in the manner of Boulton and Watt's

copper pence. They are manufactured by moulding the

metal, and then filing the protuberant parts smooth.

Such coins stand wear, and preserve their design betterthan European coins, but they are easily counterfeited.

 

            VII.10 The most singular of all coins are the

scimitar-shaped pieces formerly circulated in Persia.

 

VII.11

 

The best Form for Coins.

 



It is a matter of considerable importance to devise the

best possible form for coins, and the best mode of

striking them. The use of money creates, as it were, an

artificial crime of false coining, and so great is the

temptation to engage in this illicit art that no penalty is

sufficient to repress it, as the experience of two

thousand years sufficiently proves. Thousands of

persons have suffered death, and all the penalties of

treason have been enforced without effect. Ruding is

then unquestionably right in saying, that our efforts

should be directed not so much to the punishment of

the crime, as to its prevention by improvements in the

art of coining. We must strike our coins so perfectly

that successful imitation or alteration shall be out of the

question.

 

VII.12There are four principal objects at which we should

aim in deciding upon the exact design for a coin.

 


1. To prevent counterfeiting.

2. To prevent the fraudulent removal of metal from

    the coin.

3. To reduce the loss of metal by legitimate wear and

    tear.

4. To make the coin an artistic and historical

    monument of thestate issuing it, and the people

    using it.

 


            VII.13 For the prevention of counterfeiting,

our principal resource is to render the mechanical

execution of the piece as perfect as possible, and to

strike it in a way which can only be accomplished with

the aid of elaborate machinery. When all coins were

made by casting, the false coiner could work almost as

skilfully as the moneyer. Hence, in the Roman Empire,

it was difficult to distinguish between true and false

coin. Hammered money was a great improvement on

moulded money, and milled money on hammered

money. The introduction of the steam coining press by

Boulton and Watt was the next great improvement; and

the knee-joint press of Ulhorn and Thonnelier, nowused in nearly all mints, except that on Tower Hill,

forms the last advance in the mechanism for striking

coin.

 

            VII.14 The utmost attention ought to be paid to

the perfect execution of the milling, legend, or other

design, impressed upon the edge of modern coins. This

serves at once to prevent clipping or tampering with

the coin, and to baffle the skill of the counterfeiter. The

coins of ancient nations were issued with rough,

unstamped edges, and the first coin marked with a

legend on the edge was a silver coin of Charles IX. of

France, issued in the year 1573. The English coinage

was first grained or marked on the edge in 1658 or

1662, when the use of the mill and screw was finally

established in the mint. All the larger coins now issued

from the English, and, indeed, from most other mints,

bear a milled or serrated edge, produced by ridges on

the internal surface of the collar which holds the coin

when being struck between the two dies. These collars

are difficult to make, and useless when made except in

the coining-press, and the counterfeiter cannot imitate

the milling by hand work, it being almost impossible to

use a file with sufficient regularity.

 

            VII.15 The French five-franc pieces bear alegend on the edge in raised letters, the words being

"Dieu protége la France." Such raised letters are quite

beyond the art of the counterfeiter. The English crown

has a legend, "Decus et Tutamen," and the year of the

reign in incised letters, which could obviously be

imitated by the use of punches. The new German gold

coins are issued with smooth edges, the ten-mark piece

having only a few slight incised marks, and the twenty-

mark piece bearing the legend, "Gott mit uns," in faint

letters; this is surely a far less satisfactory protection

than the milled edge adopted in most other mints. It

may be worthy of inquiry, whether the milled edge

might not be combined with a legend or other design in

relief, so as to render imitation still more difficult. One

or two centuries ago, silver coins used to have a kind of

ornamental beading on the edge. Elaborate patterns,

produced by machinery with perfect regularity, and

altogether incapable of imitation by hand, might now

be substituted.

 

VII.16

 

Coins as Works of Art.

 



I have in the previous section considered the best formof a coin as regards the prevention of counterfeiting.

The falsification of coins, the loss which they undergo

by abrasion, and the best means of avoiding these evils

will be treated in Chapter XIII. Of the use of coins as

artistic medals it would not be appropriate to speak at

any length. I must however remark that many of the

coins still issued from the English mint are monuments

of bad taste. It is difficult to imagine poorer designs

than those upon the shilling and sixpence, descending

from a time when art in many branches was at its

apogee in England. As our architecture and art

manufactures of many kinds are regenerated by the

efforts of private persons, is it too much to hope that a

government department will follow? The florin is

indeed an immense advance upon the shilling, being in

some respects a reversion to the style of old English

money. A very beautiful pattern crown piece was

produced in 1847, in a somewhat similar style, but

never issued. Mr. Lowe, when Master of the Mint,

gave us back the old George and Dragon sovereign,

which is much superior to the shield and wreaths. I

think, however, that the time has come for a general

improvement in our coins.

 

VII.17

 Historical Coins.

 



Some states have utilized their coins as monuments of

important events, such as conquests, jubilees, the

accession of monarchs, etc. The German states,

especially Prussia, have struck a long series of

beautiful coins down to the Krönung's Thaler of 1861,

and the Sieges Thaler of 1871. Some of these coins are

at once treasured up in cabinets in the manner of

medals. If it is possible to conceive literature

destroyed, and modern cities and their monuments in

ruins and decay, such medallic coins would become the

most durable memorials, and the history of the kings of

Prussia would be traced out by future numismatists as

that of the great dynasties of Bactria has lately been

recovered.

 

            VII.18 In 1842 M. Anténor Joly brought

before the French legislative chambers a scheme for a

system of historical money, and he renewed his

proposal in 1852. M. Ernest Dumas has also suggested

the issue of twenty-centime bronze pieces, which

should serve either as money or as historical medals.

Such schemes have not been carried out in France, and

in England no coins of the sort have been struck.Except the mere expense of a new set of dies, I see no

objection to the issue of historical money.

 

VII.19

 

The Royal Attribute of Coining.

 



Every civilized community requires a supply of well-

executed coins, and there arises the question, how shall

this money be provided? The coins of each

denomination must contain exactly equal weights of

fine metal, and must bear an impress proving that they

do so. Can we trust to the ordinary competition of

manufacturers and traders to keep up a sufficient

supply of such coins, just as they supply buttons or

pins and needles? Or must we establish a government

department, under strict legislative control, to secure

good coinage?

 

            VII.20 As almost every opinion finds some

advocate, there are not wanting a few who believe that

coinage should be left to the free action of competition.

Mr. Herbert Spencer especially, in his "Social Statics,"

advanced the doctrine that, as we trust the grocer to

furnish us with pounds of tea, and the baker to send usloaves of bread, so we might trust Heaton and Sons, or

some of the other enterprising firms of Birmingham, to

supply us with sovereigns and shillings at their own

risk and profit. He held that just as people go by

preference to the grocer who sells good tea, and to the

baker whose loaves are sound and of full weight, so the

honest and successful coiner would gain possession of

the market, and his money would drive out inferior

productions.

 

            VII.21 Though I must always deeply respect

the opinions of so profound a thinker as Mr. Spencer, I

hold that in this instance he has pushed a general

principle into an exceptional case, where it quite fails.

He has overlooked the important law of Gresham (to

be explained in the next chapter), that better money

cannot drive out worse. In matters of currency self-

interest acts in the opposite direction to what it does in

other affairs, as will be explained, and if coining were

left free, those who sold light coins at reduced prices

would drive the best trade.

 

            VII.22 This conclusion is amply confirmed by

experience; for at many times and places coins have

been issued by private manufacturers, and always with

the result of debasing the currency. For a long time thecopper currency of England consisted mainly of

tradesmen's tokens, which were issued very light in

weight and excessive in number. In Mr. Smiles' "Lives

of Boulton and Watt"

(p. 391), there is printed an interesting letter, in which

Boulton complains that in his journeys he received on

an average at the toll-gates two counterfeit pennies for

one true one. The lower class of manufacturers, he

says, purchased copper coin to the nominal value of

thirty-six shillings for twenty shillings in silver, and

distributed it to their work-people in wages, so as to

make a considerable profit. The multitude of these

depreciated pieces in circulation was so great, that the

magistrates and inhabitants of Stockport held a public

meeting, and resolved to take no halfpence in future

but those of the Anglesey Company, which were of full

weight. This shows, if proof were needed, that the

separate action of self-interest was inoperative in

keeping bad coin out of circulation, and it is not to be

supposed that the public meeting could have had any

sufficient effect. In China the current small money

called cash or le, is commonly manufactured by private

coiners, and the consequence is that the size, quality,

and value of the coins have fallen very much.

 

            VII.23 In my opinion there is nothing less fitto be left to the action of competition than money. In

constitutional law the right of coining has always been

held to be one of the peculiar prerogatives of the

Crown, and it is a maxim of the civil law, that

monetandi jus principum ossibus inhæret. To the

executive government and its scientific advisers, who

have minutely inquired into the intricacies of the

subject of currency and coinage, the matter had better

be left. It should as far as possible be removed from the

sphere of party struggles or public opinion, and

confided to the decision of experts. No doubt, in times

past, kings have been the most notorious false coiners

and depreciators of the currency, but there is no danger

of the like being done in modern times. The danger lies

quite in the opposite direction, that popular

governments will not venture upon the most obvious

and necessary improvement of the monetary system

without obtaining a concurrence of popular opinion in

its favour, while the people, influenced by habit, and

with little knowledge of the subject, will never be able

to agree upon the best scheme.

 

VII.24

Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 Firstpublished: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 









Chapter VIII The Principles of Circulation

 



Before proceeding to consider the actual monetary

systems adopted by modern or ancient nations, it is

desirable to dwell for a short time upon the different

meanings which may be attributed to the word money,

and upon the natural principles which govern the use

and circulation of coins. We must, in the first place,

distinguish three things which, in the practical working

of a currency system, are often separate, namely, the

actual coins employed, the numbers by which they are

expressed, and the relation of those numbers to the

assumed unit of value. We must further distinguish

coins according as their values depend upon the metal

they contain, the metal for which they can beexchanged, or the other coins for which they are the

legal equivalent.

VIII.1

 

The Standard Unit of Value.

 



It is essential, in the first place, to decide clearly what

we mean by a standard unit of value. This must consist

of a fixed quantity of some concrete substance, defined

by reference to the units of weight or space. Value may

seem to some people to be a purely mental

phenomenon, and a pound would then have to be

defined, as Lord Castlereagh asserted, by a sense of

value. But we might as well define a yard by a sense of

length, or a grain by a sense of weight. Just as every

quantity in physical science is defined by reference to

some concrete standard specimen, so, if we are to

measure and express value at all, we must fix upon

definite quantities of one or more definite and

unchangeable commodities for the purpose.

 

            VIII.2 The expression standard unit of value,

will indeed be almost inevitably misunderstood as

implying the existence of something of fixed value. As

we have seen, however (p. 11), value merely expressesthe essentially variable ratio in which two commodities

exchange, so that there is no reason to suppose that any

substance does for two days together retain the same

value. All that a standard of value means is, that some

uniform unchangeable substance is chosen, in terms of

which all ratios of exchange may be expressed and

calculated, without any regard whatever to the feelings

or mental phenomena which the commodities produce

in men. For reasons already stated, one or other of the

metals, gold, silver, or copper, has usually been

considered most suitable for constituting the standard

substance.

 

VIII.3

The absolute weight or magnitude of the unit of money

is a matter of little or no importance, provided that all

people agree upon the same unit, and that it be

permanently and exactly defined, and afterwards

adhered to. Before the English yard was fixed, it would

not have mattered whether it was a few inches longer

or shorter; it does not matter, indeed, whether the inch,

the foot, the furlong, or the mile is the unit, provided

that one of them is definitely fixed, and the others

referred to it by known ratios. So, it is really indifferent

whether we regard the pound troy of standard gold, or

the ounce, or the fixed number of grains in thesovereign, as our standard. It is only requisite that

every contract expressed in money shall enable us to

ascertain exactly how much standard gold is due from

one person to another.

 


VIII.4


M.

    Chevalier and some other continental economists

    have arguedelaborately in favour of a universal

    standard unit of value, coinciding with the metric

    system of weights. They wish the unit of value to

    be ten grams of gold exactly, and seem to think that

    there is some magical efficacy in the

      correspondence of money and weights. This

      correspondence might perhaps be a slight

    convenience to those bullion dealers who have to

    calculate the metallic value of coins before melting

    or exporting them, or to those mint officials who

    have to adjust and test the weights of coins; to all

    other persons it would be a matter of complete

      indifference. Those who use coins in ordinary

    business need never inquire how much metal they

    contain. Probably not one person in ten thousand in

    this kingdom knows, or need know, that a

    sovereign should contain 123.27447 grains of    standard gold. Besides, if we agree to accept a

    precise metrical quantity of one metal as our

    standard, the weights of the coins composed of

    other metals will be complicated fractional

    amounts, to be determined with reference to the

    accidental market values of the metals.

            VIII.5 All we can say, then, is that the standard

unit of value is some entirely arbitrary weight of the

standard metal, the exact amount of which, being a

matter of indifference on general grounds, should be

fixed as seems most convenient in reference to the

habits of nations or other accidental circumstances.

 

VIII.6

 

Coin, Money of Account, and Unit of Value.

 



It is desirable to distinguish clearly between three

things which, although definitely related to each other,

need not be identical. The unit of value, or standard

weight of the selected metal, is not necessarily made

into a coin. It may be a quantity too great or too small

for coining. All that is requisite is that the current coins

shall be multiples or submultiples of the unit, or easily

expressible in terms of the unit. Nor is it even requisitethat the numbers in which we express value should be

numbers of coins, or number of units of value. The

money of account, as it is called, may differ both from

the current money and the standard money. This is well

illustrated in the Anglo-Saxon system of currency. The

unit of value was the Saxon pound of standard silver,

which was far too large to be coined. The only coins

issued in any considerable quantity by the Anglo-

Saxon kings, were silver pennies and a few

halfpennies; yet the usual money of account was the

shilling, which, after varying from four to five pence,

was fixed by William I. at twelve pence, as it has ever

since continued. No coin called a shilling was issued

before the reign of Henry VII. Though the shilling has

survived, other moneys of account have been forgotten,

as, for instance, the mancus, which was equal to thirty

pennies, or six shillings of five pence each. The mark,

the ora, and the thrimsa were other moneys of account

used by the Anglo-Saxons.

 

            VIII.7 In our present English system the three

moneys happen to coincide, which is doubtless a

matter of some convenience. The sovereign is at once

the principal coin, the unit of value, and the money of

account in all the larger transactions, although in the

expression of smaller sums the shilling is yet preferred.In France at the present time the money of account and

the unit of value is the franc in gold; but as this weighs

only 0.3226 gram, or about five grains, it is coined

only in five, ten, and twenty-franc gold pieces, with

subsidiary silver coins. In Russia, before the time of

Peter the Great, the rouble was an imaginary money of

account, consisting of one hundred copper copecks.

 

            VIII.8 When Montesquieu affirmed that the

negroes on the West Coast of Africa had a purely ideal

sign of value called a macute, he misunderstood the

nature of money of account. The macute served with

the negroes as the name for a definite, though probably

a variable, number of cowry shells, the number being

at one time 2000. The macute has also been coined in

silver pieces of eight, six, and four macutes, struck by

the Portuguese for use in their colonies, the macute

being worth 23/4d.

 

            VIII.9 When the currency of a country

undergoes a change, the units of coinage, account, and

value are likely to become separated. Sometimes a new

system of accounts is applied to an old coinage, as in

Norway at the present time. The Stockholm

government is endeavouring to introduce the Swedish

decimal system of currency, and some merchants aresaid already to keep their accounts in kroner and öre,

although the money in circulation consists almost

wholly of the old skillings and the paper speciedalers.

On the other hand, the coinage is sometimes changed,

and yet the old methods of accounts retained,

especially as regards foreign transactions. Thus the

rates of foreign exchange between the United States

and England were, until last year, quoted in terms of a

dollar valued at 4s. 6d., in accordance with a law of

1789. This rate seems to have been the traditional par

of exchange of the Mexican dollar, and it was still

retained even when the American dollar had been

coined so as to be worth only 49.316 English pence.

 

            VIII.10 There are two causes which have often

led to a difference between coinage and money of

account. The coins may, by legitimate abrasion, or by

fraudulent clipping and sweating, become much

reduced below their proper weights, yet an agio, or

allowance, being made for the average depreciation,

the old standard of value and money of account may be

retained, as was the case in Amsterdam, Hamburg, and

other towns. When a depreciated currency is issued in a

country, the money of account may either change with

it or remain as before; and it is an exceedingly difficult,

if not insoluble problem, to decide whether, inparticular periods of English history, prices were

expressed in the new depreciated or the old good

money. Professor J. E. T. Rogers has pointed out, in his

admirable "History of Agriculture and Prices in

England," printed by the Clarendon Press (vol. i. p.

175), that, in the fourteenth century, the coinage,

though apparently passed by tale, was often weighed.

In the ancient college accounts which he has

investigated, he finds charges entered both for the cost

of scales to make the weighings, and for the deficiency

of weight of the coins.

 

VIII.11

In many countries, even at the present day, the

circulating medium consists not of any one simple and

well-connected series of coins, but of a miscellaneous

collection of coins of various sizes and values,

imported from foreign states. In such cases the money

of account must necessarily differ from the mass of the

coins, of which the value is usually estimated by a

tariff expressed in terms of the money of account. In

the German states, a few years ago, French and English

gold was freely accepted in this manner. In Canada

there is an intricate confusion of monetary systems.

There being no national mint, the circulation consists

of many species of foreign coins, chiefly varieties ofthe dollar. The monetary unit is a dollar, taken as equal

to fifty English pence; but this is represented by bank

notes, and not by any coin. At the same time there are

two different moneys of account: the Halifax Currency

Pound divided into twenty shillings of twenty pence

each, and defined by the fact that sixty such pence are

equal to one dollar; and, secondly, the Halifax Sterling

Currency, which perpetuates, for the purpose of

expressing the rates of foreign exchange, the old

valuation which makes a dollar equal to 4s. 6d.

 

VIII.12

 

Standard and Token Money.

 



We must distinguish between coins according as they

serve for standard money or for token money. A

standard coin is one of which the value in exchange

depends solely upon the value of the material contained

in it. The stamp serves as a mere indication and

guarantee of the quantity of fine metal. We may treat

such coins as bullion, and melt them up or export them

to countries where they are not legally current; yet the

value of the metal being independent of legislation will

everywhere be recognised.            VIII.13 Token coins, on the contrary, are

defined in value by the fact that they can, by force of

law or custom, be exchanged in a certain fixed ratio for

standard coins. The metal contained in a token coin has

of course a certain value; but it may be less than the

legal value in almost any degree. In our English silver

coinage the difference is from 9 to 12 per cent.,

according to the market price of silver; in our bronze

coinage the difference is 75 per cent. The metal

contained in the French bronze coins is in like manner

equal in value to little more than one quarter of the

current value. In many cases the difference has been far

greater, as for instance in some of the old kreutzer

pieces lately current in the German states. Woods's

halfpence, which at one time created so much

discontent in Ireland, or the small money previously

issued by Charles II. in Ireland, are extreme instances

of depreciated token money.

 

VIII.14

 

Metallic and Nominal Values of Coins.

 



It has been usual to call the value of the metal

contained in a coin the intrinsic value of the coin; butthis use of the word intrinsic is likely to give rise to

fallacious notions concerning the nature of value,

which is never an intrinsic property, or existence, but

merely a circumstance, or external relation (see p. 9).

To avoid any chance of ambiguity, I shall substitute the

expression, metallic value, and I shall distinguish this

from the nominal, customary, or legal value, at which a

coin actually does, or is by law required, to exchange

for other coins.

 

VIII.15

There are two ways in which the metallic value of a

coin may be reduced below its nominal value, namely,

by reducing either the weight or the fineness of the

metal. English silver coin is still maintained at the

"ancient right standard "of 11 oz. 2 dwts. in the troy

pound, which has existed from time immemorial. By

the Act of 1816 the silver coins which had previously

been, in theory at least, standard money, were reduced

in weight by 6 per cent., and thus rendered token

money, which they still continue to be. In France and

other countries belonging to the Monetary Convention,

the smaller silver coins of two francs, one franc, and

fifty centimes, have been converted into tokens by

reducing the fineness of the silver from 900 to 835

parts in 1000. It does not seem to be a matter of anyimportance which mode is adopted; but the English

mode, so long as it does not render the coins

inconveniently small, is perhaps slightly the better,

because some persons can satisfy themselves as to the

weight of a coin, but none are able to test its fineness,

unless they are professional assayers.

 

            VIII.16 It need hardly be stated that coins

which circulate by law in one country as tokens may be

accepted in other countries at their metallic value.

 

VIII.17

 

Legal Tender.

 



Money must further be distinguished, according as it is

or is not legal tender, or has or has not what the French

call cours forcé. By legal tender is denoted such money

as a creditor is obliged to receive in requital of a debt

expressed in terms of money of the realm. One great

object of legislation is to prevent uncertainty in the

interpretation of contracts, and accordingly the

Coinage Act defines precisely what will constitute a

legal offer of payment on the part of a debtor, as

regards a money debt. If a debtor tender to his creditorthe amount of a debt due in legal tender money, and it

be refused, the creditor may indeed apply for it, or sue

for it afterwards, but the costs of the action will be

thrown upon him.

 

            VIII.18 But there seems to be no legal

necessity that exchanges or contracts shall be made in

money of the realm. At common law, contracts for the

direct barter of two commodities, or for purchase and

sale in terms of any kind of money, will be valid,

provided it is clear what the terms of the contract mean.

Accordingly, the sixth section of the Coinage Act (33

Vict. c. 10), while enacting that every contract, sale,

payment, bill, note, transaction, or matter relating to

money, shall be made or done according to the coins

which are current and legal tender in pursuance of this

Act, yet adds, "unless the same be made, executed,

entered into, done or had, according to the currency of

some British possession or, some foreign state."

 

            VIII.19 If I understand the matter aright, then,

every person is at liberty to buy, sell, or exchange in

terms of any money or commodity whatsoever which

he prefers; and the fact that certain coins, up to certain

limits, are legal tender, only means that the state

provides a definite medium of exchange and definesprecisely what that is. The Act requires that English

money shall be the money issued by the mint, in

accordance with the terms of the Act. Of course it

remains quite open to a creditor to receive payment in

coins which are not legal tender, if he like to do so, and

I presume there would be nothing to prevent him

entering into a contract to that effect. If a man

contracted to sell goods to the extent of £100, and to

receive payment in bronze pence and halfpence, it

would no doubt be a valid contract, although no single

quantity of pence exceeding twelve pence is a legal

tender.

 

            VIII.20 The exact meaning of the term, legal

tender, may of course vary from country to country,

and the above remarks apply only to countries under

the English law.

 

VIII.21

 

The Force of Habit in the Circulation of Money.

 



No one can possibly understand many social

phenomena unless he constantly bears in mind the

force of habit and social convention. This is strikinglytrue in our subject of money. Over and over again in

the course of history, powerful rulers have

endeavoured to put new coins into circulation or to

withdraw old ones; but the instincts of self-interest or

habit in the people have been too strong for laws and

penalties. Though in particular instances it may be

difficult to explain occurrences which happen in the

circulation of coins, yet a close analysis of the

character of those who handle money, and their

motives for holding or paying it away, will throw much

light upon the subject.

 

            VIII.22 We must notice, in the first place, that

the great mass of the population who hold coins have

no theories, or general information whatever, upon the

subject of money. They are guided entirely by popular

report and tradition. The sole question with them on

receiving a coin is whether similar coins have been

readily accepted by other people. Thus in the remote

parts of Norway at the present time, the old paper daler

notes are preferred to the beautiful new twenty-kroner

gold pieces. By far the greater number of the people

possess no means of learning the metallic, or even the

legal, value of an unfamiliar coin. Few people have

scales and weights suitable for weighing a coin, and no

one but an assayer or analytical chemist can decideupon its fineness. Many a traveller who has carried

good new coin into a country where it happened to be

strange, has had to suffer a loss in paying it away.

When our bronze pence were quite a novelty, I

happened to take some with me into a remote part of

North Wales, and they were rejected.

 

            VIII.23 People in general accept coin simply

on the ground of its familiar appearance. So entirely is

this the case among very ignorant populations, that it

has often been found desirable to maintain unchanged

the impress on successive issues of coins. In many

cases coins have been struck for this purpose with the

date of a long past year, or even the effigy of a dead

sovereign. The Maria Theresa dollar is still coined by

the Austrian mint, with exactly the same design and

date as when first issued in 1780, because it is the

favourite coin in some of the states of North Africa,

and various parts of the Levant. The British

Government, when undertaking the Abyssinian

expedition, procured a large stock of these coins for

paying the natives. In the same way Mexican dollars

are usually worth rather more than silver bullion,

because of their easy currency in the East.

 

            VIII.24 To the supremacy of habit, and theabsence of means of estimating the real value of coin,

is obviously due the depreciation which currencies

have undergone. False coiners and kings alike find that,

if they can only make new coins look and feel exactly

like old coins, the people will accept depreciated

money without question.

            VIII.25 The annals of coinage, in this and all

other countries, are little more than a monotonous

repetition of depreciated issues both public and private,

varied by occasional meritorious, but often

unsuccessful, efforts to restore the standard of the

currency. A curious instance of successive attempts to

beguile a people are found in certain Roman denarii of

the Consular times. False coiners having issued plated

denarii among the subject Germans, the people

appeared to have notched them with files to test their

genuineness. The Germans having thus become

accustomed to see genuine notched coins, the Roman

government found it desirable to issue new coins

notched in a similar manner. But the forgers were not

to be beaten. They issued plated denarii with the

notches all complete, apparently displaying good metal

within; and notched false coins of this kind exist to the

present day in numismatic cabinets.

 

VIII.26 

Gresham's Law.

 



Though the public generally do not discriminate

between coins and coins, provided there is an apparent

similarity, a small class of money-changers, bullion-

dealers, bankers, or goldsmiths make it their business

to be acquainted with such differences, and know how

to derive a profit from them. These are the people who

frequently uncoin money, either by melting it, or by

exporting it to countries where it is sooner or later

melted. Some coins are sunk in the sea or lost, and

some are carried abroad by emigrants and travellers

who do not look closely to the metallic value of the

money. But by far the greatest part of the standard

coinage is removed from circulation by people who

know that they shall gain by choosing for this purpose

the new heavy coins most recently issued from the

mint. Hence arises the practice, extensively carried on

in the present day in England, of picking and culling,

or, as another technical expression is, garbling the

coinage, devoting the good new coins to the melting-

pot, and passing the old worn coins into circulation

again on every suitable opportunity.

             VIII.27 From these considerations we readily

learn the truth and importance of a general law or

principle concerning the circulation of money, which

Mr. Macleod has very appropriately named the Law or

Theorem of Gresham, after Sir Thomas Gresham, who

clearly perceived its truth three centuries ago. This law,

briefly expressed, is that bad money drives out good

money, but that good money cannot drive out bad

money. At first sight there may seem to be something

paradoxical in the fact, that when beautiful new coins

of full weight are issued from the mint, the people still

continue to circulate, in preference, the old depreciated

ones. Many well-intentioned efforts to reform a

currency have thus been frustrated, to the great cost of

states, and the perplexity of statesmen who had not

studied the principles of monetary science.

 

            VIII.28 In all other matters everybody is led by

self-interest to choose the better and reject the worse;

but in the case of money, it would seem as if they

paradoxically retain the worse and get rid of the better.

The explanation is very simple. The people, as a

general rule, do not reject the better, but pass from

hand to hand indifferently the heavy and the light

coins, because their only use for the coin is as a

medium of exchange. It is those who are going to melt,export, hoard, or dissolve the coins of the realm, or

convert them into jewellery and gold leaf, who

carefully select for their purposes the new heavy coins.

            VIII.29 Gresham's law alone furnishes a

sufficient refutation of Mr. Herbert Spencer's doctrine,

already noticed (p. 64) that money ought to be

provided by private manufacturers. People who want

furniture, or books, or clothes, may be trusted to select

the best which they can afford, because they are going

to keep and use these articles; but with money it is just

the opposite. Money is made to go. They want coin,

not to keep it in their own pockets, but to pass it off

into their neighbour's pockets; and the worse the

money which they can get their neighbours to accept,

the greater the profit to themselves. Thus there is a

natural tendency to the depreciation of the metallic

currency, which can only be prevented by the constant

supervision of the state.

 

            VIII.30 From Gresham's law we may infer the

necessity of two precautions in the regulation of the

currency. In the first place, the standard coins, as

issued from the mint, should be as nearly as possible of

the standard weight, otherwise the difference will form

a profit for the bullion-broker and exporter. In the

second place, adequate measures must be taken forwithdrawing from circulation all coins which are worn

below the least legal weight, otherwise they will

continue to circulate as token coins for an indefinite

length of time. All commerce consists in the exchange

of commodities of equal value, and the principal

money should consist of pieces of metal so nearly

equal in metallic contents, that all persons, including

bullion dealers, bankers, and other professed dealers in

money, will indifferently substitute one coin for

another. But it is obvious that these remarks do not

apply to coins intended to serve as tokens, since the

current value of tokens exceeds their metallic value,

and every one who uses them otherwise than in

ordinary circulation will lose the difference. Hence the

weight of a token coin is comparatively a matter of

indifference, so long as people will receive them, and

the deficiency of weight is not too great a temptation to

the false coiner.

 

            VIII.31 In England at the present day the force

of habit, and the absence of means of discrimination,

lead to the depreciation of our gold standard coinage

by abrasion. Only while a sovereign exceeds 122.5

grains in weight is it legally a sovereign; but people go

on paying and receiving indifferently, in ordinary

trade, sovereigns of which the metallic values differ 2d.or 4d., and sometimes even 6d. or 8d. Every standard

coin thus tends to degenerate into a token coin, and

such a coin can only be withdrawn from circulation by

the state.

 

VIII.32

 

Extension of Gresham's Law.

 



Gresham's remarks concerning the inability of good

money to drive out bad money, only referred to

moneys of one kind of metal, but the same principle

applies to the relations of all kinds of money, in the

same circulation. Gold compared with silver, or silver

with copper, or paper compared with gold, are subject

to the same law that the relatively cheaper medium of

exchange will be retained in circulation and the

relatively dearer will disappear. The most extreme

instance which has ever occurred was in the case of the

Japanese currency. At the time of the treaty of 1858,

between Great Britain, the United States, and Japan,

which partially opened up the last country to European

traders, a very curious system of currency existed in

Japan. The most valuable Japanese coin was the

kobang, consisting of a thin oval disc of gold about 2inches long, and 11/4 inch wide, weighing 200 grains,

and ornamented in a very primitive manner. It was

passing current in the towns of Japan for four silver

itzebus, but was worth in English money about 18s.

5d., whereas the silver itzebu was equal only to about

1s. 4d. Thus the Japanese were estimating their gold

money at only about one-third of its value, as estimated

according to the relative values of the metals in other

parts of the world. The earliest European traders

enjoyed a rare opportunity for making profit. By

buying up the kobangs at the native rating they trebled

their money, until the natives, perceiving what was

being done, withdrew from circulation the remainder of

the gold. A complete reform of the Japanese currency

is now being carried out, the English mint at Hong

Kong having been purchased by the Japanese

government.

 

            VIII.33 What happened in an extreme degree

in Japan has often happened in England and other

European countries, in a less degree. If the ratio of gold

and silver in the coinage, as legally current, differs

only one or two per cent. from the commercial ratio, it

may become profitable to export the one metal rather

than the other, and in this way, as we shall see, the

main part of the currency of France was changed fromsilver into gold between 1849 and 1869. In fact the

character of the coinage of most nations has been

determined in a similar manner, and England and the

United States were thus led to adopt a principal gold

currency. There is every reason to believe that in

ancient Rome, both in the time of the Republic and of

the Empire, great difficulties were encountered in

regulating the currency of silver alongside of copper,

and the perplexity became worse when gold coin was

introduced.

 

VIII.34

Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 









Chapter IX Systems of Metallic Money 



We are now in a position to analyse the construction of

the various systems of metallic money which have

existed, or do exist, or which might be conceived to

exist. The systems actually brought into operation are

more numerous than is commonly supposed, and I

have nowhere met with an adequate classification of

them. M. Courcelle-Seneuil, indeed, has satisfactorily

described some of the principal systems, and MM.

Chevalier, Garnier, and other writers, both continental

and English, have given other brief classifications. But

we must now take a comprehensive view of the

possible ways in which two, three, or more metals may

be employed in the construction of a more or less

useful monetary system.

            IX.1 There seem to be five distinct modes in

which a government may deal with metallic money.

 

IX.2

1. It may confine itself to providing a system of

weights andmeasures, and may then allow the precious

metals to be passed about from hand to hand, like other

commodities, in terms of the national weights and

measures, and in the form which individuals find to be

most convenient. This we may call the system ofcurrency by weight.

 

IX.3

2. To save the trouble of frequent weighing, and the

uncertainty offineness of the metal, it may coin one or

more metals into pieces of certain specified weights

and fineness, and may afterwards allow the public to

make their contracts and sales in one or other kind of

coin, as they deem expedient. This may be described as

the system of unrestrictd currency by tale.

 

IX.4

3. To prevent misunderstandings, the government,

while emittingvarious coins, in various metals, may

ordain that all contracts expressed in money of the

realm shall, in the absence of express provision to the

contrary, be taken to mean money of one kind of metal,

specially named, while other coin shall be left to

circulate at varying market rates compared with this

principal kind of coinage. This is the single legal tender

system.

 

IX.5

4. The government may emit coins of two or more

kinds of metal,and enact that money contracts may be

discharged in one or other kind, at certain rates fixedby law. This is the multiple legal tender system.

IX.6

5. While maintaining one kind of coin as the principal

legaltender, in which all large money contracts must be

fulfilled, coins of other kinds of metal may be ordered

to be received in limited quantities, as equivalent to the

principal coin. For this the name composite legal

tender system may be proposed.

 

IX.7

 

Currency by Weight.

 



The order in which I have enumerated the principal

systems of metallic money, is not only the logical

order, but it is the historical order in which the systems

have, for the most part, been introduced. There is

overwhelming evidence to prove that simple currency

by weight is the primitive system. Before the invention

of the balance, lumps and grains were no doubt

exchanged according to a rude estimation of their bulk

or weight; but afterwards the balance became a

necessary instrument in all important transactions. In

the Old Testament we find several statements clearly

implying that the ancient Hebrews used to pass moneyby weight. In Genesis (xxiii. 16) Abraham is

represented as weighing out to Ephron "four hundred

shekels of silver, current money with the merchant,"

but the silver in question is believed to have consisted

of rough lumps or rings not to be considered coin. In

the Book of Job (xxviii. 15) we are told that "wisdom

cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall silver be

weighed for the price thereof."

 

            IX.8 Aristotle, in his Politics (Book I., chap.

ix), gives an interesting account of his view of the

origin of money, and distinctly tells us that the metals

were first passed simply by weight or size, and Pliny

makes a similar assertion. That it was so, we may infer

from the remarkable fact that, even when no use was

made of it, the custom of bringing a pair of scales

survived as a legal formality in the sale of slaves at

Rome.

 

            IX.9 There can be little doubt that every

system of coinage was originally identical with a

system of weights, the unit of value being the unit of

weight of some selected metal. The English pound

sterling was certainly the Saxon pound of standard

silver, which was too large to be made into a single

coin, but was divided into two hundred and forty silverpennies, each equal to a pennyweight. In the English

and Scotch pounds, and the French livre, we have the

vestiges of a uniform international system of money

and weights, the establishment of which is attributed to

Charlemagne, but which unfortunately became

differentiated and destroyed by the various

depreciations of the coinage in one country or another.

Most of the other principal units of value were

originally units of weight, such as the shekel, the talent,

the as, the stater, the libra, the mark, the franc, the lira.

 

            IX.10 In the Old Testament the notion of

money is expressed three times by the Hebrew word

kesitah, which is translated in certain old versions into

words meaning lamb. This might seem to be an

additional proof of the former use of cattle as a

medium of exchange; but I am informed by my learned

friend, Professor Theodores, that this translation

probably arises from an accidental blunder, and that the

original meaning of the word kesitah, was that of "a

certain weight," or "an exact quantity." The

corresponding word in the Arabic, kist, is said to

denote a pair of scales.

            IX.11 Currency by weight still exists among

considerable portions of the human race. In the

Burman empire, for instance, three kinds of metal arecurrent, namely, lead, silver, and gold, and all

payments are made by the balance, the unit of weight

for silver being the tical. In the Chinese Empire and

Cochin China, there is indeed a legal tender currency

of cash or sapeks but gold and silver are usually dealt

in by weight, the unit being the tael. A very interesting

account of Chinese money, by M. le Comte

Rochechouart, will be found in the Journal des

Economistes for 1869 (vol. xv. p. 103). According to

this writer, both gold and silver are treated simply as

merchandise, and there is not even a recognized stamp,

or government guarantee of the fineness of the metal.

The traveller must carry these metals with him, as a

sufficient quantity of strings of cash would require a

waggon for their conveyance. Yet in exchanging silver

or gold he is sure to suffer great losses, both from the

falsity of balances and weights, and the uncertain

fineness of the metal. In buying a tael of gold the

traveller may have to give eighteen taels of silver; but

in selling it he will often not obtain more than fourteen

taels.

 

            IX.12 Whatever be the inconveniences of the

method, currency by weight is yet the natural and

necessary system to which people revert whenever the

abrasion of coins, the intermixture of currencies, thefall of a state, or other causes destroy the public

confidence in a more highly organized system. Though

the silver penny among the Anglo-Saxons was

supposed to correspond with a pennyweight, there was

a practice of giving compensatio ad pensum, which

really amounted to taking the coins by weight, to allow

for abrasion and inaccurate or false coinage. The as

was at first equal in weight to a Roman pound, but it

was rapidly lessened, so that at the epoch of the First

Punic War, it did not exceed two ounces, and by the

time of the Second Punic War it had sunk to one ounce.

The Roman people had naturally reverted to weighing

the metal, and the aes grave was money reckoned by

weight instead of by tale.

 

            IX.13 In the present day currency by weight is

far more extensively practised then might be supposed,

because, in many parts of the world, the currency

consists of a miscellaneous assortment of old gold,

silver, and even copper coins, which have been brought

thither from other countries, and have been variously

worn, clipped, or depreciated. In such countries the

only means of avoiding loss and fraud is to weigh each

coin, and the impress passes for little more than an

indication of the fineness of the metals. In all large

international transactions, again, currency by weight isthe sole method. The regulations of a state concerning

its legal tender have no validity beyond its own

frontiers; and as all coins are subject to more or less

wear and uncertainty of weight, they are received only

for the actual weight of metal they are estimated to

contain. The coin of well-conducted foreign mints is

bought and sold by weight without melting; but the

coin of minor states, which have occasionally

depreciated their money, is melted up and treated

simply as bullion.

 

IX.14

 

Unrestricted Currency by Tale.

 



The simplest way for a state to manage its money

might seem to be to revert to the primitive notion of a

coin, and issue pieces of gold, silver, and copper,

certified to be equal to units of weight, leaving all

persons free to make contracts or sales in terms of any

of these metals. These pieces of certified metal would

then be so many commodities thrown into the markets

and allowed to take their natural relative values.

 

            IX.15 Such appears to have been the systemintended to be established by the French Revolutionary

Government in terms of the abortive law of Thermidor,

an III. Discs of ten grams each were to be struck in

gold, silver, and copper, and then put in circulation,

without any attempt to regulate their currency. If I

understand his meaning correctly, M. Garnier has

recently brought forward a somewhat similar scheme,

proposing to make the gram of gold at nine-tenths the

unit of value, and to coin pieces of one, two, five,

eight, or ten grams concurrently with standard silver

pieces, which are in France already multiples of the

gram. M. Chevalier's proposed system of international

money, partially at least, involves the same notion; for

he considers that the principal currency should consist

of decagrams of gold. But, as Mr. Bagehot has well

remarked, there is no object whatever, as regards the

greater mass of the population, in having coins simply

related to the system of weights, because most people

never need take any account of the weight at all. They

need only know how many copper coins are equal to

one silver coin, and how many silver to one gold coin.

Now, if we carry out M. Chevalier's scheme

consistently and fully, and make all the coins multiples

of the gram, we shall oblige all people to be constantly

working complex arithmetical sums. No one could give

exactly correct change without calculating how manysilver ten-gram pieces are, at the market price of silver,

equal to one gold ten-gram piece. The necessity for

calculation occasions needless loss of time and trouble,

and a factitious gain is sure to accrue to the expert and

unscrupulous at the expense of the poor and ignorant.

 

IX.16

Owing to these obvious objections no government has

ever, I believe, carried into practice a system of money

of the kind described. Nevertheless, currencies

approximating to it in nature have come to exist in

many parts of the world by the intermixture of

coinages of different states. There are many half-

civilized nations which have no national coinage, but

employ the coins which happen to reach them in the

course of trade. On the West Coast of Africa the

Spanish dollar is the best known coin, but Danish,

French, or Dutch coins also circulate. In several of the

South American states the currency is in a state of

complete confusion, consisting of a mixture of

American eagles, gold doubloons, silver dollars,

English sovereigns, piastres, etc., together sometimes

with several different issues of coinage of the South

American states variously depreciated. Even in British

possessions we find the same state of things. In the

British West Indian Islands, American, Mexican,Spanish, and other dollars, circulate concurrently with

English money; but it should be added that in most

cases the Spanish dollar is treated as the standard of

value, and other coins are quoted in terms of it.

 

            IX.17 In Eastern countries there is a similar

intermixture of coinage. In Singapore the Indian rupee

mingles with Spanish and Mexican dollars. Persia has a

rude coinage of its own, so uncertain in weight that it

has to be dealt in by the balance, but Russian, Turkish,

and Austrian gold coins circulate by tale. Some of the

best-regulated nations have allowed, or even promoted,

the currency of various foreign coins. In Germany,

French and English gold coins used to be accepted,

according to a wellrecognised tariff. The circulation of

English, French, Spanish, Mexican, and other gold

coins in the United States was legalized by an Act of

June 28th, 1834, repealed by an Act of February 21st,

1857, which however allows certain foreign coins to be

received at government offices.

            IX.18 In England we have for many

generations enjoyed a very pure currency, so that we

are unconscious of the inconveniences arising from a

confusion of coins of different values. But in the early

part of this century Spanish dollars were put into

circulation for a time in England. 

            IX.19 In former centuries the mixture of

coinages was far more common than at present. No

country had a currency free from strange coins. It is

impossible to open an old book on commerce without

finding long tables of coins which the merchant might

expect to meet with; and the business of money-

changing was a lucrative and common one.

 

            IX.20 It will be understood, that only so long

as coins are known by the fresh sharp appearance of

the impression to be of full weight, and are accepted

according to tariff, does the system of currency by tale

or number exist. The silver dollar, being a large coin, is

subject to comparatively little abrasion, so that people

learn to receive dollars of various species at certain

well-established rates. Thus the dollar has practically

been for several centuries the international money of

the tropical countries. But so soon as coins bear

evidence of wear or ill-treatment, they must be

circulated by weight, and we revert to a more primitive

system.

 


IX.21


M.      Feer-Herzog has described, as the system of

    parallel standards, that in which a state issues coin

    in two or more metals, and then allows them to

    circulate by tale at ratios varying according to the

    market values of the metals. He cites, as recent

    examples, the rixdaler in silver, employed as the

    internal money of Sweden in

combination with the ducat in gold, serving as

international money. The government of India, again,

has on several occasions tried to introduce a parallel

standard of gold alongside of the single silver legal

tender now existing there. Gold mohurs have long been

more or less in circulation in India, and are supposed to

form at present about one-tenth part of the coinage.

They are of exactly the same weight and fineness as the

silver rupee, and are usually valued at from 15 to 15

2/3 rupees. It seems probable, however, that what M.

Feer-Herzog calls the system of parallel standards will

coincide according to circumstances, either with that

which I have described as the system of unrestricted

currency by tale, or that of a single legal tender, with

an additional commercial money of varying value. The

Indian currency must certainly be classed under the

latter head. There cannot in fact be two different

parallel standards used both at the same time; and

though it is not uncommon for a state to coin moneysin two metals, and leave its subjects to pay in one or

other at will, yet one of the two is generally recognized

as the standard of value.

 

IX.22

 

Single Legal Tender System.

 



The system of currency naturally adopted by the first

coiners of money was that of a single legal tender.

Coins of one kind of metal, or even a single series of

coins of uniform weight, were at first thought

sufficient. Iron in small bars was the single legal tender

in Lacedæmon, and possibly in some other early states.

Aes was undoubtedly the legal tender among the

Romans for a length of time. In China the sole measure

of value and legal tender to the present day consists of

brass cash or sapeks, strung together in lots of a

thousand each. In England silver was the only metal

coined from the time of Egbert to that of Edward III.,

with the doubtful exception of a very few small pieces

of gold. Silver was the sole legal tender and measure of

value, and few coins except silver pennies were issued.

In Russia and Sweden, during part of last century,

copper was the sole legal tender.

             IX.23 A single metal currency has the great

advantages of simplicity and certainty. Every one

knows exactly what he is to pay or receive, and when

the coins are of one size or of a few sizes, simply

related to each other, like the early English coins, no

one is subject to loss by errors of calculation. But there

is the obvious disadvantage that, according as the metal

chosen is cheap or dear, large or small transactions will

be troublesome to effect. To pay a few hundred pounds

in Swedish copper plates, or Chinese strings of cash, a

cart would be required for conveyance, and the

counting of cash is almost impracticable. A silver

coinage again does not admit of coins sufficiently

small for minor transactions. It is difficult to

understand how retail trade was carried on when the

silver penny weighed 221/2 grains, and the precious

metals were far more precious than at present. The

penny was, indeed, cut up into halfpence and farthings,

i.e. four-things; but even the farthing must have been

equal in purchasing power to our threepenny or

fourpenny piece. The mass of the currency appears to

have consisted of silver pennies.

 

            IX.24 Accordingly it is found that, if a

government issue coins only of a single metal, the

people will introduce and circulate coins of othermetals for their own convenience. In Anglo-Saxon

tines gold byzants from Byzantium were used in

England, and the gold coins of Florence, thence called

florins, were much esteemed both here and in other

parts of Europe. In later centuries, too, in the absence

of a legitimate copper coinage, tradesmen's tokens

came into general circulation.

IX.25

 

Multiple Legal Tender System.

 



Out of a single legal tender naturally grow up systems

of a double or even a multiple legal tender. The

Plantagenet kings of England, for instance, finding that

though they coined only silver the people made use of

gold, eventually began to issue gold coins, and fixed

the rates at which they should be exchanged for silver

coins. In the absence of any special regulations to the

contrary this constituted a double tender system. As,

after a time, the ratio of values of the metals would fail

to coincide with that involved in the relative weights of

the coins, it became requisite to fix by royal

proclamation a new value for one metal in terms of the

other. From 1257 to 1664 the gold and silver currency

of England was thus regulated, no coins of copper orany inferior metal being then issued. From 1664 to

1717 no proclamations were made upon the subject,

and the value of the guinea was allowed to vary in

terms of the shilling. At one time it rose nearly to 30s.,

owing partly to the decreased value of silver, but

chiefly to the clipped and worn state of the silver

money. During this interval, then, the country had a

single silver standard.

 

            IX.26 In the early part of the last century a

great deal of discussion took place upon the

unsatisfactory state of the silver currency, and Sir Isaac

Newton, the Master of the Mint, was requested to

report upon the best measures to be adopted. In 1717

he made a celebrated report, recommending that the

government should revert to the practice of fixing the

price of the guinea, and he suggested 21s. as the best

rate. His advice being accepted, the guinea has ever

since been valued at 21s. Then there was again a

double standard in England, any one being at liberty to

pay in either kind of coin. In practice, however, it is

almost impossible that the commercial value of the

metals should coincide with the legal ratio. At the rate

adopted by Sir Isaac Newton, gold was overvalued by

rather more than 11/2 per cent.; to that extent it was

more valuable as currency than as metal. Therefore, inaccordance with the Law of Gresham, and the

principles laid down in Chapter VIII., the full weight

silver coin was withdrawn or exported, and gold

became the practical measure of value, which it has

ever since continued to be.

 

            IX.27 In every other part of the world, where

attempts have been made to combine two metals as

concurrent standards of value, similar results have

followed. In Massachusetts, in 1762, gold was made a

legal tender, as well as silver, at the rate of 21/2d. per

grain; but, being overvalued as much as 5 per cent., the

silver coinage rapidly disappeared from circulation.

Various laws were passed to remedy this inconvenient

state of things, but without success so long as this

valuation of gold was maintained.

 

            IX.28 In these and many other cases which

might be quoted, a government had attempted to

combine a circulation of gold with that of silver,

without being aware of all the principles involved in

the experiment. It was hardly, perhaps, till the time of

the French Revolution that the double standard system

was consciously selected as the best method. Since the

celebrated law, known as "La loi du 7 Germinal, an

XI.," was adopted by the Revolutionary Government,the system has become identified with the policy of the

French economists. The history of the origin of this law

was almost unknown, until M. Wolowski described it

in a series of valuable articles published in the Journal

des Economistes for 1869.

            IX.29 As early as 1790 Mirabeau presented to

the National Assembly a celebrated memoir on

monetary doctrines, in which, amid a curious mixture

of true and false views, he decided in favour of silver

as the principal money, on the ground of the greater

abundance of silver compared with gold. He proposed

to make silver the constitutional money, that is, the

legal tender, and to employ gold and copper as

additional signs of value. These ideas were only so far

carried out that the franc was defined first as ten grams

of silver by the decree of the 1st August, 1793, and was

afterwards definitively fixed at five grams by the law

of the 28th Thermidor, an III. The old gold pieces of

twenty-four and forty-eight livres continued to

circulate, while the ten-gram gold pieces ordered by the

decree to be struck were not really issued.

 

            IX.30 In the year IX. Gaudin proposed that the

ratio of 151/2 to 1 should be adopted in fixing the

weight of the gold coins relatively to the silver ones.

Thus, while the franc was defined as consisting of fivegrams of silver nine-tenths fine, the twenty-franc gold

piece was to contain 6.451 grams of gold of equal

fineness. He seems to have thought that this ratio was

sufficiently near to that of the markets to allow the

coins to circulate side by side for a long time, and in

case of a change, he thought that the gold pieces could

be melted and reissued at a different weight. After a

great amount of discussion, in which Berenger,

Lebreton, Daru, and Bose took the most prominent

part, the proposals of Gaudin were carried out, but not

precisely on the ground indicated by him. It appears to

have been thought unwise either to demonetize gold

altogether, which would have seriously diminished the

circulating medium, or to leave the value of the gold

coins uncertain, which would give rise to disputes.

            IX.31 The ratio adopted by the legislators of

the Revolution happened to overvalue silver in some

degree, and hence the currency of France came to

consist principally of the heavy five-franc pieces, or

écus. Not until the Californian and Australian

discoveries caused gold to be the cheaper money in

which to make payments, did this heavy silver money

gradually disappear. The action of the double standard

system will be further considered in Chapter XII.

 

IX.32 

Composite Legal Tender.

 



We have seen that with a single metal currency there is

inconvenience in making small or large payments,

according as the metal chosen is dear or cheap. If two

or more series of full-weight coins be issued in

different metals, and allowed to vary in relation to each

other, the difficulty of calculation intervenes. If they

both be made legal tenders at a fixed ratio, the currency

will tend to become composed alternately of one or the

other metal, and money-changers will make a profit out

of the conversion.

 

            IX.33 There yet remains another possible

system, in which coins of one metal are adopted as the

standard of value and principal legal tender, and

subordinate token coins of other metals are furnished

for the purpose of subdivision, being recognized as

legal tender only for small amounts. The values of

these token coins now depend upon that of the standard

coins for which they are legally exchangeable, and care

is taken to make their weights such that the metallic

value will always be less than the legal value. No profit

can ever be made by melting such coins, or removingthem from the country, and their ratio of exchange with

the principal coins is always a simple ratio fixed by

law.

 

            IX.34 The composite legal tender rises

naturally out of the double standard system; for, as we

have seen, if, under the latter system, gold be

overvalued at the legal rate, all full-weight silver coins

will be withdrawn and exported by degrees, so that

there will remain practically a token currency of light

silver. Lord Liverpool, having in his thorough

investigation of the subject of metallic money observed

the superior convenience of the composite legal tender

to the double legal tender, advocated its adoption in

England in the most conclusive manner. His arguments

will be found in his admirable "Treatise on the Coins of

the Realm in a Letter to the King" (Oxford, 1805), and

his recommendations, as carried into effect in 1816, are

the foundation of our present monetary system.

 

            IX.35 A composite system of currency has

frequently existed in one country or another without

being specially designed or recognized. It comes into

existence whenever coins of gold and silver are current

at rates fixed by law or custom, but the silver coins are

reduced by abrasion or clipping below thecorresponding weight. From the year 1717, when the

guinea was fixed at 21s., until the present system was

instituted in 1816, the English currency was based

theoretically upon the double standard system.

Practically, however, the silver coins were so scarce

and worn that they served but as tokens. The

tradesmen's copper tokens, too, being always of light

weight, and exchangeable by custom for a certain

proportion of silver coins, formed the third term in the

series. But Lord Liverpool appears to have been the

first to apprehend and explain the principles on which

such a composite system worked, and there can be no

doubt that the system, as he expounded it, is the best

adapted for supplying a convenient and economical

currency.

 

            IX.36 Most of the leading nations have now

adopted the composite legal tender in a more or less

complete form. France, Belgium, Switzerland, and

Italy still adhere to the double standard in theory, but

have reduced all coins of less value than five francs to

the footing of token money, by reducing the fineness of

the silver from 900 parts to 835 parts in 1000, or by

71/4 per cent., and by limiting the amount for which

they are legal tender. The copper money of France had

previously been restricted as a legal tender to sumsbelow five francs in any one payment. In the United

States, when metallic currency was generally

employed, the double standard system existed in

theory, but was reduced to a composite standard by the

excessive overvaluing of the gold money. Moreover,

by a law of 21st February, 1853, the smaller silver

coins were reduced in weight, and made legal tender

only for sums not exceeding five dollars. The silver

three-cent pieces, and the several copper, bronze, or

nickel coins, issued from the United States' mints, were

also token money with various limits as regard legal

tender.

 

            IX.37 The new German monetary system is

perfectly organized as a composite legal tender.

 

IX.38

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 Advanced Search

 









Chapter X The English System of Metallic Currency

 



I now come to describe in more detail the system of

metallic currency which has existed in England for

more than half a century, and which seems to be the

best of all as regards the principles on which coins of

three different metals are combined into composite

legal tender. The legal regulations under which the

English coinage is issued and circulated, can be

ascertained with ease and certainty, thanks to the Act

of Parliament (33 Victoria, ch. 10), which Mr. Lowe

caused to be passed to simplify and consolidate the

statutes on the subject.

 




English Gold Coin.

 



The English sovereign is the principal legal tender andthe standard of value. It is defined as consisting of

123.27447 grains (7.98805 grams) of English standard

gold, composed of eleven parts of fine gold, and one

part of alloy, chiefly copper. The sovereign ought,

therefore, in theory, to contain 113.00160 grains, or

7.32235 grams, of pure gold. But as it is evidently

impossible to make coins of any precise weight, or to

maintain them of that weight when in circulation, the

weight stated is only that standard weight to which the

mint workmen should aim to attain as closely as

possible, both in each individual piece, and in the

average.

 


1. From the weight of the sovereign we deduce the

    mint price of gold. For if we divide the number of

    grains in the sovereign into the number of grains -

    namely, 480-in the troy ounce, we ascertain exactly

    how many sovereigns and portions of a sovereign

    the mint ought to return for each ounce delivered

    in. This we find to be 3.89375, which is equivalent

    to £3 17s. 101/2d. It comes to exactly the same

    thing to say in terms of the old mint indentures that

      twenty-pounds' weight troy of gold are to be coined

    into 934 sovereigns, and one half-sovereign. I have

    heard of people who protested against the    government fixing the price at which gold should

    be bought and sold by the mint, and who yet

    allowed that the sovereign must have some fixed

    weight. But the fixed price is convertible with the

    fixed weight, and vice versâ. Either follows from

    the other.

 

2. In practice the weight of a coin is always a matter

    of limits, and there must be limits both for the

    weight as sent out and that at which it can legally

    remain in circulation. The remedy is the technical

    name for the allowance made to the mint-master for

    imperfection of workmanship, and is defined by the

    Act as two-tenths of a grain (0.01296 gram). Thus

    the mint cannot legally issue a sovereign weighing

    less than 123.074 grains, or more than 123.474

    grains. Since the fineness of the gold, again, can

    never be


adjusted exactly to the standard of eleven parts in

twelve, or 916.66 in a 1000, a remedy of two parts in

1000 is allowed in this respect. It is understood that the

English mint succeeds in working well within the

remedy both of weight and fineness.

 


1. Every sovereign issued from the mint in accordance    with these regulations, and bearing the impress

    authorized by the Queen, is legal tender, and must

    be accepted by a creditor in discharge of a debt to

    that amount, provided that it has not been reduced

    by wear or ill-treatment below the weight of 122.50

    grains (7.93787 grams). If a sovereign of less than

    this least current weight be tendered to any person,

    he is presumed by the law to detect the deficiency,

    and is bound to cut or deface the coin, and return it

    to the tenderer, who must bear the loss. If the coin

    so defaced should prove not to be below the limit,

    then the defacer has to receive it and bear the loss

    arising from his mistake. Any justice of the peace

    may decide disputes arising concerning light

    sovereigns in a summary manner.

 

2. The only other gold coin actually issued is the half-

    sovereign, of which the standard weight and

    remedy are exactly half those of the sovereign, the

    remedy in fineness the same as in the sovereign,

    and the least current weight 61.1250 grains

    (3.96083 grains). The Coinage Act also legalizes

    the issue of two- and five-pound gold pieces, the

    weights and remedies in weight being

    corresponding multiples of those of the sovereign.

    Coins of the value of five and two guineas were    struck by most of the English monarchs from the

    time of Charles II. to that of George III. Patterns of

    five- and two-pound pieces have been prepared

    under Queen Victoria; but gold coins of this size

    have not been issued in the present reign, nor is it

    desirable, for reasons stated in Chapter XIII., that

    they should be issued.


English Silver Coin.

 



The further subdivision of the pound is effected by

token coins of silver and bronze, which are made of

such weights that there is no danger of their metallic

values rising above the metallic value of the gold coins

for which they are legally equivalent. Previous to the

year 1816, the troy pound of standard silver, containing

925 parts of fine silver and 75 parts of alloy in 1000,

was coined into 62 shillings, so that each shilling

would contain 92.90 grains of standard metal. Under

these regulations gold was rated as 15.21 times as

valuable as silver. As silver, however, may sometimes

become more valuable relatively to gold, Lord

Liverpool very wisely recommended in his letter to the

king, that the weight of the shilling should be reduced.

By the Act 56 Geo. III. ch. 68, it was ordered that thetroy pound of silver should be coined into 66 shillings,

a reduction of weight of about 6 per cent. The new

Coinage Act maintains the chief provisions of that of

1816, so that the English shilling now has the weight of

87.27272 grains of standard silver (5.65518 grams),

and the weights of all the other silver coins are exactly

corresponding multiples or submultiples of this. The

mint remedy in weight for the shilling is a little more

than the third part of a grain, and in simple proportion

for the other coins. The remedy in fineness is in all

cases four parts in one thousand. The denominations of

coins authorized are nine in number, namely, the

crown, half-crown, florin, shilling, sixpence, groat, or

fourpenny piece, threepence, twopence, and penny.

All, except the crown, are coined in greater or less

quantity, but the fourpence, twopence, and penny, are

now only struck in very small quantities as Maundy

money, which, after being distributed by the Queen

annually in alms, appears to find its way into

numismatic cabinets or to be melted down.

 


1. All such coins are legally current, irrespective of

    their weights, so long as they are not called in by

      proclamation, or so worn and defaced that the

    impress of the mint cannot be recognized. The coin    in circulation is actually reduced in weight by

    abrasion to a considerable amount, often one-fourth

    or one-third of its original weight. Moreover, the

    fall in the value of silver relatively to gold reduces

    the metallic worth of the coins, so that no one can

    export them to foreign countries, or melt them for

    sale as bullion without losing from 10 to 30 per

    cent. of their nominal value.

 

2. It would obviously be a cause of grievance if a

    person could be obliged to receive unlimited

    amounts of this token money in discharge of a debt.

    Merchants might often have thousands of pounds

    worth of such coins thrown upon their hands, the

    full value of which could only be realized by

    gradually putting it into circulation again. It was

    therefore provided by the Acts of 1816 and 1870,

    that silver coin shall be a legal tender only to the

    amount of forty shillings in any one payment. This

    limit was chosen apparently because the two-pound

    piece was in 1816 regarded as the largest coin then

    in circulation, or likely to be issued.

 

3. 

 


English Bronze Coinage. 



The final subdivision of the pound is effected by

bronze pence, halfpence, and farthings, of which the

weights when issued should be respectively 145.833,

87.500, and 43.750 grains. They are composed of an

alloy of 95 parts by weight of copper, four parts of tin,

and one part of zinc, being exactly the same kind of

bronze as was previously employed by the French

mints. The remedy in weight is one-fifth of one per

cent., and as the coins are token money there is no least

current weight. As the reasons against allowing them to

be a legal tender for large sums are stronger than in the

case of silver coin, it is enacted that bronze coins shall

be a legal tender only to an aggregate amount of one

shilling.

 


1. If a copper penny were now made to contain metal

    equivalent in value to the 240th part of a sovereign,

    its weight would be 871 grains, at the present

    market price of copper (£75 per ton). Thus the

    fractional coinage has been reduced in weight

    nearly to one-sixth part of what it would be as

    standard copper coin. The bronze of which the

    pence are made is worth, according to Mr. Seyd,

    10d. per troy pound, so that the metallic values of    the coins are almost exactly one-fourth part of their

    nominal values. A considerable profit therefore

    accrues upon the coinage of bronze, amounting up

    to the end of 1871 to about £270,000; but the

    reduction of weight is altogether an advantage, and

    is probably not carried as far as it might properly be

    done.

 

2. 

 


Deficiency of Weight of the English Gold Coin.

 



It is the theory of the present English monetary law, as

we have seen (p. 107) that every person weighs a

sovereign tendered to him, and assures himself, before

accepting it, that it does not weigh less than 122.5

grains. In former days it was not uncommon for people

to carry pocket-scales for weighing guineas, and such

scales may still be occasionally seen in old curiosity

shops. But we know that the practice is entirely given

up, and that even the largest receivers of coins, such as

the banks and railway companies, and even tax-offices,

post-offices, etc., do not pay the least regard to the law.

Only the Bank of England, its branches, and a few

government offices, weigh gold coin in England. Theresult is that a large part of the gold coinage is worn

below the least current weight, and all persons of

experience avoid paying old sovereigns to the Bank of

England. Only ignorant and unlucky persons, or else

large banks and companies which cannot otherwise get

rid of light coin, suffer loss. The quantity of light gold

coin withdrawn by the bank did not for many years

exceed half a million a year; during the last few years it

has varied from £700,000 to £950,000. As the average

amount of gold coined annually is four or five millions,

and the coins melted or exported are for the most part

new and of full weight, it follows necessarily, that the

currency is becoming more and more deficient in

weight.

 


1. In 1869 I ascertained, by a careful and extensive

    inquiry, that 311/2 per cent. of the sovereigns and

    nearly one-half of the ten-shilling pieces were then

    below the legal limit. The reader who has attended

    to the remarks on Gresham's Law (p. 80), will see

    that no amount of coinage of new gold will drive

    out of circulation these depreciated old coins,

    because those who export, or melt, or otherwise

    treat the coins as bullion, will take care to operate

    upon good new ones.

 2. Great injustice arises in some cases from this

    defective state of the gold currency. I have heard of

    one case in which an inexperienced person, after

    receiving several hundred pounds in gold from a

    bullion dealer in the city of London, took them

    straight to the bank of England for deposit. Most of

    the sovereigns were there


found to be light, and a prodigious charge was made

upon the unfortunate depositor. The dealer in bullion

had evidently paid him the residuum of a mass of

coins, from which he had picked the heavy ones. In a

still worse case, lately reported to me, a man presented

a post-office order at St. Martin's-le-Grand, and carried

the sovereigns received to the stamp-office at Somerset

House, where the coins were weighed, and some of

them found to be deficient. Here a man was, so to say,

defrauded between two government offices.

 


1. It should be stated that the government made, in

    July, 1870, a slight effort to promote the

    withdrawal of light gold, by engaging to receive it

    through the Bank of England at the full price of £3

    17s. 9d. per ounce by weight, the price previously

    paid by the bank having been only £3 17s. 61/2d.,

    owing to the old sovereigns being a little below the    standard in fineness. A certain increase in the

    amounts withdrawn has no doubt followed this

    measure; but the loss by deficiency in weight is still

    thrown upon the public, and as long as this is the

    case the withdrawal of light gold will continue

    inadequate to maintain the coinage at its standard

    weight.

 

2. 

 


Withdrawal of Light Gold Coin.

 



Some steps must soon be taken to remedy the

increasing deficiency of weight of the gold coinage

described above. The withdrawal may no doubt be

effected in several ways. One method would be for the

Queen to issue a proclamation calling in and

prohibiting the circulation of all gold coins more than

twenty or twenty-five years old, as it is mostly the

older coins which are deficient in weight. Another

method would be to oblige all revenue officers,

postmasters, and others, under the control of

government, to weigh all sovereigns presented to them.

If necessary, the bankers of the kingdom generally

might be obliged to weigh coin. But it is obvious thatgreat trouble and inconvenience would arise from such

measures. The progress of the post-office savings

banks would be imperilled if every depositor of a

pound were liable to be charged 2 per cent. for

lightness. Considerable excitement and trouble

followed the issue of the last proclamation of June,

1842, calling in light gold. To make the last holder of a

coin pay for the whole cost of its circulation during

thirty or forty years past, leads in many cases to gross

injustice. The present law tends to throw the loss upon

the poor, who have usually only one or two sovereigns

at a time to pay, whereas rich people, having many, can

avoid paying light gold at offices where it will be

weighed.

 


1. I hold that the only thorough remedy is for the

    government to bear the loss occasioned by the wear

    of the gold, as it already bears that of the silver

    currency. The Bank of England should be

    authorized to receive all sovereigns showing no

    marks of intentional damage or unfair treatment at

    their full nominal value, on behalf of the mint,

    which should recoin the light ones at the public

    expense. No one would then have any reason for

    keeping the light gold away from the bank; the    currency would soon be purged of the illegally light

    coins, and would thenceforth be kept up strictly to

    the standard weight; all loss of time and trouble

    would be saved to individuals, a consideration

    which we should not lose sight of; and, lastly, no

    injustice would be done, as at present, to the last

    holder of a light sovereign.

 

2. In opposition to such a proposal it is usually urged,

    that encouragement would be given to the criminal

    practice of


sweating or otherwise diminishing the weight of the

currency. I answer that, on the contrary, it is the

present state of things which gives the best opportunity

for illegal practices, because it renders the population

perfectly accustomed to handling old and worn coins.

No one now actually refuses any gold money in retail

business, so that the sweater, if he exists at all, has all

the opportunities he can desire. I have met with

sovereigns deficient to the extent of four to five grains,

or 8d. to 10d., but they nevertheless circulate. If under

a better system the gold currency consisted entirely of

full-weight, fresh coins, with sharp, new, perfect

impressions, attention would quickly be drawn to any

coin which appeared to be worn or ill-treated in anydegree. As the currency, too, would be constantly

passing through the automaton weighing-machines of

the Bank of England, without previously undergoing

the operation of garbling by bullion brokers, sweated

coins, if they existed at all, would soon be detected;

whereas, according to the present system, the bank

authorities have no opportunity of examining the whole

coinage. It is the present state of things, then, which

gives the best opportunity for tampering with the

currency, though there is no evidence to show that

fraudulent practices are carried on to any appreciable

extent. Under the proposed new system such practices

would be rendered almost impossible.

 

X.18

 

Supply of Gold Coin.

 



It is the theory of the English monetary law that every

individual is entitled to take gold to the mint and have

it coined gratuitously, all the expenses being borne by

the public revenues. It is intended that the coin shall be

rendered identical in value with an equal quantity of

gold bullion, so that it shall, in short, be so much

certified bullion, and shall be reconvertible into ingotswithout loss. Though this theory is simple and sound in

some respects, it is not perfectly carried into practice.

The mint never engages to deliver coin in immediate

exchange for gold sent for coining, so that there is a

loss of interest during the uncertain interval of coinage.

If, instead of sending gold directly to the mint, the

owner pursues the customary mode of selling it to the

Bank of England, he receives, according to the Bank

Charter Act of 1844, only £3 17s. 9d. per ounce,

instead of the full mint price of £3 17s. 101/2d.

Moreover, it has been pointed out by Mr. E. Seyd, that,

as the bank used to conduct their bullion business,

there was a series of small charges or profits made for

weighing, melting, assaying, the turn of the scale, the

difference of the assay reports, etc., which amounted

on the whole, including, the above charge of 11/2d. per

ounce for demurrage, to 0.2828 per cent. on the value

of the gold. The bank has since made some small

improvements in the mode of conducting the business,

but it may still be considered that the cost of converting

gold bullion into sovereigns is about 1/4 per cent.

 

            X.19 Though every person whatever has the

right, under the Coinage Act, of taking gold to the mint

and having it coined free of charge and in order of

priority without undue preference, no one ever doesuse the privilege, except the Bank of England. During

an inquiry into the Bank Act in 1857, Mr. Twells stated

that he had once sent £10,000 to the mint, and was

afterwards surprised to find his firm of Spooner and

Co., mentioned in a parliamentary paper as the only

private firm that had ever done such a thing. The

directors of the Bank of England have naturally

acquired the monopoly of transactions with the mint,

because they have to keep large stocks both of coin and

bullion to meet the demands of the Issue Department

and of their customers, including, directly or indirectly,

the whole of the bankers of the United Kingdom. They

can convert portions of their bullion into coin without

any loss of interest or cost, whenever they find the

stock of coin running down. They feel the monetary

pulse of the whole community, and they have all the

requisite appliances for the custody, assay, or exact

weighing of bullion. Even those persons who need to

possess large sums of gold often employ the bank to

weigh, pack, and warehouse it, and the bank is always

willing to do the work for fixed low charges. Hence it

is most natural and convenient that the bank should act

as the agent of the mint. Though the bank makes a

certain profit out of the business, it is hardly earned at

the cost of the public, but rather comes out of the

economy with which the work is managed. It could inno way improve the currency of the country if every

one who owned a few ounces of gold were to run with

it to the mint, throwing upon the country the cost of

melting and assaying insignificant ingots, and

complicating the accounts and transactions of the mint.

 

X.20

 

Supply of Silver Coin.

 



On account of the absurd misapprehensions recently

existing as to the scarcity of silver money, and the

supposed right of private individuals to demand the

coinage of silver, it may be well to describe exactly

how the supply of silver coin is legally regulated and

practically carried out. There is no law, statute, or

common, which gives any private person, company, or

institution, the right to take silver to the mint, and

demand coin in exchange. Thus it is left in the hands of

the Treasury and the mint to issue so much and such

denominations of silver coins as they may think

needful for the public service. This state of the law is

perfectly right; because, as the silver coins are tokens,

they cannot be got rid of by melting or exportation at

their nominal values. If individuals were free todemand as much silver coin as they liked, a surplus

might be thrown into circulation in years of brisk trade,

which in a subsequent year of depressed trade would

lie upon people's hands.

 

            X.21 Practically speaking, the mint is guided

in the supply of silver coin by the Bank of England, not

because this bank has by law any special powers,

privileges, or duties in the matter, but because, in

acting as the bank of banks, and the bank of

government departments, it has the best opportunities

of judging when more coin is wanted. Not only do all

the London bankers draw silver coin from the Bank of

England when they need it, but the same is done

directly or indirectly by all the other bankers in the

kingdom. A deficiency of silver coin in any county is

shown by the stock of the local bankers running down.

They replenish their stocks either from the nearest

branch of the Bank of England or from their London

agents, who again draw from the Bank of England. At

other times or places, the bankers tend to accumulate a

surplus of silver coin. Some banks in a large town may

happen to have accounts with many shopkeepers,

butchers, brewers, cattle-dealers, or dealers of one kind

or another, who deposit silver coin in large quantities.

Other banks may be largely drawn upon bymanufacturers for the payment of wages, and may

suffer from a deficiency of silver coin. It is a common

practice, therefore, for bankers in any locality to assist

each other by buying or selling superfluous silver coin

as the case may require. If a superfluity of coin,

however, cannot be got rid of in this way, it may be

returned to the Bank of England or one of its branches.

This bank indeed is in no way bound to provide or

receive large sums in silver, and it therefore usually

makes a small charge of about five shillings per

hundred pounds to cover the trouble and risk. In

consideration of this charge the bank bears the cost of

transmission by railway, examines the coin for the

detection of base pieces and the withdrawal of worn

coin-which latter it sends to the mint for recoinage, and

acts in general as the agent, of the mint.

 


1. Having the business so much in its hands, it is

    obvious that the department of the bank which

    manages the receipt and issue of silver coin can

    judge accurately when a fresh supply of coin is

    wanted. Before the stock runs too low notice is

    given to the mint, and money is usually advanced to

    the Master that he may purchase silver bullion for

    coinage. Under this system it is almost impossible    for a deficiency of currency to arise without

    becoming known to the mint, and if, two or three

    years ago, the supply could not be made equal to

    the sudden demand, it was because the mint was

    not supplied by government with machinery

    adequate to the growing wants of the country. The

    existing system, in short, seems to be as nearly

    perfect as can be desired, provided that the mint be

    rebuilt and organized in such a manner as to enable

    it to meet any demand which the fluctuations of

    trade may occasion.

 

2. 

 


The Royal Mint.

 



While treating of the English system of metallic

money, it is impossible to avoid expressing the wish

that the House of Commons and the government will

no longer delay a complete reconstruction of the Royal

Mint. The mint factories, as they now stand, were very

creditable to the generation which erected them; but it

is needless to say that in the last fifty or seventy years

we have immensely advanced, both in the art of

constructing machinery and in our ideas of thearrangement and economy of manufactories. What

should we think of a Cotton Spinning Company, which

should propose to use a mill and machinery originally

constructed by Arkwright, or to drive a mill by engines

turned out of the Soho works in the time of Boulton

and Watt? Yet the nation still depends for its coinage

upon the presses actually erected by Boulton and Watt,

although much more convenient coining presses have

since been invented and employed in foreign and

colonial mints.

 


1. The present mint workshops are quite inadequate

    for meeting the demands which may be thrown

    upon them by the increasing industry and wealth of

    the United Kingdom, not to speak of the British

    Empire. A few years ago it was impossible to turn

    out silver coin as quickly as it was required when

    trade was brisk, and, while one metal is being

    coined, there are no means of meeting the demand

    for other kinds of coin. As to the bronze coinage, it

    has generally to be obtained from Birmingham

    presses, and bronze blanks have also to be

    purchased at times. Even silver blanks have been

    obtained from Birmingham. The British mint ought

    to represent the skill and wealth of the British    nation, and no petty considerations should be

    allowed to postpone so necessary a reform.

 

2. Nothing short of a complete reconstruction of the

    mint workshops will meet the requirements of the

    case. If this is to be done, much convenience and

    economy will arise from abandoning the large and

    valuable site upon Tower Hill, and erecting an

    entirely new mint in a more accessible position.

    The opinions of Mr. E. Seyd upon this subject are

    worthy of much attention.

 

3. 


Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 Chapter XI Fractional Currency

 



One monetary question which can hardly be said to be

satisfactorily solved as yet, is that of selecting the best

possible material for coins of small value, called in

English pence, in French monnaie d'appoint. The

fractional coins should be equal in value to about a

tenth part of the silver ones, coin for coin, but it

unfortunately happens that there is no suitable metal of

which the value is now one-tenth part of that of silver.

In the time of the Romans, gold was about ten times as

valuable as silver, and silver about ten times as

valuable as copper, so that there would then have been

no difficulty in constructing a perfect decimal system

of money.

 

XI.1

To throw light upon this subject, I have drawn out the

following table, in which are shown the weights of the

principal commercial metals which are of equal values

at present. The numbers in such a table must of course

be subject to perpetual fluctuations, according to the

changes in the market prices of the metals. In some

cases, too, it is difficult to find any accurate quotations

at all, and the price often depends greatly upon themanufactured state of the metal. Gold and silver are

taken as of standard fineness, and gold forms the unit.

 

Equivalent Weights of the Principal Metals. Gold . . . .

1 Tin . . . 942 Platinum . . . 31/2 Copper . . . . 1,696

Aluminium . . 7 Lead . . . . 6,360 Silver . . . . 16 Bar

Iron . . . . 15,900 Nickel . . . . 71 Pig Iron 50,880

 



            XI.2 It may be worthy of notice that when we

thus draw out what may be called the commercial

equivalents of the metals, they are found to form a

series very rudely approximating to a geometrical

series with the common ratio 3. Silver, however, is an

exception. There is, too, one term missing between

nickel and tin, and as tin is not a coinable metal, there

is a wide interval between nickel and copper, and a still

wider one between silver and copper. At present silver

is almost exactly one hundred times as valuable as

copper; hence copper pence must either contain in

metallic value but a fraction of the nominal value, or

else they must be very heavy and bulky. When a new

copper coinage was issued in England from the mint of

Boulton and Watt in 1797, the coins were made nearly

of standard weight, at the rate of an ounce avoirdupois

for each penny. There was a double inconvenience inthis. Sixteen pence actually weighed a pound

avoirdupois, at which rate the people would now be

carrying three tunes as great a weight in their pockets

as with our bronze currency. Moreover, the price of

copper having risen, Boulton's pence became more

valuable as metal than as coins, and were used as

material in spite of their beautiful execution.

 

            XI.3 The first and most obvious course was to

reduce the weight of the penny, making it purely a

token coin. The old pennies of Victoria weighed about

290 grains each, instead of about 433 grains, as in the

coinage of Boulton and Watt, a reduction of about one-

third part. The bronze penny has been still further

reduced, and ought to weigh 145.8 grains.

 

            XI.4 There are two inconveniences which may

arise from too great and sudden a reduction in the

weight of token currency. There is a risk of the

population rejecting the new coins as fraudulently

light. This was the case with the new copper five- and

ten-centime pieces, struck in France in 1794 by the

Revolutionary Government, at the rate of one gram for

each centime, which was half the previous rate. The

government was obliged to call in the light coin and

issue it again at the old weight, and only in the time ofNapoleon III. could coins of one grain per centime be

put into circulation. The people, then, must be educated

to receive very light tokens, and the reduction must be

made by moderate steps.

 

            XI.5 In the second place, if the metal is easily

coined or manipulated like copper, if it fails to retain a

very good impression, and if there is a considerable

margin for profit, the temptation to false coiners might

become strong. I am not aware that this has ever

happened in regard to the English copper coinage, but

counterfeit sous used to be manufactured on a large

scale in the Faubourg Saint Antoine, in Paris, almost

under the eyes of the government.

 

            XI.6 At the best, too, pure copper makes

indifferent coin, being deficient in hardness, so that it

soon becomes disfigured; it has a disagreeable odour

which it communicates to the fingers; and when

exposed to damp air it becomes covered with verdigris,

which is both unsightly and poisonous. I proceed to

consider the various ways in which it has been

attempted to substitute for copper coin some more

convenient currency.

 

XI.7 

Billon Coin.

 



Pennies and twopenny pieces, if now made of standard

silver, like the Maundy money, would be too small and

light for use, weighing respectively 71/4 and 141/2

grains. Even the threepenny pieces, now so abundant in

England, and weighing 21.8 grain each, are

inconveniently small. In England, for a very long time,

no silver has been coined of less fineness than the old

standard of 925 parts in 1000. In many continental

countries the smaller currency has been made of a very

low alloy of silver and copper, called billon. Such

coins were at one time current, to a certain extent, in

France, the metal containing only one part of silver in

five of alloy, but they have long been recalled. In

Norway the small currency now consists partly of half-

skilling and oneskilling pieces in copper, the skilling

being nearly equal in value to an English halfpenny,

but principally of two, three, and fourskilling pieces,

composed of billon, containing, according to an

analysis performed for me at the Owens' College

chemical laboratory, one part of silver and three of

copper. These billon pieces are very convenient in size,

and, being for the most part newly issued, are clean andneat. Billon is still being coined in Austria.

 

            XI.8 It is in the states now forming the

German empire that billon coins have been most

extensively used, especially in pieces of three, four,

and six kreutzers, the so-called scheidemünze now

being recalled. This consists of silver alloyed with

three, four, or more times its weight of copper. Before

such base silver is passed through the coining press, it

is usual to dissolve the copper from the surface of the

blank pieces of metal, so as to produce a film of pure

white silver upon the surface. This operation, called

colouring, gives a fine bright appearance to the coins

when new, and they are easily put into circulation. But

after a little time the silver film is worn off, and the

coins assume a very patchy aspect. Billon coinage

seems to have, too, an extraordinary power of

accumulating a layer of dirt of a very disagreeable

character, with which all travellers in Germany in past

years must be well acquainted. Moreover, it offers

great facilities to the counterfeiter, and for several

sufficient reasons cannot be recommended for

adoption.

 

XI.9

 Composite Coin.

 



It is said that Saint Louis, the great King of France,

finding much want of small money to pay his soldiers,

caused little pieces of silver wire, weighing nine and

eighteen grains, to be fixed on pieces of stamped

leather, and circulated for one- and two-dime pieces.

The silver gave the value, and the leather served as a

case or handle to preserve the small bit of metal from

being lost. In recent times, composite coins, having a

centre piece of silver and a rim of copper, were

constructed on similar principles. A model penny of

this kind has an agreeable appearance and a convenient

size, but seems to be subject to several objections. The

cost of coinage would be considerable; the coins could

hardly be made so perfect that the centre would not

come out sometimes; the contact of dissimilar metals

would set up electrochemical action, and the copper

would be corroded; and, lastly, it would be difficult to

detect counterfeit silver pieces inserted by the forger.

Composite coins of a similar character were struck in

France under Napoleon I., about the year 1810, but

were never circulated. Pennies formed of a copper

centre with a brass rim have been employed in

England, and tin pence, halfpence, or farthings, with acopper plug inserted near the centre, were long used,

and are plentiful in numismatic cabinets.

 

XI.10

 

Bronze Coin.

 



It was known, even in prehistoric times, that a small

quantity of tin communicated hardness to copper, and

the ancient nations were familiar with the use of bronze

thus manufactured. The French Revolutionary

Government melted up the bells of the churches seized

by them, and the sous de cloche, as they were called,

made from the bell metal, were superior to coins of

pure copper. Yet curiously enough no modern

government thought of employing a well-chosen

bronze for small money, until the government of the

late Emperor of the French undertook the recoinage of

the old sous in 1852. This recoinage was carried out

with great success.

 

XI.11

Between the years 1853 and 1867 coins to the nominal

value of about two millions sterling, consisting of 800

millions of pieces, and weighing eleven millions ofkilograms (10,826 tons) were struck, in addition to a

subsequent issue of about 200 millions of pieces. The

experiment was in almost every way successful. The

ten and five-centime pieces now circulating in France

are models of good minting, with a low but sharp and

clear impression. They were readily accepted by the

people, although only weighing as much as the sous

rejected in the time of the Revolution, namely, one

gram per centime, and they are wearing well.

 

            XI.12 The bronze used consists of 95 parts of

copper, four of tin, and one of zinc. It is much harder

than copper, yet so tough and impressible that it takes a

fine impression from the dies, and retains it for a long

time. It cannot be struck except by a press of some

power, and thus counterfeiting is rendered almost

impossible. It can hardly be said to corrode by

exposure to air or damp, and merely acquires a natural

patina, or thin dark film of copper oxide, which throws

the worn parts of the design into relief, and increases

the beauty of the coin.

 

            XI.13 Bronze has since been coined by the

governments of England, the United States, Italy, and

Sweden, and it seems probable that it will entirely take

the place of copper. The German government is nowusing bronze for the one-pfennig pieces.

 

XI.14

 

English Bronze Coin.

The old copper coinage of the United Kingdom was

replaced, from ten to fifteen years ago, by a much more

convenient and elegant series of pence, half pence, and

farthings, struck in exactly the same kind of bronze as

the French centime pieces. The English coins, though

far from being so well executed as the French ones, are

clean, and likely to wear well. The only great objection

which can be raised to them, is that they are still of

considerable size and weight, although less than the old

copper coins. As all the latter are now withdrawn, and

few of the new ones can yet be lost or destroyed, we

know very accurately the amount of the English

fractional currency. The whole amount issued in the

years 1861 to 1873 is as follows:-

 

            Weight in tons. Number of pieces. Nominal

value in pounds sterling. Pennies . . . 1,585

170,419,000 £710,082 Halfpennies. . 918 164,505,000

342, 119 Farthings . . 149

 

53,594,000

 55,826

 



2,652 388,518,000 £1,108,627

 




            XI.15 Including a small amount issued before

1861, the whole value of the bronze coin put into

circulation up to the end of 1873 was £1,143,633. It is

remarkable that the quantity of small coins used in

England is much less than in France, where at least

1000 million of pieces, chiefly of ten and five

centimes, are in use. Thus while the English, Scotch,

and Irish seem to be sufficiently supplied with 81/2d.

per head, the French employ on the average 1 franc 60

centimes (15 pence), the Belgians, 2 francs 26 centimes

(21/2 pence), and the Italians as much as 3 francs 10

centimes (291/2 pence).

 

XI.16

 

Weight of the Currency.

 



It is curious that the weights of the several kinds of

currency vary inversely as their nominal values; thus,taking the paper circulation of the United Kingdom at

40 millions, the gold roughly at 100 millions, the silver

at 15 millions, and the bronze as above, I find the

weights to be approximately as follows:-

 

Paper currency . . . . . . 16 tons. Gold " . . . . . . 786 "

Silver " . . . . . . . 1670 " Bronze " . . . . . . . 2652

 

"

5124 tons

 



            XI.17 It is impossible to give a satisfactory

reason why the least valuable part of the currency

should be so much the most weighty. A tendency thus

arises for the pence to accumulate upon the hands of

retail traders, especially publicans, omnibus

proprietors, and newspaper publishers. At one time the

London brewers had such large quantities of bronze

coins thrown upon their hands from the public-houses

which they own, that the mint had eventually to

arrange to buy it from them, instead of coining more.

In large towns, arrangements have to be made for

getting rid of the accumulating pence with the least

trouble and loss; the coin is transferred weekly to mills

and factories, where it is used in paying wages.Bankers refuse to have anything to do with bronze coin

beyond the amount of a shilling, for which it is legal

tender, and it is usual for persons to object to receive

more than 2d. or 3d. of change in pence.

 

            XI.18 It is worthy of inquiry whether this

tendency of the fractional currency to stagnation would

not be remedied by the substitution of a much lighter

and more elegant currency of nickel, or of some alloy

yet to be invented. In France, it is found that the bronze

coinage circulates much more freely than the old

copper and bell-metal sons, which tended to

accumulate in certain localities. Our bronze pence are

much better than the old copper pence, but it does not

follow that we have in any degree approximated to

perfection. Coins of about half the weight of those in

circulation would be much more convenient.

 

XI.19

 

Nickel, Manganese, Aluminium, and other Metals and

Alloys.

 



The employment of nickel in the manufacture of small

money has already been referred to (p. 49), and if theconditions of supply and demand of this metal were

more steady we should perhaps want nothing better.

The alloy of nickel and copper generally used is hard

and difficult to coin, but it takes a fine impression

which it will probably require long wear to efface.

Nickel coinage is thus very unlikely to be

counterfeited, and its peculiar nondescript colour

renders it easily distinguishable from silver or gold

money. The progress of metallurgy, however, is

making us acquainted with several new metals and

many new alloys, and it is quite likely that some new

material for fractional money will eventually be found.

Dr. Percy, having regard to the rising price of nickel,

suggests that manganese should be employed instead,

as it gives alloys of similar character, and can be

procured in greater quantities.

 

            XI.20 Dr. Clemens Winkler strongly

recommends aluminium as suited for monetary

purposes. Trial pieces, marked "1/4 real, 1872," have

been struck, and one of them may be seen in the

Monetary Museum at the Paris mint. This metal has a

characteristic bluish white colour, but its great

advantage is its low specific gravity. The trial pieces in

question, of which a specimen was furnished to me by

Mr. Roberts, the chemist of the English mint, is twocentimetres, or 0.79 inch, in diameter, a little wider

than a sixpence and much thicker, and yet weighs only

one grain, or 151/2 grains. Were our pence and

halfpennies as light and convenient as this coin, we

could carry many of them in the pocket without

discomfort. The chief difficulty in adopting such a new

metal would arise from the uncertain price at which it

can be produced. It is unknown, too, how it would

wear. Even if pure aluminium were found to be

unsuitable for coining, some of its remarkable alloys

might be employed instead. Mr. Graham, the late

Master of the Mint, had a series of trial pieces of one to

ten cents struck in the so-called "aluminium bronze."

 

            XI.21 I may suggest that one of the best

possible materials for small money would be steel,

provided it could be prevented from rusting. Steel

coins would be difficult to strike, but when once struck

could be hardened, so as to be almost indestructible.

The cheapness of the material would allow of their

production on a large scale at small cost, while they

could not possibly be imitated by the false coiners with

any profit. Hence it would be needless to pay any

attention to the metallic value of the coins, which

might be struck of the most convenient sizes, probably

those of the sixpence and shilling. Now it has beenpointed out by Sir John Herschel (Physical Geography,

reprinted from the "Encyclopædia Britannica," §320, p.

289), that steel appears to be protected from rusting by

being alloyed with a small quantity of nickel; this at

least is the effect in the case of meteoric iron. It is

much to be desired that such an alloy should be fairly

tried. I am informed by Mr. Roberts, that silver also

alloys well with iron or steel, and that such mixtures

have been proposed for coining purposes. An alloy of

silver, copper, and zinc has already, indeed, been fully

tested in Switzerland, where it is used for twenty, ten,

and five-centime pieces. These coins are convenient in

size, but have a poor yellowish white appearance. They

have not been adopted, so far as I know, by any other

country; and there seems to be no use in putting silver

into them, as it would probably be easy to produce a

similarly coloured alloy without silver.

 

            XI.22 It is a misfortune of what may be called

the science of monetary technology, that its study is

almost of necessity confined to the few officers

employed in government mints. Hence we can hardly

expect the same advances to be made in the production

of money as in other branches of manufacture, where

there is wide and free competition. Moreover, it is very

difficult to get an opportunity of testing any new kindof coin; in a large currency, like that of the United

Kingdom, it is almost impossible to execute

experiments. But it may be suggested that the English

mint, in supplying coins for some of the smaller British

colonies and possessions, enjoys an admirable

opportunity for testing new proposals. This need not

involve any cost to such colonies, as the English

government, in striking a few hundreds or thousands of

pounds' worth of small coin for a colony, might readily

engage to withdraw them at its own cost if found

unsuitable after a certain number of years.

 

XI.23

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 Chapter XII The Battle of the Standards

 



Ever since the great discoveries of gold in California

and Australia began to disturb the value of that metal

relatively to silver and to other commodities, it has

been a continual subject of discussion what standard of

value should be ultimately adopted. There have been

partizans of the now antiquated silver standard, of the

double standard, and of the gold standard. Having in

England long possessed a gold standard, we have been

only in a secondary degree concerned in such

discussions, upon which quite a library of works has

been written by distinguished French, Belgian,

German, Swiss, Italian, and Dutch economists. The

changes actually effected in the currencies of Europe

since 1849 are of the most extensive character. Some

nations have more than once changed their policy.

Holland, anticipating a great fall in the value of gold,

adopted silver as the single standard of value in 1850.

This change had to be effected at considerable

pecuniary loss, and it is understood that Holland is

again exposed to the trouble and expense of having to

admit a gold standard, either as a sole legal tender, likeGermany, or else concurrently with a restricted silver

coinage, like Belgium and the other monetary allies of

France.

 

            XII.1 From the time of Locke to that of Lord

Liverpool, the comparative advantages of gold and

silver, as the principal measure of value, were a

frequent subject of discussion among English political

writers. Locke and most of the earlier English

economists upheld silver. Lord Liverpool definitely

decided English policy in favour of gold, and the

tendency of opinion is now strongly in the same

direction. Several countries have recently changed

from silver to gold, and since the single example of

Holland no nation has passed from gold to silver. Even

Austria, which is still supposed to represent the silver

standard, has taken a step towards a change by coining

ten- and twenty-franc pieces in gold, the inscriptions

10 Francs and 20 Francs now appearing, as well as 4

Gulden and 8 Gulden, on the new gold coins of the

Austro-Hungarian empire.

 

XII.2

 

The Double Standard.

The single silver standard having been practicallyabandoned as regards the currencies of Europe, the

battle has more recently waged between the partizans

of the double standard, represented in the currencies of

France and the Monetary Convention of Western

Europe, and those who uphold a gold standard

combined with subsidiary coinages of silver and small

money, somewhat in the manner of the English system.

The advantages of the double standard have been most

ably advocated by MM. Wolowski, Courcelle-Seneuil,

Seyd, Léon, Prince-Smith, and others, while MM.

Chevalier, De Parieu, Hendriks, Frère Orban,

Levasseur, Feer-Herzog, and Juglar, have been some of

the leading upholders of the gold standard. The

literature of the subject is very extensive and, to most

readers, dreary in the extreme, but I will try to give a

tolerably concise statement of the principal arguments.

 

            XII.3 In the first place, I have no doubt

whatever that M. Wolowski is theoretically quite

correct in what he says about the compensatory action

of the double standard system. English writers seem

completely to have misunderstood the question,

asserting that the system exposes us to the extreme

fluctuations of both metals. No doubt, when gold and

silver are both legal tenders to unlimited amounts,

there will be a tendency to pay in that metal which isoverrated in the legal ratio of 151/2 to 1. Only when

the price of standard silver is exactly 5s. 0 13/16d. per

ounce is it a matter of indifference in France whether a

debt be paid in gold or silver, and this exact price has

only been quoted a few times in the London market in

the last thirty years. Accordingly, it has been urged that

the double standard is not really a double one, but only

an alternative gold and silver standard. When silver is

lower in price than 5s. 0 13/16d. per ounce, silver

becomes the standard; when silver rises above this

price, gold takes its place as the real measure of value.

 

            XII.4 So far the English economists are no

doubt correct; but, in the first place, it does not follow

that the prices of commodities follow the extreme

fluctuations of value of both metals, as many writers

have inconsiderately declared. Prices only depend upon

the course of the metal which happens to have sunk in

value below the legal ratio of 151/2 to 1. Now, if in the

accompanying figure we represent by the line A the

variation of the value of gold as estimated in terms of

some third commodity, say copper, and by the line B

the corresponding variations of the value of silver;

then, superposing these curves, the line C would be the

curve expressing the extreme fluctuations of both

metals. Now the standard of value always follows themetal which falls in value; hence the curve D really

shows the course of variation of the standard of value.

This line undergoes more frequent undulations than

either of the curves of gold or silver, but the

fluctuations do not proceed to so great an extent, a

point of much greater importance.

 






XII.5

 

Compensatory Action.

 



Nor is this the whole error of the English writers. A

little reflection must show that MM. Wolowski and

Courcelle-Seneuil are quite correct in urging that a

compensatory or, as I should prefer to call it,

equilibratory action, goes on under the French currency

law, and tends to maintain both gold and silver more

steady in value than they would otherwise be. If silver

becomes more valuable than in the ratio of 1 to 151/2

compared with gold, there arises at once a tendency to

import gold into any country possessing the double

standard, so that it may be coined there, and exchanged

for a legally equivalent weight of silver coin, to beexported again. This is no matter of theory only, the

process having gone on in France until the principal

currency, which was mainly composed of silver in

1849, was in 1860 almost wholly of gold. France

absorbed the cheapened metal in vast quantities and

emitted the dearer metal, which must have had the

effect of preventing gold from falling and silver from

rising so much in value as they would otherwise have

done. It is obvious that, if gold rose in value compared

with silver, the action would be reversed; gold would

be absorbed and silver liberated. At any moment the

standard of value is doubtless one metal or the other,

and not both; yet the fact that there is an alternation

tends to make each vary much less than it would

otherwise do. It cannot prevent both metals from

falling or rising in value compared with other

commodities, but it can throw variations of supply and

demand over a larger area, instead of leaving each

metal to be affected merely by its own accidents.

 

            XII.6 Imagine two reservoirs of water, each

subject to independent variations of supply and

demand. In the absence of any connecting pipe the

level of the water in each reservoir will be subject to its

own fluctuations only. But if we open a connection, the

water in both will assume a certain mean level, and theeffects of any excessive supply or demand will be

distributed over the whole area of both reservoirs. The

mass of the metals, gold and silver, circulating in

Western Europe in late years, is exactly represented by

the water in these reservoirs, and the connecting pipe is

the law of the 7th Germinal, an XI, which enables one

metal to take the place of the other as an unlimited

legal tender.

 

XII.7

 

The Demonetization of Silver.

 



M. Wolowski has earnestly warned Europe against the

danger of abrogating the law of the double standard,

and demonetizing silver. Germany, in adopting a gold

standard, is causing a considerable demand for gold,

and at the same time throwing many millions of silver

coins upon the market. Austria, Denmark, Sweden, and

Norway are likely to follow her example. If other

countries were to insist upon suddenly having a gold

money, it is evident that gold would tend to rise in

value compared with silver, which might be largely

depreciated. If France, Italy, Belgium, and other

countries now possessing theoretically the doublestandard, were to allow the free action of their

monetary laws, the depreciated silver would flow in

and replace the appreciated gold, so that the change of

values would be moderated. M. Wolowski asserts that

if this compensatory action be suspended, and the

demonetization of silver be extended, there must ensue

a disastrous rise in the value of gold, thus rendered the

sole standard of value. All debts private and public will

be legally due in this metal, and all burdens will be

greatly increased.

 

            XII.8 Within the last year or two the

predictions of M. Wolowski may seem to have been

verified in some degree. The price of standard silver,

which was at one time 621/2d. per ounce, has already

fallen as low as 573/4d. while the demonetization of

silver in Germany is only partially accomplished. The

whole effect of the great discoveries of gold was only

to raise the price from about 593/4d.

to a maximum of 621/2d., while the double standard

system freely worked; but since its action has been, as

we shall see, suspended, the minting operations of a

single government can affect the price in a greater

degree.

 

            XII.9 Agreeing that M. Wolowski is entirelycorrect in an abstract point of view, and is justified to

some extent by the course of events, I must adhere to

the opinion which I expressed at his request in 1868,

and which was partially published in his volume, "L'Or

et l'Argent "(p. 62).

 

            XII.10 The question seems to be entirely one

of degree, and in the absence of precise information is

quite indeterminate. If all the nations of the globe were

suddenly and simultaneously to demonetize silver, and

require gold money, a revolution in the value of gold

would be inevitable. But M. Wolowski seems to forget

that the nations of Europe constitute only a small part

of the population of the world. The hundreds of

millions who inhabit India and China, and other parts

of the eastern and tropical regions, employ a silver

currency, and there is not the least fear that they will

make any sudden change in their habits. The English

government has repeatedly tried to introduce a gold

currency into our Indian possessions, but has always

failed, and the gold coins now circulating there are

supposed not to exceed one tenth part of the metallic

currency. Although the pouring out of forty or fifty

millions sterling of silver from Germany may for some

years depress the price of the metal, it can be gradually

absorbed without difficulty by the eastern nations,which have for two or three thousand years received a

continual stream of the precious metals from Europe. If

other nations should one after another demonetize

silver, yet the East may be found quite able to absorb

all that is thrust upon it, provided that this be not done

too rapidly.

            XII.11 As regards the gold required to replace

silver, it does not seem to be evident that there will be

any scarcity. The adoption of the gold standard does

not necessarily involve the coining of much gold, for

some countries may, like Norway, or Italy, or Scotland,

have a principal currency almost entirely composed of

paper. In other countries, such as France and Germany,

the cheque and clearing system, which we shall shortly

consider, may be gradually introduced, and may

economize to a great extent the rise of the metallic

currency. The current supply of gold from the mines is

still very large, and we cannot be sure that it will not be

increased by fresh discoveries in New Guinea, South

Africa, North and South America, and elsewhere.

 

            XII.12 In short, then, the amount of supply and

amount of demand of both the precious metals depend

upon a number of accidents, changes, or legislative

decisions, which cannot be in any way predicted. The

price of silver has fallen in consequence of the Germancurrency reforms, but it is by no means certain that it

will fall further than it has already done. That any great

rise will really happen in the purchasing power of gold

is wholly a matter of speculation. We cannot do more

than make random guesses on the subject, and, as a

mere guess, I should say that it is not likely to rise.

Gold has since 1851 been falling in value, and an

increased demand for gold is not likely to do more than

slacken, or at the most arrest, the progress of

depreciation.

 

XII.13

 

Disadvantages of the Double Standard.

While the need for maintaining the system of the

double standard is a matter of speculation, the

inconveniences of the system are beyond doubt. So

long, indeed, as its operation resulted in substituting a

beautiful coinage of napoleons, half-napoleons, and

five-franc pieces in gold for the old heavy silver écus,

there was no complaint, and the French people admired

the action of their compensatory system. But when, a

year or two ago, it became evident that the heavy silver

currency was coming back again, and that the gold coin

was likely to form the circulating medium of other

nations, the matter assumed a different aspect. TheFrench, in short, have been educated to the use of gold,

and they are not likely to wish for the return of a

currency 151/2 times as heavy and cumbrous.

Moreover, the change involves a loss to the community

in general, who receive their debts in a metal of

lessened value; and a part of the benefit is reaped by

bullion-brokers, money-changers, and bankers, for

whom a factitious trade in gold and silver money is

created by the law of the 7th Germinal, an XI. The

statesmen of the countries still maintaining the double

standard must have reflected that other nations showed

no tendency whatever to adopt the same system. Thus,

if France were to continue to act as a great

compensatory currency pendulum, she would bear the

cost and inconvenience, while other nations would reap

equally with herself the advantage of the increased

steadiness of value of the precious metals. The

founders of the Monetary Convention and the

advocates of International Currency never intended to

sacrifice themselves to this extent for the benefit of the

world. Accordingly they have in effect abandoned the

double standard.

 

            XII.14 When the renewed tendency to coin

silver five-franc pieces in large quantities first became

apparent, the French government at once suspended thecoinage. Subsequently an agreement has been made

from year to year between France, Switzerland,

Belgium, and Italy, that each country shall coin only a

fixed quantity of silver écus proportional to its

population. An agreement to the same effect had before

existed as regards the silver token currency of two-

franc and smaller pieces; but the coinage of écus,

which were in theory standard coins and legal tender

for unlimited amounts, had been left unrestricted. The

result of the limitation of coinage now imposed is to

destroy the action of the double standard system. Silver

being coined only in limited quantities cannot replace

and drive out the gold, and the five-franc pieces,

although worth more than five single franc pieces, are

worth less than the fourth part of a napoleon or twenty-

franc piece in gold. Although, so far as I understand,

they remain a legal tender for unlimited amounts, they

cannot be had in unlimited quantities, and are thus

practically reduced to the rank of token coins. By the

least possible legislative change, the French and other

governments of the Monetary Convention have thus

practically abandoned the double standard, and have

adopted one which is hardly distinguishable from the

composite legal tender of England and Germany. Ever

since 1810 copper or bronze money had only been

legal tender in France to the amount of 4 francs 99centimes, and since the fineness of the smaller silver

currency was lowered, this money also was restricted

as a legal tender to the amount of 50 francs for any one

payment between individuals, or to the amount of 100

francs for any payment to the public treasuries. The

silver écu forms the single link by which France holds

the double standard, and this link is half severed.

 

            XII.15 It is remarkable that the changes thus

effected in the money of Western Europe are almost

the same as those by which the United States had

previously abandoned the double standard. Until the

year 1853 the silver dollar of the United States mint

was a standard coin of unrestricted legal tender,

concurrently with the gold coinage of eagles and their

fractions. The legal ratio of silver to gold in weight

indeed, was 16 to 1, instead of 151/2 to 1 as in France.

More silver being thus required to make a legal

payment in America than elsewhere, gold was naturally

preferred for this purpose, and the silver was sent

abroad. To remedy this state of things the government

of Washington, in 1853, reduced the half-dollar and

smaller silver pieces to the condition of token coins,

and though the single silver dollar pieces remained of

standard weight, they were coined in very small

quantities and were practically suppressed. Thepredominance of an inconvertible paper currency

suspended the question of metallic money for a time.

The Coinage Act of the United States Congress came

into operation on 1st April, 1873, and constituted the

gold one-dollar piece the sole unit of value, whilst it

restricted the legal tender of the new silver trade dollar,

and of the half-dollar and its subdivisions, to an

amount not exceeding five dollars in any one payment.

Thus the double standard previously existing in theory

was finally abolished, and the United States was added

to the list of nations adopting the single gold standard.

 

XII.16

 

The Monetary Systems of the World.

 



On reviewing the changes which have recently taken

place in the currencies of the principal nations, we

notice an unmistakable tendency to the adoption of

gold as the measure of value, and the sole principal

medium of exchange. This system is now adopted

throughout Great Britain and Ireland, the Australian

colonies, and New Zealand, the African colonies, and

many of the minor possessions of the British empire. It

has existed for some time in Portugal, Turkey, Egypt,and in several of the South American States, such as

Chili and Brazil. It has been established by recent

legislation in the German empire, and also in the

Scandinavian kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, and

Sweden, where a gold currency, and principal legal

tender, of twenty-kroner pieces, is now being issued.

Even Japan has imitated European nations, and

introduced a gold coinage of twenty, ten, five, two, and

one-yen pieces, the yen, being only three per mille less

in value than the American gold dollar. The new

fractional money of Japan is to consist of fifty, twenty,

ten, and five-sen pieces in silver, the sen corresponding

to a cent, and forming a token money at the fineness of

eight parts in ten.

 

            XII.17 The double standard is still

theoreticallv maintained in France, Italy, Belgium,

Switzerland. Spain, Greece, and Roumania have also in

recent years reformed their currencies in imitation of

the French system, and must, I suppose, be considered

as having a double standard. In the New World, Peru,

Ecuador, and New Granada, profess to have the same

system.

 

            XII.18 A few years ago a very considerable

part of Europe might have been classed as retaining theancient system of a single silver standard, with gold

coins circulating, if at all, at varying rates, as

commercial money. The whole of Germany, north and

south, together with Austria, the Scandinavian

kingdoms, and Russia, belonged to this group. Owing

to the changes already mentioned, only Austria and

Russia now clearly represent the silver standard in

Europe, and even Austria has begun, since 1870, to

coin gold pieces of eight and four florins, the same in

weight and fineness as the French gold twenty- and

ten-franc pieces. By an imperial decree, dated Vienna,

12th July, 1873, it is ordered that the French, Belgian,

Italian, and Swiss gold pieces of twenty, ten, and five

francs shall be internationally accepted in the Austro-

Hungarian empire in the ratio of eight gold florins to

twenty francs of gold coin of the other nations.

Nevertheless the silver standard practically prevails

over a large part of the world. The vast populations of

India and China, Cochin China, the East Indian Islands,

portions of Africa and the West Indies, Central

America and Mexico, have a currency mainly

consisting of silver coins, either rupees as in India,

sycee bars as in China, or silver dollars as in many

other places.

 

            XII.19 The gold standard has thus made greatprogress, and it will probably continue to progress.

When the United States return to specie payments, they

will certainly adopt gold, and Canada, whose currency

can hardly be classed at all at present, must do the

same. The Latin nations, having once abandoned the

double standard in practice, are not likely to return to

it, and Austria must follow. An extensive monetary

change is hardly to be expected in Russia, although it is

very remarkable that in the province of Finland, a part

of the empire highly distinguished for intelligence and

good education, Russia has positively admitted the

franc system and its decimal subdivisions, the Finnish

marc or quarter-rouble having the precise silver weight

and value of the franc, lira, and peseta. A great step

towards a future international coinage is thus effected.

Like changes are impossible among the poor, ignorant,

conservative nations of India, China, and the tropics

generally. Hence we arrive, as it seems to me, at a

broad, deep distinction. The highly civilized and

advancing nations of Western Europe and North

America, including also the rising states of Australasia,

and some of the better second-rate states, such as

Egypt, Brazil, and Japan, will all have the gold

standard. The silver standard, on the other hand, will

probably long be maintained throughout the Russian

empire, and most parts of the vast continent of Asia;also in some parts of Africa, and possibly in Mexico.

Excluding, however, these minor and doubtful cases,

Asia and Russia seem likely to uphold silver against

the rest of the world adopting gold. In such a result

there seems to be nothing to regret.

 

XII.20

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 









Chapter XIII Technical Matters Relating to Coinage

 



In this chapter I propose to consider several minorpoints relating to the construction and regulation of

metallic currency. Although the first principles of

money are simple, it is surprising how many little

details have to be considered before we can attain the

maximum of convenience. We have already discussed

the selection of metals to be employed, the modes in

which they may be combined into a system, the

regulations as to issue, etc. In this and the following

chapters we still have to consider the character of the

alloy which is best adapted for coining; the most

convenient sizes for coins; the method of counting

large numbers of coins; the cost at which the currency

is maintained; the advantages and disadvantages of

international currency of money; the difficulty of

selecting a single standard unit; the best series of

multiples and submultiples of the unit. At the, most I

cannot in this work attempt to give more than a slight

sketch of the complicated questions of detail which

have to be considered before making any change in the

currency.

 

XIII.1

 

The Alloys in Coin.

 Although we commonly speak of money as consisting

of gold or silver, the coins actually used contain alloys

either of silver and copper, or of gold and copper, or of

gold, silver, and copper. Money struck in nearly pure

gold has indeed been issued both in early and recent

times, and among such gold coin may be mentioned the

ancient bezant, the recent Austrian ducat, containing

986 parts of gold in 1000, the six-ducat piece of

Naples, containing 996 parts, or the Tuscan sequin,

which is said to be almost pure gold, namely, 999 parts

in 1000. Pure gold and silver are, however, soft metals,

so that even if they were found naturally in the pure

state, it would be desirable to add copper, which

communicates hardness and reduces very much the

abrasion of the coins. The proportion of copper to be

adopted has been a matter of frequent discussion, and

is determined partly on historical, partly on scientific

grounds.

 

XIII.2

The exact alloy employed in England appears to have

been decided by the system of weights used. Silver was

weighed by the troy pound of 12 ounces, of which 11

oz. 2 dwts. were to be pure silver, and 18 dwts. copper.

This proportion, which, even in 1357, was called the

"old right standard of England," has, in spite oftemporary depreciations, been maintained to the

present day, and corresponds to the proportion of 925

parts in 1000. Gold having been weighed by the

ancient and curious system of carat weights, said to be

derived from the seeds of an Abyssinion plant, the unit

weight of gold was 21 carats, of which 22 were to be of

pure gold and two of alloy. This ratio, which has

existed for many centuries, is decimally expressed by

916.66 parts in 1000.

 

            XIII.3 The degrees of fineness employed in

one country or another at different times are infinitely

various. Silver has been coined of only 200 or even

150 parts in 1000, and gold of 750 or 700 parts; and

coins exist of almost every fineness from these limits

up to nearly pure metal. The only standards of fineness

which it is needful to discuss in the present day are

those of 900 and 835 which are proposed for general

adoption in international money. A few years ago,

indeed, the Berlin government contemplated the

adoption of a standard German crown, consisting of ten

grams of pure gold and one grain of alloy, which

would give a fineness of 10/11 or 909.09. This scheme

had no apparent advantages, and was fortunately

abandoned in favour of the present German coinage,

which is, both as regards gold and silver, of thefineness of 900 parts in 1000. This simple decimal

proportion was adopted by the French in the time of the

Revolution; it has been extended over the countries

belonging to the Monetary Convention of 1865, and

over Spain, Greece, and other countries which have

more or less imitated the French system. It was long

ago adopted by the United States, and has been

recently introduced into the gold currency of the

Scandinavian kingdoms. The German government,

having now decided to accept it, the simple decimal

fineness is established in all the more advanced

countries, excepting England and some of her colonies,

and a few nations, such as Russia, Portugal, and

Turkey, which have imitated the English currency and

coined gold at 916.66.

 

            XIII.4 In a chemical and mechanical point of

view the exact degree of fineness is not a matter of

importance. The difference between 11/12 and 9/10 is

only 1/60, and though the often-quoted experiments of

Hatchett were said to show that our standard was

slightly better than that of the French, the difference is

so slight and questionable as to afford no ground for

preference. The late Master of the Mint, Professor

Graham, was quite willing to accept the standard of

900, both for gold and silver, and there are really noreasons, except prejudice and traditional usage, why

we should not do so as soon as we make any change at

all. Uniformity in the practice of nations is desirable in

this and many other points, and the French economists

lay great stress upon this question of fineness. It

appears to me, however, that the exact degree of

fineness is altogether a matter of secondary

importance. If we were now to make our sovereign

nine-tenths fine, we should have to raise its weight

from 123.274 grains to 125.557 grains, and the mixture

of old and new coins would entirely frustrate the

method of counting gold money by the scales adopted

in all banks. We must certainly, therefore, postpone a

change of fineness in gold until we make a more

considerable monetary reform. I see no reason, on the

other hand, why the mint should not at once be

authorized to coin silver of the decimal fineness of

nine-tenths. This would merely involve an

imperceptible increase in the thickness of the coins,

which would, in the case of the smaller ones, be

advantageous.

 

XIII.5

The fineness of 835 parts in 1000 was adopted by

France, as already stated (p. 76), in order to reduce the

two-franc and smaller pieces to the rank of tokens,without making any change in their weight and

appearance. There is no special objection to this alloy,

which is perfectly coinable and of good colour; but it is

not likely that it will be adopted by the English

government, instead of the present fineness of 925

parts in 1000 of our silver coinage; and does not. need

further discussion. It may be added that, in former

years, the alloy contained in gold coins consisted in

part of silver, which is always present in a greater or

less quantity in native gold wherever it is found. The

yellow appearance of guineas, and also of many

Australian sovereigns, was due to this silver alloy; but

all such silvery gold coins are rapidly withdrawn now

by gold refiners, who can profitably separate the silver.

The very remarkable invention of Mr. F. B. Miller, of

the new Melbourne mint, enables this separation to be

effected with great ease, and at small cost, almost on

the gold fields. It is only requisite to melt the silvery

gold, and pass a current of chlorine gas into it, to

obtain the silver in the state of chloride, which is

readily separated from the gold and reduced to the

metallic state. It is a further advantage of this simple

process that all gold so treated is freed from accidental

impurities, and rendered perfectly malleable and fit for

coining. One of the great difficulties of mint masters,

the brittleness of gold, has thus been entirelyovercome. A full description of the process, as

employed at the English, Australian, American,

Norwegian, and other mints, will be found in the First

Annual Report of the Deputy Master of the English

Mint (p. 93), and in the Second Report (p. 33), or in the

specification as printed by the Patent Office.

 

XIII.6

 

The Size of Coins.

There appear to be pretty well defined limits of size

within which we should confine ourselves in the

striking of money. Coins must not be so small that they

can be easily lost, or can with difficulty be picked up.

The rule seems to be that the coin should cover the

whole area of contact between the points of the thumb

and first finger; and though, of course, this area will

differ with men, women, and children, we should err

rather in excess than defect. On this ground I should

condemn the English threepenny silver piece as too

small, and, on the same ground, the Swedish ten-öre

piece, the American one-dollar gold piece, the former

Papal onescudo piece, must be pronounced

inconveniently small. The French five-franc gold piece

of the later type, the English fourpenny piece, the

Canadian five-cent piece, or the new silver piece oftwenty pfennigs, now being introduced into the

German Empire, must be considered the smallest coins

to be tolerated. The thickness of the coins, however,

must be taken into account as well as the diameter. The

moneys issued from the United States mint are thicker

than usual, and though this tends to give some of the

coins a clumsy appearance, yet they seen to me all the

more convenient to use. The French have gone to the

opposite extreme, the five-franc gold piece being very

thin, and having a diameter of nearly seventeen

millimetres, while the American dollar, which is more

valuable, has a diameter of little more than thirteen

millimetres. The maximum size of coins has probably

been determined chiefly with regard to the practical

difficulty of coining. The largest coin which has been

very widely circulated is perhaps the Maria Theresa

dollar, measuring 1.6 inches, or 41 millimetres, in

diameter; the other most common species of dollar are

somewhat smaller, such as the Spanish dollar of 1858,

measuring 37 millimetres; the American dollar, 1846,

the Spanish dollar, 1870, the Mexican dollar, 1872,

measuring from 37 to 38 millimetres. The average

diameter of the dollars which I have examined is 381/2

millimetres, or almost exactly an inch and a half. In

their larger gold coins, the Americans maintain unusual

thickness. Thus the double eagle, though in value equalto more than four pounds, has a diameter of only 34

millimetres, or 1 1/3 inch. The beautiful four-ducat

piece of Austria has a larger diameter than the double

eagle, though it contains less than half the quantity of

fine gold.

 

XIII.7

 

The Wear of Coin.

 



Some attention must be given to the abrasion which

coins suffer in use. In the case of gold coins the loss of

metal thus occasioned is of importance, and leads, as

we have seen (p. 111), to a gradual depreciation of the

currency. As coins pass frequently from hand to hand,

the amount of metal abraded will be nearly the same as

regards each coin of the same type, and each year of

circulation. The loss will be proportional to length of

wear. Now the English law allows a sovereign to be

legal tender so long as it weighs 122.5 grains, or more;

and the difference between this and the full standard

weight, or 0.774 grain, represents the margin allowed

for abrasion. Now, from experiments described in a

paper read to the London Statistical Society in

November, 1868 ("Journal of the Statistical Society,"Dec., 1868, vol. xxxi. p. 426), I estimated the average

wear of a sovereign for each year of circulation at

0.043 grain (0.00276 gram). It would follow that a

sovereign cannot in general circulate more than about

eighteen years without becoming illegitimately light.

This length of time, then, would constitute what may

be called the legal life of a sovereign. It has since been

shown by Dr. Farr, that certain considerations

overlooked in my calculations would reduce this

estimate of the legal life to fifteen years. Mr. Seyd, on

the other hand, thinks that twenty years might be

adopted as the legal age of the sovereign.

            XIII.8 When we compare the currencies of

different countries, it becomes evident that the rate of

abrasion will depend partly upon the rapidity and

constancy of circulation, partly upon the size and

character of the coins. According to the inquiries of M.

Feer-Herzog in Switzerland, the average loss of the

twenty-franc piece amounts to 200 millionths of the

full weight in each year, while with the ten and five-

franc gold pieces, the corresponding amounts are 430

and 620 millionths. My own weighings of English gold

show that the sovereign loses about 350 millionths in

each year of wear, and the half-sovereign no less than

1120 millionths, or more than one-tenth per cent. per

annum. As the English coins are heavier than thenapoleon and half-napoleon, they should suffer less

loss in proportion. M. Feer-Herzog attributes the

excessive loss manifested by English money to the

softer character of the English alloy of eleven-twelfths.

This cause may contribute something to the effect

observed, but it is probable that the greater rapidity of

the circulation in England is the main ground on which

so great a difference can be explained.

 

            XIII.9 The rate of wear of a coin depends

greatly, it will be seen, upon its size. A large coin, like

an English crown, a French silver écu, or an American

double eagle, suffers comparatively little wear, because

the surface increases much less rapidly in proportion

than the contents of the coin. The slight degree of

abrasion of the various silver dollars may be one cause

of their popularity in the East. Smaller silver money

loses much more. Thus, according to experiments

made at the mint in 1833, the loss per cent. per annum

on half-crowns is about 2s. 6d., on shillings 4s., and on

sixpences 7s. 6d., or decimally .125, .200, and .375 per

cent. respectively. This loss becomes considerable in

the course of years, as may readily be seen in the case

of worn sixpences. The average loss of weight of the

old silver coins melted at the mint, seems to be about

161/2 per cent., but this loss is more than covered bythe profit upon the issue of new silver coin.

Experiments were made at the mint in 1798 upon the

weight of English silver coins then in circulation. It

was found that the deficiency amounted in crowns to

3.31 per cent., and in half-crowns, shillings, and

sixpences respectively, to 9.90, 24.60, and

38.28 per cent. In the recent withdrawal of the old

silver money ofSouth Germany, it was found to have

lost on the average about one-fifth part of its weight.

 

            XIII.10 To reduce the loss arising from the

wear of gold coin, it might seem to be desirable to

issue large gold pieces. The Americans used to have a

great circulation of eagles and double eagles, the latter

especially being very handsome medal-like pieces. In

former days many large gold coins, such as the carlino,

dobraon, doubloon, quadruple pistole, and the double

ryder were current. A serious objection, however, to

such coins as a double eagle, one-hundred franc piece,

or five-pound piece, is that they can readily be

falsified. Small holes can be drilled through them, and

then concealed by hammering. The application of the

file, the sweating bag, or cylinder, or of chemical

reagent, would probably be safer with large than with

small coins. In some cases a double eagle has been

completely sawn into two flat discs, which wereafterwards neatly soldered together again with a plate

of platinum between to give the requisite weight. It

might have been thought that the labour and skill

required to effect such falsification would have been

better remunerated in some honest employment; but,

according to the reports of the Director of the United

States Mint, there is evidence to show that the practice

is profitable. It is proposed to prevent this falsification

by reducing the thickness of the double eagle, and also

making it somewhat dish shaped; but it would be better

to abandon the issue of such large gold money, as has

long been done in England and France. Experience

shows that sovereigns, napoleons, half-eagles, and gold

coins of the same size are not fraudulently treated, nor

are silver coins ever debased in the way described.

 

            XIII.11 In order to diminish the abrasion of

coins as far as possible, the design and legend should

be executed with the least possible relief consistent

with perfect definition, and the head of the monarch, or

other personage, should not protrude. In this and most

other respects the sharply defined flat design upon the

English florin is much superior to the high rounded

ornaments of the old crown, half-crown, and shilling.

Tic French mints seem to be very successful in the

execution of dies, all the coins, gold, silver, and bronzestruck by them having flat yet admirably executed

devices. Perhaps the most beautiful recent coin which I

have seen is the new twenty-franc gold piece struck

during 1874 for Hungary, the engraving of the die

being excellent. The new Scandinavian gold pieces of

five-specie dollars, or twenty kroner, are also well

executed.

 

XIII.12

 

Methods of Counting Coins.

 



To count large quantities of coin by tale, piece after

piece, is not only a tedious operation, but very

uncertain as regards accuracy. Several methods have

been devised to facilitate the operation. In mints, the

Bank of England, and other establishments, where vast

quantities of coin are treated, counting boards are used.

Similar boards have, indeed, been used from time

immemorial in some parts of India by money-changers

and tradesmen. These consist of simple flat trays, with

several hundred depressions regularly arranged, and of

such a size that one coin will exactly fit into each

depression. Handfuls of uniform coins are thrown on to

the board, and shaken over it, until most of the holesare filled; the remaining holes are then filled up one

after another by hand. The number contained upon the

board is then known with infallible accuracy, and at the

same time it is very easy to examine the coins, and

detect any counterfeit, defective, or foreign pieces. By

the use of such boards, bags of equal numbers of any

coinage are readily made up with great certainty.

 

            XIII.13 In English banks it is requisite to count

out considerable sums in gold coin with rapidity for the

payment of cheques over the counter, or to verify the

number of sovereigns paid in on deposit. For this

purpose balances are employed, with weights prepared

so as to be equivalent to 5, 10, 20, 30, 50, 100, 200,

and 300 sovereigns. Any sum which is a multiple of

five sovereigns can thus be rapidly, and almost

infallibly, weighed out in a few seconds, provided that

the coins are not too old and worn. An error of a

sovereign is sometimes possible in a large sum, on

account of deficiency of weight. In the case of half-

sovereigns, this process is seldom to be depended

upon, owing to the very considerable lightness of the

coins. This uncertainty in weighing is one of several

serious inconveniences which arise from the defective

state of our gold coinage.

             XIII.14 Half sovereigns, however, and in fact

all coins which are approximately equal to each other

on the average, can be rapidly counted on the balance

by the ingenious method of duplication. Any

convenient number, for instance, fifty coins, being

counted into one scale, an equal number may be made

to balance them, without counting, in the other scale.

The two equal lots being united, one hundred more

coins may be made to counterbalance them, and by a

second union we get two hundred coins. We may

repeat this duplication, if the balance will bear the

weight, and afterwards, using one lot of coins as the

fixed weight, may go on counting out lot after lot equal

to it in weight and number.

 

            XIII.15 When neither balance nor counting

board is available, coins may be counted out into little

piles of ten, fifteen, or twenty. Placing these piles

alongside each other on a flat board, it is easy to detect

any inequality of height by the unassisted eye, or by a

straight edge laid along the top. A mistake in counting

will thus be generally made manifest.

 

XIII.16

 

Cost of the Metallic Currency. 



Calculations of some interest may be made as to the

cost which falls upon the public in one way or another,

owing to the use of metallic money. Speaking first of

the subordinate coins of silver and bronze, the

government make a profit by their manufacture, owing

to the reduced weight at which they are issued as

tokens. Standard silver can usually be bought by the

mint for 5s. per standard ounce. It is issued to the

public at the rate of 5s. 6d. per ounce, so that the

government receives a seignorage of at least nine per

cent. on the nominal value of the coin issued. The

average coinage of silver at the English mint during the

last ten years has been £546,580, upon which the

seignorage would be about £49,200 per annum. On the

other hand, the mint has to buy back worn silver

coinage at its nominal value, and in recoining such

money there is a loss, which, on the average of the last

ten years (1864-73) has been £16,700, leaving a net

annual profit of £32,500, no account being taken of the

cost. of the mint establishment. At present the price of

silver is not above 4s. 10d. per ounce, so that the

seignorage is about 12 per cent., and the profit on

coining silver proportionately greater.

             XIII.17 We may look at this matter in another

way, by regarding the seignorage as so much money

funded to bear interest, to meet the cost of withdrawing

the coin, when worn out, say thirty years subsequently.

Now a pound bearing 31/4 per cent. compound interest,

becomes in thirty years 2.61 pounds, so that the 9 per

cent. of seignorage will have multiplied to 23.5 per

cent. But the actual deficiency of weight of the silver

coin withdrawn is, on the average, only 161/2 per cent.,

so that, without taking into account the considerable

number of coins which must be lost, exported, melted,

hoarded, sunk in the sea, or otherwise finally

withdrawn from circulation, there is a profit on the

issue of the silver coin under the present regulations.

 

            XIII.18 In the issue of bronze money there has

been, as before stated, a profit of £270,000, against

which must be set off the possible, but uncertain, cost

of recoining a light token currency at some future time.

 

            XIII.19 The cost of the currency is made up of

four principal items: the loss of interest upon the

capital invested in the money, the loss by the abrasion

of gold coins, the expenses of the mint, and lastly the

casual loss of coins. The last item is of wholly

unknown amount; the other items may be estimated asfollows. We may, roughly speaking, assume the gold

currency of the kingdom to consist of 84,000,000 of

sovereigns and 32,000,000 of half-sovereigns, the total

value being 100,000,000 sterling. The sovereigns lose

annually on the average 0.043 grain each, giving an

annual loss of

about £30,000; the half-sovereigns lose 0.069 grain

each, producing a loss of £18,000. The loss of interest,

however, is a far more serious matter. The whole value

of the metals employed in the currency is, roughly

speaking, as follows:-

 

Gold coin in circulation . . . . 100 millions. Bullion in

the Bank of England . . 15 " Silver coin . . . . . . . . 15 "

Bronze coin . . . . . . . . 1 1/8

 

            " Total . . . . . . . . . 131 1/8 millions.

 



The interest on this sum at 31/4 per cent. is no less than

£4,262,000.

 

            XIII.20 The cost of the mint establishment is

about £42,000 annually. The following statement, then,

show the aggregate cost of the metallic currency so far

as it can be estimated.

 Loss of interest . . . . . . £4,262,000 Wear of coin . . . . .

. . 48,000 Mint establishment . . . . . 42,000

 



£4,352,000

 



From this amount ought to be subtracted the profit

which the mint makes out of the seignorage upon silver

and bronze coins; but we may set off this profit against

the wholly unknown amount which the public loses by

the accidental dropping of coins.

XIII.21

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 Chapter XIV International Money

 



In a book upon money written in the present day,

reference must certainly be made to the scheme put

forward, and even the steps accomplished, towards a

world-wide system of International Money. Much time

will no doubt pass before such a notion is realized, and

the recent retrograde action of the German government

tends to retard so great an achievement of advancing

civilization. Yet in all our changes and discussions of

monetary matters we ought to bear in mind the

eventual introduction of a uniform monetary system.

We may surely look for a gradual amelioration in the

relations of nations, though wars cannot yet be

avoided. We have international copyright, extradition

of criminals, maritime codes of signals, postal

conventions, treaties for lessening the horrors of war.

Nations have long since ceased to be isolated bodies

wishing evil to all their neighbours; and as free trade

becomes everywhere predominant, and communication

by means of railway, steamboat, telegraph, post, and

newspaper continually increases, we may look for the

time when all people will seek to break down, as far as

possible, the barriers between one family and anotherof the human race.

 

            XIV.1 I will first of all state the advantages

which may be expected to accrue from an international

system of metallic money, and will then describe in

succession the corresponding possible disadvantages,

the progress which has already been made towards the

simplification of monetary systems, the principal

schemes set forth, and their comparative merits and

demerits.

 

XIV.2

 

Advantages of International Money.

 



Short-sighted people have objected to all schemes of

international money, that the object in view, if ever

realized, would only save trouble to the comparatively

few people who travel from nation to nation. This is

the least of all the benefits which the uniformity of

money would confer. I am disposed to put in the first

place the immense good which would arise from

facility in understanding all statements of accounts,

prices, and statistics, when expressed in terms of a

uniform measure of value. To the statistician it isalmost intolerable to meet with tables of information,

variously expressed in francs, pounds, dollars, thalers,

metres, yards, ells, hundred-weights, kilograms. The

labour of statistical inquiry is sufficiently great without

the preliminary labour of reducing great masses of

figures to a common unit. To the merchant, or man of

business, the variety of moneys and measure is equally

perplexing. In many places the value of the currency is

not certainly known, and only those who happen to

have special knowledge of a locality, and the money

and measures there employed, can venture to trade

with it. The difference of monetary systems, again,

renders calculations relating to the foreign exchanges

very complex, so that profit fall to those who have

acquired skill in calculations of the kind.

 

            XIV.3 In the second place, the actual

adjustment of the foreign exchanges would be rendered

more prompt and perfect when the coin of one country

could be transferred directly into the circulation of

another country. One result of international currency

would be that the precious metals would be held more

in the form of coin. At the present time, what is coined

by one country has often to be melted up and recoined

by another, although to some extent the principal kinds

of coins, English sovereigns, American eagles, Frenchnapoleons, Mexican dollars, are held by banks and

bought and sold. With a single system of coins, all

stocks of gold and silver would, as a general rule, be

kept in the coined state, ready to go into circulation at

any moment. Some small savings would accrue from

the less amount of mintage required, though this is a

very secondary matter. One of more importance is the

lessened opportunities of profit which there would be

for bullion brokers and others, who trade upon the

difficulties of conducting the bullion traffic in the

present state of things. Nor is the saving of trouble and

loss to travellers a matter of indifference. As

international communication increases, the number of

travellers will increase, and we ought to break down, as

far as possible, all factitious difficulties.

            XIV.4 One benefit of international money

which has been insufficiently noticed, is the

improvement which its adoption would probably effect

in the currencies of minor and half-civilized states. In

many parts of the world there is still a mixture of coins

of various and uncertain value; and as long as the

principal nations coin money on totally different

systems, the coins will circulate elsewhere and make

confusion. Already for a long time the practically

international currency of the Mexican dollar has been a

matter of great convenience; and where it is the unit ofvalue, merchants know on what basis they are making

contracts. Now, if all the leading nations combined to

issue coins of one uniform series of weight and sizes,

these would by degrees form the currencies of non-

coining state, and would effect a reform in the most

remote parts of the world.

 

XIV.5

 

Disadvantages of International Money.

 



There are, no doubt, certain evils which might possibly

arise from the circulation of money between nation and

nation. One government, for instance, might coin

money slightly inferior to the proper standard, and such

money, once introduced, would, in virtue of Gresham's

law, be difficult to dislodge. The French mint has been

in fault in this respect. French gold coin, when

carefully assayed, is found to have a fineness of 898 or

899 parts in 1000, instead of 900 parts. There is,

indeed, a mint remedy of two parts, so that the coin

was legally issued; yet the mint authorities have taken

advantage of this remedy in an improper way. On the

average, the coins issued by any mint ought to have

almost the exact standard fineness, and the divergenceallowed under the name of remedy is only intended to

cover accidental faults of workmanship in particular

coins, and not an intentional average divergence from

the standard.

 

            XIV.6 It is hardly to be supposed that a state

issuing money under international obligations would

wish to make a profit of one or two parts in a thousand

in this way. To secure uniformity, it would be desirable

for the assayers and officers of different mints to meet

and agree upon a common standard process, and

uniform trial plates. Experience does not show that one

nation need distrust the faithfulness of another in

matters of coining. We do not look upon Spain and

Mexico as models of financial integrity, yet so

faithfully used the mints of those countries to maintain

the standard of weight and fineness in the issue of

silver dollars; that these coins have for a hundred years

past been received by tale almost without question in

most parts of the world, and were at one time made

current in England. The possibility of international

currency is proved by the fact that, without any

international treaties, the coins of several nations are

recognized as a legal tender elsewhere. This is the case

with English sovereigns, not only in the British

colonies and possessions, but also in Portugal, Egypt,Brazil, and probably elsewhere. The napoleon has

circulated freely in most parts of Europe. The ducat of

Holland has also been a highly esteemed coin; and of

the wide circulation of several species of dollars I have

frequently spoken.

 

XIV.7

 

Conflict of Monetary Systems.

 



The chief difficulty in establishing an international

money, arises from the fact that there are several great

nations, the French, English, Americans, and Germans,

each with its own system of money, which, from

motives worthy and unworthy, it is unwilling to give

up. There is no overpowering advantage which marks

out any one of these systems on its own merit as

distinctly the best. There is accordingly a balance of

power which produces a dead lock. Each of the three

first-named nations has much to say in favour of its

own system. The French system, founded on the franc,

is an eminently perfect decimal coinage, and has the

prestige of being recognized as international money in

Belgium, Switzerland, and Italy, besides being adopted

with international currency as regards gold in Austria,and without it as regards silver in Spain, Greece, and

some minor states.

 

            XIV.8 The English may very properly urge

that, though the subdivision of the pound is not to be

recommended, the pound sterling is itself an excellent

unit of value. It is the largest existing monetary unit,

and on a gold basis, so that it seems to be peculiarly

suitable for the growing wealth of nations. Though

recognized only in a small corner of Europe, namely,

Portugal, we must remember that Europe is rapidly

ceasing to be the exclusive centre of trade and

civilization. In the Australian, Polynesian, and African

colonies are growing states which will make their

might felt ere long, and they adhere to the pound. The

world-wide extension of British commerce and British

shipping makes the sovereign known in all the ports of

the world.

 

            XIV.9 On their part, however, the Americans

might have much to say in favour of the dollar. It is

decimally divided, and, as we shall see, in the most

convenient manner. It corresponds to the coins which

have for two or three centuries been most widely

circulated and treated as units of account, so that there

is much weight of experience in its favour. But, aboveall, it is firmly adopted as the money of a nation,

which, as far as human wisdom can penetrate the

future, is destined to be the most numerous, rich, and

powerful in the world. That nation, which has arisen

from the best stock of England, has absorbed much of

the best blood of other European nations, and has

inherited the richest continent in the world, must have

an importance in coming times of which even

Americans are barely conscious.

 

XIV.10

 

International Monetary Negotiations.

 



It is quite impossible that I should in this brief work

give any sufficient sketch of the long series of

discussions, meetings, congresses, associations,

negotiations, and conventions which resulted in the

actual establishment of an international money among

the nations of western continental Europe. I must refer

the reader, desirous of more information, to the

excellent pamphlet of the eminent actuary, Mr.

Frederick Hendriks, which first made the subject well

known in England. It is called "Decimal Coinage; a

Plan for its immediate Extension in England inconnection with the International Coinage of France

and other Countries," and was privately printed in

1866. Mr. Seyd's "Treatise on Bullion and the Foreign

Exchanges" may also be consulted, and the Journal des

Economistes is full of information on the subject.

 

            XIV.11 The International Association for

obtaining a Uniform Decimal System of Measures,

Weights, and Coins, was founded in Paris in 1855, and

the English branch carried on active operations. In

1858 the United States made proposals towards the

assimilation of currencies. In 1860 and 1863 important

international congresses were held in London and

Berlin, and, at the latter one especially, important

resolutions were adopted which we shall have to

consider. It was, however, the close contiguity of the

countries, Belgium, France, Switzerland, and Italy, and

the fact that French gold, and even silver coin, could

not be prevented from passing the frontiers, which

forced the question forwards, and led in December,

1865, to an actual Convention for International

Currency.

 

            XIV.12 The report of the Congress of 1863

concerning currency is a highly important document. It

point out the superior convenience of a gold standard,with a subsidiary coinage of silver and bronze;

advocates uniform fineness of nine parts in ten for all

standard coins; suggests a definition of weights of

coins, on the metric system; and, finally, propounds a

scheme by which the existing monetary units could be

brought into simple relations with each other.

 

            XIV.13 In 1870, a short time previous to the

declaration of war with Germany, France summoned a

fresh Imperial Commission, presided over by the

Minister of Commerce and the Minister President of

the Council of State (M. de Parieu), to take evidence

from all sides on the various questions connected with

the standard and its bearing upon international coinage.

No less than thirty-seven witnesses were examined,

and the results of the inquiry, printed by the French

government in two very large volumes in 1872, show

that the majority of the witnesses and of the

Commissioners were decidedly in favour of a single

gold standard.

 

            XIV.14 Owing to a purely accidental

coincidence, the principal monetary units already

closely approximate to simple multiples of the franc.

The following table shows the present relative values

of these units and the multiples to which it is proposedto make them exactly conform.

 

            Present value in francs Proposed value in

francs Franc . . . . . . . 1 1 Florin (Austrian, silver). 2.47

21/2 Dollar (American, gold). 5.18 5 Pound sterling . . .

. 25.22 25

 



            XIV.15 It is only requisite to raise the florin

1.21 per cent., and to lower the dollar and pound

sterling respectively 3.5 and 0.88 per cent., to establish

very simple ratios between them. Thus, without any

appreciable change of monetary systems, it would be

possible to reduce statements from one mode of

expression into another; moreover, the coins might

themselves have international currency, the pound

sterling serving as a twenty-five franc piece in France,

and as a five-dollar piece in America, the American

gold dollar reciprocally circulating as an écru in

France, and a four-shilling piece in England.

 

            XIV.16 The congress abstained from

recommending any one unit for universal adoption, but

urged that every nation, not possessing one of the four

units named, should select that which pleased them

best. Had this scheme been accepted by all nations inan intelligent and liberal spirit, we should ere now have

probably seen our way clearly to the selection of the

best unit. Since 1865, unfortunately, both the German

empire and the Scandinavian kingdoms have made

alterations not in accordance with these principles. A

great assimilation of moneys has taken place, but it is

in the direction of groups of national, rather than of

international currencies, although, as has been

demonstrated by Mr. Hendriks in several articles in the

Economist, the new coins have many fresh and

important points of contact and of agreement with the

metrical and decimal systems, so that some real

progress has actually been accomplished.

 

XIV.17

 

Decimalization of English Money.

 



Since Lord Wrottesley in 1824 proposed in parliament

to adopt a decimal subdivision of the pound sterling, an

immense amount of discussion has taken place upon

various schemes for a new arrangement of our money.

The advantages of several plans are so nearly balanced,

and the difficulty of carrying any one into effect is so

great, that no practical result has yet been achieved byhalf a century of debate. The two principal schemes,

which perhaps need alone be noticed now, are the

Pound and Mil scheme, and the Penny and Ten-franc

scheme.

 

            XIV.18 The former of these schemes reposes

upon the fact that the farthing is nearly the thousandth

part of the pound. Since 960 farthings make a pound, it

would only be necessary to alter the farthing 4 per cent.

to obtain the lowest decimal submultiple, to be called

the mil. The penny would be five mils, like the French

halfpenny or five centimes; as some have supposed a

new coin, in value 2.4d., would have to be introduced,

as the hundredth part of the pound; but this is

unnecessary, and the florin would be one hundred mils,

and the half-sovereign five hundred mils. The great

advantage of this method is, that it retains the pound as

the principal unit, together with several other familiar

coins. Against it has been urged, (1) the supposed fact

that it excludes the most familiar of all coins, the

shilling and sixpence, and (2) that the mil is somewhat

too small a submultiple to begin with. This is, however,

not necessarily the case. The shilling might remain, as

coin of circulation, of the same weight, fineness, and

value as at present, but would be translated, as coin of

account, into fifty mils instead of forty-eight farthings,and the sixpence into twenty five mils instead of

twenty-four farthings. This subdivision is not more

complex than the one successfully, and in the almost

parallel forms of fifty and twenty pfennige, centimes,

lire, öre, etc., pieces, carried out in the new coinages of

Germany, Scandinavia, or of the monetary allies of

France. As to the mil being too small a submultiple, it

seems to be overlooked that it is 21/2 times as large as

the initial submultiple of the French system, and 2 1/25

times as large as that of the new German system.

 

            XIV.19 The second scheme was suggested by

the late Professor Graham, and by Mr. Rivers Wilson,

in their Report upon the Proceedings of the

International Monetary Conference of 1867. It is

founded upon the fact that the ten-franc piece is within

3/4d. of eight shillings, and only differs 4 per cent.

from one hundred pence. Thus it would only be

requisite to introduce a gold piece of ten francs,

temporarily serving as a token for eight shillings, to

obtain a link with the French system. The subsequent

reduction of the penny by 4 per cent., and the

replacement of the shilling by a franc or tenpenny-

piece, would give us a truly decimal system. A great

advantage of this proposal is, that it retains, almost

unaltered, so familiar a coin as the penny, and makes it,as it is for the most part at present, the lowest money of

account. It is, moreover, in close accordance with the

French monetary system. The main difficulty is that it

involves the abandonment of the pound, which

becomes two and a half of the new unit; and that, of all

our present coins, only the florin, penny, and

halfpenny, would fall in conveniently. To convert sums

of money from pounds sterling into the new currency,

it would be requisite to multiply by the factor 21/2,

which would be regarded by most people as a very

troublesome process.

 

            XIV.20 When the decimalization of English

money was first proposed, the notion of international

money had never been seriously entertained, and

hardly indeed conceived. So much progress has now

been made, that it is impossible to consider the one

reform without reference to the other. The difficulty of

making any change whatever is so great, that it would

not be worth while to achieve a partial reform.

 

XIV.21

 

The Future American Dollar.

 The most easy and important step which can now be

taken towards an international money, consists in the

assimilation of the American dollar to the five-franc

piece. A great opportunity arises from the fact that the

currency of the United States is now a variable paper

currency. Considering the enormous fluctuations of

value which have been experienced in the last ten

years, it would be altogether needless scrupulosity to

bring it back to the old standard, to the last degree of

exactness. Every change of value of the currency,

whether it be a fall or a rise, is so far injurious. Now

the American dollar consists of 25.8 grains of gold,

valued in English money at 49.316 pence. When gold

is at 111 the paper dollar will be at a discount of 10 per

cent., and will therefore be worth 44.384 pence,

whereas the French dollar, or five-franc gold piece,

weighs 24.89 grains, and is worth 47.58 pence. It

would be obviously desirable, therefore, to make the

new metallic dollar exactly of the same weight as the

French one, and to commence specie payments when

the greenback currency shall have risen to par with this

coin. As regards all contracts made in paper, all current

prices and charges, this change would involve no

breach of faith whatever; it would in fact imply less

change and breach of contracts than if the paper

currency were reduced sufficiently to come to par withthe old dollar.

 

            XIV.22 The reduction of weight of the dollar

would indeed lead to a repudiation of all gold

contracts, including all bonds of the United States,

railway companies, and other bodies payable in coin,

unless provision were made to alter the terms of such

contracts. This difficulty, however, could be overcome

by simply enacting that each 1031/2 of the new dollars

shall be received and paid as equivalent to 100 of the

old ones.

 

            XIV.23 There is little doubt that the adhesion

of the American government to the proposals of the

Congress of 1863 would give the holding turn to the

metric system of weights, measures, and moneys. It is

quite likely that it might render the dollar the future

universal unit. The fact that the dollar is already the

monetary unit of many parts of the world, gives it large

odds. In becoming assimilated to the French écu,

American gold would be capable of circulation in

Europe, or wherever the French napoleon has hitherto

been accepted. It may seem unpatriotic in an

Englishman to advocate a change which may lead to

the defeat of the pound sterling, but I look upon any

one scheme of unification as better than none.Whatever may be the ultimate results, I desire to see

assimilation between the French and American systems

adopted as soon as possible. For reasons subsequently

stated, I consider the dollar so good a unit that it would

be mere national prejudice to oppose it, were there a

fair chance of its general adoption. Even if it were not

generally adopted, it would be a great step in advance

if Great Britain, America, and France were to agree to

coin gold money identical in weight and fineness,

which might circulate indifferently as sovereigns, five-

dollar pieces, and twenty-five franc pieces.

 

XIV.24

 

German Monetary Reform.

 



The new monetary system of the German empire is

introducing a good money where all was before

confusion. In a few years it will hardly be

comprehensible to Germans that they had so long

endured a state of the currency in which two, or even

three or four, inconsistent series of coins were mingled

without any method. In many respects the new system

is all that could be desired. In spite of the antiquated

silver standard, gold is selected as the measure ofvalue, the sole principal money, and unlimited legal

tender. The unit of account is the mark, consisting of

6.1465 grains of gold of the fineness of 9 parts in 10.

Its value is, therefore, about 113/4d. The principal coin

will be the twenty-mark piece, weighing 122.92 grains,

or 7.964954 grams, and containing 7.168459 grams of

pure gold. There is also a ten-mark piece of exactly

half the weight.

 

            XIV.25 The subordinate coins of silver and

nickel-copper are issued on the footing of the

composite tender, or English system, being tokens. The

seignorage to be levied on the German silver coins,

will be 11.111 per cent., exceeding the amounts

subtracted from the English and French silver money,

which are about 9 and 7.784 per cent. respectively.

            XIV.26 It cannot be too much regretted by all

friends of progress that, in deciding upon the weight of

the new mark piece, the German government should

have studiously avoided assimilation to the French

system. The sovereign contains 7.3224 grams of pure

gold, the twenty-five franc piece when coined will

contain 7.2581, and the twenty-mark piece has been

made to contain 7.1685. The only ground on which this

precise weight could have been justified, is that three

marks are approximately equal to one thaler. But sovarious was the coinage of the German states, that the

field was open to the adoption of any system; and it is

impossible to suppose that in so great a reform a

difference of 11/4 per cent. would have been an

insuperable obstacle to the adoption of international

coinage.

 

XIV.27

 

Systems of Fractional Money.

 



A unit of value having been chosen, there are three

competing methods according to which it might be

subdivided, the binary, duodecimal, and decimal. The

first system is carried out most perfectly in our

avoirdupois weights, in which sixteen ounces make a

pound; but it is also freely employed in our monetary

system, the sovereign being divided into half-

sovereigns, crowns, and half-crowns, the shilling into

sixpences and threepenny pieces; and the penny into

halfpence and farthings. At the same time, the

duodecimal method is represented in our money by the

division of the shilling into twelve pence, of which the

third part is still in circulation as the groat, or

fourpenny piece, now being withdrawn.            XIV.28 Each system of subdivision has its

own advantages, and there must always exist a kind of

natural competition between them. They have thus

competed from the earliest times. In ancient Italy the

duodecimal system predominated to the south of the

Apennines, while the decimal division was in use to the

northward. In Sicily the two methods were confused

together. China has had a purely decimal system from

an unknown epoch in antiquity. In England duodecimal

and binary divisions have existed from very early

times. It will be readily allowed that the binary system

is most simple and natural, involving as it does the

least possible factor above unity. The duodecimal

system also has marked advantages, because it allows

of division into several aliquot parts, involving the

factor 2 twice over, and the next higher factor 3 once.

Thus the shilling is divisible exactly into two

sixpences, three fourpences, four threepences, and six

twopences.

 

            XIV.29 The decimal system is far less simple,

and in some ways less convenient. Ten admits of only

two factors superior to unity, namely, 2 and 5, and 5 is

a more complex prime factor than appears in either of

the previous methods. But the system has the supreme

advantage of exactly falling in with our decimal systemof numeration and calculation. Although probably not

the best method which might have been selected, had

selection been open to us, decimal numeration is firmly

fixed among the institutions of the human race, as an

hereditary habit, derived from the early practice of

counting on the fingers. We have no choice but to

accept the inevitable, and as all our arithmetical

processes are conducted on the decimal method, there

is an overwhelming advantage, as education and the

use of writing advance, in making all our weights,

measures, and coins conformable to the same system.

            XIV.30 A perfectly and purely decimal

system, indeed, would admit only the decimal

multiples and submultiples, thus:-1000, 100, 10, 1, 0.1,

0.01, 0.001. But it is so troublesome to have to count

out as many as ten coins, before coming to the next

higher unit, that the rigour of the decimal divisions has

always been relaxed. In the French system, the half and

the double of each multiple are allowed to be

represented by intermediate coins, the series being 1, 2,

5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 500, etc. The American coinage

is less simple and symmetrical, since it admits the half

and quarter eagle, half and quarter dollar, the ten and

five-cent pieces, and also a three-cent piece. I am

inclined to prefer the French method, and to think that

the American mint has issued too many dominations ofcoins.

 

XIV.31

 

Final Selection of the Unit of International Money.

 



I will conclude this chapter by some remarks on the

reasons which should guide us in selecting the

monetary unit to be finally established as the basis of a

future universal money.

 

            XIV.32 I attribute very little weight to

arguments concerning the absolute amount of the rival

units. It is said that as the wealth of nations increases,

and the value of gold at the same time sinks, we need a

larger unit. The pound is recommended on this ground

as clearly superior to the franc. If we count in francs

our figures will be twenty-five times as large as in

pounds sterling. It seems to be forgotten that the same

unit can never suit the extremely different sums which

we have to express, so that we must use multiples or

submultiples of the actual unit. Just as we use inches,

feet, yards, furlongs, miles, or diameters of the earth's

orbit, according to the magnitudes to be measured, so

we vary the unit with money. If we are discussing aworkman's weekly wages, we count in shillings; if we

speak of a clerk's yearly salary, we speak of pounds; if

the fortune of a merchant or banker is in question, we

take notice only of thousands of pounds; in matters

relating to the revenue of the kingdom or the national

debt, we give our exclusive attention to millions of

pounds. The Portuguese unit of account, called the rei,

is worth only about the nineteenth part of an English

penny, and is probably the smallest unit in the world.

Practically, however, the milreis, or thousand reis,

worth 53 1/3d., becomes the unit. In the same way

Indian merchants speak of lacs and crores of rupees.

The French estimate their national debt in milliards of

francs. No doubt it is puzzling to Englishmen to

interpret exactly the meaning of a milliard of francs,

but, to those accustomed to count in francs it is no

more difficult than a million of pounds. Exactly the

same considerations apply to units of weight; thus,

though the French use so small an ultimate unit as one

gram, or 15.43 grains, yet according to the magnitudes

of the objects to be weighed, they use smaller or larger

units, centigrams or milligrams on the one side, or

decagrams and kilograms on the other. The absolute

amount then of the ultimate unit seems to me to be

entirely a matter of indifference in this point of view.

             XIV.33 As regards the subdivision of the unit

there are considerations of more importance. The

subdivision ought of course to be decimal, and it ought

to be so contrived that the lowest submultiple shall

correspond to the smallest sum which is thought

worthy of being recorded in mercantile transactions.

Now the franc is divided into 100 centimes, so that the

centime has a value of less than the tenth of a penny.

Though bronze pieces of one and two centimes were

coined to the amount of about 5 per cent. of the whole

bronze currency, it is found that they hardly circulate.

Even if they were used in the smallest retail

transactions at baker's shops, they would not be entered

in account books. Thus the lowest entry which a

French accountant makes is five centimes, and the next

lowest ten centimes, corresponding to our penny. A

needless complexity is thus introduced into small

accounts. It is indeed so inconvenient to have to call

the smallest coin in general use cinq centimes that it is

still common to speak of it as a sou, in spite of the

ninety years during which the decimal system has

existed in France. The Portuguese rei is so small a unit

that it is not represented by any coin at all. It

nevertheless has a place in Portuguese mercantile

accounts, and thus needlessly adds a figure to all

pecuniary statements. 

            XIV.34 In England the smallest coin in actual

use is the farthing, but in accounts little notice is taken

of farthings or halfpennies, so that the penny is the

lowest money of account. The post-office, in the

regulations of the savings bank business, refuses to

recognize any coin less than the penny. But the penny

is inconveniently related to the pound, the hundredth

part of which is 2.4d., and the thousandth part about a

farthing. Thus the decimal system applied to our pound

would oblige us to record as the lowest money of

account an inconveniently small coin, namely, the mil.

In this respect, indeed, the pound, and mil scheme is

superior to the franc and centime system. Thus 12s. 6d.

may be expressed as 625 mils; but in French money (at

twenty-five francs to the pound) it would become

15.625. Taking the ten-franc piece as the principal unit,

it would become 1.56 units, or 156 metrical pennies. In

many cases it would require less figures to express a

sum in pennies than in mils or centimes.

 

            XIV.35 The American system is

unexceptionable in this respect. The dollar is divided

into one hundred cents, each of which has the value of

about one halfpenny. Although half-cents have been

coined, and may be used in some trifling purchases,they need never be entered in ordinary accounts. The

cent thus seems to me to correspond to the smallest

sum which need be treated in accounts, so that money

statements are reduced to the greatest possible

simplicity. The question may well be asked whether

the lowest coin actually recorded is not truly the unit,

of which all other coins are multiples. Perhaps the best

answer would be to say that the unit is indifferently the

cent, or the dollar, or the eagle. In English money it

matters not whether we regard the pound, or its

twentieth part, or its two hundred and fortieth part, as

the unit. The absolute amount of the unit, I repeat, is

totally a matter of indifference, and the only point we

have to consider is whether it, or any decimal part of it,

corresponds to the smallest sum of which we need take

account. In this respect the dollar is the best existing

unit; but it might admit of discussion whether the

double dollar, or ten-franc piece of gold, equal to eight

shillings, or one hundred pence, would not be better. If

the wealth of nations continues to grow, and the value

of gold to fall, even the cent will be too small a coin to

appear conveniently in accounts, and the penny will be

a better lowest unit. In this case the hundred pennies, or

the ten-franc piece, would become the best unit. The

choice thus seems to me to lie between the five-franc

and the ten-franc piece in gold as the ultimate unit ofinternational money. In favour of the ten-franc piece it

may be added, that it would make a convenient gold

coin of the smallest size which it would be well to

issue. The gold dollar and five-franc piece are too

small, and suffer great abrasion.

 

XIV.36

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 









Chapter XV The Mechanism of Exchange

 



Having now sufficiently discussed the subject ofmetallic money, we pass on to consider the devices

which naturally develop themselves in a highly

organized commercial nation, for the purpose of

economizing the precious metals, or even avoiding the

use of coins altogether. No sooner have a people fully

experienced the usefulness of a good system of money,

than they begin to discover that they can dispense with

it as a medium of exchange, and return to a method of

traffic closely resembling barter. With barter they

begin and with barter they end; but the second form of

barter, as we shall see, is very different from the first.

Purchases and sales continue to be made in terms of

gold and silver coin, but equivalent quantities of goods

thus estimated are made to pay for each other. If

ownership in gold or silver intervenes at all, it is in the

shape of warrants or representative documents with

which gold can be procured, if desired, but which are

seldom used to procure it.

 

            XV.1 At the outset we found that money

performed at least two, and probably four distinct

functions (Chapter III.); and, in a simple state of

industry, it is convenient that the same metallic

substance should fulfil all these functions concurrently.

But it does not follow that this union of functions is the

best possible arrangement under all conditions. Weshall find that gold or silver always continues to be the

common denominator of value, but that these metals

cease to a great extent to be the actual medium of

exchange which is passed about between buyer and

seller. In a later part of the book (Chapter XXV.) I

shall further show that money may with great

advantage be replaced in its function as a standard of

value for long periods of time by a Tabular Standard.

 

XV.2

 

Progressive Development of the Methods of Exchange.

 



Beginning with the primitive method of barter, a series

of steps have been made towards a perfect and world-

wide system of interchange of commodities, with the

least possible use of the precious metals. We may

classify the devices employed for avoiding the use of

metallic money under five different heads, as follows:-

 


1. Replacement of standard money by representative

    money.

2. Intervention of book credit.

3. The cheque and clearing system.

4. Use of foreign bills of exchange.5. International clearing system.


XV.3

 

Representative Money.

 



Metallic money, as we have seen, immensely facilitates

and, so to speak, lubricates the operation of exchange.

But nations employing gold and silver money have

usually discovered, in the course of time, that tokens of

small metallic value, or even pieces of leather and

paper of nominal value, might be passed from hand to

hand as signs of the ownership of coins. That which

replaces gold, or silver, or copper money, is at first of a

purely representative character. But, when a

community has become thoroughly habituated to the

circulation of a currency of this character, it is often

found possible to remove the basis of valuable metal,

which it is supposed to represent, and yet to maintain

the valueless bits of leather or paper in circulation as

before. Thus arises the abnormal phenomenon known

as an inconvertible paper money. Such a currency is,

however, never accepted beyond the frontiers of the

state recognizing it.

 

            XV.4 Merchants conducting large internationaltransactions soon found out that great loss of interest

and risk of loss of the whole money would arise, if they

were to trade with actual specie. Hence they introduced

the use, many centuries since, of bills of exchange,

which are signs or certificates of debt, passed from

hand to hand almost like representative money, and

often accomplishing many acts of exchange by a single

transfer of specie.

 

XV.5

 

Cheque and Clearing System.

There is yet a more potent way of avoiding the actual

use of a medium of exchange, without encountering

any of the inconveniences of barter. Those who

frequently traded with each other, both buying and

selling, found that it was absurd to pay a sum of money

for what was bought, and then receive it back for what

was sold. It was sufficient to estimate in terms of

money the values of the articles exchanged, and then

pay the difference, if any, in actual cash. The practice

having grown up of depositing the metallic money not

immediately wanted with goldsmiths or bankers, for

safe custody, it was gradually discovered that an order

to pay money would serve instead of the money; and

that, if two persons trade with the same banker, theyneed not in their mutual transactions handle the money

at all. A transfer in the books of their common bankers

will effect the payment of any balance of debt. Bankers

can in like manner arrange their mutual accounts, and

in this way there has been gradually developed in this

country and in America a vast system, which I propose

to denominate the Cheque and Clearing System,

whereby all the larger internal transactions of the

people are arranged by a mere settlement of accounts.

 

            XV.6 In this system London naturally becomes

the monetary centre of the United Kingdom; but there

is a further tendency to make London the banking of

the world as regards all large and international

transactions. It is found to be advantageous to deposit

money in London, or to obtain credit and make bills

payable there, rather than elsewhere. By such a

concentration of banking operations, London tends to

become the seat of a worldwide Clearing House. Such

are the principal steps in the development of the

mechanism of exchange, and we proceed to consider

them In detail.

XV.7

 Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 









Chapter XVI Representative Money

 



Although we now distinguish money according as it is

metallic or paper money, because paper has in recent

times been universally adopted as the material for

representative money, yet it is well to remember that

various other substances have been used for the

purpose. We may pass, in fact, by gradual steps from

the perfect standard coins, whose nominal value is

coincident with their metallic value, to worthless bits

of paper, which are yet allowed to stand for thousands,

or even millions of pounds sterling.            XVI.1 Token money, which we considered in

Chapter VIII. (p. 67), is in some degree representative

money, because it derives its value, not so much from

the metal it contains as from the standard coins for

which it can be exchanged. There is no need that a

promise should be always expressed by ink and paper.

It may be still more durably recorded by a die upon a

piece of metal. Accordingly, while the monarchs of

England down to the end of Elizabeth's reign refused to

debase their currency, as the notion seems to have

been, by issuing such a poor metal as copper, the

tradesmen supplied the want of pence by issuing

tokens. These pieces were in the earlier centuries

composed of lead, or latten, a kind of brass, or

sometimes, it is believed, of leather. During the last

century, again, they were issued in large quantities,

chiefly in copper, and often bore an express statement

that they served as promissory notes. Thus a well-

executed piece, issued at Southampton in 1791, bears

the inscription, "Halfpenny Promissory, payable at the

Office of W. Taylor, R. V. Moody & Co." A token

struck by the Flint lead works in 1813, states the

promise in different terms, thus-"One Penny Token,

One Pound Note for 240 Tokens." The variety of such

promissory coins issued at one time or other is very

great, and their study forms an important branch ofnumismatic science, as will be learnt by looking into

such a work as Akerman's "London Tradesmen's

Tokens." In quite recent years small money was found

to be scarce in New South Wales, and some tradesmen

issued copper or bronze tokens which circulated until

the year 1870, when their further use was prohibited.

 

            XVI.2 The ancients were well acquainted with

the difference between a standard and a token currency.

The iron money of the Lacedæmonians was probably

standard legal tender, for it is described as being heavy

and bulky, and yet of small value. The iron money of

the Byzantines, on the contrary, was token

representative money. We shall find in the following

section that pieces of money of the same nature as

bank-notes were also employed by several ancient

nations.

 

XVI.3

 

Early History of Representative Money.

 



Ancient nations were unacquainted with the use of

paper money, simply because they had no paper. But it

would be a mistake to suppose that they did not employrepresentative money exactly on the same principles as

we use bank-notes. Some few particulars on the subject

have long been known, but a recent article by M.

Bernardakis in the Journal des Economistes (vol.

xxxiii. pp. 353370) has added much to our knowledge,

and made it quite clear that the ancients were more

acute in matters of currency than we have given them

credit for.

 

            XVI.4 One of the very earliest mediums of

exchange, as we have seen (p. 20), consisted of the

skins of animals. The earliest form of representative

money consisted of small pieces of leather, usually

marked with an official seal. It is a very reasonable

suggestion made by Storch, Bernardakis, and other

writers, that when skins and furs began to be found an

inconveniently bulky kind of money, small pieces were

clipped off, and handed over as tokens of possession.

By fitting into the place from which they were cut they

would prove ownership, something in the same way

that notched sticks, or tallies, were for many centuries

used to record loans of money to the English

Exchequer. We know by experience in the case of

paper money, that if a people had become thoroughly

accustomed to the circulation of these small leather

tallies, they would in time forget their representativecharacter, and continue to circulate them, when the

government, or other holders of the skins themselves,

had made away with the actual property. Such is no

doubt the history of the leather money which long had

currency in Russia.

 

            XVI.5 It is impossible to ascertain what was

the character of the leather money which, according to

an obscure tradition, was in use at Rome before the

time of Numa. There is no doubt that the Carthaginians

had a representative leather currency, for Æschines the

Socratic tells us that they used small pieces of leather

wrapped round cores of unknown material, and then

sealed up. Neighbouring nations refused to receive

these curious pieces of currency, whence we may

safely infer that their value was nominal.

 

            XVI.6 It is however in China that the use of

paper money was most fully developed in early times.

More than a century before the Christian era, an

emperor of China raised funds to prosecute his wars in

a way which shows that the use of leather tokens was

familiar to the people. The tokens having been made of

the skins of white deer, he collected together into a

park all deer of this colour which he could find, and

prohibited his subjects from possessing any animals ofthe same kind. Having thus obtained a monopoly of the

material, reminding one of the monopoly of the Bank

of England in water-marked paper, lie issued pieces of

the white leather as money at a high rate.

 

            XVI.7 In the middle of the thirteenth century,

Marco Polo found a paper money in circulation in

China, composed of the inner bark of a tree beaten up

and made into paper, square pieces of which were

signed and sealed with great formality. These notes

were of various values, and were legal tender, death

being the penalty imposed upon those who refused to

receive them. Counterfeiters likewise incurred the same

penalty. Another traveller, who visited China in the

fourteenth century, gives a very similar account of the

paper money then circulating, and adds that, when

worn or torn, it could be exchanged for new notes

without charge. It is needless to follow out the long and

doubtful history of the subject in later times, many

particulars of which will be found in the article of M.

Bernardakis, or that of M. Courcelle-Seneuil on Papier

Monnaie in the "Dictionnaire de l'Economie Politique."

It may suffice to say that the history resembles that of

most inconvertible currencies. The quantity of paper

afloat increased so much under the Mongol dynasty as

to cause great evils, and the Ming dynasty, continuingthe issues, went so far as to prohibit the use of gold or

silver money. The value of the paper fell so low, it is

said, that one metallic cash was worth a thousand paper

cash, reminding us of the present state of the paper

currency in San Domingo. The result was a collapse

and reaction in the fifteenth century.

 

            XVI.8 Among other Asiatic nations, the

Tartars and the Persians also understood the use of

paper money, and Sir John Maundeville, who travelled

in Tartary in the fourteenth century, gives the

following account of the advantages which the Great

Chan enjoyed in consequence. "This Emperour may

dispenden als moche as he wile, withouten

estymacioun. For he dependethe not, ne makethe no

money, but of Lether emprented, or of Papyre. And of

that money, is som of gretter prys, and som of lasse

prys, aftre the dyversitee of his Statutes. And whan that

Money hathe ronne so longe that it begynnethe to

waste, than men beren it to the Emperoure's Tresorye;

and than thei taken newe money for the olde. And that

Money gothe thorghe out alle the contree, and thorghe

out alle his Provynces. For there and beyonde hem, thei

make no Money nouther of Gold nor of Sylver. And

therefore he may despende ynow, and outrageously."

Not a few great emperors and kings and even republicshave imitated the Great Chan, and have spent their

paper money, "ynow and outrageously."

 

XVI.9

 

Reasons for the Use of Representative Money.

 



It is well to analyse and state exactly the reasons which

may be given for the introduction of pieces of

representative money. Several motives may be

detected, and they have been of different weight in

different cases. The origin of the European system of

bank-notes is to be found in the deposit banks

established in Italy from four to seven centuries ago. In

those days the circulating medium consisted of a

mixture of coins of many denominations, variously

clipped or depreciated. In receiving money, the

merchant had to weigh and estimate the fineness of

each coin, and much trouble, loss of time, and risk of

fraud thus arose. It became, therefore, the custom in the

mercantile republics of Italy to deposit such money in a

bank, where its value was accurately estimated, once

for all, and placed to the credit of the depositor.

 

            XVI.10 The banks of Amsterdam andHamburg were subsequently established on a similar

system, and a full account of them will be found in

Adam Smith's "Wealth of Nations," Book IV., Chapter

III., and in Hewitt's "Treatise upon Money" (p. 121).

The money placed to the credit of individuals in these

banks was called bank-money, and commanded an agio

or premium corresponding to the average depreciation

of the coins. Payments were made by the merchants

attending at the bank at a particular hour, and ordering

transfers to be made in the bank books. The money

paid was thus always of full value, and all trouble in

counting and valuing it was avoided. The regulations

of these banks were, however, in many respects

complicated, and it is difficult to understand their

purpose.

 

XVI.11

 

Inconvenience of Metallic Money.

 



Closely involved with the previous motive for the use

of representative money is that of avoiding the trouble

and risk of handling large amounts of the precious

metals. In order to keep large sums of metallic money

in safety a person must have strongholds andwatchmen. The origin of banking in England has never

been sufficiently investigated, but, so far as we know,

it arose for the purpose of safe custody. While public

and well-regulated deposit banks had existed for

centuries in Italy, the only trace of such an institution

in England was found in the mint in the Tower of

London, whither merchants were accustomed to send

their specie for safe keeping. Unfortunately, in 1640

King Charles I. appropriated as a loan £200,000 thus

deposited, and the merchants, no longer trusting the

government, and finding it dangerous to keep large

sums of money in their own houses during the troubled

times which followed, resorted to the practice of

depositing their money with goldsmiths, who probably

had vaults and guards suitable for the purpose.

 

            XVI.12 As acknowledgments of the

possession of such sums of money, the goldsmith gave

receipts, and at, first these documents were special

promises, like dock warrants. The practice arose of

transferring possession by delivery of these receipts, or

"goldsmith's notes," as they were called. Such notes are

frequently referred to in Acts of Parliament, and even

as late as 1746 most of the London bankers continued

to be members of the Goldsmith's Company. It is plain

from the manner in which these notes were mentionedin some statutes that they had become general and not

special promises-mere engagements to deliver a sum of

money on demand, without conditions as to keeping a

reserve for the purpose.

 

XVI.13

 

The Weight of Currency.

 



Even the weight of metallic money would be a

sufficient reason for the use of representative

documents in large transactions. In proportion as the

legal tender is more bulky and inconvenient to carry

about, is this motive more powerful. Thus, when the

state of Virginia employed tobacco as the medium of

exchange in the eighteenth century, the tobacco was

placed in stores, and receipts on paper were handed

about. Paper money was issued in Russia under

Catherine II. in 1768, on the ground that the copper

money, then forming the legal tender, was

inconvenient. So much were these assignats, or notes,

preferred, that they at first circulated at a premium of

1/4 per cent.

 

            XVI.14 In the present state of commerce, evengold money would be far too heavy to form a

convenient medium for making large payments. M.

Chevalier states that it would require forty men to carry

the gold equal in value to the Regent Diamond. The

average daily transactions in the London Bankers'

Clearing House amount to about twenty millions of

pounds sterling, which if paid in gold coin would

weigh about 157 tons, and would require nearly eighty

horses for conveyance. If paid in silver the weight

would be increased to more than 2500 tons. For the

conveyance and custody of very moderate sums in coin

or bullion, individuals, or even large banks, resort to

the aid of the Bank of England, whose officials are

experienced in the matter, and have all facilities.

 

            XVI.15 I find that a Bank of England note

weighs about 201/2 grains (1 1/3 grams), whereas a

single sovereign weighs about 123 grains, and the note

may represent five, ten, fifty, a thousand, or ten

thousand such sovereigns with slight differences in the

printing. If we were obliged to handle a medium of

exchange actually embodying value, it would, ere now,

have been necessary to employ precious stones, or

some metal much more rare and precious than gold.

But the use of representative documents is becoming so

general in the most advanced commercial countries,that the portability of metallic money is a question of

very minor importance. Gold already acts in England

only as change for notes, and the question will arise

whether it will long be needed even for that purpose.

 

XVI.16

 

Saving of Interest.

 



A further and very potent motive for employing

representative tokens or notes, consists in the saving of

interest and capital, which is effected by substituting a

comparatively valueless material in place of costly gold

and silver. Whenever a nation is in great straits for

want of revenue, there is a great temptation to treat the

metallic currency as a treasure to be temporarily

borrowed for the necessities of the state. The ancient

Greeks understood this as well as the modern English,

Italians, or Americans. Dionysius, on this ground,

obliged the Syracusans to accept tin tokens in place of

silver coins, worth four times as much in metallic

value. In the book on Economics, attributed to

Aristotle, we are told that Timotheus the Athenian

persuaded the soldiers and merchants to receive copper

money in place of silver, promising to exchange it forsilver coins at the close of the war. The Clazomenians

made a similar issue of token money avowedly for the

sake of the interest thereby saved. Being unable to pay

twenty talents due to some mercenary troops, they

were under the necessity of paying four talents a year

as interest. They fell upon the device of coining iron

tokens to the nominal amount of twenty talents, which

they obliged the citizens to take in place of silver coin.

The silver thus obtained was used for the immediate

discharge of the debt, and there was a spare annual

revenue of four talents, formerly absorbed in the

payment of interest, which now enabled them in a few

years to redeem the token money. Closely parallel to

this is the case of the Guernsey Market, which was

built without apparent cost. Daniel le Broc, the

governor of the island, determined to build a market in

St. Peters, but not having the necessary funds, issued

under the seal of the island four thousand market notes

for one pound each, with which he paid the artificers.

When the market was finished and the rents came in,

the notes were thereby cancelled, and not an ounce of

gold was employed in the matter. There is, however, no

mystery in this advantage of paper money.

 

            XVI.17 Daniel le Broc, by issuing his market-

notes, drove an equivalent amount of gold out ofcirculation, and thus effected a kind of forced loan out

of the metallic currency of the island, without paying

any interest for it. A similar gain of interest accrues

upon all paper notes so far as their amount exceeds the

gold held in readiness to pay them. The private and

joint stock banks of issue in England in this way enjoy

the interest upon a sum of about six millions and a half

sterling, the Scotch banks upon two millions and three

quarters, and the Irish banks upon more than six

millions. The issue of paper representative money is

beneficial to all parties, provided that it be conducted

upon a sound method of regulation, a subject upon

which the greatest differences of opinion exist.

 

XVI.18

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 Chapter XVII The Nature and Varieties of Promissory

Notes

 



Before attempting to come to any conclusion as to the

best mode of regulating the issue of promissory notes,

we must carefully analyse the differences which may

exist between one promise and another. What seems at

first sight a very slight and subtle distinction, may be

found to lead to important results. He who issues a

representative or promissory document, engaging to

give a certain quantity of a defined commodity in

return for the document when presented, may really

make any one of three distinct engagements.

 


1. He may promise to keep a certain identical article

    in hispossession until it is called for.

2. He may engage to have in his possession a certain

    amount ofcommodity ready to meet the promissory

    notes, without distinguishing between portion and

    portion of a similar substance.

3. The undertaking may be merely to the effect that    the requiredcommodity shall be forthcoming when

    the note is presented, no covenant being made as to

    the quantity to be held in stock for the purpose.

 


XVII.1

 

Specific Deposit Warrant.

 



The most satisfactory kind of promissory document is

the first, which is represented by bills of lading, pawn-

tickets, dock-warrants, or certificates which establish

ownership to a definite object. A bill of lading entitles

the legal holder of it to certain cases or packages of

goods, described by marks, numbers, dimensions, or

otherwise. The ship-master signing such a bill is

obliged to retain the identical cases committed to his

care, until he delivers them up in return for the bill of

lading at the close of his voyage. Dock-warrants are of

the same character, being receipts for packages of

goods deposited in the London or other dock

warehouses. The holder of a dock-warrant has a prima

facie claim to the pipes of wine, bales of wool,

hogsheads of sugar, or other packages named thereon.

Transfer of the warrant by endorsement or otherwise,

as required by law and custom, is accounted a transferof the ownership of the goods. The important point

concerning such promissory notes is, that they cannot

possibly be issued in excess of the goods actually

deposited, unless by distinct fraud. The issuer ought to

act purely as a warehouse-keeper, and as possession

may be claimed at any time, he can never legally allow

any object deposited to go out of his safe keeping until

it is delivered back in exchange for the promissory

note.

 

XVII.2

 

General Deposit Warrant.

 



We pass to the case in which the issuer of a promissory

document engages to keep on hand goods exactly

equivalent in quantity and quality to what are specified

thereon, without taking note of individual parcels. In

many cases commodities are so homogeneous that

there seems to be no need to distinguish parcel from

parcel, or to restore the identical portion deposited.

Thus the keeper of a pig-iron store in Glasgow receives

large quantities of pig iron, of several brands, and

issues corresponding warrants representing ownership

therein. As no difference, however, is known to existbetween different portions of iron of the same brand, it

was the practice in former years not to allot one heap

of pigs to each warrant, but simply to retain a stock of

each brand equal in weight to the aggregate amount

due on outstanding warrants. More recently a better

system has been introduced, and each specific lot of

iron has been marked and set aside to meet some

particular warrant. The difference seems to be slight,

but it is really very important, as opening the way to a

lax fulfilment of the contract. Misunderstandings

occasionally arise upon this point in other trades. For

instance, a cotton merchant in Liverpool, a few years

since, obtained a loan of money upon the security of

cotton in his possession, and a court of law was

subsequently called upon to decide whether he had

mortgaged certain individual bales of cotton, and

undertaken to retain them until the loan was repaid, or

whether he had merely engaged to have in his hands an

equal quantity of cotton of the same quality. I have

heard that carrying and warehousing companies are

sometimes careless about distinction of parcel and

parcel. If they are continually conveying or holding

portions of exactly the same goods, flour from the

same miller, coal from the same seam, they will

sometimes deliver out the required quantity of the same

sort of goods, irrespective of its being the identicalportion delivered to them for conveyance or safe

custody.

 

XVII.3

 

Difference between a Special and a General Promise.

 



The great importance of the distinctions pointed out in

the last section will be easily apparent. He who has

made a special promise to give definite parcels of

goods in return for particular individual papers, cannot

issue any such promissory papers without holding

corresponding goods. If he does so, he will be

continually liable to be convicted of fraud or default by

the presentation of a particular document. If the

promises made by him, however, are only general

ones, any promissory document can be met by any

portion of commodity of the proper quality, and it will

be necessary to present most or all of the documents in

order to disclose default. The way is thus opened for

the speculative issue of promissory notes. The receiver

of deposits, finding that a large portion of the deposited

commodity always remains on hand, may proceed to

use it in trade, only keeping so much as may meet

current demands. So long as he does fulfil promises noharm seems to be done; but experience proves that

there will always be a certain proportion of persons

who, in such circumstances, will not act so discreetly

as to be in a position to redeem all their engagements.

 

            XVII.4 Moreover, it now becomes possible to

create a fictitious supply of a commodity, that is, to

make people believe that a supply exists which does

not exist. The possessor of a promissory note or

warrant regards the document as equivalent to the

commodity named thereon. It is only necessary then to

print off, fill up, and sign an additional number of such

notes in order to have a corresponding supply of

commodity to sell. It is true that the issue of promises

involves their fulfilment at a future day; but the future

is unknown, and the issuer may believe that before the

fulfilment is likely to be demanded the price of the

commodity will have fallen. Thus, if pig-iron warrants

could be issued in unlimited quantities (irrespective of

the stocks actually in the stores at Glasgow), an

unscrupulous band of speculators might perhaps make

large profits by selling great quantities of iron for

future delivery. After suddenly and excessively

depressing the price of pig-iron they might succeed in

gradually buying up enough at lower prices to meet the

warrants when presented. This kind of "bear"operations has certainly been successful in other

markets.

 

            XVII.5 About ten years ago it became the

practice to rig the market as regards the shares of

particular joint-stock banking companies. A party

would be formed, perhaps owning none of the shares of

the selected company, and they would proceed to sell

considerable quantities of the shares, hoping so to

damage the reputation of the company and lower the

value of the stock as to be able to buy up enough

before delivery would be required. This noxious kind

of speculation was checked by an Act of Parliament

(30 Victoria, c. 29, 1867), which now requires the

seller of bank shares to specify the numbers or the

registered proprietors of the shares which he is selling

for future delivery.

 

            XVII.6 It might be urged, indeed, that there is

a natural right belonging to all persons to make

promises, if they can thereby benefit themselves. Any

one can accept a bill, thereby promising to deliver

money at a future day. It is quite common to make

contracts involving the delivery of government stock,

or of cotton or corn expected to arrive by sea, before

delivery becomes due. But we must remember that alllaws and all social relations are devised to secure the

greatest good of the greatest number. If a right to make

all promises be recognized by law, it must be because

the right is beneficial to society, and it is the

recognition by law which makes it a right. If, on the

contrary, it be found by experience that freedom of

making and selling promises in a particular way gives

scope to illegitimate speculation, or otherwise injures

society more than it produces benefit, the law ought

certainly to restrict this freedom and regulate the matter

for the good of the community. The whole matter, in

short, is one of expediency. It used to be held as a

general rule of law, that any present grant or

assignment of goods not in existence is without

operation. Though the rule seems to be generally

disregarded, there are many cases in which it might be

advantageously enforced.

 

XVII.7

 

Pecuniary Promissory Notes.

 



Applying these considerations to the special matter of

money, we find that pecuniary promises are nearly

always of a general kind. He who undertakes to pay asum of money on a future day, rarely specifies the

individual coins which will be paid. In fact the Coinage

Act, in defining legal tender, makes any sovereigns,

shillings, and pence, duly coined and of proper weight,

a discharge for a corresponding sum named in a

contract. It is true that just as pipes of wine are

warehoused in the London docks, cases of gold and

silver bullion or, it may be, of foreign or English coin,

are warehoused in the vaults of the Bank of England.

In fact, imports of gold and silver, at whatever port in

the kingdom they may arrive, are almost always sent

up for delivery at the bullion office of the bank, which

acts precisely as if it were a dock warehouse, and

delivers the packages on production of the bills of

lading. These bills of lading are specific promises, and

may yet be passed by endorsement from one person to

another. Such consignments of bullion, however, do

not enter into banking accounts.

 

            XVII.8 A Bank of England note is neither

more nor less binding upon the bank authorities than a

bill of lading, but it does not specify the bag or box of

money to be employed in paying it. Almost all other

pecuniary engagements are in the same way general

engagements. No banker could make any profit if he

were obliged to put away the sovereigns deposited by acustomer until that customer presented a checque for

them, nor would there usually be sufficient motive for

desiring such a special pledge. The idea never enters

into our heads in mercantile matters. Disputes,

however, have occasionally arisen upon this point.

Some people have a peculiar fancy for collecting

particular coins, and an old lady, having formed a

hoard of fourpenny pieces, died after bequeathing them

to a relative. Although wishing to keep them out of

respect to the old lady, this relative was in want of

ready cash, and desired to realize their value; he

thought to achieve both objects by pledging them with

a pawnbroker. The broker readily received them, but

after a time thoughtlessly used the groats as change.

When the pawn-ticket was presented he considered that

the tender of the equivalent sum in sovereigns and

shillings was a sufficient discharge. Here, however, the

pledge should have been held as a special one.

 

            XVII.9 Now, if pecuniary promises were

always of a special character there could be no possible

harm in allowing perfect freedom in the issue of

promissory notes. The issuer would merely constitute

himself a warehouse-keeper, and would be bound to

hold each special lot of coin ready to pay each

corresponding note. But this is not the case, and muchharm may arise from the excessive issue of promises to

pay gold on demand. The gold market may be rigged

as well as the iron or any other special market. One

difference is that the gold market is the most extensive

of all markets, so that a great many individuals or

companies, each acting under the separate impulse of

self-interest, must over-issue notes in order to produce

any appreciable effect. A further difference is that gold,

being itself the measure of value, the rise or fall in its

price cannot be apparent except in the average fall or

rise in the price of many commodities. This subject

must be pursued in Chapter XXIV.

 

XVII.10

 

Principles of the Circulation of Representative Money.

 



In the last two sections of Chapter VIII. (pp. 80-85),

we found that by analysing the motives of individuals

in receiving, holding, or paying away metallic money,

we could arrive at certain laws of circulation, which

were amply confirmed by experience. It was also

pointed out that the same laws might be extended

mutatis mutandis, to the mixed circulation of metallic

and paper money.Habit is almost as powerful in supporting the use of

representative money as of real metallic coins. Persons

who have long been accustomed to pay away certain

pieces of paper without loss, will continue to regard

them as good currency until some rude shock is given

to their confidence. This may go so far that a dirty bit

of paper, containing a promise to pay a sovereign, will

be actually preferred to the beautiful gold coils which it

promises. The currency of Scotland is a standing proof

of this assertion; and the same may be said of Norway,

where, until 1874, no gold at all was in circulation, and

notes for one, five, or ten dollars formed the principal

part of the currency.

 

            XVII.11 There is one all-important point in

which representative differs from metallic money; it

will not circulate beyond the boundaries of the district

or country where it is legally current or habitually

employed. No doubt Bank of England notes are

frequently carried abroad by travellers, and are in most

places readily exchanged for the money of the locality;

but they never circulate, and are treated as bills upon

London, forming a convenient mode of remittance.

They do not satisfy a debt from this to another country,

but rather create it, an English bank-note, in the hands

of a Paris banker, representing a claim which he hasupon the Bank of England. The only money which can

really be exported in payment of debts due to foreign

merchants is standard metallic money. Hence paper

money has exactly the same capacity for driving out

standard money that light or depreciated coins possess.

 

            XVII.12 In the case of inconvertible notes this

has always been most obvious. As the quantity of such

notes issued progressively increases, as almost always

happens, coin must be exported, otherwise the currency

would become excessive. But when most of the coin is

gone, need of it begins to be felt for making foreign

payments, and then the value of the paper falls below

that of the coin which it is supposed to correspond to.

Many persons begin to hoard the coins for the sake of

anticipated profit, and nothing but paper is soon to be

found in circulation. This effect of paper in driving

coin out of use has been manifested over and over

again, as in the time of the assignats of the French

Revolution, the suspension of specie payments at the

Bank of England between 1797 and 1819, and the late

American war. One of the most recent and striking

instances is to be found in Italy, where large quantities

of beautiful gold and silver coins had been struck in the

years 1862 to 1865, but all disappeared very rapidly

from circulation as soon as the cours forcé of papermoney was proclaimed.

 

XVII.13

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search Chapter XVIII Methods of

Regulating a Paper Currency

 



We may now proceed with advantage to consider the

various methods on which the issue of paper money

may be conducted. This question is perhaps the most

vexed and debatable one in the whole sphere of

political economy; but, by carefully adhering to the

analysis of facts, we may perhaps get a view of the

subject free from the great perplexities in which it is

commonly involved. The elementary principles of the

subject are not of a complex character; and if we hold

tenaciously to those principles, we may perhaps besaved from that dangerous kind of intellectual vertigo

which often attacks writers on the currency.

 

            XVIII.1 The state may either take the issue of

representative money into its own hands, as it takes the

coining of money, or it may allow private individuals,

or semi-public companies and corporations, to

undertake the work under more or less strict legislative

control. We will afterwards briefly consider the relative

advantages of government and private issues, but in

either case we may lay down the following series of

methods according to which the amount of issue may

be regulated, and the performance of the promises

guaranteed.

 

XVIII.2

1. The Simple Deposit Method. The issuer of

promissory notesmay be obliged to keep a stock of

coin and bullion constantly on hand, equal in amount to

the aggregate of the uncancelled notes, each of which,

being instantly paid on presentation, will induce a

corresponding decrease of the reserve.

 

XVIII.3

2. The Partial Deposit Method. Instead of being

obliged to keepthe whole of the precious metalsdeposited in his vaults, the issuer may be able to invest

a fixed amount in government funds, or other safe

profitable securities.

 

XVIII.4

3. The Minimum Reserve Method. The issuer may be

bound tohave on hand under all circumstances a fixed

minimum amount of coin and bullion.

 

XVIII.5

4. The Proportional Reserve Method. 2 The reserve

may be madeto vary with the amount of standing notes,

being, say, at least one-third or one-fourth of the total.

 

XVIII.6

5. The Maximum Issue Method. Permission may be

given to issuenotes not exceeding in the aggregate a

fixed amount, prohibitory penalties imposed upon any

breach of this restriction.

 

XVIII.7

6. The Elastic Limit Method. A limit may be assigned

to theaggregate amount of notes, as in the last method,

but the penalties on the excessive issue may be

intentionally made so light, that the issuer will under

some circumstances prefer to pay the penalty ratherthan restrict his issues.

 

XVIII.8

7. The Documentary Reserve Method. The reserve of

propertywhich the issuer is required to keep may

consist not of gold or silver coin or bullion, but of

government funds, bonds, shares, or other documentary

securities.

 

XVIII.9

8. The Real Property Reserve Method. Instead of

merelydocumentary property, the issuer may be

allowed to treat various property, such as land, houses,

ships, railway shares, etc., as his reserve of wealth to

meet engagements.

 

XVIII.10

9. The Foreign Exchanges Method. Some important

bank may beallowed to issue convertible notes on the

understanding that it will not increase the amount in

circulation so long as the foreign exchanges are against

the country, and render the export of specie profitable.

 

XVIII.11

10. The Free Issue Method. The business of issuing

promissorynotes may be left open to the freecompetition of all individuals, free from any

restrictions or conditions, except such laws as apply to

all commercial contracts and promises.

 

XVIII.12

11. The Gold Par Method. Paper money may be issued,

bearingthe appearance of promissory notes, but

inconvertible into coin. The issue being restricted as

long as any premium on gold is apparent, the paper

money may be thus maintained equal in value to the

coin which it nominally represents.

 

XVIII.13

12. The Revenue Payments Method. Inconvertible

paper moneymay be freely issued, but an attempt may

be made to keep up its value by receiving it in place of

coin in the payment of taxes.

 

XVIII.14

13. The Deferred Convertibility Method. Notes may be

  issuedpromising to pay metallic money at some

  future day, either

definitely fixed or dependent upon political or other

contingent events.

 

XVIII.1514. The Paper Money Method. Lastly, those who coin

apparentpromissory notes may be entirely absolved

from the performance of their promises, so that the

notes circulate by force of habit, by the command of

the sovereign, or in consequence of the absence of any

other medium of exchange.

 

            XVIII.16 Although I have, in the above

statement, enumerated no less than fourteen distinct

methods of managing the issue of paper currency, it is

by no means certain that other methods have not been

employed from time to time. There may be, in fact, an

almost unlimited number of devices for securing the

performance of promises, or for rendering the

performance unnecessary. Moreover, these methods

may be combined together in almost unlimited variety.

The reserve may be required to be partially in the form

of specie, and partially in documentary securities, or

real property. A banker may be allowed to issue a

certain fixed amount of notes without any condition as

to reserves, and to issue further notes on the Deposit

Method.

 

            XVIII.17 It would obviously require a very

large volume to enter at all in an adequate manner upon

a description of these methods, their relativeadvantages or defects, and the ways in which they have

been combined and carried into effect at different times

and places. I must therefore confine myself in this

small book to a very concise discussion of this most

extensive subject.

 

XVIII.18

1. Simple Deposit.

 



This method is perfectly represented by the ancient

deposit banks in the Italian commercial republics, by

the banks of Amsterdam and Hamburg, or by the

London goldsmiths, so long as they only acted as safe

keepers of the specie committed to their care. Notes

issued on this system have a purely representative

character, like dock warrants or pawn tickets, as I have

already fully explained. The performance of promises

is rendered certain so far as legislation can provide for

it. The amount of such a currency will vary exactly like

that of a metallic currency, and there can be no fear of

paper replacing specie, and driving it out of the

country, because the specie must be in the vaults of the

issuing bank before the notes are issued.

 

            XVIII.19 At the same time the advantages ofthe method are comparatively slight, because the use of

paper representatives merely saves the abrasion of

coin, and the trouble and risk of carrying it about and

counting it. The community loses the interest of the

whole sum held in pledge, and this forms by far the

largest part of the cost of the currency, as we have seen

(p. 164). The coin, too, may be safer in the hands of the

people. When lying apparently useless within the reach

of an arbitrary government, it often proves an

irresistible temptation. Charles I. seized the money in

the Tower. When the French invaded Holland in 1795,

a large part of the specie supposed to be deposited in

the vaults of the bank of Amsterdam was not

forthcoming, having been secretly lent to the Dutch

East India Company, and the city authorities. The

Russian government diligently collected a bank reserve

in the citadel of St. Petersburg, which was under the

cognizance of members of the Exchange, until the

troubles of 1848 forced the emperor to assume the

control himself. In innumerable instances governments,

including the English government in 1797, have made

use of bank deposits, under the form of suspending

specie payments.

 

XVIII.20

 2. Partial Deposit.

 



The Bank of England, under the Bank Charter Act of

1844, perfectly represents this method. For each

additional five-pound note which is put forth out of the

issue department, gold to the weight of 616.37 grains

must be deposited in that department. The whole

amount of gold, however, retained in the vaults is less

by £15,000,000 than the outstanding notes, this

constant difference being covered by documentary

securities, and by a sum of about eleven millions which

the bank lends to the government without interest.

Under this arrangement we secure all the advantages of

the simple deposit system, while the community gains

the interest amounting to about £445,000, of which the

government receives £188,000 per annum. The

character of the contract between the government and

the bank is of too intricate a nature to be readily

fathomed or described, but it substantially amounts to

the government borrowing the larger part of the fifteen

millions of deposits, and allowing the bank to use the

rest to cover the cost of printing and managing the note

circulation. I shall treat of this system again in Chapter

XXIV. The Partial Deposit Method is the basis of the

new law concerning the issue of notes in the Germanempire, in combination with the Elastic Limit method,

which possibly constitutes an improvement.

 

XVIII.21

 

3. Minimum Reserve.

One mode of guaranteeing the payment of notes, which

might be suggested, would consist in obliging the

issuers to keep on hand a stock of specie, which is

never to be allowed to fall below a certain fixed

amount. This would be like recommending a man to

avoid impecuniosity by always keeping a shilling in his

pocket. The fact that the minimum amount must be

kept in the vaults renders it unavailable for meeting

demands when they come. There can be no use in such

a reserve unless there be a power exercised by the

legislature or executive government, of arbitrarily

suspending the operation of the law when there is a run

upon the banks.

 

XVIII.22

 

4. Proportional Reserve.

 



The issuer of promises to pay money on demand may

be required to keep a reserve of coin never less than,say, one-fourth of the whole outstanding notes. This is

analogous to the method on which the National Bank

currency of the United States was lately regulated, and

it is, perhaps, better to enforce the keeping of a certain

amount of reserve than to leave the matter entirely to

the discretion and good faith of the individual issuers.

As the banker sees his reserve running down nearly to

the legal limit, he will be compelled to use additional

caution, in order to avoid a breach of the law. But if the

untoward state of trade and credit causes any large

portion of the outstanding notes to be presented, the

legal tender reserve will be diminished in a greater

proportion than the amount of notes, which is larger in

absolute quantity. If there be 100,000 dollars of

outstanding notes, and 40,000 dollars reserve, then it is

obvious that the presentation of 20,000 dollars of notes

will reduce these numbers respectively to 80,000

dollars of outstanding notes, and 20,000 dollars of

reserve; and if the law required the reserve to be one-

fourth part of the liabilities, no more notes could be

paid. Thus, from the moment that the banker allow his

reserve to touch the legal minimum, it become

unavailable to him, except by a breach of law, and it

may be said that the law is of little use except when

broken. This system, in fact, reduces itself, when it

comes into operation at all, to the Minimum Reservemethod last described. The banker cannot touch his

reserve just when he most wants it, and the deadlock

thus occasioned was acutely felt in the United States

during the panic of 1873.

 

            XVIII.23 This method of regulation has,

moreover, little or no effect in removing the motives

for an extension of the circulation. The greater part of

the value of every additional note kept in circulation is

a gratuitous addition to the loanable capital of the bank,

and bears interest as long as it can be kept afloat.

 

XVIII.24

 

5. Maximum Issue.

 



To allow a bank or banks to issue in the aggregate a

certain fixed amount of promissory notes, and no more,

appears to me quite consistent with the principles of

political economy. It saves interest upon a certain

portion of the circulating medium, and supplies a

convenient and economical currency. At the same time,

the notes issued cannot drive gold out of the country

beyond a fixed amount. It is strongly urged by Mr. R.

Inglis Palgrave and others, that the limitation isarbitrary, and that the people want more money; but it

is always open to them to use metallic money instead.

The limitation imposed is not upon money itself, but

upon the representative part, and though we thereby

forego the increased saving of interest upon enlarged

issues, this loss may be balanced by the freedom from

any risk of producing a fictitious abundance of gold.

This system is sufficiently illustrated in the 170 banks

of England which are still allowed to issue notes. Sir

Robert Peel provided, in the Act of 1844, that they

might continue to issue, without any condition as to

reserve, the same quantity of notes as they had issued

on the average of twelve weeks preceding a day

named. If any bank exceeded the amount thus

determined it was to be fined a sum of money equal to

the average excess of the month; and sworn returns of

their circulations were required from all issuing banks.

 

XVIII.25

 

6. Elastic Limit.

 



The above is the best name which I can find for a new

method of regulation which has just been adopted in

the Bank Act of the German empire. So far as regardsthe issue of bank-notes the banking organization of

Germany will substantially resemble that of England.

The new Imperial Bank, and such of the state or other

banks which conform to the requirements of the law,

will have the right of issuing notes not backed by gold

to the aggregate sum of 385 millions of marks. They

may apparently issue any further quantity of notes in

exchange for a deposit of gold to an equal value. So far

the method is precisely that of the partial deposit

already described (p. 222). Observing, however, that

the English Bank Charter Act has on several occasions

been violated to prevent a panic, the German

legislature has provided that more bank-notes may be

issued, provided that a tax of 5 per cent. be paid

thereon. It is intended in this way to make it

unprofitable for any bank to exceed the normal limits.

It seems likely that this provision will work well, and

form an improvement on our method. The English

government, indeed, has always deprived the Bank of

England of the interest on any excess of notes which it

issued during a suspension of the Bank Act, but the

German law makes the limit of issue elastic in all

cases, so as to avoid the danger of panic.

 

XVIII.26

 7. Documentary Reserve.

 



It might seem enough in order to ensure the

convertibility of notes, that the bankers issuing them

should prove their possession of abundant funds, in the

form of government stocks, bonds, exchequer bills,

rentes, or even good mercantile bills, sufficient to

establish the perfect solvency of the firm. If a

considerable margin be left, it may seem impossible

that the notes should not ultimately be paid. To argue

in this way, however, is to forget that banknotes are

promises to pay gold or legal tender metallic money on

demand, and that to pay the notes ultimately is not to

pay them on demand. With such a reserve, payment

can only be made in any large quantity by selling the

stocks and bonds for metallic money; but it is just

when there is a scarcity of gold and silver, that notes

are presented for payment. No doubt good government

funds and good bills can always be sold at some price,

so that a banking firm with a strong reserve of this kind

might always maintain their solvency. But the remedy

might be worse for the community than the disease,

and the forced sale of the reserve might create such a

disturbance in the money market as would do more

harm than the suspension of payment of the notes.Payment of notes on demand implies the possession of

adequate gold and silver, and if there be not sufficient

bullion and coin in the country, no paper documents, or

promises to pay at a future day, can take their place.

 

XVIII.27

 

8. Real Property Reserve.

 



Many currency theorists have held, that in securing the

repayment of notes we need not restrict ourselves to a

single commodity gold, but may mortgage for the

purpose, land, houses, or any kind of fixed real

property. The celebrated scheme of John Law was of

this nature. In his remarkable tract on "Money and

Trade Considered, with a Proposal for Supplying the

Nation with Money," published in 1705, he suggests

that commissioners should be appointed to "coin" notes

"to be received in payment where offered," that is, I

presume, as legal tender. He sets forth three alternative

modes of issuing these notes on land security, the first

and simplest being to lend them to landowners at the

ordinary interest, to the extent of one-half or two-thirds

of the value. He endeavours to provide against

depreciation of the notes by taking care that the pricesare always estimated in silver money.

 

            XVIII.28 The assignats of the French

Revolutionary Government represented land assigned,

namely, portions of the confiscated estates of the

Church. They were to be received back and cancelled

as the lands were bought by the public; but, as the price

of the land was not fixed, no proportion was

established between land and paper, and no amount of

land could prevent the assignats from falling as they

did to one two-hundredth part of their original value. In

the subsequent issue of Mandats, an attempt was made

to fix the price of land in mandats, but this scheme also

failed. The inconvertible land mortgage notes, issued

by Frederick the Great to recruit his treasury exhausted

by wars, were of somewhat the same nature, but bore

interest.

 

            XVIII.29 Land is doubtless one of the best

kinds of security for the ultimate repayment of a debt,

and is therefore very suitable when money is lent for a

long time. But representative bank-notes purport to be

equivalent to gold payable on demand, and nothing is

less readily convertible into gold on an emergency than

land. In this respect a reserve of real property is worse

than a reserve of exchequer bills or consols. 

            XVIII.30 This method of providing paper

money has generally been advocated on the ground that

the quantity of money in circulation might thus be

greatly increased, and the wealth of the nation

augmented. It could readily be shown, however, that an

increase of the money in circulation will lead to a

reduction in its value. In any given state of industry

only a certain quantity of circulating medium is

needed, and were the notes really convertible into

definite quantities of land or any other substantial

commodity, the excess of notes would ultimately be

presented for payment. To suppose that the currency

could be made equal in aggregate value to any large

part of the lands of the country is evidently absurd.

 

XVIII.31

 

9. Regulation by the Foreign Exchanges.

 



A theory was very much in favour among bank

directors at the beginning of this century that a paper

currency could be regulated merely by watching the

rates of the foreign exchanges, and restricting the issue

when the lowness of the rates and the export of specieshowed a depreciation of the paper. This was one of

the methods proposed in opposition to the celebrated

Bullion Report, and a summary of the interminable

discussions on the subject will be found in Mr.

Macleod's Treatise on Banking, Vol. II. Chapter

IX.

 

            XVIII.32 Regulation by the foreign exchanges

is much better than no regulation at all, but if perfectly

carried out it would give exactly the same results as the

deposit method, and is only a loose and indirect way of

reaching the same end.

 

XVIII.33

 

10. Free Issue System.

 



There is a school of economists, both in this country

and America, who uphold the expediency of allowing

all persons to issue as many promissory notes payable

on demand as they can get other persons to accept.

They call this system the Free Banking system, but

incorrectly, because it is no necessary function of a

banker to issue promissory notes, and a great many

banks exist in England without any power of issue.This subject will be further discussed in a subsequent

chapter, and I will only add here that under the system

of unrestricted issue, a banker is bound by law to pay a

note issued by him, but is left entirely at his own

discretion to keep such balance of specie for the

purpose as he may think proper. As a general rule, no

doubt, notes thus issued will be paid; but, having

regard to the great fluctuations of commerce, which are

becoming more, rather than less marked, there will

occur periods when a pressure for payment of notes

will be made. Experience abundantly shows that a

certain number of individuals will calculate too

confidently on their good fortune, and fail to carry out

their promises and intention when the critical time

arrives.

 

XVIII.34

 

11. The Gold Par Method.

 



Assuming an inconvertible paper currency to be issued,

and to be entirely in the hands of government, many of

the evils of such a system might be avoided if the issue

were limited or reduced the moment that the price of

gold in paper rose above par. As long as the notes andthe gold coins which they pretend to represent circulate

on a footing of equality, they are as good as if

convertible. Since the beginning of the Franco-Prussian

war, the Bank of France appears to have acted

successfully on this principle, and the inconvertible

notes were never depreciated more than about 1/2 or 1

per cent. in spite of the vast political and financial

troubles of France. But this is one of the very few cases

in which inconvertible paper currency has not been

seriously depreciated. During the restriction of specie

payments in England, gold was bought and sold at a

premium varying up to 25 per cent., yet Fox,

Vansittart, and other leading men of the time, declared

it to be absurd to suppose that paper was depreciated.

So unaccountable are the prejudices of men on the

subject of currency that it is not well to leave anything

to discretionary management.

 

XVIII.35

 

12. Convertibility by Revenue Payments.

In many instances governments have tried to maintain

the value of a paper circulation by engaging to receive

it as taxes, or even rendering its use for this purpose

obligatory. The Russian government when issuing

assignats received them at a fixed rate in place ofcopper coin, and required that at least one-twentieth

part of every payment was to be thus paid. The French

assignats of the Revolution were also received at the

public treasuries. This would be a fair method of

securing stability of value on two conditions:-(1) that

the taxes or charges were themselves levied according

to a fixed tariff; and (2) that the quantity of notes

issued was kept within such moderate limits that any

one wishing to realize the metallic value of the notes

could find some one wanting to pay taxes, and

therefore willing to give coin for notes. It is very

unlikely, however, that these conditions could ever be

fully and conveniently realized in practice.

 

            XVIII.36 The United States greenback

currency was made receivable for all United States

stamps, and was also to be received in payment of all

taxes and dues in sums of certain assigned amounts,

excepting Customs dues. But the fact that some notes

are thus withdrawn will not prevent depreciation, if

they be soon paid out again with additions required to

meet the pressing expenditure of a government.

 

            XVIII.37 In a small way postage stamps are

becoming used as currency in several countries. They

were extensively used in the earlier years of theAmerican war as the well-known fractional currency.

They are now a recognized medium of payment in

England, being repurchased by most postmasters at a

discount of 21/2 per cent. if presented in a piece of two

or more undivided stamps. Independently, however, of

repurchase, stamps are so continually being cancelled

by use in postage, that their value can hardly be

lowered by excess of quantity. They form a convenient

and costless form of remittance for very small sums,

say from a halfpenny to five shillings, and little or no

objection can be made to their occasional use as

change, in place of pence. They would, however, form

a very bad currency if circulated to any great extent.

 

XVIII.38

 

13. Deferred Convertibility.

 



It is a common resource for insurrectionary or

belligerent governments in want of funds to issue

documents promising to pay cash after their successful

establishment. When interest proportional to the time is

also promised, these notes must be regarded rather as

bonds. Of such nature were those issued by Kossuth in

New York to form a Hungarian fund, to be paid afterthe erection of an independent Hungarian government.

Similar bonds were signed by the notorious Walker, as

President of the provisional government of the republic

of Nicaragua. By far the best instance of this kind of

currency is furnished by the Confederate States

treasury notes, the early issues of which were made

payable six months after the ratification of a treaty of

peace with the United States, and further issues were to

be payable two years after such treaty.

 

            XVIII.39 All such documents may be

considered as bills of very long date and of very

uncertain value. The public spirit of a people in time of

war often enables them to be put afloat, and the need of

currency keeps them in circulation for a time, but their

value undergoes violent variations, and there are few

instances in which such bills have been eventually

paid.

XVIII.40

 

14. Inconvertible Paper Money.

 



Finally we come to the undisguised paper money

issued by government and ordered to be received as

legal tender. Such inconvertible paper notes have in allinstances been put in circulation as convertible ones, or

in the place of such, and they are always expressed in

terms of money. The French mandats of 100 francs, for

instance, bear the ambiguous phrase "Bon pour cent

francs." The wretched scraps of paper which circulate

in Buenos Ayres, are marked "Un Peso, Moneda

Corriente," reminding one of the time when the peso

was a heavy standard coin. After the promise of

payment in coin is found to be illusory the notes still

circulate, partly from habit, partly because the people

must have some currency, and have no coin to use for

the purpose, or if they have, carefully hoard it for profit

or future use. There is plenty of evidence to prove that

an inconvertible paper money, if carefully limited in

quantity, can retain its full value. Such was the case

with the Bank of England notes for several years after

the suspension of specie payments in 1797, and such is

the case with the present notes of the Bank of France.

 

            XVIII.41 The principal objections to an

inconvertible paper currency are two in number.

 


1. The great temptations which it offers to over issue

      andconsequent depreciation.

2. The impossibility of varying its amount in    accordance with therequirements of trade.


XVIII.42

 

Over Issue of Paper Money.

 



It is hardly requisite to tell again the well-worn tale of

the over issue of paper money which has almost always

followed the removal of the legal necessity of

convertibility. Hardly any civilized nation exists,

excepting some of the newer British colonies, which

has not suffered from the scourge of paper money at

one time or other. Russia has had a depreciated paper

currency for more than a hundred years, and the history

of it may be read in

M. Wolowski's work on the finances of Russia.

Repeated limits were placed to its issue by imperial

edict, but the next war always led to further issues.

Italy, Austria, and the United States, countries where

the highest economical intelligence might be expected

to guide the governments, endure the evils of an

inconvertible paper currency. Time after time in the

earlier history of New England and some of the other

states now forming parts of the American Union, paper

money had been issued and had wrought ruin. Full

particulars will be found in Professor Sumner's newand interesting "History of American Currency." Some

of the greatest statesmen pointed to these results; and

Webster's opinion should never be forgotten. Of paper

money he says, "We have suffered more from this

cause than from every other cause or calamity. It has

killed more men, pervaded and corrupted the choicest

interests of our country more, and done more injustice

than even the arms and artifices of our enemy."

 

            XVIII.43 The issue of an inconvertible money,

as Professor Sumner remarks, has often been

recommended as a convenient means of making a

forced loan from the people, when the finances of the

government are in a desperate condition. It is true that

money may be thus easily abstracted from the people,

and the government debts are effectually lessened. At

the same time, however, every private debtor is

enabled to take a forced contribution from his creditor.

A government should, indeed, be in a desperate

position, which ventures thus to break all social

contracts and relation which it was created to preserve.

 

XVIII.44

 

Want of Elasticity of Paper Money.

 A further objection to a paper money inconvertible into

coin, is that it cannot be varied in quantity by the

natural action of trade. No one can export it or import it

like coin, and no one but the government or banks

authorized by government can issue or cancel it.

Hence, if trade becomes brisk, nothing but a decree of

the government can supply the requisite increase of

circulating medium, and if this be put afloat and trade

relapse into dullness, the currency becomes redundant,

and falls in value. Now, even the best-informed

government department cannot be trusted to judge

wisely and impartially when more money is wanted.

Currency must be supplied, like all other commodities,

according to the free action of the laws of supply and

demand.

 

            XVIII.45 Some persons have argued that it is

well to have a paper money to form a home currency,

which cannot be drained away, and will be free from

the disturbing influences of foreign trade. But we

cannot disconnect home and foreign trade, except by

doing away with the latter altogether. If two nations are

to trade, the precious metals must form the

international medium of exchange by which a balance

of indebtedness is paid. Hence each merchant in

ordering, consigning, or selling goods must pay regardnot to the paper price of such goods, but to the gold or

silver price with which he really pays for them. Gold

and silver, in short, continue to be the real measure of

value, and the variable paper currency is only an

additional term of comparison which adds confusion.

 

XVIII.46

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 









Chapter XIX Credit Documents

 



Much mystery has been created on the subject ofmoney by those who assert vaguely that credit can

replace coins, and that we have only to print sufficient

bills and other promissory documents in order to have

an abundant circulating medium. Credit has been said

to multiply property and to perform all hinds of

prodigies.

When we analyze its nature, however, credit is found

to be nothing but the deferring of a payment. I take

credit when I induce my creditor to consent to my

paying a month hence what might be demanded to-day;

and I give credit when I allow my debtor in the same

manner to put off the liquidation of his debt. Thus

credit involves, as Locke very accurately said, "the

expectation of money within some limited time." The

debts, indeed, may consist of a definite quantity of any

commodity. I may have to pay corn, pig iron, palm oil,

cotton, or any other staple article, but, generally

speaking, debts are debts of legal tender money.

 

XIX.1

 

Measurement of Credit.

 



In order to measure and define exactly the amount of

credit which is given or received, and to estimate thepresent value of a debt, we must take into account at

least five distinct circumstances, which are as follows:-

 


1. The amount of money to be received.

2. The probable interval of time elapsing before its

    receipt.

3. The probability that it will then be paid.

4. The rate of interest likely to prevail in the mean

    time.

5. The legal liabilities which it creates or involves.

 


            XIX.2 Writers upon currency have been too

much accustomed to mass together all kinds of credit

documents, taking no account of the important results

which may follow from very slight legal or customary

differences. No doubt every kind of promise to pay

money has a certain value, but the degree in which it

may be made available to facilitate exchange varies

exceedingly according to circumstances.

 

XIX.3

 

Bank-notes.

 What we call a bank-note is a promissory note, issued

by a banker, and binding him to pay the sum named

therein to the bearer immediately upon demand. The

note is transferable by delivery, so that the holder is

like the holder of a coin, the owner primâ facie, and as

such can claim the fulfilment of the promise at any

moment, within reasonable hours, without inquiry. The

failure of the banker to pay the note when presented

does not create any liability between the persons

through whose hands the note had previously passed,

so that the note is continually employed, like metallic

money, in settling debts and removing liabilities. It is

most important to observe that a bank-note being

payable on demand bears no interest, and is never

bought at a discount, except when the ultimate

payment is doubtful. Hence the holder of a note has,

like the holder of ordinary coins, no motive in keeping

it, except to make future purchases. If a man has more

notes than he expects to pay away in the next week or

two, he will do best to deposit them in a bank, where

they will be safer and at the same time bear interest.

There is thus an inherent tendency in notes to circulate

like coins, and to be kept down in amount to the lowest

quantity consistent with the accomplishment of retail

purchases.

 XIX.4

 

Cheques.

A cheque payable to bearer is an order addressed to a

banker, requiring him to pay the sum named to the

bearer of the cheque on demand. Like a bank-note, it

bears no interest, and is transferable from hand to hand

without any formality, so that the holder is primâ facie

the owner. If there be no doubt at all as to the credit

both of the drawer and of the bank on which the

cheque is drawn, it is difficult to see why a cheque

should be inferior to a bank-note as representative

money, except that it is usually drawn for an odd sum.

In some places cheques have been so used, and in

Queensland at the present time, in the absence of coins

and notes, the settlers pay their men in small bank

cheques, which are received at the stores, and thus

become the circulating medium of the colony. Obvious

objections to this use of cheques may be pointed out.

 

            XIX.5 It is impossible to be acquainted with

the cheque forms of all banks, the signatures of those

who draw them, and the credit of the drawers. If the

public were in the habit of daily receiving and paying

cheques without minutely inquiring into their validity,

immense facilities would be given to the perpetrationof fraud. Forgery would be easy but hardly requisite,

since it would be better to obtain possession of a

cheque book, and then fill up cheques for amounts

exceeding the deposits in the banker's hands. Every one

accepting a cheque thus receives it at the risk of fraud

or bankruptcy on the part of the drawer. There is,

moreover, the possibility of failure of the bank on

which it is drawn; for it is a well-understood point of

law, that if the holder of a cheque does not present it in

"reasonable time," that is before the close of business

hours on the day following the receipt of the cheque,

he loses his claim against the drawer, if the bank on

which it is drawn should happen to fail. The reason

obviously is that the drawer loses the deposit which he

left in the banker's hands to meet the cheque, and

should not suffer from the holder's want of diligence.

 

            XIX.6 The salutary effect of this law and of

other conditions is, that cheques do not circulate in this

kingdom in place of money, but are usually presented

within one or two days of receipt. Hence they come to

serve as mere instruments of transfer of money, and

involve no considerable length of credit. Nothing can

be gained by holding an ordinary cheque, for there is

no interest, and something may be lost. Beyond the

mere trouble of presentation, then, there is no motive toprevent a holder from at once getting coin or bank-

notes for his cheque which, though paying no interest,

are safer. Or still better, he may deposit the sum at his

bankers, get a low interest in the mean tune, and draw a

new cheque of his own when he wishes to pay the

money away again. Experience shows that the latter is

the most satisfactory course, the money being usually

safer and more available in the hands of a good banker

than elsewhere, and usually paying interest all the time.

On this foundation is erected the extensive system of

payment which will be described in the next chapter,

and which may be called the Cheque and Clearing

System.

 

            XIX.7 There are, indeed, many varieties of

cheques. Bankers' cheques are those drawn by one

banker upon another, and are used as a means of

remittance. If both the bankers concerned are of perfect

credit, and the form and signature can be verified, such

cheques seem to me to be in no way inferior to bank-

notes as representative money. If two perfectly well-

known banks were to arrange to draw cheques upon

each other for convenient even amounts, and to issue

these to their customers, it would effect a successful

evasion of the law against the unlimited issue of notes.

So great however is the force of habit, or the respectfor law, that no such attempt is made, and bankers'

cheques are presented almost as promptly as any

others.

 

            XIX.8 Certified cheques, as employed in the

New York trade, are a still nearer approach to a bank-

note, for they are cheques which have been marked by

the bankers on which they are drawn, as sure to be paid

on presentation. Either the banker in certifying the

cheque has funds belonging to the drawer which he can

retain to meet it, or else he pledges his own credit that

he will meet the cheque in any case. Such cheques are

really promissory notes of the banker, and I can see no

reasons why they should not circulate as freely as

bank-notes, except that they are drawn for odd sums,

and present few safeguards against forgery. The

cheques of the Cheque Bank, which will be

subsequently considered (Chapter XXII.), are

equivalent to certified cheques, as they cannot be

issued except against deposits which are retained until

the cheque is presented.

 

            XIX.9 Of late years the practice has become

very general of making cheques payable to order

instead of to bearer, and of crossing them so as to

necessitate their presentation through a banker. Theorder may, indeed, be discharged by an open

endorsement, which renders the cheque again payable

to bearer, but there remains the possibility of a forged

endorsement, concerning which difficult points of law

have arisen. A general crossing need not interfere

appreciably with the circulation of a cheque, but when

crossed specifically for presentation through a

particular bank, the cheque becomes practically an

order to credit a particular individual, who keeps his

account in that bank, with the sum of money named.

 

XIX.10

 

Bills of Exchange.

A bill of exchange is an order to a person to pay money

to the legal holder of the document on a day indicated

therein. If payable at sight, a bill does not apparently

differ from a cheque or draft to order, except that it will

be usually drawn upon persons of less credit than well-

known bankers. If not payable at sight, the length of

time intervening between the day named for payment

and the day of issue may vary from a day or two

upwards, and the money cannot be demanded in the

mean time. Hence a bill generally bears interest, or

rather is only bought at such a discount as will enable it

to be held to maturity without loss. To estimate theliability of loss, some estimate must be formed of the

rate of interest likely to prevail in the mean time, and

the value of the bill will thus vary according to a

multitude of circumstances. Bills of exchange may be

made payable to the bearer, but as a general rule they

are payable to a specified person, and transferred by

endorsement to other specified persons. Thus every

party concerned with a bill incurs a certain liability,

which is not removed until it is duly paid. In several

respects, then, a bill may differ from coined money,

which bears no interest, and discharges instead of

creating liability when tendered in payment of debts.

 

XIX.11

 

Interest-bearing Documents.

 



It is extraordinary that few writers on currency have

remarked the deep difference between commercial

documents which bear interest and those which do not.

On this point turns the possibility of their forming

representative money. For it is an essential

characteristic of coin that it yields no profit by keeping

it in the pocket or the safe. I may be obliged to keep

money ready to pay debts, but in the mean time I losethe interest which I might receive by investing the sum

in the funds, in bills, bonds, or even as a bank deposit.

Hence money must be considered as a commodity

which, as Chevalier says, is in a constant state of

supply and demand. Every one is always trying to part

with it in a profitable purchase, and keeps as little in

hand as possible. The same is even more true of bank-

notes, cheques, circular notes, bills at sight, and a few

other kinds of documents, all of which are payable on

demand at any moment, so that no amount of interest

can be assigned to them. Except so far as the payment

may be doubtful, or the possession of the documents

may involve the holder in legal difficulties, these

documents have the characteristics of coin, and the

amount held is kept down to the lowest convenient

figure. Interest-bearing documents, on the contrary, are

held in as large quantities as possible, because the

longer they are held the more interest accrues. It is the

principal business of every banker to hold a portfolio

full of good bills, which really represent the investment

of capital in industry. Government bonds, or bonds

issued by public companies and corporations, do not

differ from commercial bills except in the fact that they

have very long, or even interminable, usance, and that

the interest is paid at definite intervals. Such bonds

represent the sinking of capital in fixed undertakings,and are therefore held as property by individual

investors. They may be bought and sold for money, but

are not money themselves. They rather necessitate than

replace the use of money, since currency must have

been paid at the first investment, and is repaid by

degrees at the periodical terms fixed.

 

            XIX.12 A number of schemists have urged

from time to time, that, in addition to our ordinary

currency, there ought to be an interest-bearing

currency. The first small issue of the French assignats

bore interest, and about twelve years ago the United

States government tried a similar experiment, which

was soon discontinued. Persons have proposed to coin

the whole National Debt into money, so that instead of

some 160 millions of metallic and paper currency we

might have more nearly a thousand millions. Mr. E.

Hill has published a form of bank-note entitling the

holder to one hundred pounds on demand, and to

interest at the rate of 3 1/3 per cent. up to the time

when it is presented, the amount of interest being

tabularly stated on the form. It is obviously impossible,

however, that any government should issue such notes,

because whenever the current rate of interest rose

above 3 1/3, and the value of the note accordingly fell

below par, a profit would be made by presenting thenotes for payment. Thus the government issuing such

notes would have to keep a large quantity of coin in

reserve to meet them, and would at the same time be

paying interest on the whole of the notes. Thus there

would be a loss of interest upon the whole reserve of

coin.

 

            XIX.13 The English government has rendered

the National Debt as transferable as possible by

authorizing, in terms of the Act of 33 and 34 Victoria,

chapter 71, the issue of stock certificates. These

certificates resemble the bonds of the United States and

other governments. They have coupons for the

payment of interest, and when not filled up with a

name are transferable by delivery like bank notes. They

are issued in exchange for Three Per Cent Annuities

for even sums of not less than £50 and not more than

£1000; and if the right to an annuity could be passed

from one person to another as currency, these

certificates would allow of its being done. But it is

understood that a comparatively small amount of such

certificates has ever been applied for. They are, I

believe, used to some extent by bankers and others,

who have to hold sums of money invested in the funds

for short periods, and can save the cost of transfers by

the use of certificates. The public at large are found toprefer the old method of registering their stock in the

books of the Bank of England.

 

XIX.14

 

Definition of Money.

 



Much ingenuity has been spent upon attempts to define

the term money, and puzzling questions have arisen as

to the precise kinds of credit documents which are to

be included under the term. Standard legal tender coin

of full weight is undoubtedly money, and as

convertible legal tender banknotes are exactly

equivalent to the coined money for which they may at

any moment be exchanged, it has often been

considered that these also may be included. But

inconvertible notes are often made legal tender by law,

and can discharge in inland trade all the functions of

money. Are they not then to be included? The question

will next arise whether cheques may not be as good as

money.

 

            XIX.15 All such attempts at definition seem to

me to involve the logical blunder of supposing that we

may, by settling the meaning of a single word, avoid allthe complex differences and various conditions of

many things, each requiring its own definition. Bullion,

standard coin, token coin, convertible and inconvertible

notes, legal tender and not legal tender, cheques of

several kinds, mercantile bills, exchequer bills, stock

certificates, etc., are all things capable of being

received in payment of a debt, if the debtor is willing to

pay and the creditor to receive them; but they are,

nevertheless, different kinds of things. By calling some

money and some not, we do not save ourselves from

the consideration of their complex legal and

economical differences. Bullion is evidently not coin,

but can be turned into it at little or no cost, and will

make foreign payments almost as well as coin. Token

coins are not standard coins, and will not make foreign

payments, but are legal tender for small sums, and may

be readily exchanged for standard coin at little or no

loss. Bank of England notes are not exactly coin, but

can be readily turned into coin by those who dwell near

the Bank of England, and are received as equivalent to

coin by other persons. Cheques are not coin, but orders

to receive it on demand, and are valuable in proportion

to the probability that the sum will be received.

Accepted bills are an engagement to pay coin at a day

named; if we overlook the possible failure of the

acceptor to pay them, they are, as it were, deferredmoney. A certificate of consolidated stock entitles the

holder to an annuity, that is, to quarterly sums of

money.

 

            XIX.16 We get back, in short, to that with

which we started. Standard legal tender coin is that in

which all commercial transactions and documents are

expressed, but according to infinitely various

circumstances, the receipt of the money is more or less

probable, more or less deferred, more or less involved

in legal complexities, and also variable in amount, as

interest is or is not to be received in addition. All other

commercial property, mortgage deeds, preference

shares and bonds, and ordinary shares, resolve

themselves into more or less probability of receiving

coin at future dates; and thus we pass insensibly from

the golden sovereign in hand to the most flimsy chance

of receiving gold which is still like the bird in the bush.

 

            XIX.17 The word cash is used with exactly the

same ambiguity as money. Originally cash meant that

which was encaissé, i.e. put into the chest or till.

Strictly speaking, it should consist of actual specie, and

the word is used in some English banks to include only

coin of the realm. But I find by actual inquiry that bank

cashiers use it with every shade of meaning. Some takeBank of England notes to be cash. Good cheques upon

a bank paid into that bank are evidently as good as

cash. Others go so far as to include cheques upon other

banks of the same town, and even country banknotes

are sometimes included in cash. The question is

evidently one of degree, and cannot be settled except

by the general adoption among cashiers of some one

arbitrary line of definition.

 

            XIX.18 In ordinary life we use a great many

words with a total disregard of logical precision. Who

shall decide, for instance, what objects are to be

included under the names building and house? Let the

reader attempt to decide which of the following objects

is to be considered a house, and why?-namely, stables,

cow-houses, conservatories, sheds, lighthouses, tents,

caravans, hulks, sentry-boxes, icehouses,

summerhouses, and parish pounds. The difficulty is

exactly analogous to that of deciding what is money or

cash.

 

XIX.19

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and theMechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search Chapter XX Book Credit and the

Banking System

 



Considerable economy of the precious metals arises, as

we have seen, from passing about pieces of paper

representing gold coin, instead of the coin itself. But a

far more potent source of economy is what we may call

the Cheque and Clearing System, whereby debts are,

not so much paid, as balanced off against each other.

The germ of the method is to be found in the ordinary

practice of book credit. If two firms have frequent

transactions with each other, alternately buying and

selling, it would be an absurd waste of money to settle

each debt immediately it arose, when, in a few days, a

corresponding debt might arise in the opposite

direction. Accordingly, it is the common practice for

firms having reciprocal transactions, to debit and credit

each other in their books with the debt arising out of

each transaction, and only to make a cash paymentwhen the balance happens to become inconveniently

great. An insurance broker is one who acts as a

middleman between the owners of ships and the

underwriters who insure them in shares. He has

therefore to make many small payments to

underwriters, for the premiums on policies, and at

intervals has to receive back the indemnity for any

insured vessel which has been lost. It is the common

practice to avoid cash payments; the broker credits the

underwriters with the premiums and debits him with

losses, and only pays or receives the balance when

large.

 

XX.1

To represent the highly complex system of book credit

which is organized by the bankers of a large kingdom,

we shall have to employ a method of diagramatic

notation. I will therefore remark that the simplest case

or type of book-credit is represented by the formula

 



P -- Q.

 

Each of the letters, P and Q, indicates a person or a

firm, and the line indicates the existence of transactions

between them. Only in special cases, however, will thisdirect balancing of accounts render the use of cash or

of a more complex system unnecessary. Generally

speaking, there will be a tendency for a surplus of

goods to pass in one direction, so that money must pass

in the opposite direction. The manufacturer sells to the

wholesale dealer, the hatter sells to the retailer, and the

retails retailer to the consumer. By the intervention of

the banker, however, the transactions of many different

individuals, or even of many branches of trade, are

brought to a focus, and a large proportion of payments

can be balanced off against each other.

 

XX.2

 

Single Bank System.

 



To obtain a clear notion of the way in which bankers

help us to avoid the use of money as the medium of

exchange, we must follow up the rise of the system

from the simplest case to the complete development of

the complex organization now existing in the United

Kingdom. Let us imagine, in the first place, that there

is an isolated town having no appreciable dealings with

other parts of the world, and possessing only a single

bank, in which each inhabitant has deposited all hismoney. If any person a, then, wishes to make a

payment to b, he need not go to his banker, draw out

coin, and carry it to b, but may hand to b a cheque

requiring the banker to pay the coins to b, if needed.

But if b makes payments in the same way, he will not

need to draw out any coin. It would be a mere

formality for b to receive the coin due from a, and then

pay it back over the counter to the credit of his account

with the same banker. The payment is made by merely

writing the sum of money to the debit of a's account,

and to the credit of b's account. If b wishes to make

another payment to c, a similar record in the banker's

ledger will accomplish the business. However many

other traders, d, e, etc., there may be, their mutual

transactions may be settled in the same way, without

their seeing a single coin. We may represent this

elementary banking organization by the following

diagram,

 






in which it is obvious that P represents the single

banker, and a, b, c, d, e, his customers. The deposit

banks of Amsterdam and Hamburg furor perfect

illustrations of this arrangement.

             XX.3 So long as we regard only the internal

transactions of a town, then, a stationary amount of

coin, lying untouched in the bank, will allow the whole

to be accomplished. If the traders never require to

make payments to a distance the metallic money might

be dispensed with altogether. But since any of the

customers a, b, c, etc., may want his money, the banker

ought to keep at least as much as will meet possible

demands.

 

XX.4

System of Two Banks.

 



As a second case, let us suppose that there is a town

which is able to support two banks. Some of the

inhabitants keep their money in one bank and soma in

the other, but all whom it is requisite to consider have

an account with one or the other. In the diagram,

 






let P and Q be the two bankers, a, b, c, d, being

customers of P, and q, r, s, t, customers of Q. Now, the

mutual transactions of a, b, c, d, will, as before, be

balanced off in the books of P, and similarly with thecustomers of Q. But if a has to make a payment to q,

the operation becomes somewhat more complex. He

draws a cheque upon P, and hands it to q, who may, of

course, demand the coin from P. Not wanting coin, he

carries the cheque to his own banker, Q, and pays it in

to his account in place of coin. It is the banker, Q, who

will now have to present the cheque upon P, and it

might seem as if the use of coin would be ultimately

required. There will be other persons, however, making

payments in the town in the same manner, and the

probability is very great that some of these will result

in giving P cheques upon Q, and some in giving Q

cheques upon P. The two bankers, then, will be in the

position of the two traders before described (p. 251),

who have a running account. At the worst the payment

to be made in coin will be only the balance of what is

due in opposite directions; but as this balance will

probably tend in one direction one day, and in the

opposite direction the next day, the balance need only

be paid when it assumes inconvenient proportions.

 

XX.5

Complex Bank System.

 



A large commercial town usually possesses several ormany banks, each with its distinct body of customers.

The mutual transactions of each body will, as before,

be balanced off in the books of their common bank, but

the larger part of the transactions will now be cross

ones, resulting in a claim by one banker upon another.

The probability is very great, indeed, that each banker

will have to receive, as well as to pay, each day; but it

does not follow that he will pay to the same as those

who are going to pay to him. The complexity of

relations becomes considerable; thus among fourteen

banks there are (14 × 13)/2 or 91 different pairs which

may have mutual claims, and among fifty banks there

would be no less than 1225 pairs. The result is, that P

might happen to have a considerable balance to pay to

Q, and yet might be going to receive about the same

sum from R or S. The actual carrying about of coin

under such circumstances would be absurd, because a

manifest extension of the book-credit system at once

meets the difficulty. The several banks need only agree

to appoint, as it were, a bankers' bank, to hold a portion

of the cash of each bank, and then the mutual

indebtedness may be balanced off just as when a bank

acts for individuals. In the figure we see four banks, P,

Q, R, S, each with its own body of customers, but

brought into connection with each other by the bankers'

bank, X. 






P need not now send a clerk to present bundles of

cheques upon Q, R, and S, but can pay them into the

central bank, X, where after being placed to the credit

of P and sorted out, they will be joined to similar

parcels of cheques received from Q, R, S, and finally

presented at the banks upon which they are drawn.

Thus all the payments made by cheques will be

effected without the use of coin, just as if there were

only a single bank in the town. What each bank has to

pay each day will usually be balanced pretty closely by

what it has to receive. Such balance as remains will be

paid by a transfer in the books of X, the bankers' bank.

 

            XX.6 It is not precisely true that there is in any

English town a bankers' bank, which thus arranges the

payments between banks. The accountants' part of the

work is carried out by an institution called the Clearing

House, managed by a committee of bankers, and the

Bank of England is employed to hold the deposits of

the bankers, and make transfers which close the

transactions of each day. The organization of the

Clearing Douse will be described in the next chapter.

 XX.7

 

Branch Bank System.

 



It is impossible to avoid perceiving that the

organization of the English bank system is undergoing

a complete transformation, and is approximating to that

which has existed for a century or more in Scotland.

Instead of a great number of small, weak, disconnected

banks, there is arising, by amalgamation and extinction

of the weaker ones, a moderate number of important

banks, each possessing numerous branches. The Scotch

banks have long had many branches, and at present

each of the eleven great banks has on the average 78

branches, the lowest number being 19, and the highest

125. Already a few of the English banks have equally

extensive ramifications. Thus the London and County

Bank, and the National Provincial Bank, which have

especially developed the branch system, have

respectively 148 and 137 branches; the Manchester and

Liverpool District Bank has 50 branches and sub-

branches. The Irish banks also adopt the same system,

and the National Bank of Ireland has about 114

branches and sub-branches. It is interesting to observe

that in Australia, too, the banking system has taken asimilar form, and a comparatively small number of

strong banks, such as the Bank of New South Wales, or

the Bank of New Zealand, leave no rising village

without its branch.

 


XX.8

Now, the close connection which exists between the

head office and each of the branches of an extensive

bank leads to a great clearing off of claims. The

diagram on p. 256 again serves to represent this

relation, X being the head office, P, Q, R, S, branch

banks, and a, b, c, etc., customers. If a pay m with a

cheque on P, the cheque will be paid into R, credited to

m, forwarded by post direct to P, and debited to a. The

head office, being informed of this transaction in the

usual daily statement, will close the business by

transferring the sum from the account of P to that of


R.

 

    Much accountants' work seems to arise, but it is

    work of mereroutine which costs little. Cash

      remittances are seldom necessary, because each

    branch settles accounts only with the head office, so

    that many sums will be credited and debited during

    each week, and the balance will usually be small.    The head office, in fact, acts in every way like a

    clearing house, or bankers' bank.

 

            XX.9 The question naturally arises, indeed,

how will the branches of one bank transact business

with those of another bank? The solution, however, is

simple; for unless the branches happen to be in the

same town, or for other reason, in close relation with

each other, they will communicate through their head

offices. A cheque upon any branch of the London and

County Bank received by a branch of the National

Provincial Bank, will be presented through the head

office of the latter at the Clearing House upon the head

office of the former.

 

XX.10

 

Bank Agency System.

 



Another important feature of the banking system is the

extensive organization of agencies. A large bank has

various business to be transacted in each of the

principal commercial towns of the kingdom, and if it

has no branches in these towns employs a banker in

each town to act as its agent. This agent-bank collectscheques, bills, notes, etc., payable in the district, cashes

drafts drawn against them, retires bills according to

instructions, and does almost all that a branch bank

would do, the main difference being that the

remuneration for this work consists of a commission.

Each agent-bank has a running account with its

principal, so that to a certain extent each important

bank and its agencies form a clearing system analogous

to that of a head bank and its branches.

 

XX.11

 

London Agency System.

 



By insensible degrees there has grown up in England

an all-comprehensive and most perfect system of

relations between the provincial and London city

banks. Every banker in the United Kingdom, without, I

believe, any exception, employs one or other of the

great London city banks to act as agent. There are

twenty-six city clearing banks which thus undertake

agencies, and on an average, each of these banks

represents at least twelve country banks; but the

number varies very much, and some country banks

have two London agent-banks.

             XX.12 This agency system leads at once to a

clearing of transactions, because, if any two country

banks have the same London agent, all their mutual

adjustments of accounts can be made by transfers in

the books of the agent. The diagram on p. 256 applies

for a third time, and X represents the city agent, having

running accounts with P, Q, R, S, the country banks.

The whole of the customers of all the banks, having the

same London agent, are thus brought into close

relation, though they may live in the most distant parts

of the country. Each of the city banks maybe regarded

as a bankers' bank and a clearing house on a small

scale.

 

XX.13

 

Country Clearing System.

 



Only one further step is required to complete the

system of connections between each bank in the

kingdom and all other banks. Every country bank, as

we have seen, has a running account with some city

bank, and all the city banks daily settle transactions

with each other through the Clearing House. It follows

that payment from any part of the country to any otherpart can be accomplished through London. In the

following diagram, let P, Q, R be country banks having

the London agent, X, and U, V, W, other country banks

having the London agent, Y.

If a, a customer of P, wishes to pay r, a customer of U,

he transmits by post a cheque upon his banker, P. The

receiver, r, pays it into his account with U, who having

no direct communication with P, forwards it to Y, who

presents it through the Clearing House on X, who

debits it to P, and forwards it by the next post. Nothing

can exceed the simplicity and perfection of this

arrangement.

 

            XX.14 It will be readily seen, too, that sums of

money passing between London banks, or rather

cleared off in the Lombard Street Clearing House, will

frequently be the balances of extensive running

accounts between country banks and their agents and

correspondents. So long as the balance of accounts

between any two banks does not assume large

proportions, it need not be paid in cash at all, except

for special reasons. When a balance has to be paid, and

the banks happen to have the same London agent, it is

only requisite for the debtor bank to direct their

London agent to transfer so much money to the credit

of the other country bank. If they have differentLondon agents, and P, in the last diagram, desires to

pay a balance to U, it is done by directing X to credit

Y, the agent of U. The credit note effecting this

payment passes through the Clearing House, amid a

mass of other documents representing payments in one

direction or the other, and will, in general, become an

insignificant item in the general clearing. If it can be

said to be paid in cash at all, it is in the form of a final

transfer in the books of the Bank of England, as we

shall see. Great as are the transactions daily settled in

the London Clearing House, they are after all only

those which have not been previously cleared off by

any more direct communication, and they often

represent the balances of multitudinous transactions

which never pass through London at all.

 

XX.15

Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 Chapter XXI The Clearing-House System

 



By means of the London agency system, the banking

transactions of the country are, as we have seen,

brought to a focus in the city of London. The

settlement of the reciprocal claims of the twenty-six

principal city banks is therefore a business of the

utmost magnitude and importance, representing as it

does the completion of the business of no small part of

the world. In a room of moderate dimensions, entered

from a narrow passage running from the post-office in

King William Street across to Lombard Street, debts to

the average amount of nearly twenty millions sterling

per day are liquidated without the use of a single coin

or bank-note. In the classic financial neighbourhood of

Lombard Street, and even in this very chamber, the

system of paper commerce has been brought nearly to

perfection. The early history of the London Clearing

House is buried in obscurity, and it is much to be

desired that those who are acquainted with the

principal incidents in its progress should put them on

record before it is too late. 

            XXI.1 The Clearing House appears to have

been first created just a century ago. About the year

1775 a few of the city bankers hired a room where their

clerks could meet to exchange notes and bills, and

settle their mutual debts. The society was of the nature

of a strictly private club, the public knowing nothing

about it, and the transactions being conducted in

perfect secrecy. Mr. Gilbart tells us that, even in this

form, it was regarded as a questionable innovation, and

some of the principal bankers refused to have anything

to do with it. By degrees, however, the convenience of

the arrangement made itself apparent, more bankers

were admitted to the society, and a distinct committee

and set of rules were formed for its management.

Although it remains to the present day a private and

voluntary association, unchartered, and in fact

unknown to the law, the Clearing House has steadily

grown in importance and in the publicity of its

proceedings.

 

            XXI.2 Several important extensions of the

clearing work have been made in the last twenty-five

years. After the rise of the London Joint Stock Banks,

subsequent to 1833, they were for a long time refused

admittance to the Clearing House; but in June, 1854,they were at last allowed to join the association. The

Bank of England long remained entirely outside of the

confederation, but more recently it has become a

member, so far as regards the presentation of claims

upon other banks. The West End banks of London are

still beyond its sphere, partly, perhaps, because their

distance stands in the way of the working of the

system. They are thus in the position of provincial

banks, and can clear through city agents like provincial

banks.

 

            XXI.3 Before the year 1858 the business of the

Clearing House was restricted to the exchange of

cheques and bills actually drawn on the clearing

bankers. Country bankers receiving cheques drawn

upon other distant country banks were in the habit of

remitting them direct by post, the paying bank

effecting the payment by directing their London banker

to pay the amount to the London agent of the receiving

bank. In the year 1858, at the suggestion of Mr.

William Gillett, but chiefly by the exertions of Sir John

Lubbock, the country clearing system was organized.

The country banker, instead of posting many cheques

every day to all parts of the kingdom, sends them in a

single parcel to his London agent, to be presented

through the Clearing House on the London agents ofthe paying banks. This exchange is made, as we shall

see, at different hours of the day, but the results are

summed up in the general balance of the day's

transactions.

 

XXI.4

 

Transaction of Business at the London Clearing House.

 



There are three clearings daily at the Lombard Street

House. The morning clearing opens on ordinary days at

10.30; drafts are received not later than 11, and the

work must be closed at noon. The country clearing then

begins, drafts being received until 12.30, and the

clearing closed at 2.15. The heaviest clearing, however,

is that of the afternoon, which begins at 2.30. The

bustle and turmoil of the work grow to a climax at four

o'clock, the runners rushing in with the last parcels of

drafts, up to the moment when the door is finally

closed. On the fourth day of each month, when the

heaviest work occurs, the hours are extended, the

House opening at nine o'clock.

 

            XXI.5 The Clearing House is a plain oblong

room, with rows of desks in compartments round threesides, and down the middle. A small office for the two

superintendents stands at one end. Each bank sends as

many clerks to the House as may be requisite for the

rapid completion of the work, and some banks have as

many as six clerks. The cheques and bills to be

presented by any one clearing banker, say the Alliance

Bank, upon any other clearing banker, are entered at

home in the "Out-clearing book," and are then sorted

into twenty-five parcels, one of which is to be

presented on each of the other clearing banks. On

reaching the Clearing House, these parcels are

distributed round the room to the desks of the clerks

representing the several paying banks, who

immediately begin to enter them in the "In-clearing

books" in columns bearing at the head the name of the

presenting bank. After being entered, the drafts are, as

soon as possible, forwarded to the banking house for

examination and entry in the bank books. Any cheques

or bills refused payment are called "returns," and can

generally be sent back to the Clearing House the same

day, and entered again as a reverse claim by the bank

dishonouring them on the banks which presented them.

At the close of the day the clerks of the Alliance Bank

are able to add up the whole of the claims which have

been made upon them by the other twenty-five banks,

and they learn from the out-clearing book the amountof the claims which the Alliance Bank is making on

other banks. The difference is the balance which the

Alliance Bank has either to pay or receive as the case

may be. These balances being communicated to the

superintendents of the House are by them inserted in a

kind of balance sheet. When finally added up, the

debtor and creditor sides of the sheet should exactly

balance, because every penny to be received by one

bank must be paid by another.

 

            XXI.6 In former years the balance due by or to

each bank was paid in bank-notes, and in the year

1839, average daily transactions to the amount of about

three millions were cleared by the use of £200,000 in

bank-notes, and £20 in coin, or about one-fifteenth part

of the debts liquidated. More recently a suggestion of

the late Charles Babbage was carried into effect, and

the balances were paid by drafts upon the Bank of

England, in which bank each city banker deposits a

large part of his spare cash.

 

            XXI.7 One ingenious minor arrangement in

the London Clearing House is the division of the whole

list of twenty-six bankers into three groups, in such a

way that one of the clearing clerks of the Alliance

Bank corresponds with one group of the other banks, asecond clerk with the second group, and so on. Thus

when a comparison or correction of accounts is made

between any two banks, it is known precisely which

clerk must answer to the questions called across the

room.

 

            XXI.8 Although the rapid and effective way in

which the settlement is carried out in the London

Clearing House must always excite surprise, it is quite

open to question whether improvements are not

needed. The room did not seem to me large enough for

the convenient and wholesome transaction of such vast

and increasing work. Although some banks employ as

many as six clerks, the pressure is very great at times.

The facility which these clerks acquire by practice in

making and adding up entries is very great, but the

intense head work performed against time, in an

atmosphere far from pure, and in the midst of bustle

and noise arising from the corrections shouted from

one clerk to another across the room, must be

exceedingly trying. Brain disease is occasionally the

consequence.

 

            XXI.9 The question must arise, too, whether

the privilege of clearing is to be for ever restricted to

twenty-six principal city banks, when there arecertainly many other banks existing or being founded

which need the convenience of access to the House. In

New York the clearing circle, as we shall see, is much

wider. At present the minor London banks are forced to

employ the clearing bankers as agents, or to forego the

advantages of the Clearing House altogether. It is

hardly just or possible that a narrow monopoly of the

sort should be maintained for ever.

 

XXI.10

 

Manchester Clearing House.

 



Though the London Clearing House is entirely the

birthplace of the system, and the spot where the work

has been organized on the largest scale, it does not

follow that it is in every respect the most suitable for

imitation in commercial towns of less magnitude. At

least two English provincial towns, Manchester and

Newcastle, have established local clearing horses. The

bankers of Liverpool, also, I am told, have recently

arranged a private system of clearing among

themselves; and it is possible that the bankers of other

towns may have taken a similar step without the fact

becoming generally known. Through the kindness ofsome members of the committee, I have received full

information as to the working of the Manchester

Clearing House. The business seems to have been

arranged, chiefly, I believe, by Mr. E. W. Nix, with

great success, and it may be useful to describe the

arrangements in detail as they would be very suitable

for adoption in many English, foreign, or colonial

towns, which will doubtless before long establish

clearing houses.

 

            XXI.11 In the Manchester Clearing House the

work is performed entirely upon loose forms, and not

in account-books, as in London. Though these forms

may seem rather numerous and elaborate, they greatly

assist in the accurate and orderly settlement of the

balance. The clearing clerk, before leaving his bank,

sorts out the drafts, which he has to deliver, into

thirteen parcels, one for each of the thirteen other

banks, and then fills up thirteen lists, one for each

parcel, in the Form No. 1 shown below, each cheque

being represented only by the amount of money

expressed in it. A copy of the list is entered in one of

the books of the bank provided for the purpose.

             XXI.12 Adding up each such list, he inserts

the totals in one of the left-hand columns of the Form

No. 2. He thus obtains a complete abstract of all the

claims he holds upon other banks, and adding up the

columns ascertains the aggregate "Out-clearing."

 







            XXI.13 On reaching the Clearing House, the

clerk walks round the room and lays on the desk

belonging to each other bank the parcel of cheques and

the corresponding list already described. In the course

of a little time thirteen similar parcels and lists will be

laid on his own desk by the clerks of other banks, and

as they come in he compares the list with the cheques,

verifies the addition, and if all be correct, enters the

amount in one of the right-hand columns of the second

form, against the name of the bank presenting the

drafts. These parcels are called the "In-clearing," and

represent all the claims of other banks upon the one in

question, so that when all the thirteen amounts are

entered, and the columns added up, the clerk learns the

aggregate which his bank will have to pay.

             XXI.14 At Manchester two clearings are held

each day. The first at 11.15

a.m. is a preliminary one only, and no payment of

balances ismade. As soon as the columns for the first

clearing are filled up, the clerk returns to his bank with

the in-clearing parcel of cheques and drafts presented

upon the bank. These documents are immediately

examined by the proper officials in order to detect any

which may be irregular, fraudulent, or, for want of

funds, or other reasons, must be dishonoured. At the

Clearing House the clerk has already made a first

rough inspection, and returned any documents which

were obviously irregular, but no draft is considered to

be finally accepted until one hour after the clearing is

over. The returned drafts are comparatively few, and,

as soon as detected, are forwarded direct to the bank

presenting them.

 

            XXI.15 The second clearing takes place at

2.15 p.m, and is conducted just as in the morning. The

second columns of the out- and in-clearing, in Form 2,

having been filled and summed up, the totals of the

first columns are added in, and the clerk learns the sum

that has to be paid, and at the same time to be received,

by his bank. The difference is the balance which he has

either to receive or pay. These totals and the balance hecopies into the following brief form, No. 3, which he

hands to the inspector of the Clearing House.

 







            XXI.16 The inspector now proceeds to verify

the balances by inserting the amounts in Form No. 7,

given on the next page, in an abbreviated form, only

four of the names of the banks being inserted, to save

space. In these forms the names of the banks are given

in the briefest manner, and the Branch Bank of

England is called simply "Bank."

 






            XXI.17 It is evident that the total which some

of the banks have to receive on balance must equal

what the others have to pay, because every cheque has

been added in twice, once in favour of, and once

against, some bank. If the debtor and creditor columns

of the seventh form, being added up, fail to balance,

some error of account must have been committed, and

all the work is submitted to careful re-examination

until the error is detected. When all is correct, itremains only to effect the payments, which is done by

means of credit and debit notes, directing transfers in

the books of the Branch Bank of England, to or from

the accounts of the clearing bankers. The payments are

made, indeed, to and from the Clearing House, as a

kind of fictitious entity; but as its payments and

receipts each day exactly balance, the Clearing House

requires no separate ledger account, except for small

current expenses, or inconsiderable errors.

            XXI.18 To effect the transfer the clerk of each

paying bank fills up the double form, No. 4, as

follows:-

 






            XXI.19 The coupon on the left-hand side is a

draft to be signed by the clerk, if he has authority for

the purpose, or else to be carried by him to his

principals to be signed, and then paid into the Bank of

England. It directs the cashier to credit the Clearing

House with the balance, and debit the sum to the

paying bank in question. The authorized official of the

Bank of England signs the corresponding form on the

right hand, when the payment is made, as a receipt for

the sum on behalf of the Clearing House.

             XXI.20 When, on the other hand, the balance

is in favour of a bank, Form No. 5, printed on green

paper for the sake of easy discrimination, comes into

use. It sufficiently explains itself.

 






            XXI.21 There remains then only the question

of the returned cheques. Even these do not require cash

payment. The balance at the close of the day is paid

only provisionally, and those cheques which have to be

dishonoured are returned within an hour to the bank

presenting them. Unless the irregularities be explained

away, or removed, the presenting cashier then signs the

allowing form, No. 6, which is an acknowledgment

that so much money too much was received by him at

the last clearing. This form is included by the bank

dishonouring the cheques, in its out-clearing parcel,

and the matter is rectified in the balance of the next

clearing.

 






            XXI.22 The settlement in the Manchester

Clearing House is often effected in less time than itwould take to read this account of the method, and the

work goes on with noiseless ease, strongly contrasting

with the turmoil of the London House. No doubt, the

amounts cleared are comparatively insignificant in

Manchester, the average daily sums being, in the years

1872, 1873, and 1874, respectively £226,160,

£237,150, and £247,930, or little more than one-

hundredth part of the daily transactions in the Lombard

Street House.

 

            XXI.23 The Manchester Clearing House is

managed by a committee of bankers, of which the chief

agent of the Bank of England in Manchester is the

chairman, and the superintendence of the clearing work

is conducted by an official of the Bank of England.

Thus the Bank, while naturally taking precedence,

harmoniously co-operates with the local bankers.

 

XXI.24

 

New York Clearing House.

 



The New York Clearing House was established in

October, 1853, and has become a most important

institution, embracing 59 banks, as compared with 26in London, and settling transactions hardly, if at all,

inferior in amount to those of the London house. The

general method of settling the business is necessarily

much the same as that already described, but it seems

to be in some respects better arranged than in London.

The work is carried on in a fine large Exchange Room,

and there is proper accommodation for the manager

and his clerks, instead of the small glass box in which

the inspectors sit in the Lombard Street room.

 

            XXI.25 Each New York bank has one settling

clerk in the Exchange Room, besides a messenger, who

brings and delivers the parcels of cheques and bills.

The settling clerks sit in a series of desks arranged in

an oval form in the middle of the spacious room, and

the exchanges are effected by an equal number of

messengers simultaneously walking round the desks,

delivering the parcels of "out-clearing," and receiving

those of "in-clearing," or as they are called in New

York the Credit and Debit Exchanges. An account of

the institution will be found in Gibbon's work on "The

Banks of New York; "but the general method of

procedure is so far like that in England, that I need not

again enter into the details, which I have had no

opportunity of examining in person.

 XXI.26

 

Extension of the Clearing System.

 



Until within the last few years there existed only two

bankers' clearing houses, those of Lombard Street and

New York, but much progress has recently been made

in extending a similar system to other places, and even

to other branches of business. The Manchester Clearing

House was established in July, 1872, and Newcastle

has a similar establishment. On the continent only a

single city has yet adopted the method. In Paris about

eighteen bankers have formed an association, called a

"Chambre des Compensations," which is located in the

Place de la Bourse, and balances the reciprocal claims

of these firms much in the manner of the English

clearing houses. In France, Germany, and other

continental countries the use of the banker's cheque is

much less developed than in England and America. In

Germany a person wishing to remit a hundred pounds

will often collect the actual coins, seal them up in a bag

with five seals, and register them at the post-office.

Thanks to the excellent system of government Postes

existing in Germany, this method of remittance is

sufficiently safe. But it is evident that where themonetary arrangements of a country are of such a kind

there is no need of a clearing house.

 

            XXI.27 The method of balancing claims needs

by no means to be restricted to the business of banking.

As, indeed, the monetary transactions of any locality

come to a focus in the banks, the principal clearing will

always be in the hands of bankers. But wherever a set

of traders have numerous reciprocal claims, they may

find it desirable to set up their own clearing house. As

long ago as 1842, it occurred to Robert Stephenson and

Mr. K. Morison, that the principle of the City Clearing

House might be advantageously applied to settling the

very complicated accounts arising between the railway

companies, which have through booking arrangements.

The work constantly carried on in the great house full

of accountants at Euston Square is vastly more

complicated and various than that of a bankers' clearing

house; but the final result is to ascertain how much

each railway company is indebted to each other one.

The balance due to or from each company is then paid

by a transfer at the bankers.

 

XXI.28

Within the last twelve months an attempt has been

made, unsuccessfully as yet, to introduce the generaluse of cheques into Liverpool, where great sums of

money are constantly passing, especially in the cotton

market. For reasons which it would be difficult to trace

out satisfactorily, the Liverpool merchants and bankers

have never adopted the use of cheques to the same

extent and in the same way as in other commercial

towns. Many firms in Liverpool still refuse to receive

payment by cheques, and only a year or two ago it was

a common practice for a Manchester firm to send a

clerk to Liverpool by railway with a bundle of

banknotes to make payments. At present, as I am

informed, bank bills payable at sight, and forwarded by

post, are substituted for Bank of England notes.

 

            XXI.29 A Liverpool stock or cotton broker,

wanting to make a payment, draws money out of his

bank in notes and gold, and his clerks carry it about the

town. Every evening a great number of small cash-

boxes, containing large sums of money, are deposited

at a well-known silversmith's shop, opposite the Town

Hall, for safe custody during the night. A great amount

of capital is thus kept lying idle, and it is surprising that

the bankers do not secure this sum, as an addition to

their deposits, by removing every obstacle. At present

the practice is to charge 1/8 or 1/4 per cent.

commission, whereas the actual cost of the accountants'work by which the bank transfers are accomplished is

almost nominal in regard to large transactions.

 

            XXI.30 An important extension of the clearing

principle was effected by the establishment, in 1874, of

the London Stock Exchange Clearing House, which

undertakes to clear, not sums of money, but quantities

of stock. As stock brokers settle their transactions only

once a fortnight, or in consols once a month, it

naturally arises that, in the intervals, the same broker

will usually have bought the same kind of stock for one

client and sold it for another. The very same stock may

leave passed through several different hands, and the

same brokers may have had reciprocal dealings with

each other. Instead, then, of actually making transfers

of stock for each transaction, and paying by cheques

which greatly swell the business of the Lombard Street

Clearing House on settling days, a plan has been

arranged, according to which each member of the

Clearing House prepares a statement of the net amount

of each stock which he has to receive from or deliver to

each other member. The manager of the house, after

verifying these accounts, which should balance in the

aggregate, directs the debtor members to transfer

quantities of stock to the creditor members in such a

way as to close all the transactions. It will be noticedthat, for pretty obvious reasons, the transfers are made

in the stock exchange, directly from broker to broker,

and not to the manager of the Clearing House, as in

banking transactions. A separate clearing has, of

course, to be made in each kind of stock. It is found

that the quantities actually transferred do not exceed 10

per cent. of the whole transactions cleared, and the

cheques drawn are diminished on settling days as much

as ten millions sterling.

 

            XXI.31 Still more recently the Cotton Brokers'

Association of Liverpool, although unable to apply the

system of clearing as yet to their money transactions,

have arranged a clearing system for the settlement of

business connected with sales of cotton "to arrive."

Under the new arrangement the first seller and the last

buyer come into contact, and all intermediate business,

which sometimes occasioned much dispute and delay

from contracts involving many middle-men, will be, as

it were, cancelled by the Clearing House. The business,

indeed, is being extended; so that all contracts,

declarations, and payments will be effected through the

agency of the association.

 

            XXI.32 It may very well admit of question

whether we have at all reached the limit of theadvantageous application of the clearing principle.

From bankers' transactions it has been extended to

railways, stock exchange, and cotton brokers' business.

It is conceivable that any other body of merchants,

brokers, publishers, or others who have frequent

pecuniary claims upon each other, might have a

clearing meeting once or twice a week. Suggestions to

this effect have already been made, and I am told that

in the Glasgow iron market, a settlement day for the

clearing of mutual transactions has been established.

 

XXI.33

 

Advantages of the Cheque and Clearing System.

 



Returning to the subject of the bankers' Clearing

Houses, it is to be remarked concerning the vast system

of relations which now exists between English banks,

that it has grown spontaneously, uninvented,

unauthorized by the legislature, and only recognized by

the judges when firmly established as a matter of

business custom. No Act of Parliament has been passed

to facilitate the operations of clearing, and it is only by

an understanding between the banks, that the

presentation of cheques and bills through the ClearingHouse, or their settlement by the payment of a balance,

is regarded as legally valid.

 

            XXI.34 The advantages of the system are

evidently of enormous magnitude. All the larger

payments are made with a minimum of risk, loss of

time, trouble, or use of the precious metals. While the

cheque representing a payment is travelling about the

country, the money which it is transferring is reposing

in the vaults of some bank, or rather, not being needed

in the operation at all, is lent or sent out of the country,

so that its interest is saved. We found in p. 165 that the

loss of interest upon the metallic money now

circulating or stored up in the United Kingdom,

amounts to between four and five millions annually. If

payments were now made by coin only, many times as

much metallic money would be needed.

 

            XXI.35 The security with which the payments

are effected is also an element of importance. Specie

when transmitted in large sums, is always a temptation

to thieves, and has usually to be accompanied by one

or more guards. Through the agency of banks, whether

by crossed cheques or credit notes, the largest

payments may be made with almost absolute immunity

from risk. The cheques, bills, and other documentstransferred in the clearing houses are, as a general rule,

so crossed or endorsed as to be of no value to any one

but the legal owners, and in any case are regarded by

thieves as "duffer," with which they dare not meddle.

 

XXI.36

 

Proportion of Cash Payments.

 



It is surprising to find to what an extent paper

documents have replaced coin as a medium of

exchange in some of the principal centres of business.

In the Statistical Journal for September, 1805, Sir J.

Lubbock published some particulars concerning the

business of his bank during the last few days of 1864.

Transactions to the amount of £23,000,000 were

effected by the use of coin and documents, as shown in

the following statement:-

 

            Per Cent. Cheques and Bills passed through

the Clearing House 70.8 Cheques and Bills not cleared

. . . . . . . . 23.3 Bank of England Notes . . . . . . . . . . 5.0

Coin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6 Country Bank-notes . . . . . .

. . .3

 100.0

 



            XXI.37 The sums of money paid in by town

customers amounted to £19,000,000, and when

analysed gave the following results:-

 

            Per Cent. Cheques and Bills . . . . . . . . . 96.8

Bank of England Notes . . . . . . . . . 2.2 Country Bank-

notes . . . . . . . . .4 Coin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6

 



100.0

 



            XXI.38 It is not for a moment to be supposed

that these figures represent the average use of coin in

banking transactions. The proportional amounts of

different kinds of money and commercial documents

used in different parts of the country, in different

trades, or in banks of different size and character vary

widely. It is much to be desired that bankers and others

who have the facts before them should publish more

copious information on the subject. In Manchester the

use of Bank of England notes appears to be much more

extensive than in London. Mr. R. H. Inglis Palgrave

gave in the Statistical Journal for March, 1873 (p. 86),an estimate prepared for him by Mr. Langton, the

Managing Director of the Manchester and Salford

Bank, of the proportion of cash payments made in that

bank. It appears that coin and notes formed 53 per cent.

of the total turn-over in 1859, 42 per cent. in 1864, and

only 32 per cent. in 1872, so that a rapid decrease has

been going on. But we find that in 1872 the amount of

notes was still large, the turn-over of customers'

accounts being thus composed:-

 

            Per Cent. Cheques, Bills, etc.. . . . . . . . . 68

Bank-notes . . . . . . . . . 27 Coin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

 







            XXI.39 I have endeavoured to form some

notion of the comparative amounts of cheques and bills

which are cleared off at successive points in the

organization of the banking system. It is very desirable

that we should learn what proportion the transactions

of the Clearing House bear to the whole transactions of

the banks of the kingdom. There would not be much

difficulty in forming a fair estimate if we had from one

or more banks in each of the principal towns a

statement of the comparative amounts of cheques dealtwith in various manners. According to information

kindly furnished to me by the authorities of one of the

principal banks of Manchester, I find that, during the

months July to October, 1874, the cheques and bills on

demand presented on or through the bank were

disposed of as follows:-

 

            Per Cent. Cheques paid in Coin and Bank-

notes over the Counter . . . 34.2 Cheques on Selves

paid to Credit of Account . . . 25.4 Cheques presented

through Manchester Clearing House . . . . 22.5 Cheques

and Bills on demand on London presented through

London Clearing House . . . . . . 10.8 Cheques on

Country Bankers presented through the London

Clearing House 3.5 Cheques on Country Bankers

presented direct . . 3.6

 



100.0

 



            XXI.40 Although considerable trouble has

been spent in the preparation of this account, it seems

doubtful whether the items are complete and correct,

and I give it more as a specimen of the kind of

information which is much wanted than as a reliable

statement. 

XXI.41

 

Cases to which the Clearing System is inapplicable.

 



It will now be sufficiently apparent that, so long as

trade is reciprocal, the cheque and clearing system can

arrange all exchanges without the use of coin. The

values of goods are estimated and expressed in terms

of gold, which acts as the common denominator of

value, but metallic money ceases to be the medium of

exchange. The banking organization effects what I

have heard Mr. W. Langton describe, as a restoration

of barter. But it happens in some cases that transactions

are not reciprocal, and cannot be made to balance. In

certain trades there is a permanent set of the goods in

one direction. In the Manchester cotton trade, for

instance, the manufacturers in purchasing cotton from

the Liverpool merchants, pay with cash or short credits.

The goods when completed are often shipped again at

Liverpool for foreign consignees at long credits, but

are not generally purchased by the Liverpool

merchants. Consequently, while the Manchester

manufacturer owes the Liverpool merchant for the

whole cost of the raw material, and for the shippingcharges and freight upon the goods sent abroad, there

are no equivalent claims of Manchester merchants

against Liverpool. The foreign consignees of the goods

pay for them by bills upon London. Now if the

Manchester manufacturers held their funds in

Manchester, and the Liverpool merchants their funds in

Liverpool, there would have to be a constant current of

money from London to Manchester, and from

Manchester to Liverpool, whence it would go abroad to

pay for the raw material. This inconvenient state of

things is remedied to a certain extent, as we shall see in

Chapter XXIII., by making London the head-quarters

and clearing house both of home and foreign

transactions.

 

            XXI.42 But there is always a liability that

claims expressed in metallic money, and actually

capable of being demanded in that shape at the option

of the owner, will sometimes be pressed. In certain

states of trade, or under certain contingent

circumstances, the holders of cheques require gold, and

bankers who have become accustomed to consider

metallic reserves as almost superfluous, find

themselves suddenly in a difficult position. Such, as we

shall see in Chapter XXIV., is the real cause of the

present instability of the English money market.XXI.43

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 









Chapter XXII The Cheque Bank

 



The Cheque and Clearing System, so far as we have

hitherto considered it, is mainly restricted to the

arrangement of considerable payments. No one can

enjoy its advantages unless he keeps a banking

account, and for this purpose he must be able to

command a certain sum of money, and must have a

sufficiently good position and credit to be entrusted bya banker with a cheque book. The result is that the

larger part of the population is entirely outside the

banking system, and must either use coin, postage

stamps, or post-office orders in making payments.

            XXII.1 A very ingenious attempt is now being

made to extend the area of banking to the masses by

the institution of the Cheque Bank. When preparing

materials for this book, I was so much struck by the

way in which this new bank seems to be adapted to

complete the cheque and clearing system in a

downward direction, that I applied to Mr. James Hertz,

the able inventor of the scheme, for information upon

the subject, and have been enabled to inquire minutely

into it.

 

            XXII.2 The weak point of the present ordinary

cheque book is, that a person once getting a book full

of blank cheques, can fill them up for any amounts,

irrespective of the balance against which they are

supposed to be drawn. Here is an opening for easy

fraud, if cheques were generally received from

strangers without inquiry. The Cheque Bank proceeds

on the new principle of issuing cheques which can be

filled up only to limited amounts, as shown by printed

and indelible perforated notices upon the forms. These

cheques, too, are only to be had in exchange for theutmost sum for which they can be drawn, which sum is

retained as a deposit until each corresponding cheque

has been presented. It follows that each cheque, when

duly filled up and signed by the owner, is as good as a

bank-note issued against a documentary reserve. It is

true that cheque books or forms may be lost or

purloined, and then fraudulently signed and issued; but,

being drawn to order and crossed, these documents are

very dangerous to meddle with in a criminal manner,

and, in the only instance in which fraud has yet been

attempted, swift punishment followed.

 

XXII.3

 

Relation of the Cheque Bank to other Banks.

We have seen how much has been accomplished

establishing relations between banks, as branches

agents, or correspondents of each other. The Cheque

Bank carries out a similar system to the utmost extent

by establishing relations with almost all the banks of

the United Kingdom, as well as with most foreign

banks of importance. Already 984 English, Irish, or

Scotch banks, have entered into relations with the

Cheque Bank, and 596 colonial or foreign banks cash

the cheques. One advantage of this arrangement is, that

the sphere of the cheque system can be greatlyextended without any equal increase of trouble and

risk. Whenever a bank opens a new account with an

individual, that account has to be kept apart in the

ledger, and constantly watched. But a bank can sell

Cheque Bank cheques to any amount, without opening

separate accounts with the purchasers, and may also

pay such cheques when presented without risk. The

Cheque Bank thus aims at becoming a great institution

of accountants, operating for the most part through

other banks, but relieving them of much of the risk and

trouble of small transactions. The Bank of England is a

bankers' bank in the sense that it holds the reserves of

other banks, and makes those final payments of cash

which close the general balance of transactions. The

Cheque Bank seems to be a bankers' bank in the

opposite sense of making deposits in all other banks

and employing them as agents.

 

            XXII.4 A peculiar feature of the Cheque Bank

is that it entirely abstains from using, or even holding,

the money deposited. All money received for cheque

books is left in the hands of the bankers, through whom

they are issued, or transferred to other bankers, as may

be needed for meeting the cheques presented. The

interest paid by these bankers will be the source of

profit, and as the money thus lies in the care of themost wealthy and reputable firms in the kingdom, it

could not be lost in any appreciable quantity, except by

the break-down of the whole banking system of the

country. It would hardly be true to say that these

cheques correspond to notes issued on the deposit of

government funds, because each agent-bank can use at

its own discretion the portion of the funds of the

Cheque Bank in its possession. Nevertheless, as the

portion in the hands of any one bank will usually be a

small fraction of the whole, and there is, moreover, a

guarantee fund of consols in the background, the

system of issue is more closely analogous to that of a

documentary reserve than any other.

 

XXII.5

 

The Cheque Bank as a Monetary Agent.

 



The Cheque Bank appears to aim at becoming the

medium for the accomplishment of an immense mass

of small payments. Small pensions and annuities, small

dividends, small disbursements by officers of

departments, by agents, clerks, or even domestic

servants are made through it. A book of the Cheque

Bank cheques can be safely trusted to almost anyservant or agent who can write, and the cheque when

presented forms a record of the way in which he has

applied the money. No one can venture in like manner

to give signed blank cheques to a servant, as they may

be filled up for unlimited amounts, and the Cheque

Bank cheques are evidently better than a sum of

metallic money, which may be mere readily

misapplied, purloined, or lost.

 

            XXII.6 The recipient of such cheques finds

them one of the most convenient possible forms of

remittance, because they will be cashed by almost any

banker, and will therefore be received as cash by any

person who has acquired sufficient knowledge of their

nature. Thus the Cheque Bank seems to be capable of

replacing with great advantage the money-order system

of the English Post-Office.

 

            XXII.7 To procure a post-office order it is

requisite to apply at an office and wait while certain

forms are being filled up. A definite office of payment

must be selected, and the receiver of the order can

obtain payment, as a general rule, only by applying

personally at the office, and giving the name of the

sender. Even if a person cannot afford to purchase a

book of Cheque Bank cheques, he can, in towns whereagencies are established for the purpose, buy single

cheques filled up for any odd sum with less formality

than at the post-office, and these cheques are payable

not at one office, but at almost any bank in the United

Kingdom and in most foreign towns. They can

afterwards be restricted in payment, if desired, to any

particular bank. The cost of remittance by cheques will

on the average be lower than by money orders, since

the Post-Office makes charges for inland orders,

increasing from 1d. for sums under 10s. to 1s. for a £10

order, with much higher charges for orders to be paid

in certain colonies or foreign countries. The Cheque

Bank cheque costs only one penny and one-fifth of a

penny in excess of the sum remitted, and of this charge

the penny is for the government stamp duly and

represents so much public revenue.

 

            XXII.8 The government can have no reason

for opposing the Cheque Bank, because if successful it

must earn for the Chancellor of the Exchequer a large

annual revenue. The money-order system, on the other

hand, in spite of the higher charges, is understood to

yield no profit, and is rather a burden upon the

department. It is said that the issue of every money

order involves the filling up of eight or nine forms, and

the amount of labour rendered requisite swallows upthe revenue. It is a very striking instance of the

comparative inefficiency of government industry,

except in special cases, that a single banking company

can bring into use a form of remittance available in all

parts of the world, and far cheaper than post-office

orders, and yet pay duty upon their transactions.

 

            XXII.9 The Cheque Bank also aims at

becoming a collecting as well as a paying agency. Any

public institution needing to collect a subscription, for

instance, has only to procure a "paying-in" form, or

credit note, and the sum inserted therein will be

received by any of the numerous banks in relation.

Thus small debts and subscriptions may be readily

collected without trouble or expense in any part of the

country.

 

XXII.10

 

Payment of Wages by Cheques.

 



The managers of the Cheque Bank hope to substitute

their cheques for the coin now used by manufacturers

in payment of wages. If this could be accomplished it

would be convenient rather than otherwise to bankers,who are weekly called upon to furnish large sums in

gold and silver coin, and have the trouble and cost of

holding and counting a sufficient stock. Now, if a

master in paying his men presented them with small

cheques, or, perhaps better still, with cheques for even

sums, and the balance in silver, the cheques would be

cashed by shopkeepers, and would be deposited by

them in the banks, or might even be bought back in

large sums by the masters for further use. It was at one

time the practice of great railway contractors to issue

tally checks in the form of one, two, or five-shilling

cards, which were paid to their workmen, and

circulated among the publicans and tradesmen of the

neighbourhood, until taken back by the contractor in

wholesale. Such cheques constituted true representative

money, but would be of doubtful legality. The Cheque

Bank cheques might serve the same purpose, and have

been declared legal, but it is yet very doubtful how far

the wholesome practice of immediately presenting

ordinary cheques will stand in the way of the continued

circulation of other cheques, for which there is no need

of immediate presentation. Time after time we have

found that habit and custom exercise an immense and

very unmanageable influence in monetary affairs, and

it will probably take a long time to teach the public to

look upon a cheque as a safe document to keep. 

XXII.11

 

The Cheque Bank as a Savings Bank.

 



Already the Cheque Bank serves as a savings bank into

which persons may put surplus money for security,

receiving as an acknowledgment the cheque forms by

which it can be drawn out or paid away with ease. No

interest, however, is paid on such deposits. It seems to

me, however, that the bank, if successful in its present

aims, might readily become the most admirable of

savings banks. Instead of issuing cheques payable at

any moment, it might issue through its agent-banks,

deposit receipts, bills, or, what comes to much the

same thing, post-dated cheques, the interest to be paid

at the time of deposit as a discount at the rate of 2 or

21/2 cent. This receipt could be retained, transferred by

endorsement, or again discounted by the Cheque Bank.

If retained until maturity it would become payable like

a cheque at any bank in relation with the Cheque Bank.

The money deposited in this way might be invested in

consols at 31/4 per cent., and the cost of the documents

and accountants' work, being slight, might leave a fair

margin of profit.

             XXII.12 The Post-Office Savings Bank system

as established by Mr. Gladstone is an admirable

institution; it has been very successful, and has done

great service in increasing providence. But it is

troublesome and costly in working, and leaves no

profit to the state. Already the Scotch banks serve

almost in the capacity of savings banks by receiving

small fixed deposits; and it is well worthy of

consideration whether, by the assistance of the Cheque

Bank, almost all the English banks might not be

converted savings banks, to the advantage of every

one.

 

XXII.13

 

Results of the Cheque Bank System.

 



I have thought it quite suitable to this book to enter

somewhat minutely into the actual and possible work

done by the Cheque Bank, because, if successful, the

institution opens an indefinite sphere for financial

improvement. The institution is, indeed, at present a

mere experiment, undertaken at the risk of

shareholders, and it can only succeed by offering

conveniences to the public and the body of bankers. Itmay succeed in some of its schemes, and not in others,

but in any case it will tend to replace coin payments by

cheque payments, to be balanced off in the general

London clearing. The profits of the bank depend upon

the very small charge of 1/5 of a penny for each

cheque, and the interest on deposits. The amount of

deposits remaining undrawn depends upon three

circumstances: (1) the time before the cheque is

utilized; (2) the time it is in circulation, or travelling

about, and

(3) the difference between the sum drawn and that

deposited. Theaverage duration of circulation, I am

informed, was lately ten days, but many cheques have

already been out a year.

 

            XXII.14 I should add that, in describing with

some detail the operations of the Cheque Bank, I have

no interest in the success of the institution other than a

strictly scientific interest. In any case it is a most

ingenious innovation, and if successful cannot fail to

benefit the community in a high degree, adding a new

feature to a banking system already wonderfully

organized.

 

XXII.15

 Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 









Chapter XXIII Foreign Bills of Exchange In early

times foreign trade consisted in the direct exchange of

commodities. A caravan set out with a variety of

manufactured articles, across the deserts of Arabia or

Sahara, and came back with the ivory, spices, and other

valuable raw produce obtained by barter. In later times

the merchant loaded his own ship and sent her forth on

an adventure, trusting that his shipmaster would sell

the cargo to advantage, and, with the proceeds, bring

back another cargo to be sold to great profit at home.

Trade was thus evidently reciprocal, and what was sent

out paid for what was brought back, so that little or nomoney was kept idle in the mean time.

 

            XXIII.1 Wherever this direct reciprocal

exchange did not exist it was necessary either to

transmit metallic money, or to devise some mode of

transferring debts. Now the transmission of money not

only causes the loss of interest during the interval of

transit, but leads to the expense of guarding it, and the

liability of total loss. Many centuries ago accordingly,

it was discovered that the use of paper documents

would economize, if not altogether render needless, the

use of metallic money in foreign trade.

 

XXIII.2

 

Origin and Nature of Bills of Exchange.

 



Even the Romans appear to have been acquainted in a

slight degree with the system of foreign bills of

exchange; but it is to the early Italian, and especially

the Jewish merchants, that we owe the development of

the practice. The history of the subject is buried in

much obscurity, but there is evidence that, as early as

the fourteenth century, the use of bills of exchange was

fully established. The forms of the bills, and the lawsand customs relating to them, were then much the same

as in the present day.

 

            XXIII.3 A bill is nothing but an order to pay

money addressed by the drawer to the drawee, or

person on whom it is drawn, specifying the amount to

be paid, the time of payment, and the person to whom

it is to be paid. Whenever a bill is drawn, it is to be

presumed that a debt is due from the drawee to the

drawer. When presented to the drawee and accepted by

him, this acceptance is an acknowledgment of the

existence of the debt. The bill, although drawn in

favour of a particular person, is transferable by

endorsement, and thus represents a negotiable claim to

receive money at a future date in a distant country.

Hence it is capable of being transmitted in discharge of

another debt of equal amount.

 

            XXIII.4 England buys every year from

America a great quantity of cotton, corn, pork, and

many other articles. America at the same time buys

from England iron, linen, silk, and other manufactured

goods. It would be obviously absurd that a double

current of specie should be passing across the Atlantic

Ocean in payment for these goods, when the

intervention of a few paper acknowledgments of debtwill enable the goods passing in one direction to pay

for those going in the opposite direction. The American

merchant who has shipped cotton to England can draw

a bill upon the consignee to an amount not exceeding

the value of the cotton. Selling this bill in New York to

a party who has imported iron from England to an

equivalent amount, it will be transmitted by post to the

English creditor, presented for acceptance to the

English debtor, and one payment of cash on maturity

will close the whole circle of transactions. Money

intervenes twice over, indeed, once when the bill is

sold in New York, once when it is finally cancelled in

England; but it is evident that payment between two

parties in one town is substituted for payment across

the whole breadth of the Atlantic. Moreover, the

payments may be effected by the use of cheques, or the

bills when due may themselves be presented through

the Clearing House, and balanced off against other bills

and cheques. Thus the use of metallic money seems to

be rendered almost superfluous, and, so long as there is

no great disturbance in the balance of exports and

imports, foreign trade is restored to a system of

perfected barter.

 

XXIII.5

 Trade in Foreign Bills.

 



It is an unnatural supposition that every importer of

goods will meet with an exporter of goods to the same

amount, so that two transactions will exactly balance

each other. But there are many merchants in Liverpool

indebted to American merchants, and many American

merchants indebted to others in Liverpool. Hence there

will be a continual supply of bills of various amounts,

and a continual demand, and it becomes a profitable

business for certain houses to deal in the bills,

purchasing bills from those who can draw and selling

to those who wish to remit.

 

            XXIII.6 Large firms of merchants often have

houses both in America and in England, or a firm in

one country has agents or correspondents in the other

with whom they keep a running account. Not

uncommonly, the very same firm may be both

importing and exporting, so that a direct balancing of

their accounts will be so far effected. The remaining

balance need only be paid from time to time as

opportunity offers. Thus, in foreign as in home trade,

book credit serves in a great degree to economize the

use of money. Only when there is a derangement of thebalance of trade, and one country owes to another a

preponderating debt of large amount, need specie be

transmitted.

 

            XXIII.7 It is out of the question that I should,

in this small treatise, attempt to enter into the

intricacies of the Foreign Exchanges, which have been

so admirably treated by Mr. Goschen, in his "Theory of

the Foreign Exchanges." The general principle of the

subject is, that bills of exchange drawn on any

particular place constitute a new kind of article, subject

to the laws of supply and demand. Any circumstance

diminishing the supply, or increasing the demand,

raises the price of such bills, and vice versâ. The price

being raised, there is additional profit on any

transaction which allows a new supply of bills to be

drawn. The export of any kind of goods in greater

quantities tends to restore the balance, but, if requisite,

coin or bullion can be sent at a certain cost, and bills

drawn against it. Thus the cost of transmitting specie is

the limit to the premium on bills. Gold and silver being

everywhere considered a desirable possession, and

being also very portable, form, as remarked at the

outset, the natural currency between nation and nation.

If a country were to be absolutely denuded of specie,

and had foreign debts to pay, forced exportation andsale of the next most generally desirable and portable

commodity would be the only resource, and the

premium on bills might vary to almost any extent from

par. Thus it is seen that, in an economical point of

view, gold and silver differ from other merchandise not

in kind but in degree.

 

XXIII.8

 

The World's Clearing House.

It might seem that in the use of cheques internally, and

of bills of exchange in foreign trade, we have reached

the climax in the economy of metallic money but there

is yet one further step to make. We found that so long

as all the merchants of a town keep their cash with the

same banker, they have no need to handle the money at

all, but can make payments by transfers in the books of

their banker. Let us imagine, then, that merchants all

over the world agreed to keep their principal accounts

with the bankers of any one great commercial town.

All their mutual transactions could then be settled

among those bankers. An approximation to such a state

of things exists in the tendency to make London the

monetary head-quarters of the commercial world, and

the general clearing house of international transactions.

             XXIII.9 All that is needed to secure economy

of money is centralization of transactions, so that there

may be the wider scope for the balancing of claims.

Before the elaborate system of English provincial

banking grew up, considerable economy was effected

by the practice of "drawing upon London." In every

country town many persons wanted to transmit money

to London, and others wanted to draw money from the

same place. To vast private trading transactions with

the capital and principal commercial towns was added

the whole of the payments connected with the

collection and expenditure of the public revenue. In

each country town some prominent trader discovered

that profit was to be made by selling bills on London to

those who wished to remit, and buying with the

proceeds the bills of those who had claims upon banks

or firms in London. The capital thus becoming the

monetary centre, it was often convenient to make

payments to other towns by bills upon London. Each

person wanting to remit was more likely to get a bill

upon London with ease than upon any other place, and

it was likely that the creditor would prefer such a bill to

one upon a town with which he had no relations. It is

obvious that if every important trader in England kept

his principal cash with a city banker, the use of bills on

London would have enabled all the commercialtransactions of England to be centred in, and cleared

through the books of these bankers and the Clearing

House.

 

XXIII.10

 

Centralization of Financial Transactions in London.

 



There is a similar advantage in centralizing foreign

transactions in London. In the absence of any general

centre each two commercial towns must settle their

transactions directly and separately. A merchant will be

receiving bills upon the bankers and merchants of

many other towns. There is a double inconvenience in

this. The supply and demand for bills upon

comparatively small places must be comparatively

small and variable, and the bills will be drawn upon

minor firms, of the soundness of which it will not be

easy to get satisfactory information. Many firms, too,

in the, present day have houses in several parts of the

world, and it would be more convenient that their

mutual transactions should be brought to a centre

somewhere, just as the transactions of branch banks are

brought to a centre in the head office. Thus there arises

a tendency to prefer bills drawn upon well-knownLondon banks, or other great London firms, whose

credit is known all over the world, and ceteris paribus,

such bills will command a readier acceptance in the

exchange market. Persons having to draw bills will get

a better price if they can draw upon London, which

they can do by opening an account with a London firm,

and arranging that remittances due to them shall be

deposited to their credit in London. It comes to pass

that a merchant in America, Australia, or India, will

prefer to receive money in London rather than

anywhere else. Everyone wishing to remit money can

then do so in the form of a bill upon the holders of

these funds in London, and the fund will be recruited

from time to time by similar bills received and

transmitted to London for collection.

 

            XXIII.11 This tendency to the centralization of

financial business in London is much promoted by the

fact that the largest mass of cheap loanable capital

exists there. The general rate of interest in New York is

at least 2 per cent. higher than in London, so that a

trader who has credit enough to obtain loans in

London, will make a profit by borrowing there rather

than in New York. Thus, instead of first depositing

money in London, and afterwards drawing against it,

the more usual and profitable form of the transaction isto get a credit there, that is, leave to draw against a

banker, making subsequent remittances to recoup the

banker accepting and paying the bills. As regards

continental trade, Paris, Berlin, Vienna, Hamburg, and

Amsterdam are of course highly important centres, but

recent wars have occasioned a considerable transfer of

financial business to London. Moreover, the great

foreign trade of England, reaching into every quarter of

the globe, and the distant colonies and dependencies

which naturally have financial relations with the capital

of the an empire, tend to give London a unique

position.

 

XXIII.12

 

Representation of Foreign Bankers in London.

 



The result of this centralization of banking transactions

in London, is that colonial and foreign bankers find it

very desirable to have agents, or even head offices in

London. At the present time there are no less than 60

important colonial and foreign banks which have their

own London offices or houses. These include the

principal Australian, New Zealand, and Indian banks,

and a number of minor banks, established by Englishcapitalists to cultivate the trade of the minor states of

Europe, South America, China, and the East. In

addition to the above 60 banks, there are fully 1000

foreign and colonial banking houses in correspondence

with London bankers, so that almost every town in the

world which can maintain a bank at all, has the means

of correspondence with some member of the London

banking system. The foreign bankers vary greatly in

the importance of their transactions, and some of them

would, according to English ideas, be considered

merchants rather than bankers; but, in the aggregate,

their transactions must be exceedingly large. It must

almost inevitably follow that transfers of money will be

more and more made through London. Just as this city

is the link of connection between each English country

banker and each other one, so it may, and probably will

by degrees, become the link between the most distant

parts of the world. But the greater becomes the

profitable burden of financial business thrown upon

Lombard Street and Threadneedle Street, the more it

behoves us to take care that our currency system is

maintained upon the soundest possible basis. It is

requisite, too, that our bankers, financiers, and

merchants should regulate their operations with a

thorough comprehension of the immense system in

which they play a part, and the risks of derangementand failure which they encounter by over-severe

competition. No one doubts that alarming symptoms

have during recent years presented themselves in the

London money market. There is a tendency to frequent

severe scarcities of loanable capital, causing sudden

variations of the rate of interest almost unknown thirty

years ago. I will therefore in the next chapter offer a

few remarks intended to show that this is an evil

naturally resulting from the excessive economy of the

precious metals, which the increasing perfection of our

banking system allows to be practised, but which may

be carried too far and lead to extreme disaster.

 

XXIII.13

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 Chapter XXIV The Bank of England and the Money

Market

 



We commenced the study of money with the barter of

ordinary commodities, and money appeared in the first

place as some common commodity handed about as a

medium of exchange. By degrees, however, the subject

assumed a greater and greater degree of complexity.

The metals took the place of other commodities as

currency, and delicate considerations began to enter

concerning token and standard coins. From metallic

representative money, we passed to paper

representative money, and finally discovered that, by

the cheque and clearing system, metallic money was

almost eliminated from the internal exchanges of the

country. Pecuniary transactions now present

themselves in the form of a room full of accountants,

hastily adding up sums of money. But we must never

forget that all the figures in the books of a bank

represent gold, and every creditor can demand the

payment of the metal. In the ordinary state of trade no

one cares to embarrass himself with a quantity ofprecious metal, which is both safer and more available

in the vaults of a bank. But in international trade, gold

and silver are still the media by which balances of

indebtedness must be paid, and serious consequences

may arise from any disproportion between the amount

of transactions carried on, and the basis of gold upon

which they are settled.

 

XXIV.1

 

Expansion of Trade.

 



No one doubts that in the last thirty years there has

been an immense expansion in the trade of this and

most other countries. If, as is very commonly done, we

take the foreign trade as a test of the general advance of

industry, we find that the total declared real value of

British and Irish produce exported from the United

Kingdom was, in 1846, about 58 millions sterling. In

1866 it amounted to 189 millions, or more than three

times as much. In the mean time the bank-note

circulation had remained almost unchanged, and such

alteration as there was, consisted in a decrease. The

total circulation of bank-notes, English, Scotch, and

Irish, was, in 1846, 39 millions, and in 1866, 381/2millions. I believe, however, that the best test of the

progress of trade, both internal and external, is

furnished by the out-put of coal, the mainspring of our

wealth. Now, in 1854 the total quantity of coal raised

was about 65 millions of tons, and the note currency 38

millions; in 1866 the coal raised had increased to

1011/2 millions of tons, or by 56 per cent., while the

note currency still remained almost as before, namely,

381/2 millions. Between 1866 and 1874, indeed, there

was a remarkable increase in the circulation, the

amount of which rose to £43,912,000, or by 14 per

cent., but the production of coal had in the mean time

risen to 127 millions, an increase, compared with 1854,

of 95 per cent.

 

XXIV.2

 

Competition of Bankers.

 



It is quite apparent, therefore, that the tendency is to

carry on a greater and greater trade upon an amount of

metallic currency which does not grow in anything like

the same proportion. The system of banking, too,

grows more perfect in the sense of increasing the

economy with which money is used. The competitionof many great banks, leads them to transact the largest

possible business with the smallest reserves which they

can venture to retain. Some of these banks pay

dividends of from 20 to 25 per cent, which can only be

possible by using large deposits in a very fearless

manner. Even the reserves consist not so much of

actual coins or bank-notes in the vaults, as of money

employed at call in the Stock Exchange, or deposited in

the Bank of England, which again lends the deposits

out to a certain extent.

 

            XXIV.3 Now the larger the trade which is

carried on, the larger will be the occasional demand for

gold to make foreign payments; and if the stock of gold

kept in London be growing comparatively smaller and

smaller, the greater will be the difficulty in meeting the

demand from time to time. Such is, I believe, the whole

secret of the growing instability and delicacy of the

money market in this country. There is a larger and

larger quantity of claims for gold, and comparatively

less gold to meet them, so that every now and then

there is a natural difficulty in paying claims, and the

rate of interest has to be suddenly raised to induce

those who have gold to lend it, or to induce those who

were demanding it to forego their claims for a time.

Most people, it is true, attribute all these troubles,either to the much-abused gentlemen who meet weekly

in the parlour of the Bank of England, or to Sir Robert

Peel, who established the note issue of the Bank upon

the partial deposit system already described (p. 222).

 

XXIV.4

 

The Bank Charter Act of 1844.

 



At all times, during the last two hundred years, there

has been some currency topic upon the anvil. In early

days it was the scarcity of silver coin, the South Sea

Bubble, or the price of the guinea. Later on came the

restriction of specie payments, the bullion report, the

one-pound note question, and the joint stock banks.

Since 1844, however, all currency theorists have

concentrated their attentions upon the Bank Charter

Act of that year, and, while endlessly differing about

the nature of the remedy, have been unanimous in

attributing all kinds of evils to a settlement of our

currency, which I believe to be a monument of sound

and skilful financial legislation.

 

            XXIV.5 The Acts of 1844 and 1845 placed a

fixed limit upon the amount of notes which can in thiscountry be issued without an equal deposit of gold. At

present (April, 1875) the Bank of England can issue,

without gold, fifteen millions; the private and joint

stock banks of England are individually restricted to

fixed amounts, which, added together, make about

£6,460,000, while the Scotch banks can, in a similar

manner, issue notes to the amount of £2,750,000, and

the Irish banks to the amount of £6,350,000, making in

all about 301/2 millions. In addition to this the Bank of

England, and the Scotch and Irish banks, can issue as

many more notes as they have deposits of bullion or

coin; and in the year 1874, the extra amount thus

issued was about 141/2 millions. Let it be never

forgotten, that no restriction is thus placed upon the

sum total of the currency of the country; for the

original legal tender of the country is the coined

sovereign of 123.274 grains of gold, and every one

who has the gold can readily turn it into sovereigns.

The objectors to the Bank Charter Act urge that we

want more currency, but they cannot really mean more

metallic currency. We must not look to changes in the

law to increase the amount of specie in the country,

and, as I have remarked, any one can get sovereigns if

he has the needful gold. This metal, again, is only to be

had, in the absence of gold mines, by that state of

foreign trade which brings it, and does not drain itaway again. The principal currency, in short, must be

regarded as a commodity, the supply of which is to be

left to the natural action of the laws of supply and

demand. The unrestricted issue of paper representative

notes produces an artificial interference with these

natural conditions.

 

XXIV.6

 

The Free-banking School.

 



What the currency theorists want, then, is not more

gold, but more promises to pay gold. The Free-banking

School especially argue that it is among the elementary

rights of an individual to make promises, and that each

banker should be allowed to issue as many notes as he

can get his customers to take, keeping such a reserve of

metallic money, as he thinks, in his own private

discretion, sufficient to enable him to redeem his

promises. But this free issue of paper representative

money does not at all meet the difficulty of the money

market, which is a want of gold, not of paper; an the

contrary, an unlimited issue of paper would tend to

reduce the already narrow margin of gold upon which

we erect an enormous system of trade. Here we reachthe critical point of the whole theory of currency. There

is also a school of currency writers, formerly

represented in England by Ricardo and Tooke, who

hold that it is impossible to over-issue convertible

paper money. Arguments to this effect have been

recently urged with great ability by Mr. R. H. Inglis

Palgrave, in his work entitled "Notes on Banking," and

his wide acquaintance with the subject should lend

much force to his opinions. But there is, to my mind,

an evident flaw in their position.

 

XXIV.7

 

Possibility of Over-issue.

 



When prices are at a certain level, and trade in a

quiescent state, a single banker is, no doubt, unable to

put into circulation more than a certain quantity of

bank-notes. He cannot produce a greater effect upon

the whole currency than a single purchaser can by his

sales or purchases produce upon the market for corn or

cotton. But a number of bankers, all trying to issue

additional notes, resemble a number of merchants

offering to sell corn for future delivery, and the value

of gold will be affected as the price of corn certainly is.We are too much accustomed to look upon the value of

gold as a fixed datum line in commerce; but, in reality,

it is a very variable thing. The tables of prices analysed

by me in the Statistical Journal for June, 1865, show

that between 1822 and 1825 there was an average rise

of prices to the amount of 17 per cent.; and between

1844 and 1847, and 1852 and 1857, the average rises

were respectively 13 and 31 per cent. Such variations

of prices mean that the value of gold is itself altered in

the inverse ratio; and these variations are produced

mainly by extensions of credit. Every one who

promises to pay gold on a future day, thereby increases

the anticipated supply of gold, and there is no limit to

the amount of gold which can thus be thrown upon the

market. Every one who draws a bill or issues a note,

unconsciously acts as a "bear" upon the gold market.

Everything goes well, and apparent prosperity falls

upon the whole community, so long as these promises

to pay gold can be redeemed or replaced by new

promises. But the rise of prices thus produced turns the

foreign exchanges against the country, and creates a

balance of indebtedness which must be paid in gold.

The basis of the whole fabric of credit slips away, and

produces that sudden collapse known as a commercial

crisis.

             XXIV.8 Now, what is true of credit generally,

is still more true of the special form of credit involved

in bank promissory notes. These purport to be payable

in gold coin on demand, so that they are taken by every

one as equivalent to the coin. Even bills of exchange

can be paid in notes, and as regards internal trade, no

difficulty would be felt in maintaining credit so long as

promises to pay gold circulate instead of gold. But

foreigners will not hold such promises on the same

footing; and, if the exchanges are against us, the

metallic, not the paper, part of the currency will go

abroad. It is at this moment that bankers will find no

difficulty in expanding their issues, because many

persons have claims to meet in gold, and the notes are

regarded as gold. The notes will thus conveniently fill

up the void occasioned by the exportation of specie;

prices will be kept up, prosperity will continue, the

balance of foreign trade will be still against us, and the

game of replacing gold by promises will go on to an

unlimited extent, until it becomes actually impossible

to find more gold to make necessary payments abroad.

 

            XXIV.9 Professor Cliffe Leslie, writing in

Macmillan's Magazine for August, 1864, correctly

pointed out, as I think, that speculative credit often

raises prices for a time above their natural range.Representative credit, on the other hand, by which I

suppose he means notes issued against the actual

deposit of metal, obviously forms no augmentation of

the currency, and can have no effect in raising prices

above the level which would exist under a purely

metallic system.

 

            XXIV.10 The actual exhaustion of the bullion

of a country is no mere ideal event, for it is what

occurred in this country in 1839, under the free system

of note issue. The Bank of England had parted with

almost the whole of its bullion and was only saved

from bankruptcy by the ignominious expedient of a

large loan from the Bank of France. The narrow limits

of this book evidently restrict me from entering into

historical and statistical illustrations, but it may be said,

that the collapse which followed the crisis of 1839

induced severer distress and depression of trade than

has ever since been known in this country. We now

carry on industry and commerce many times greater

than in 1839, and there is nothing to indicate that either

the bank directors or the commercial classes are more

cautious or farseeing than they then were. On the

contrary, competition, speculation, and the bold

erection of the widest affairs upon the narrowest basis

of real capital is more common than ever. Knowing aswe do the very narrow margin of real metal upon

which our many great banks conduct their business, it

is impossible to entertain for a moment the notion of

allowing the paper currency of the country to rest upon

the discretionary reserves of such competing bankers.

 

XXIV.11

 

The Right of Coining Bank Notes .

 



According, to the view which I adopt, the issue of

notes is more analogous to the royal function of

coinage than to the ordinary commercial operation of

drawing bills. We ought to talk of coining notes, as

John Law did; for though the design is impressed on

paper instead of metal, the function of the note is

exactly the same as that of a representative token. As to

the right to issue promises, it no more exists than the

right to establish private mints. For our present

purposes that alone is right which the legislature

declares to be expedient to the community at large. As

almost every one has long agreed to place the coinage

of money in the hands of the executive government, so

I believe that the issue of paper representative money

should continue to be practically in the hands of thegovernment, or its agents acting under the strictest

legislative control. M. Wolowski, in his admirable

works on banking, has maintained that the issue of

notes is a function distinct from the ordinary operations

of a banker; and Mr. Gladstone has allowed that the

distinction is a wholesome and vital one. Bankers

enjoy the utmost degree of freedom in this country at

present, in every other point, so that it is wholly a

confusion of ideas to speak of the unrestricted emission

of paper representative money as a question of free

banking.

 

            XXIV.12 Professor Sumner and others have

objected to the Bank Charter Act, that it cannot be

regarded as a scientific settlement of the currency

question, inasmuch as no other nation had adopted the

same principles. Quite lately, however, the German

Imperial government has adopted the main principle of

a partial deposit, adding to it the liberty of increasing

the issues under a tax of 5 per cent., an arrangement

which I have described under the name of the Elastic

Limit System (p. 226). This provision appears to be

designed to avoid the suspension of the law during

times of crisis, and it is quite possible that we might

with advantage introduce a similar modification into

our own currency law. But the fine or tax upon theexcessive issue ought surely to be much more than 5

per cent., and in this country should certainly not be

less than 10 per cent.

 

XXIV.13

 

Scotch and English Banking.

 



It is common, indeed, to point to the Scotch banks as a

proof that a perfectly sound currency may be furnished

by banks acting on their own unfettered discretion. Up

to 1845, the twelve or thirteen Scotch banks certainly

did possess the right of freely issuing notes down to

one-pound notes, and only in one or two cases did

bankruptcy occur. All this I grant, holding that

Englishmen and Americans, and natives of all

countries, may well admire the wonderful skill,

sagacity, and caution with which Scotch bankers have

developed and conducted their system. There is no

doubt, too, that Scotch bankers are guiding the course

of development of the banking system in England,

India, the Australian colonies, and everywhere, with

conspicuous success. If we were all Scotchmen, I

believe the unlimited issue of one-pound notes would

be an excellent measure. But when we compare theScotch and English banking systems, we discover a

profound difference. In Scotland there exist only

eleven great banks, which take good care that there

shall not be a twelfth great bank. The undoubted

monopoly which they possess is, however, used with

great moderation and wisdom, and by an immense

ramification of branches (p. 258), every village has its

banks, and every poor man may have his bank deposit,

if he will save a few pounds. In England and Wales we

have 267 private and 123 joint stock banks, or, in all,

388 banking firms, including in these numbers the

London banks, but not including any of the numerous

branch banks. There is, no doubt, a tendency to

approximate to the Scotch system by the amalgamation

of smaller banks. Still many new banks are from time

to time started, and the competition between them is of

the keenest character. The high dividends expected by

the shareholders can only be earned by bold trading on

small reserves, and every commercial man is aware

that the money market is becoming more and more

sensitive.

 

XXIV.14

 

Cash Reserves of Bankers.

 It is important, but very difficult to decide, what is the

amount of real cash held by the bankers of the United

Kingdom in readiness to meet their liabilities. Many

banks publish balance-sheets professing to show the

reserve of ready money. I have already remarked (pp.

248-256) upon the ambiguity which attaches to the

words money and cash as commonly used; and, when

we inquire into the nature of the banker's ready money,

it is found to consist in a great degree of money

invested in government securities, deposited with other

bankers, especially the Bank of England, or held "at

call," that is, lent to speculators who invest it in

negotiable securities. From the published balance-

sheets we thus get no indication of the real metallic

reserve of the country, available for the payment of

foreign debts.

            XXIV.15 Mr. R. H. Inglis Palgrave, in his

important "Notes on Banking," published both in the

Statistical Journal, for March, 1873 (Vol.

xxxvi. p. 106), and as a separate book, has given the

results of aninquiry into this subject, and states the

amount of coin and Bank of England notes, held by the

bankers of the United Kingdom, as not exceeding four

or five per cent. of their liabilities, or from one twenty-

fifth to one twentieth part. Mr. T. B. Moxon, of

Stockport and Manchester, has subsequently made anelaborate inquiry into the same point, and finds that the

cash reserve does not exceed about seven per cent. of

the deposits and notes payable on demand. He remarks

that even of this reserve a large proportion is absolutely

indispensable for the daily transactions of the bankers'

business, and could not be parted with. Thus the whole

fabric of our vast commerce is found to depend upon

the improbability that the merchants and other

customers of the banks will ever want, simultaneously

and suddenly, so much as one-twentieth part of the

gold money which they have a right to receive on

demand at any moment during banking hours.

 

XXIV.16

 

Remedy for the Sensitiveness of the Money Market.

 



The present state of things in England is not to be

cured by any legislation. No government can save

those from trouble who will make unlimited

transactions in gold, without a sure prospect of finding

the gold when wanted. It is absurd to suppose that any

single establishment like the Bank of England, itself

becoming hardly more important than some of the

great city banks, can prop up the whole fabric ofEnglish commerce.

            XXIV.17 The only measure which can restore

stability to the London market, or prevent it from

becoming more and more sensitive, is to secure by

some means the existence of more satisfactory cash

reserves, either in actual coin, or in Bank of England

notes, representing deposits of coin in the Bank vaults.

It would be of comparatively little use, however, for

some banks to become more prudent and self-denying,

while others are allowed to stretch their resources to

the utmost possible point, and outbid the more prudent

banks in the rates of dividend they can pay. Combined

action, therefore, seems requisite, somewhat in the

manner suggested by Mr. Bagehot, as regards the city

bankers.

 

            XXIV.18 As the Bank of England pays no

interest upon the eight millions which it on the average

of the last four years holds as the deposits of the

London bankers, there seems to be no sufficient reason

why the Bank should be allowed to make a profit out

of so large a sum. If held by a committee of the

depositing banks it would be equally safe, almost

equally available, and might, moreover, by the

investment of a portion in government stock, yield a

profit to the depositors. It may be asked, Why not leaveeach bank to hold its own reserve in its own vaults?

But there would then be no security against some

banks running their reserves dangerously low, and

trusting to extrinsic aid in times of difficulty. One

objection which I should make to the scheme as put

forth is, that government stock should not be allowed

to form any part of the ultimate reserve. When loanable

capital is very scarce, such stock can only be converted

into actual bullion by forced sales which depreciate the

funds, shock public confidence, and drain away money

from those who would in some other channel have

employed it in the money market. Unless government

stocks be sent abroad, their sale cannot possibly

increase the stock of gold in the country. A cash

reserve ought to be composed of cash, and although it

may be very convenient to bankers to use this word in

a loose and ambiguous manner, it ought not to mean, in

speaking of the ultimate reserves of the country,

anything but gold coin or bullion, or warrants, actually

issued against coin or bullion, on the deposit system

previously considered.

 

            XXIV.19 It has been pointed out, moreover, in

an able article in the Bankers' Magazine for February,

1875, that the proposed scheme would be very

insufficient if carried out merely by a narrow circle ofcity bankers. The association should include, in one

way or another, all the more important banks in the

three kingdoms. The vast trade of the country cannot

be placed upon a sound basis until the force of public

opinion among bankers imposes upon each member the

necessity of holding a cash reserve bearing a fair

proportion to the liabilities incurred. It matters little

who holds the reserve, provided it actually does exist in

the form of metal, and is not evaporated away by being

placed at call, or deposited with other banks which

make free use of it. In the absence of some common

action among bankers, it is certain that the

sensitiveness of the money market will increase, and it

is probable that commercial crises will from time to

time recur, even exceeding in their violence and

disastrous consequences those whose history we know

too well.

 

XXIV.20

 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search

 









Chapter XXV A Tabular Standard of Value

 



At the outset it was observed that money, besides

serving as a common denominator of value, and as a

medium to facilitate exchange, was usually employed

likewise as the standard of value, in terms of which

contracts extending over long series of years are

expressed. In letting land on long or perpetual leases,

in lending money to governments, corporations, and

railway companies, it is the general practice to make

the interest and capital repayable in legal tender gold

money. But there is abundance of evidence to prove

that the value of gold has undergone extensive

changes. Between 1789 and 1809, it fell in the ratio of

100 to 54, or by 46 per cent., as I have shown in a

paper on the Variation of Prices since 1782, read to the

London Statistical Society in June, 1865. From 1809 to1849 it rose again in the extraordinary ratio of 100 to

245, or by 145 per cent., rendering government

annuities and all fixed payments, extending over this

period, almost two and a half times as valuable as they

were in 1809. Since 1849 the value of gold has again

fallen to the extent of at least 20 per cent.; and a careful

study of the fluctuations of prices, as shown either in

the Annual Reviews of Trade of the Economist

newspaper, or in the paper referred to above, shows

that fluctuations of from 10 to 25 per cent. occur in

every credit cycle.

 

XXV.1

 

Corn Rents.

 



The question arises whether, having regard to these

extreme changes in the values of the precious metals, it

is desirable to employ them as the standard of value in

long lasting contracts. We are forced to admit that the

statesmen of Queen Elizabeth were far-seeing when

they passed the Act which obliged the colleges of

Oxford, Cambridge, and Eton, to lease their lands for

corn rents. The result has been to make those colleges

far richer than they would otherwise have been, therents and endowments expressed in money having sunk

to a fraction of their ancient value.

 

            XXV.2 I believe that there is no legal

impediment in the way of a landlord leasing his lands

at present for a corn rent, or an iron, or coal, or any

other rent. All that the law requires is that the contract

shall be perfectly definite, and of exactly determinate

meaning, so that the kind of commodity intended, and

the quantity of that commodity, shall be exactly

ascertainable. But the law, in defining legal tender

money, provides against misapprehensions concerning

money payments, whereas there is no security that

mistakes and difficulties will not arise in taking other

commodities as the matter of rents. Moreover any

single commodity, such as corn or coal, undergoes

considerable fluctuations from year to year, and as

regards periods of ten or twenty years, might prove not

to be so good a standard as silver or gold. Commodities

which are comparatively steady in value on the average

of long periods may be subject to great temporary

variations of supply or demand.

 

XXV.3

 

A Multiple Legal Tender. 



The question thus arises whether the progress of

economical and statistical science might not enable us

to devise some better standard of value. We have seen

(pp. 136-143) that the so-called double standard system

of money spreads the fluctuations of supply and

demand of gold and silver over a larger area, and

maintains both metals more unchanged in value than

they would otherwise be. Can we not conceive a

multiple legal tender, which would be still less liable to

variation? We estimate the value of one hundred

pounds by the quantities of corn, beef, potatoes, coal,

timber, iron, tea, coffee, beer, and other principal

commodities, which it will purchase from time to time.

Might we not invent a legal tender note which should

be convertible, not into any one single commodity, but

into an aggregate of small quantities of various

commodities, the quantity and quality of each being

rigorously defined? Thus a hundred pound note, would

give the owners a right to demand one quarter of good

wheat, one ton of ordinary merchant bar iron, one

hundred pounds weight of middling cotton, twenty

pounds of sugar, five pounds of tea, and other articles

sufficient to make up the value. All these commodities

will, of course, fluctuate in their relative values, but ifthe holder of the note loses upon some, he will in all

probability gain upon others, so that on the average his

note will remain steady in purchasing power. Indeed,

as the articles into which it is convertible are those

needed for continual consumption, the purchasing

power of the note must remain steady compared with

that of gold or silver, which metals are employed only

for a few special purposes.

 

            XXV.4 In practice, such a legal tender

currency would obviously be most inconvenient, since

no one would wish to have a miscellaneous assortment

of goods forced into his possession. He who wanted

corn, would have to sell to other parties the iron, beef,

and other things received along with it; gold, or other

metallic money, would doubtless be used as the

medium in these exchanges. This scheme would,

therefore, resolve itself practically into that which has

been long since brought forward under the title of the

Tabular Standard of Value.

 

XXV.5

 

Lowe's proposed Table of Reference.

 Among valuable books, which have been forgotten, is

to be mentioned that by Joseph Lowe on "The Present

State of England in regard to Agriculture, Trade, and

Finance," published in 1822. This book contains one of

the ablest treatises on the variation of prices, the state

of the currency, the poor-law, population, finance, and

other public questions, of the time in which it was

published, that I have ever met with. In Chapter IX.

Lowe treats, in a very enlightened manner, of the

fluctuations in the value of money, and proceeds to

propound a scheme, probably invented by him, for

giving a steady value to money contracts. He proposes

that persons should be appointed to collect authentic

information concerning the prices at which the staple

articles of household consumption were sold. In regard

to corn and sugar authoritative returns were then, and

have ever since been, published in the London Gazette,

and there seemed to be no difficulty in extending a like

system to other articles. Having regard to the

comparative quantities of commodities consumed in a

household, he would then frame a table of reference,

showing in what degree a money contract must be

varied so as to make the purchasing power uniform. In

principle the scheme seems to be perfectly sound; but

Lowe did not attempt to work out the practical details,

and his plan involves needless difficulties. 

XXV.6

 

Poulett Scrope's Tabular Standard of Value.

 



A very similar scheme was independently proposed,

about eleven years later, by Mr. G. Poulett Scrope, the

well-known writer on geology and political economy.

In a very able but now forgotten pamphlet, called "An

Examination of the Bank Charter Question, with an

Inquiry into the Nature of a Just Standard of Value"

(London, 1833), Mr. Scrope suggests (p. 26) that a

standard might be formed by taking an average of the

mass of commodities which, even if not employed as

the legal standard, might serve to determine and correct

the variations of the legal standard. The scheme was

also described in Mr. Scrope's interesting book on the

Principles of Political Economy, published in the same

year (p. 406), and in the second edition of the same

book, called "Political Economy for Plain People,"

issued two years ago, (p. 308). The late Mr. G. R,.

Porter, without referring to previous writers, gave the

same scheme in 1838, in the first edition of his well-

known treatise on "The Progress of the Nation,"

(Sections III, and IV. p. 235). He added a tableshowing the average fluctuations of fifty commodities

monthly during the years 1833 to 1837.

 

XXV.7

Such schemes for a tabular or average standard of

value appear to be perfectly sound and highly valuable

in a theoretical point of view, and the practical

difficulties are not of a serious character. To carry

Lowe's and Scrope's plans into effect, a permanent

government commission would have to be created, and

endowed with a kind of judicial power. The officers of

the department would collect the current prices of

commodities in all the principal markets of the

kingdom, and, by a well-defined system of

calculations, would compute from these data the

average variations in the purchasing power of gold.

The decisions of this commission would be published

monthly, and payments would be adjusted in

accordance with them. Thus, suppose that a debt of one

hundred pounds was incurred upon the 1st of July,

1875, and was to be paid back on 1st July, 1878; if the

commission had decided in June, 1878, that the value

of gold had fallen in the ratio of 106 to 100 in the

intervening years, then the creditor would claim an

increase of 6 per cent in the nominal amount of the

debt. 

            XXV.8 At first the use of this national tabular

standard might be permissive, so that it could be

enforced only where the parties to the contract had

inserted a clause to that effect in their contract. After

the practicability and utility of the plan had become

sufficiently demonstrated, it might be made

compulsory, in the sense that every money debt of, say,

more than three months' standing, would be varied

according to the tabular standard, in the absence of an

express provision to the contrary.

 

XXV.9

 

Difficulties of the Scheme.

The difficulties in the way of such a scheme are not

considerable. It would, no doubt, introduce a certain

complexity into the relations of debtors and creditors,

and disputes might sometimes arise as to the date of the

debt whence the calculation must be made. Such

difficulties would not exceed those arising from the

payment of interest, which likewise depends on the

duration of the debt. The work of the commission,

when once established and directed by Act of

Parliament, would be little more than that of

accountants acting according to fixed rules. Theirdecisions would be of a perfectly bonâ fide and reliable

character, because, in addition to their average results,

they would be required to publish periodically the

detailed tables of prices upon which their calculations

were founded, and thus many persons could

sufficiently verify the data and the calculations. Fraud

would be out of the question.

 

            XXV.10 The only real difficulty which I

foresee, is that of deciding upon the proper method of

deducing the average. According to the method which I

should advocate, a considerable number of

commodities, say 100, should be chosen with special

regard to the independence of their fluctuations one

from another, and then the geometrical average of the

ratios in which their gold prices have changed would

be calculated logarithmically. This is the method which

I employed in my pamphlet on the "Serious Fall in the

Value of Gold, etc." and in the paper on the Variations

of Prices since 1782, previously referred to (p. 323). A

somewhat similar method had been previously

employed by Mr. Newmarch. In the annual

Commercial History and Review of the Economist

newspaper, there has, for many years, appeared a table

containing the Total Index Number of prices, or the

arithmetical sum of the numbers expressing the ratiosof the prices of many commodities to the average

prices of the same commodities in the years 1845

50. Whatever method were adopted, however, the

results wouldbe better than if we continued to accept a

single metal for the standard, as we do at present.

 

            XXV.11 The space at my disposal will not

allow me to describe adequately the advantages which

would arise from the establishment of a national

tabular standard of value. Such a standard would add a

wholly new degree of stability to social relations,

securing the fixed incomes of individuals and public

institutions from the depreciation which they have

often suffered. Speculation, too, based upon the

frequent oscillations of prices, which take place in the

present state of commerce, would be to a certain extent

discouraged. The calculations of merchants would be

less frequently frustrated by causes beyond their own

control, and many bankruptcies would be prevented.

Periodical collapses of credit would no doubt recur

from time to time, but the intensity of the crises would

be mitigated, because as prices fell the liabilities of

debtors would decrease approximately in the same

ratio.

 

XXV.12 




Author: Jevons, William Stanley Title: Money and the

Mechanism of Exchange Publisher: D. Appleton and

Company Location: New York Edition: 1876 First

published: 1875

 

William Stanley Jevons

 

Advanced Search Chapter XXVI The Quantity of

Money Needed by a Nation

 



It might seem natural that one most important point for

discussion in an Essay on Money would be the quantity

of money required by a nation. Nothing would seem

more desirable than to decide how much each person

needs of paper, gold, silver, or bronze currency, so that

the government might take care to provide sufficient

for every one. In almost every country great complaints

have from time to time been made as to the scarcity of

the circulating medium, and the urgent need of more.

All the evils of the day, the slackness of trade, falling

prices, declining revenue, poverty of the people, want

of employment, political discontent, bankruptcy, and

panic, have been attributed to the want of money, theremedy suggested being in former days the setting of

the mint to work, and in later times the issue of paper

money.

 

            XXVI.1 The true answer to all such

complaints is that no one can tell how much currency a

nation requires, and that to attempt to regulate its

quantity is the last thing which a statesman should do.

In almost every case the apparent scarcity of currency

arises from unskilful management of the metallic

currency, bad regulation of paper representative

money, illegitimate speculation, or some unsoundness

in commerce which would be aggravated by a further

increase of the paper currency. We shall find that to

ascertain how much money is needed by a nation is a

problem involving many unknown quantities, so that a

sure solution can never be obtained.

 

XXVI.2

 

Quantity of Work to be done by Money.

 



To decide how much money is needed by a nation, we

must, firstly, determine the quantity of work which

money has to do. This will be proportional, ceterisparibus, to the number of the population; twice the

number of people, if equally active in trade and

performing it in the same way, will clearly want twice

as much money. It will be proportional, again, to the

activity of industry, and to the complexity of its

organization. The more goods are bought and sold, and

the more often they pass from hand to hand, the more

currency will be needed to move them. It will be

proportional, again, to the prices of goods; and if gold

falls in value, and prices are raised, more money will

be needed to pay the debts increased in nominal

amount.

 

            XXVI.3 Few of the quantities concerned in

such considerations are known. We know the number

of the population approximately, and the amount of

foreign trade, but the quantities of goods bought and

sold in inland trade are almost entirely unknown. It is

needless to dwell on this side of the question, as our

knowledge is still more defective in other respects.

 

XXVI.4

 

Efficiency of the Currency.

By the efficiency of the currency we mean the average

number of exchanges effected by each piece of moneyin a unit of time, such as a year. The aggregate work

done by money will be measured by its quantity

multiplied into the average number of times which

each coin or note passes from hand to hand during the

year. Now we know very imperfectly what is the

quantity of currency in most countries, and we know

nothing at all as to the average rapidity of circulation.

Some coins, especially small silver or bronze coins,

may pass several times in the course of a day. Other

coins or notes may be kept in the pocket for weeks, or

may be laid by for months and years. I have never met

with any attempt to determine in any country the

average rapidity of circulation, nor have I been able to

think of any means whatever of approaching the

investigation of the question, except in the inverse way.

If we knew the amount of exchanges effected, and the

quantity of currency used, we might get by division the

average number of times the currency is turned over;

but the data, as already stated, are quite wanting.

 

            XXVI.5 There is no doubt that the rapidity of

circulation varies very much between one country and

another. A thrifty people with slight banking facilities,

like the French, Swiss, Belgians, and Dutch, hoard coin

much more than an improvident people like the

English, or even a careful people with a perfectbanking system like the Scotch. Many circumstances,

too, affect the rapidity of circulation. Railways and

rapid steamboats enable coin and bullion to be more

swiftly remitted than of old; telegraphs prevent its

needless removal, and the acceleration of the mails has

a like effect. A decrease in the circulation of country

banknotes in England, in 1842, was attributed to the

effect of the penny postal reform in facilitating

presentation of notes by post.

 

XXVI.6

Effects of the Cheque and Clearing System.

 



Far more important than these considerations is the fact

that, where an extensive banking system exists, only a

portion of the exchanges are actually effected by

money. I do not lay much stress upon the use of bills of

exchange as replacing money, because the degree in

which they are so used must be comparatively limited,

and they are rather articles bought and sold with money

than money itself. But we have traced out step by step

the way in which the cheque and clearing system

enables debts to be balanced off against each other, so

that the money is never touched at all, and only

intervenes as the unit of value in which sums areexpressed. Almost all large exchanges are now effected

by a complicated and perfected system of barter. In the

London Clearing House, transactions to the amount of,

at least, £6,000,000,000 in the year are thus effected,

without the use of any cash at all, and, as I have before

explained, this amount gives no adequate idea of the

exchanges a arranged by cheques, because so many

transactions are really cleared in provincial banks,

between branches, agents, or correspondents of the

same bank, or between banks having the same London

agents.

 

            XXVI.7 If our knowledge of the amount of

transactions in England is highly imperfect, we know

still less of the way in which payments are effected in

other countries. The New York Clearing House

transactions are very extensive, as we have seen, and

there is an elaborate banking system extending over all

the States of the Union; but it would require much

investigation on the spot to enable any one to form a

notion whether the correspondence between these

banks enables them to economize currency as much as

the English system of London agencies. In France and

most continental countries the cheque and clearing

system can hardly be said to exist except in some of the

large towns. Paris has an incipient clearing house, andthe Bank of France, moreover, makes transfers

between clients to the extent of two or three millions

daily. All banks will to a certain extent economize

currency, and those of Amsterdam and Hamburg have

for some centuries carried on a system of transfers, the

true prototype of our system.

 

            XXVI.8 Considerable changes, it is true, are

taking place in the mode of conducting business in

some parts of the Continent. Professor Cliffe Leslie,

who is well known to be intimately acquainted with the

economical systems of the continental countries,

attributes the rise of prices in Germany in a great

degree to the quicker circulation of the money, and the

freer use of instruments of credit. In the Fortnightly

Review for November, 1870 (pp. 568-9), he says:-"The

improvements in locomotion and in commercial

activity which have so largely augmented the money-

making power of the Germans, have also quickened

prodigiously the circulation of money; and the

development of credit, likewise following industrial

progress, has added to the volume of the circulating

medium a mass of substitutes for money which move

with greater velocity. A much smaller amount of

money than formerly now suffices to do a given

amount of business, or to raise prices to a given range;and to the increased amount of actual money now

current in Germany we must add a brisk circulation of

instruments of credit. Were the circulating medium

composed of coin alone, whatever the amount of the

precious metals issuing from the mines, or circulating

in other countries, and whatever the price of German

commodities in markets abroad, no rise in the prices of

German commodities at home could take place without

additional coin to sustain it."

            XXVI.9 So different, then, are the commercial

habits of different peoples, that there evidently exists

no proportion whatever between the amount of

currency in a country and the aggregate of the

exchanges which can be effected by it. Even if we had

reliable statistics of the amounts of currencies, such

data should be regarded as indicating, not the

comparative abundance or scarcity of money, but the

degree of civilization, of providence, or of complexity

of banking organization, in the country.

 

XXVI.10

 

Conclusion.

 



From all the above considerations it follows that theonly method of regulating the amount of the currency

is to leave it at perfect freedom to regulate itself.

Money must find its own level like water, and flow in

and out of a country, according to fluctuations of

commerce which no government can foresee or

prevent. The manner in which paper notes may be used

to represent and replace part of the metallic currency

should be strictly regulated, because otherwise belief in

the existence of metallic money is created when there

is no such money to warrant the belief. But the amount

of money itself can be no more regulated than the

amounts of corn, iron, cotton, or other common

commodities produced and consumed by a people. It

must be allowed, indeed, to be no easy matter to

discriminate precisely and soundly between those

points at which the legislator must interfere in the

management of the currency and lay down a fixed rule,

and those points at which perfect freedom must be

maintained.

 

XXVI.11

A comparison of our present laws regarding currency

and trade, with those which existed in this country

from the tenth to the fourteenth century, will show a

curious double progress. Many things which our

ancestors attempted to regulate by law are now left freeby general consent, and other things which they left

free, or nearly so, are now strictly regulated. The rates

of wages, the price of the quartern loaf, the exercise of

various trades, were then the subject of legislation,

though we now know that they cannot be properly

brought within the scope of legislative control. On the

other hand, an endless diversity of weights and

measures were formerly used in different parts of the

country, and little or no attempt was made to reduce

them to any system or precise definition. Almost every

important town, too, had its mint in the earlier

centuries, and barons and great ecclesiastics often

exercised the right of issuing their own money. There

are still a very few persons who advocate free coinage;

but, by almost general consent, the work of coining

metallic money is now, in every civilized country,

committed to the care of the state. We provide for a

uniform system of coins with the same care that we

establish a national system of weights and measures.

But while we thus take the greatest care of the metallic

currency in one respect, we have utterly abandoned all

the futile attempts which were in former centuries

made to bring bullion into the kingdom in order to set

the mint to work.

 

            XXVI.12 We must deal with the papercurrency in analogous manner, and regulate it both

more and less than hitherto. Private issues should

disappear like private mints, and each kingdom should

have one uniform paper circulation, issued from a

single central state department, more resembling a mint

than a bank. The manner of issuing this paper currency

should strictly regulated in one sense; the paper

circulation should be made to increase and diminish

with the amount of gold deposited in exchange for it.

At the same time, no thought need be taken about the

amount so issued. The purpose of the strict regulation

is not to govern the amount, but to leave that amount to

vary according to the natural laws of supply and

demand. In my opinion, it is the issue of paper

representative notes, accepted in place of coin, which

constitutes an arbitrary interference with the natural

laws governing the variations of a purely metallic

currency, so that strict legislative control in one way

leads to more real freedom in another. I am quite

willing to allow, however, that questions of great

nicety and subtlety arise in this subject, and that only in

the gradual progress of economic science can they be

finally set at rest.

 

XXVI.13

   *******************************

 



William Stanley Jevons, Money and the Mechanism of

Exchange NOTES

 



Introduction

 


1. "The Theory of Political Economy." 8vo. 1871

      (Macmillan).

 

2. Walras, Éléments d'Économie politique pure."

    Lausanne, Paris (Guillaumin), 1874.

 

3. "Travels in Alaska, etc.," by F. Whymper, p. 225.

 

4. Gladstone, "Juventus Mundi," p. 534.

5. See a scarce tract, entitled "Two Letters to Mr.

    Wood on theCoin and Currency in the Leeward

    Islands," p. 34. London, 1740.

 




End of Notes