One Way to
(Get Over
Writer's Block

With Link to Video Version of Book

REUD INSTITUTE

6;5'

THE FREUD

 
                          One Way to Get Over Writer’s Block
 
                            For video version of book, go to:
                        https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SeFUjZwnQ64
 
 
    A lot of times, writer’s block isn’t about not having something to say; it is about not
knowing what it is worth it to say. Any given person has a lot to say, but he doesn’t necessarily
know what it is that he knows that other people don’t know. He doesn’t necessarily know what
he knows that other people are interested in hearing about.
Here is why I say this. I regularly do ‘ask me anything’ sessions. These are online events where I
say that I am expert on such and such and then invite others to ask me anything about such and
such. And the thing is, I get questions that I can answer that I had no idea other wanted to know
the answer to. And when I answer those questions, floods of creativity come gushing out of me.
    But when I am in a vacuum, I don’t say anything, because, in a vacuum, there is nothing
to say. And in order to get out of such a vacuum, I either have to address a fantasy-audience, 
which is usually what I do, or I address a real audience, which is what I am doing in the context
of these ask me anything sessions.
So one way to get over writer’s block is to put yourself in a situation where, instead of having to
create ex nihilo, you merely have to respond to other people’s questions and comments.
    One last point: I am extremely good at getting people who think that they have nothing to
say to say really smart and original things; I am good at getting people who think they have no
material to discover really good material within themselves. Part of the reason for this is that I
make thought-provoking points to them, but the main reason is that I know how to provide a
context in which it is socially permissible, and socially indicated, for them to make the points
that are bottled up inside them. Usually people who are stuck, as in, they are staring impotently
at a blank computer monitor, are stuck because they need somebody else to make it clear to them
which of the various points that are within is worth making. Their being stuck isn’t about there
being nothing inside their heads; it is about their being a dense mass of points in their heads, no
one of which is singled out as especially significant. So dialogue with me
(www.freudinstitute.com), and I’ll let you know which of those points is significant, and then
you’ll find out just how good a writer you really are.
 