 


 



              Philosophical Knowledge


 


What it is and why philosophy-departments don't

                            want you to have it


 


 


 


 


                        John-Michael Kuczynski, PhD


                              Fellow, Bard College


 


 


 


 


1.0 Philosophy as providing the justification for the empirically

unjustifiable assumptions on which empirical science depends


 


 2.0 The main confusion underlying empiricism


 


 


3.0 That it is self-defeating to deny the existence of philosophical truth

(or truth in general)


 


 


4.0 How Psychological and Sociological Factors Thwart Philosophical

Progress


           


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


  


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


1.0 Philosophy as providing the justification for the empirically

unjustifiable assumptions on which empirical science depends


       An empirical[1] discipline is one whose findings, when justified, are

justified by their consistency with sensory observation. Biology is an

empirical discipline; so is physics.


      Any given empirical discipline makes assumptions that cannot be

justified by that discipline or, indeed, by any empirical discipline. For

example, when investigating the external world, and thus when doing physics

or biology, one must assume that one’s senses give one accurate information

about it.  For if our sensory experiences turned out to be hallucinations, then

any hypotheses based thereupon would be spurious.


       But this assumption cannot itself be given an empirical justification.

More plainly, observation cannot tell you that it itself is a source of accurate

information. Witnesses cannot self-corroborate. Thus, a physicist could not

coherently attempt to provide experimental support for his belief that his

senses are accurate. For it is only through his senses that he can know

whether those experiments were even conducted, as opposed to merely

dreamt, or what their outcomes were, supposing that they were in fact

conducted.


     Of course, to the extent that we are able to determine to what degree, if

any, this or that particular sensory experience is veridical, we do so on the

basis of other sensory experiences. But when judging that, last night at 4:00

am (sleep-time), I wasn’t really in the presence of a talking cow, I am

assuming the veridicality of the experiences with which my cow-experiences

fail to cohere. In general our sensory experiences can provide only a relative

justification for the judgments we make about this or that specific perception:

relative to the assumption that those experiences are typically accurate,

inferences can be made as to the degree of accuracy of this or that particular

perception. But we cannot legitimately assume that our sense perceptions areaccurate when trying to show that sense-perception is a legitimate source of

information about the external world. 


       So, since the hypotheses generated by physics are based on sensory

experiences, and therefore presuppose that such experiences are typically

accurate, physics cannot possibly justify that presupposition, and neither, for

the very same reason, can any other empirical discipline. Therefore, unless

that presupposition can be justified, we know nothing about the external

world, and, as a result, all of the empirical sciences crumble. It is the task, not

of the scientist, but of the meta-scientist---of the philosopher, in other words--

-to provide that justification. 


      The assumption that our senses are a viable source of information about

the external world is but one of many assumptions on which empirical

knowledge rests but for which no empirical justification can be provided and

for which, therefore, a philosophical justification must be provided. It is the

purpose of this book to identify the most important of these assumptions and

to provide the requisite philosophical justifications for them.


 


2.0   The main confusion underlying empiricism   


 


        Philosophy is regarded with more suspicion than most other disciplines. 

One reason for this is that it is a non-empirical discipline.  But that is not the

only reason. Mathematics is a non-empirical discipline. But it isn’t regarded

with suspicion. Why this double standard?


       First of all, because of the close connections of mathematics to empirical

disciplines such as physics, people often assume that, like physics,mathematics must be empirical. Also, the importance of some branches of

mathematics to scientific and technological innovation makes it clear that,

even if mathematics is non-empirical, it’s unwise to question its methods.

Don’t look a gift-horse in the mouth.


          But there is another reason why, despite it’s being quite as non-

empirical as philosophy, mathematics is erroneously seen as empirical and

why, as a result, it isn’t the object of the same overt hostility and suspicion as

philosophy, which, unlike mathematics, is seen for the non-empirical

discipline that it is.


       For obvious reasons, people tend to think that it is through visual

observation of figures on chalk-boards (or some such) that one learns

geometry and that, given any branch of mathematics, the same thing mutatis

mutandis is true of the way in which one learns the truths belonging to it.


     This reasoning embodies a confusion that has stymied intellectual

progress for centuries. The message borne by a perception, or any other

mental representation, is known as its “content.” One way in which sense-

perceptions can add to what we know is by transmitting their contents to us. I

see a dog running towards me, and I know on that basis that, indeed, there is

a dog running towards me. Here what I learned from my sense perception

coincided with the content of that very perception.


         But there is a very different way in which sense perception can add, or

at least help to add, to what one knows. A sense perception may trigger

ratiocinative processes that yield knowledge of truths that were not part of

that perception’s content.[2] Many truths learned in this way couldn’t

possibly be any part of any perception’s content. An illustration is in order.


           You see figures on a blackboard that vaguely resemble circles,triangles, etc. These sense perceptions help you learn that:


 


          (BH)[3] The area of Euclidean triangle is ½ bh.


 


Those visual perceptions directly apprise you of various non-mathematical

facts (e.g., that there is a blackboard nearby on which there are various

markings). Those perceptions do not themselves transmit BH to you. So how

do they help you become aware of that principle? The answer: By

precipitating thought-processes that in their turn lead to your seeing that BH

is correct.


      You can see specific markings on specific surfaces; you can see specific

rocks and specific people; you can see specific objects. (Given that there are

no non-specific objects, “specific object” is a pleonasm, and we might as well

have just said: “you can see objects.”) But you cannot see (or otherwise

sense-perceive) principles. (The parenthetical qualification will henceforth be

left unstated.) There are two reasons for this:


 


          Reason #1: Principles are general. BH says that, for any x,

        x’s being a triangle has the consequence that x’s area is ½

        its base times its height. One cannot see general truths. One

        sees particulars: particular rocks, trees, people, events, and

        so forth. One can see instances of general truths, but not

          general truths per se.


           Reason #2:  Principles express dependence-relations. In

        other words, they are to the effect that, given P, Q must be

        the case, or at least is disposed to be the case, this being

          equivalent to: P’s being the case depends on (or is disposed

        to depend on) Q’s being the case. BH says that x’s being a

          triangle depends on x’s being such that its area is ½ its base

          times its height.


     So far as one’s senses apprise one of anything, they

        apprise one of what is the case, not of what must be the

          case. There are several reasons for this. One of them is that

        P’s having to be the case is equivalent to its being

          impossible that P should fail to be the case; and one cannot

          sense-perceive the non-existent, let along the impossible.

        [4]       


 


        Thus, our senses have two quite distinct roles in the acquisition of

knowledge: an information-transmitting role and a thought-triggering role.


        Here is one way of making it clear how these two roles differ. You have

a visual perception that is experientially just like that of seeing of a dog

running towards you; and on that basis you believe that, indeed, there is a dog

running towards you. But it turns out that you weren’t really seeing a dog;

you were having a hallucination. Question: did your sensory experience give

you knowledge to the effect that there was a dog running towards you? No. It

may have been that there was a dog running towards you. But your sense

perceptions didn’t provide you with knowledge of any such fact.


         Bearing these points in mind, consider the following, very differentscenario. You have visual experiences that are experientially just like the

visual experiences you’d ordinarily have of drawings of figures on a

chalkboard. Those experiences precipitate a long train of mathematically

impeccable reasoning that results in your accepting BH. It turns out that your

visual perceptions of the chalkboard were hallucinatory. Does it follow that

you don’t know that a triangle’s area is ½ its base times its height?


       No. Those visual experiences merely prompted the thought-process that

led to your accepting BH. Since that thought-process was itself impeccable,

even though it was initiated by hallucinations, the result was indeed

knowledge of BH. Those hallucinations no more constituted your

justification for believing BH than your turning the key in the ignition of your

car constitutes the road-trip that you subsequently make.


      But in the first scenario, any justification you had for believing that there

was a dog running towards you vanished when it turned out that the

experiences on which your belief was based were hallucinatory. So far as you

had any justification for believing that a dog was running towards you, that

justification lay in your visual experiences. So, given that those experiences

were hallucinations, it follows that you had no justification for believing that

a dog was running towards you and, therefore, that you didn’t know it. In the

other scenario, your visual experiences weren’t themselves constitutive of

your justification for accepting BH. They were merely precursors to the

thought-processes that did provide you with such a justification. So the fact

that those visual experiences were hallucinations in no way undermines your

justification for accepting BH.


       A story will help put these points into focus. A coconut lands on

Newton’s head. This causes him to conduct various investigations, which

bear rich mathematical and scientific fruit. The blow to Newton’s headwasn’t constitutive of Newton’s subsequent ratiocinative activity, which was

impeccable; it merely initiated it. It is along these lines that one must

understand the relationship between, on the one hand, your grasp of the fact

that a Euclidean triangle’s area is ½ its base times its height, and, on the other

hand, the visual perceptions (of chalk figures, or whatnot) that, in due course,

led to your grasping this fact.


   One last scenario will make it clear just how much the reason-triggering

role of sense perception differs from its information-transmitting role. Smith

reads a proof of some mathematical theorem. Smith understands what he is

reading and duly becomes aware of the proof in question. It is, of course,

through visual perceptions that he becomes aware of that visual theorem.

Brown hears a lecture in which that same proof is set forth. That lecture is

simply a reading of the article that Smith read. (So the words Brown hears are

the very words that Smith read.) Brown understands what he is hearing and

duly becomes aware of the proof in question.


     Smith’s sense-perceptions bear no resemblance, even of the most abstract

kind, to Brown’s perceptions. And yet Smith and Brown come away from

their respective experiences with the same mathematical knowledge. There is

no way to reconcile this last fact with the supposition that it is through sense-

perception that one becomes aware of mathematical truths; and it must be

supposed that, in the situation just described, the visual and auditory

experiences in question merely occasioned ratiocinative processes that,

unlike those sense-perceptions, endowed in whom they occurred knowledge

of the relevant theorem. Given any mathematical principle---or, indeed, any

logical or philosophical principle----an exact analogue shows that, so far as

sense-perception had a hand in a given person’s acquiring knowledge of that

principle it was merely by functioning as a trigger for ratiocinations that,unlike any sense-perception, were capable of awakening the relevant

ratiocinative faculties.


      The fact that the senses sometimes function in this way undermines the

facile the claim that all knowledge is empirical and therefore delegitimizes

any conceivable attempt to delegitimize the discipline of philosophy.


      Let us end by making a point that will make it clear what is meant by the

(already defined, but, even when properly defined, oft-misunderstood) word

“empirical.” When our senses transmit knowledge to us, the resulting

knowledge is empirical. (Also, inferential and theoretical knowledge based

on knowledge thus transmitted to us is empirical. So our knowledge of the

truths described by Relativity Theory, though obviously not acquired directly

from sense-perception, is empirical.) Knowledge is not empirical if it results

from purely ratiocinative processes, regardless of whether those processes

were occasioned by sense-perceptions. Non-empirical knowledge is purely

conceptual: it is knowledge, not of the structures or interrelations of denizens

of the spatiotemporal world, but of the structures and interrelations of

concepts. Non-empirical knowledge is typically (though probably not always)

obtained by analyzing concepts. For this reason, it is often described as

analytic.[5]


 


3.0 Why the claim that there is no such thing as philosophical truth is

self-defeating


 


      I've heard it said that, in philosophy, "there is no right or wrong." First of

all, this is itself a philosophical statement. So if it's true, then it's false, and if

it's false, then it's true. Therefore it's false, given that no true statement isinconsistent with itself. (P is inconsistent with Q if the one must be false if

the other is true. ‹x is a triangle›[6]  is inconsistent with ‹x has four sides›

because the one must be false if the other is true.)


     The position that there is no philosophical truth is a common one. Every

semester, at least ten students of mine openly advocate it. When such a

student is asked why he holds that view, he always take one of three views:


 


        (i) All legitimate knowledge is empirical knowledge;

          therefore, philosophy, being a non-empirical discipline, is

        no source of knowledge,


 


        (ii) All legitimate knowledge is scientific knowledge

          therefore, philosophy, being a non-science, is no source of

          knowledge,


 


and


 


        (iii)  There is no truth where there is disagreement.


 


         (i) is straightforwardly false, given that mathematics yields knowledge

and that it isn’t an empirical discipline. Also, as we’ve seen, any given

empirical discipline makes assumptions that it cannot justify and that it,

unless they’re justified, that discipline fails to yield knowledge. So,supposing that, in (ii), the term “scientific knowledge” refers to the results

generated by empirical sciences, it follows that (ii) is false. And supposing

that, in (ii), that term refers, not just to empirical disciplines, but also to non-

empirical disciplines (e.g. mathematics, philosophy), then what it says in no

way implies that philosophy fails to yield knowledge.


        (iii) is easily shown to be false. If one person disagrees with another, at

least one of those people must be wrong. If Smith thinks that 2+2=5 and

Jones disagrees, his position being that 2+2=6, then, even though each has the

wrong arithmetical belief, each is right to think that the other is wrong.  If

Smith thinks that 2+2=5 and Jones disagrees, his position being that 2+2=4,

then, in addition to having the right arithmetical belief, Jones is right to think

that Smith is wrong. So where there is disagreement, there is truth.

Consequently, the alleged fact that there is more disagreement in philosophy

than in other disciplines doesn't warrant the conclusion that there isn't such a

thing as philosophical truth.


 


3.1 What philosophers agree about


 


      There probably is more disagreement within the discipline of philosophy

than there is within most other disciplines. But in philosophical

disagreements have nothing to do with the logical structure of discipline of

philosophy and instead have to do with egos of the people involved in this

disagreements. . The problem isn't that there aren't agreed-upon methods of

resolving disputes. Nor is the problem that people disagree as to how those

methods are to be applied. The problem is that, for whatever reason,

philosophers practically never admit that they're wrong. They are provenwrong---and, when this happens, they usually know it. But, when proven

wrong, they respond, not by admitting that they’re wrong or even privately

changing their views, but rather by coercing people over whom they power

into towing their line. Since people don't depend for their well-being on how

philosophical disputes are settled, market forces don't weed out bad

philosophers the way they weed out bad doctors and engineers. That said, 

there is nothing inherent in the discipline of philosophy that prevents disputes

from being resolved: one must distinguish the discipline itself from the

personalities of its practitioners.


      Also, despite everything just said, there is considerable agreement among

analytic philosophers, and this agreement often concerns foundational issues.

For example, analytic philosophers, setting aside completely incompetent

ones, are unlikely to disagree as to whether a given proposition expresses a

legitimate rule of inference, and, given a pair of propositions, they're unlikely

to disagree as to whether the one entails the other . P entails Q if P cannot

possibly be true if Q is false. (Thus, ‹x is triangle› entails ‹x  has three sides.

›) A proposition is what is affirmed by an utterance of a declarative sentence.

[7]


        Further, given two propositions, philosophers are likely to agree as to

whether the one confirms the other. (P confirms Q if, other things being

equal, Q is less likely to be true if P is false than if P is true. Given that Smith

clearly isn’t a butler or chauffeur, Smith's living in a big house and driving a

Rolls Royce confirms, but does not entail, that Smith is wealthy. Why doesn’t

it entail it? Because Smith might have stolen the car and he might not be able

to afford the house.)  So, granting that there is more disagreement in

philosophy than there is botany or astronomy, there is also a great deal of

agreement in philosophy. 


3.2 What philosophers don't agree about


 


      That said, after ego-driven fakery is set aside, there is at least as much

disagreement in philosophy as there is agreement; and even though, as we've

seen, philosophers agree about some foundational issues, they disagree about

others. For example, even though, when asked whether one proposition

entails another, different philosophers tend to give the same answer, there is

no consensus among philosophers as to what it is for one proposition to entail

another. Indeed, there is no agreed upon answer to the question "what are

propositions?." Nor, consequently, is there any agreed upon answer to the

question "to what extent, and in what way, are the structures of propositions

reflected in those sentences that we use to express them?" This last question,

though seemingly arcane and technical is profoundly important, the reason

being that, in the answer to it, lies the answer, or a large part of the answer, to

the question “in what respects does a person’s knowing a language enhance

his cognitive abilities?”


        In the pages to come, we'll encounter dozens of other equally important

philosophical questions that have yet to be resolved. We'll also find that,

when supplemented with a modicum of technical rigor, a willingness to listen

to one's intuitions, however heterodox they may be, often yields plausible

answers to questions that, despite centuries of trying, philosophers have

failed to answer with anything other than brazen falsehoods .      


 


4.0 How Psychological and Sociological Factors Thwart Philosophical

Progress 


       I suspect, on average, students of biology at first-tier institutions are way

ahead of their counterparts at counterparts at bottom-tier universities in

respect of their likelihood to discover biological truths. But philosophical

discoveries are only marginally more likely to be made by students at top-tier

institutions than at bottom-tier ones. I made this claim in the last section, but

didn't defend it. Now I will defend it. My reason for discussing this topic is

that, by doing so, we'll have the chance the discuss philosophical disputes

that we won't have occasion to discuss in the pages following this preface.


        There are two facts that, once clearly stated, are likely to be accepted,

since they are consistent with generally accepted truths about human

psychology, and that make it clear that this hypothesis of mine is at least

approximately correct. The second fact is by far the more important one.


    Fact #1:  Whereas what passes for mathematical/musical ability in

institutional contexts really is mathematical/musical ability, what passes for

philosophical ability in such contexts is more likely than not to be a mere

mimicry of it. Why is this? Two reasons. First, even though an interest in

philosophy is extremely widespread, genuine ability at it is extremely

uncommon. Second, whereas the difference between somebody who has

musical talent and somebody who lacks it is brazenly obvious to almost

everyone, the only exceptions being those who are tone-deaf or otherwise

severely cognitively defective, the difference between somebody who has

philosophical talent and somebody who lacks it is invisible to people who do

not themselves have it. Given these two facts, it becomes inevitable that the

people in charge of institutions whose very purpose is to cultivate

philosophical insight haven't a shred of it themselves and are therefore can't

judge who has philosophical talent and who doesn't. When judging whether agiven person is philosophically gifted, such a person is forced to rely on some

belief of his to the effect that people who have philosophical ability are likely

to have other characteristics whose presence, unlike that of philosophical

ability itself, are easy to detect. Those characteristics are typically ones that

conduce to institution-internal success (e.g. orderliness, discipline in regards

to following instructions, complacency in regards to forming views of one's

own views) but are seldom ones that have anything to do with a person's

degree of philosophical acumen. As a result, philosophy professors are likely

to be people who should have become bureaucrats, not philosophers. would

have made good bureaucrats but don't make good philosophers. 


   Fact #2: 99 times out of a 100, a brilliant student of philosophy at

Cambridge or Princeton will use every ounce of intellect that he has to defend

the views of his professors, since his professional future is in their hands; and

he will make every effort to smear a position, however plausible, that isn’t in

lockstep with those of his professors. He’ll find ways to defend behaviorism,

functionalism, modal realism, or whatever happens at the time to be the line

one must toe if one is to move forward in the philosophical world. 99% of the

time, people gifted with philosophical intelligence use it to rationalize

philosophical views that, although clearly broken, happen to be held by the

people who give out philosophy-professorships. I will now give several

examples of this.


         Boris Kment, a contemporary of mine who received his degrees from

Oxford and Princeton and must therefore surely be extremely intelligent,

takes it for granted that, given some true claim about what would have been

the case hold in virtue of the things that happen alternative universes that

exist as concretely as our own.  For example, suppose that Smith has exactly

two cars; and, with that assumption in mind, consider the statement: 


        (1) If Smith had three cars, he would have an odd number

          cars.


 


      According to Kment, the meaning of (1) is:


 


        (2) There  exists an alternative universe that is just likes

        ours except that, in it, Smith has three cars; and in that

          universe, Smith has an odd number of cars.[8]


 


I disagree with Kment. In my view, the meaning of (1) is: 


 


        (3) The statement that Smith has an odd number of cars

          follows from the statement that Smith has three cars. In

        other words, one is guilty of holding a self-contradictory

          view if one holds that Smith holds three cars but not an odd

          number of cars.         


 


        Is my view right? I don't know. But here's what I do know. It isn't by

going to other universes that we know that (1) is correct. It is by considering

whether it makes sense. To be sure, there are no alternate universes where

Smith has three cars but where he doesn't have an odd number of cars. But

that's because it makes no sense to deny (1). So, while I don't know whethermy view is right, I do know Kment’s view isn't exactly self-evidently correct.

[9]  


        Question: Why does somebody of Kment’s level of intelligence not

bother to consider alternatives to his view or even to consider questions that,

although presupposing the correctness of his view, concern anything other

than minor technicalities?     


        Answer: Kment’s adviser at Princeton was David Lewis (1940-2000).

Like Kment, Lewis held that (2) is the correct analysis of (1) and that all

statements of its kind are to be analyzed along the same lines.[10] In fact, this

view, which is known as “modal realism,” is the cornerstone of Lewis’s

work. Lewis was a philosophical genius and, in most philosophical contexts,

was unusually flexible. But he wouldn’t budge when it came to modal

realism. For him, that was a line in the sand: accept it or get lost. Kment

accepted it. And, ten years after receiving his doctorate, he still does. In that

time, everything he's published has been simply repeated or elaborated on

points that he made in his dissertation. That said, Kment is tenured at one of

the top ten departments in the country and I've been told more than once that

he's one of the two or three finest philosophical minds of his generation.      


           But, when one looks at the philosophical legacy of Ludwig

Wittgenstein (1889-1951), one finds even starker examples of the principle

that philosophers use their intelligence, not to find the truth, but to defend

orthodoxies and to discredit any truth that should happen to conflict with

those orthodoxies.


      Wittgenstein was the most highly ranked professor at Trinity College

Cambridge, then the most prestigious philosophy department in the world,

and his views became orthodoxies. Unfortunately, those views were not onlyfalse but idiotic. His major work is titled Philosophical Investigations. The

main thesis of that work is, I quote, that “thinking is not a mental process.”

His position was that to think is to engage in overt behaviors that need not

have mental accompaniments. And he held that, should such behaviors have

mental accompaniments, they are in no way enriched by them---those mental

accompaniments do not add, or help, to add a cognitive dimension to those

behaviors. Whatever is going on in the relevant person's head is, to use

Wittgenstein's term, a "free wheel."


       Thus, Wittgenstein denied that what a person says is to any degree

determined by what his beliefs are. For, according to Wittgenstein, what a

person says is what a person thinks; so there can’t be thought behind the

speech. There is just the speech. The speaker’s psychology is irrelevant. In

fact, Wittgenstein went so far as to deny that there was anything to the mind

other than what that person’s body did.


       So according to Wittgenstein, what determines what a person is thinking

is not what that person is thinking. (It's not hard not to state this contention of

Wittgenstein's in a way that doesn't make it sound like a joke.) Whether one

is thinking this as opposed to that is determined by how one's body is

moving, what noises one is making, and where (in the cultural, not the

geographical sense of "where") those noises and body-movements are

occurring. Wittgenstein’s view was that you are the mask that you wear.[11]


         Wittgenstein thus held that cannot experience pain without acting as

though one is pain and, more generally, that what we refer to as

“experiences” partly or entirely consist of the behaviors to which they tend to

give rise. In his view, it  isn't just what we think that is determined by how

our bodies interact with those of others in our culture: what we feel is also so

determined.       In denying that thoughts had any existence apart from their overt

manifestations, Wittgenstein was obliterating the distinction between

voluntary and involuntary behavior. A voluntary movement is one that is

caused by an intention on the part of the agent. But intentions are thoughts, or

at least involve them; so, since Wittgenstein held that there is nothing to a

person’s thoughts other than his body movements, he was effectively denying

that there is any difference between involuntary movements (such as those

involved in an epileptic fit) and voluntary ones (such as those involved in my

typing this sentence).    


            Wittgenstein’s view was that we’re zombies who don’t think or feel

anything unless we wiggle and jiggle in culturally accepted ways. This is not

a summary of his position. It is his position. If it sounds as though I’m

ridiculing it, that’s only because I’m stating it clearly.     


            To anyone who is not a hollowed out pseudo-person, these claims are

brazenly absurd. I suspect that, in his attempt to describe the psyche,

Wittgenstein was describing himself. For hundreds of pages, Wittgenstein

insists that


 


        (i) Thought has no existence independently of overt bodily

          behavior,


 


        (ii) Thought has no existence outside of a cultural context:

        to think is to act (or, in any case, for one's body to move) in

        ways that are in keeping with the mores (or, to use

          Wittgenstein's term, "forms of life") constitutive of one's

          culture 


and


 


        (iii) Although some noises (e.g. an utterance of "it's

          raining") are meaningful, there are no such things as

          meanings: meaningfulness is a characteristic of certain

          behaviors and ink-marks and noises. But meanings per se

        are non-entities.


 


     (i) and (ii) are self-evidently false. (iii) isn't self-evidently false, but it is

false. A logical consequence of


 


        (a) Smith and Jones are both tall


 


is


 


        (b) There exists some property---namely, tallness---that

          Smith and Jones share.


 


        Given the existence of properties, the existence of meanings is readily

established. Given any statement S, there are properties p…p such that S is
                                                                  1n

true if p…pare jointly instantiated and S is false otherwise. For example,
        1n  


        (c) John is tall


 


is true if the each of the following properties is instantiated, and otherwise

false: the property of being identical with John, the property of being tall, and

the property of a being a thing x such that x is tall and x is identical with

John. (Of course, if the last of these properties is instantiated, so are the other

two. But given the (c) contains discrete parts corresponding to "John" and

"tall," the corresponding proposition cannot possibly consist of just one

property, and the decomposition of that proposition is therefore to be

identified with the membership of the set containing all three of the just-

mentioned properties.)


     Of course, it is by no means obvious what properties are, and it is by no

means clear that a deflationary conception of them is the wrong one. But that

is neither here nor there: what matters is that they do exist and therefore that

(iii) is false.


         Stated as directly as possible, Wittgenstein's three main views are:


 


        (a) We're empty shells. There's nothing on the inside. 


 


        (b) We are the masks we wear. 


 


        (c) Nothing means anything. 


      Speaking from a psychiatric, as opposed to a philosophical standpoint,

(a), (b), and (c) perfectly articulate the outlook of the psychopath. A

psychopath is not an insane person. Nor is a psychopath necessarily an evil

person. A psychopath is an empty fraudster whose personality-architecture is

far too rudimentary for him to even grasp what a value is, let alone have one.

Psychopaths are weak, underdeveloped con-artists; they aren't "cool" super-

villains.


       That Wittgenstein believed (a)-(c) to describe the human condition

suggests that he himself was an empty shell who valued nothing and saw no

meaning in anything. It suggests, in other words, that he was a psychopath. In

 
Chapter 27, it will be argued that he was in fact a psychopath.[12]


           Let us relate these points to our thesis that philosophers are more

likely to rationalize existing orthodoxies, no matter how obviously false, than

to look for philosophical truths.  During Wittgenstein's 25 years at Cambridge

and for several decades after his death, many of the brightest philosophers in

Britain treated Wittgenstein’s views as simple truths. And most of those who

didn’t agree with all of Wittgenstein's contentions didn‘t dare concede that,

on the whole, his thinking was basically sound. As a result, some capable

philosophers advocated some views that obviously no merit.


        For example, Norman Malcolm (1911), a hardcore Wittgensteinian,

denied that people dream.[13] His argument: Dreams, supposing them to

exist, are mental processes; and we know from Wittgenstein that we don’t

have mental processes.   


        Another hardcore Wittgensteinian, Gilbert Ryle (1900-1976), said that

the difference between voluntary and involuntary actions isn’t that the formerresult from certain kinds of mental states that the latter do not result from; the

difference, he said, is that voluntary motions are culturally more acceptable,

and tend to look more elegant, than involuntary ones.[14] According to Ryle,

what makes a ballerina’s movements voluntary is that they look good (or we

like them or they’re culturally approved of, or some such); and what makes a

person’s projectile vomiting involuntary is that it doesn’t look so good. (I

don’t know what Ryle would say about the odd person who voluntarily

projectile vomits.) 


        Ryle also held that, if I can see how your body is moving, I know what’s

going on in your mind at least as well as you do. So if somebody wants to

know whether you are having a migraine, they should ask me, not you, unless

you happen to be looking at yourself in a mirror.    


         Ryle was not stupid. He graduated with a double first class degree from

Oxford. And, even though most of what he said is Wittgensteinian, and

therefore false, one can tell from the way he said it that his was a subtle and 

penetrating mind---or would have been, had he not matriculated in a culture

of Wittgenstein-worship.     


       Ryle was not a great philosopher; he was merely a potentially great

philosopher. But his colleague at Oxford, Peter Strawson (1919-2006), was a

great philosopher. Unfortunately, like other British philosophers of his

generation, Strawson was very reluctant to question The Master. As a result,

he committed several hideous gaffes. One example is his “ascriptivist”

analysis of moral responsibility. Another is his “expressivist” analysis of the

concept of truth.     


       Strawson’s ascriptivism: Give or take some irrelevant nuances, Strawson

held that, if it's correct, the statement" 


        (a) “X should be praised for doing Y”


 


holds in virtue of the fact that:


 


        (a*) X deviates from the way in which people usually

          behave, and it does so in a way that pleases us.


 


           And he held the same thing mutatis mutandis to hold of any other

ascription of moral responsibility. So held that, if they are true, the

statements:


 


        (b)  “X should be blamed for doing Y,"


 


and


 


        (c) “X is responsible for doing Y, but does not on that

          account deserve either praise or blame”


 


hold in virtue of, respectively, the fact that


         (b*)  Y is counterstatistical in a way that we don’t like


 


and the fact that


 


        (c*) Y is not counterstatistical. 


 


         If Strawson is right, X doesn’t even have to have intentions for any of

these statements to be true. Strawson's position thus entails that intentions

either don’t exist or don’t do anything and therefore might as well not exist.   


        Strawson's analysis of ascriptions of moral responsibility is obviously

false. Inanimate objects don’t have intentions; so we can’t be held

responsible for anything. And it's only a person's behavior is the result of an

intention of his that we hold him responsible for it. We don’t hold somebody

with Parkinson’s responsible for his tremors.


         If Strawson were right, a corpse that fell on Smith could appropriately

be blamed for Smith's subsequent death. But we don't blame the corpse; we

blame the prankster who threw the corpse off a nearby rooftop.


          Strawson is saying that whether a given person has a given intention

depends on whether we ascribe an intention to him. So he's advocating the

antithesis of the traditional view, which I regard as self-evidently correct, that

whether that ascription is correct depends on whether that person has that 

intention. Strawson's view turns the living into the dead and the dead into the

living. Sad about grandma's death? No problem! Just ascribe an intention to

her---that'll bring her back. Don't like your boss? No need to worry! Just stopascribing intentions to him---that'll zombify him.


      Strawson was a brilliant man. So why did he advocate this grotesquely

mistaken view? Because Wittgenstein advocated it. But whereas Wittgenstein

said obscurely and he provided no argument for it, Strawson  said it clearly

and provided a semblance of an argument for it. So Strawson's article wasn't

redundant.


        Strawson’s expressivism: According to Strawson, the expression “true”

means nothing. “It is true that snow is white” has the same meaning as “snow

is white.” In prefacing the words “snow is white“ with the words “it is true

that”, one is doing in a polite way what one would be doing in an impolite

way by shouting “snow is white” while banging one’s fist on a table: one is

showing one’s collocutor how convinced one is that snow is white. So the

term “true” helps one express one’s feelings about a claim: they give one a

civil way of express one’s certainty as to its truth. But that’s all that word

does.       


       Strawson's expressivism is no less misguided than his acriptivism. First

of all, the word “true” is not redundant. There is no  sentence that means that

same thing as “everything Plato said was true” that doesn’t contain the word

“true” or some synonym thereof.  Suppose that S.…S is a complete list of
                                                        1n

everything every said by Plato. The sentence “everything Plato said was true”

would not have the same meaning as “S is true and S is true and…S is
                                              12n

true.” Supposing that S is the proposition that there are infinitely many
                          37

prime numbers, the statement “everything Plato said is true, but Plato never

said that there are infinitely many prime numbers”, though false, would be

coherent. (That's why one would have to know about Plato’s life to know

whether that statement was true or not.) But statement “Plato said that thereare infinitely many prime numbers and Plato never said that there are

infinitely many prime numbers” would contradict itself. (That's why one

wouldn't have to know anything about Plato’s life to know whether that

statement was true or not.)[15]    


      "What about Strawson’s claim that “snow is white” and “it is true that

snow is white” are synonymous? Surely that's got to be right."


        It is not. The first attributes a color to a substance. The second attributes

a truth-value to a proposition; so the second, unlike the first, is only indirectly

about snow. Consider the sentence: “it is probable that snow is white.” That

sentence clearly concerns a proposition. Snow is either white or it isn’t.

When you say that snow is probably white, you’re not saying that it’s

vaguely white or that it’s whiteness is only semi-existent. You are saying

that, in saying that snow is white one, what one is saying is more likely than

not to be correct.


       So “it is probable that snow is white” is about the sort of thing that

people can affirm. Snow cannot be affirmed. Neither can whiteness. Nor can

sentences. Sentence-meanings are what can be affirmed. (Actually, we'll see

in Chapter 4 that one affirms the meanings of occurrences of sentences

(particular utterances or inscriptions of them), not of sentences per se. We'll

also see that the meaning of any given sentence-occurrence is different from

the meaning of the sentence thereby occurring. Strawson was the first person

to make these claims, and his argument for them are solid. The arguments

presented in Chapter 4 are based on them.)


         The meaning had by the expression “that snow is white” in “it is

probable that snow is white” coincides with counterpart in “it is true that

snow is white.” So the latter, though equivalent with "snow is white", is abouta proposition about snow, and therefore isn‘t in any direct sense about snow.

“Snow is white“, on the other hand, clearly does directly concern snow. Two

statements are equivalent if neither can possibly be true if the other is false.


         Strawson had precisely the sort of intelligence one needs to see that, for

these reasons, “true” is meaningful. So why did Strawson say otherwise?

Because Wittgenstein said otherwise.


     Why did Wittgenstein say otherwise? An integral part of Wittgenstein’s

philosophical system is that meanings don’t exist. Wittgenstein granted that

some noises were meaningful and that others weren’t; but he denied that

there are such things as meanings.


      Why did Wittgenstein hold this? It's a corollary of his rejection of the

presumption that a least part of what distinguishes my saying “it’s raining,”

which is a genuinely linguistic act, from a coffee machine's accidentally

making those the same noises, which is not a linguistic act, is that, in the first

case but not the second, those noises resulted from intentions embodying

certain beliefs (e.g. my belief that it's raining). A belief is necessarily a belief

that such and such is the case: the object of a belief is always a proposition.

A proposition is what one affirms when one makes a statement (e.g. when

one sincerely says "it's raining"). Since Wittgenstein didn’t believe in beliefs,

he didn’t believe in meanings; and since he didn’t believe in meanings, he

didn’t think that “true”, which denotes a property of meanings, can possibly

have a meaning.


        Of course, it isn't just propositions that can be described as "true."

Occurrences of sentences can also be so described. But, in saying “Jimmy’s

words are the truth," one is saying in an abbreviated that the thing Jimmy

affirmed is true. And propositions are, by definition, things that are affirmed(and denied and questioned, etc.). 


          Wittgenstein dedicated the second half of his professional career to

establishing the non-existence of beliefs and everything else that exist only if

meanings do as well. This led him to make a number of demonstrably false

claims.


       One of such claim is that, if a person says “I am in pain”, he is no more

stating anything about his mind than he would be by writhing in agony.

Saying "I am in pain," according to Wittgenstein, is merely a way of showing

that one is in pain. So it's meaningless, except in the same non-linguistic

sense as a baby's sobbing.


        Here’s one way of showing that this position is false. Suppose that, in

response to your saying that I am in pain but am trying to conceal it, I say:


 


        (A) If I am in pain, then certain neurons in my brain are

          firing that wouldn’t otherwise be firing; since, with the

        help of modern technology, I can demonstrate to you that

          those neurons are not firing, it is not the case that I am in

          pain. 


 


      If Wittgenstein were right to say that “I am in pain” was as devoid of

meaning (in the linguistic sense) as the pain-driven howling of an injured

animal, then (A) would have the same meaning, or lack thereof, as:


 


        (B) If aaargh!, then certain neurons in my brain are firing        that wouldn’t otherwise be firing; since, with the help of

          modern technology, it is not the case that ouch![16]


 


        But B is meaningless and A is meaningful. So they don't have the same

meaning, and Wittgenstein is wrong.   


        This blunder of Wittgenstein’s led John Austin (1911-1960), a faithful

follower of his to make a similar, albeit subtler, mistake. Here is Austin's

reasoning[17]:


 


          (AA)[18]   Let S be a case of my saying to a friend: "I

          promise to give you a ride to the airport"  S is not

          affirmation of some pre-existing fact. The promised

          referred to in S is S itself.  But S doesn't describe itself. No

          utterance describes itself (with a few contrived exceptions,

        e.g. "this statement is false"). But, supposing for

          argument's sake that S does describe itself,  S's function

          isn't to describe itself, but rather to oblige the person who

          uttered it to perform a certain act.


    For exactly similar reasons, if a preacher says: "I now

          pronounce you man and wife," he's not describing some

          pre-existing fact. In uttering those words, the preacher was

          performing a social function. His wasn't a descriptive, but

          performative utterance, as was S.


     Performative utterances are meaningful. S isn't like "

            glarbojibjibjabber." Therefore, it isn't in virtue of affirming          propositions that performative utterances are meaningful.

        To this extent, Wittgenstein was right to deny that

          meanings must exist in order for statements to be

          meaningful.


 


          Austin's contention is false. If I say, "grass is green," what I am saying

is either true or false. There is some truth or falsehood that I'm affirming---

some proposition, in other words. And if I say "if grass is green, then grass

isn't colorless," I am saying of that proposition that some other proposition

follows from it. If, when occurring on its own,  "grass is green" didn't affirm

anything, then "if grass is green, then grass isn't colorless" would be as

meaningless as:


        (i) "if glarbojibjibjabber, then grass isn't colorless."


    


      Also, if embedding "grass is green" in a larger sentence changed what it

meant, then "if grass is green, grass isn't colorless" wouldn't say that grass's

not being colorless was a consequence of its being green.


      By parity of reasoning, if x is an utterance of the obviously meaningful

sentence:


 


        (ii) “if I promise to give you a ride to the airport next

          Tuesday, you’ll kill me if I break my word,”


 


and y is an utterance of: 


        (iii) “I promise to give you a ride to the airport next

          Tuesday,”


 


then y must affirm some truth or falsehood. If it didn't, x would be as

meaningless as an utterance of (i). But clearly does affirm some truth or

falsehood. And the same is therefore true of utterances of (i).


           Thus, the spuriousness of Austin's position is a consequence of the

fact, about to be demonstrated, that embedding a sentence P in ‹if P, then Q›

does not typically change P's meaning. The fact that


 


        (I) there is an even prime larger than two


 


is false can be deduced from that:


 


        (II) If there is an even prime larger than two, there is a

          prime number that is divisible by one, itself, and two,

        which is not possible


is true.  


       But (II) wouldn't necessarily be true if the occurrence in it of (I) had a

meaning different from its usual one. For example, (II) would be true if that

occurrence meant that 4 is an even prime larger than two. More importantly,

if that occurrence had a meaning different from its usual one, (II) wouldn'tmean what it currently does, and it wouldn't necessarily say anything relevant

to whether there was an even prime greater than two.


           In general, if P meant one thing on its own and a different thing in ‹if

P, then Q›, it would become impossible state indirect arguments.[19] in (An

indirect argument is one of the form: if P, then Q; not-Q; therefore not-P.)

But, to Austin's discredit, such arguments obviously can be stated.


           In conclusion, so far as the philosophers just discussed are

representative of philosophers in general, first-class philosophical thinkers

are more likely to use their intelligence to defend orthodoxies, even

wretchedly misguided ones, than to look for the truth. Ryle, Strawson, and

Austin were at the world's first or second highest ranking philosophy

department. And yet that they not only advocated views that any ten year old

knows to be false. But they didn't just advocate them: they spent years of

their lives urging acceptance of them. So these high-ranking members of

high-ranking departments advocated views that were 100% false. So no one,

even at a bottom-tier institution, could possibly say anything that's more false

than what these high-rollers said. Hence my view students and professors of

philosophy at first-tier institutions aren't as likely as one would think to

produce better work than their counterparts at bottom-tier universities.


 


[1]    Expressions that are italicized and boldfaced are very important ones whose meanings must be
known. In most cases, those terms are defined and explained in a footnote, if they aren't defined in the
main text. The term "sensory observation" refers to any instance of sight, hearing, touch, etc.              

[2]   Fodor makes this point, in an exceptionally clear and forceful manner, in his (1981) essay “The
present status of the innateness controversy,” which is one of the two or three best philosophical papers
I have ever read. What I say in Chapter 9 of the present book is heavily informed by my reading of that
paper.

[3]    “BH” stands for “base times height.” It is my practice to give names to sentences that are
frequently referred to, since it eliminates unnecessary verbiage from my prose and (partly, though not
primarily, for that reason) makes it easier to follow.   [4]    All principles express dependence relations, though this isn’t always obvious. Consider the
principle that:       (MD) military dictatorships tend to be less responsive than democratically elected
governments to the needs of those whose welfare they are duty-bound to promote.        
           MD is to the effect that, human psychology being what it is, x’s being a military dictatorship
depends on x’s being less likely than a democratically elected government, other things being equal, to
meet the demands of those whose interests it is duty-bound to promote.     
         Because all principles express dependence relations, Reason #1 and Reason #2 ultimately
coalesce. A principle is not merely a general truth. That’s why “any given tiger in North America is in
some zoo” is not a principle. A principle must be intrinsically, as opposed to contextually,
explanatory.            
             To be sure, “any given tiger in North America is in some zoo” can be explanatory---but only
under rather special conditions. The way in which “a body’s mass increases as it accelerates” is
explanatory is clearly not so context-dependent---or, even if it is context-dependent to the same degree,
it isn’t context-dependent in the same way.                      
           Unfortunately, since this manuscript is already overdue, these vague remarks are the best I can
do in the way of making it clear how a truth must be explanatory for it to be a principle as opposed to a
mere general truth.

[5]    Why “probably not always”? Because, it seems to me, there are some non-empirical facts (e.g.,
nothing can be located, in its entirety, in two disjoint places at a given time) of which one can have
knowledge without having to have analyzed anything. Also, it seems to me, that in order to analyze a
concept and thus to obtain knowledge through conceptual analysis, one must already have non-
empirical knowledge.      
       Some individuals hold that there is non-empirical knowledge that does not concern the structures
or interrelations of concepts and therefore is not analytic, as we are using this term. For example, Kant
(1787) held that there is non-empirical, non-analytic knowledge. In Chapter 10, it is argued that all non-
empirical knowledge is indeed analytic.        
       Actually, this last statement isn’t really accurate, for reasons I discuss in my (2006) article, The
analogue-digital distinction and the cogency of Kant’s transcendental arguments.

[6]  The “‹” and the “›” are known as quasi-quotation marks. this context they may be treated as
quotation marks. But, strictly speaking, they are not quotation-marks, and the differences between them
and quotation marks are important in some contexts. An example of a variable is the expression "x" in
"for any object x, if x has three cars, then x has more than one car." An example of an anaphoric
pronoun is the "he" in "if a man owns more than three cars, he owns at least one car." It's obvious that
anaphoric pronouns are similar to variables, if not identical with them.) What is the purpose of quasi-
quotation marks? Consider the expression: “if P and Q and R, then R.” That expression isn’t true or
false. So the sentence “For any propositions P, Q, and R, the sentence ‘if P and Q and R, then R’ is
true” is not true. But the sentence “for any propositions P, Q, and R, a true sentence  results when,
given the open-sentence 'if P and Q and R, then R,' the variables are uniformly replaced with arbitrary
sentences” is true. And (A) is a concise way of saying this. In general, quasi-quotation marks make it
possible to express generalizations about sentences in a concise way. Quine was the first to see the need
for quasi-quotation marks and duly introduced them in his (1941) book Mathematical Logic.
      Why, incidentally, did I choose to explain the meanings of the terms "variable" and "anaphoric
pronoun", not by defining them, but by giving examples of sentences in which they are used? Three
reasons. First, to my knowledge, no viable definitions have been given, at least not in print. (In yet to be
published work, I put forth what I believe to be definitions of them that are not totally implausible.)
Second, any accurate definition of these terms would be extraordinarily hard to follow for anyone who
didn't have a lot of background in semantics.  accurate definitions are very hard to produce. This is a
consequence of the fact that, with some trivial exceptions, all definitions are extremely intricate.
     The exceptions include ones where, given an expression belonging to one language, one is merelyidentifying its counterpart in some other language. They also include stipulative definitions, e.g.  "let
'blerk' mean triangle." And there do seem to be some cases where, non-translational, non-stipulative
definitions are not to so hard to produce, e.g. "a 'triangle' is a three-sided, straight-edged, closed, planar
figure."
      But a few comments about that definition are in order:
 
        (i) That definition embodied an analysis of the word "triangle" and, for that
          reason, wasn't easy to produce. (I didn't produce it; I merely repeated it.)
 
        (ii) Nobody learns what "triangle" means by being given such a definition.
 
        (iii) A definition (or analysis, or whatever it is) is useless unless knows what is
        meant by terms (e.g. "planar", "closed") whose meanings one is unlikely to
          know unless one knows the meaning of "triangle."
 
        (iv) That definition fails to fix the meaning of the word "triangle" and is thus
        not a viable definition. This is because the terms "straight", "closed", and so
        on, do not themselves have unambiguous meanings outside of artificial
          contexts. They are actually variables, not constants, whose meanings are
          specific, either implicitly or explicitly, by the dialectical context. The reasons
        for this are given in Chapter 1 of my book Analytic Philosophy, in the section
        titled "mathematical logic," which is the at the very end of that chapter.
 
 

[7]  . In Chapter 3 of Analytic Philosophy, I provide a detailed answer to the question "what properties
must an entity have if it is to be capable of being what we are thereby affirming in uttering declarative
sentences?" In Chapter 3 of the present work, I put forth a truncated version of my answer to that
question.

[8] See Kment (2007).

[9] After attending a lecture that Kment gave in 2006, I asked him in private why (3) isn’t the right
analysis of (1). His response was that my analysis was self-evidently false and that my question didn‘t
deserve a response. (Out of the 20 or so people who publicly asked Kment questions about his lecture,
only one audience-member, Bert Bandman asked a question that didn’t assume the truth of Lewis’
view. Bandman asked whether there were any alternatives to the view that statements such as (1)
demanded that we posit the existence of alternative universes. Kment rolled his eyes, looked at his
watch, and then said with a sigh: “yes, but none that are worth considering.” Audience-members
snorted at Bandman and laughed heartily at Kment’s witty and informative reaction to his question.
They then proceeded to ask questions which assumed the correctness of Kment’s view and were
sometimes prefaced by admiration for the patience and decency Kment had shown in his response to
Bandman‘s deeply inappropriate question.
     Apparently, only one audience member, besides myself, had any reservations about granting the
existence of concrete (as opposed to purely fictitious) alternative universes. Which I found odd, given
that we were at a philosophy conference, not a Grateful Dead concert.

[10] See Lewis (1973, 1984).

[11] Interestingly, British actors have a similar view. “To think like Hamlet“, they say (this is not a
quotation), “you must first act like Hamlet. Fake it till you make it. If you fake it long enough, you
won’t be faking it anymore: the mask you put on will now be your real face.“ American actors have the
opposite view: “In order to act like Hamlet”, they believe (again, this is not a quotation), “you must
first be Hamlet:  you must have his thoughts, feelings, and so on.” Actors who follow this principle areknown as “method actors.”

[12] The psychopath must not be confused with the cynic. A cynic is somebody who himself has
strong values but believes that, for the most part, others either don't have them or do have them but fail
 
to comply with them.(Schopenhauer was a cynic; so was La Rochefoucauld. These thinkers are heroes
of mine.) The cynic is, in many ways, the antithesis of the psychopath.
      The word "cynic", I must point out, is ambiguous.  Sometimes the word "cynic" refers to somebody
who doesn't have values or has serious reservations about whether it's worthwhile to comply with them.
But I will use the word "cynic" to refer to somebody who is skeptical, not about whether values are
worth having, but about whether people are trying to comply with them.

[13] See Malcolm (1956).

[14] See Ryle (1949).

[15] See Russell (1919, p. 168) for a similar argument. The argument that I just put forth was, in
respect of its substance and its wording, deliberately modeled on Russell's argument.

[16] This argument is an adaptation of one put forth by Peter Geach (1972). Geach was attempting to
refute a doctrine called emotivism. But the structure of Geach's argument is the same as the structure of
mine.

[17] See Austin (1962) for Austin's own rendition of his argument.

[18] "AA" is short for "Austin's argument."

[19] At least in English, unless English were changed in profound ways. It’s hard to believe that, in
other languages, embedding a sentence P in a conditional of which it is the antecedent changes P’s
meaning. So, in the aforementioned respect, English is presumably representative of all human
languages, a consequence being that indirect arguments would be inexpressible, in any human
language. But, so far as we know, they are expressible in all of them, without any of them having to
undergo any changes at all.