 

 

 

                          Quantum Mechanics

                A Comprehensible Introduction for Students
 

 

                                      Shan Gao

 

 © Shan Gao 2013

All rights reserved

 

Published 2013

by Amazon Kindle Direct Publishing

www.amazon.com

 

This book is copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to provisions of

relevant collective licensing agreements, no part of this publication may be

reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any

means, without the prior written permission of the author.

 

 

                     OTHER WORKS BY SHAN GAO

 

  Quantum Motion and Superluminal Communication (2000, in Chinese)

        Quantum: A Historical and Logical Journey (2003, in Chinese)

    Quantum Motion: Unveiling the Mysterious Quantum World (2006)

                  God Does Play Dice with the Universe (2008)

Einstein’s Ghost: The Puzzle of Quantum Entanglement (coauthored with G.

                            C. Guo, 2009, in Chinese)

                    God Does Play Dice (2010, in Chinese)

                Quantum Physics: From Illusion to Reality (2011)

  Quantum, Relativity, Consciousness and Beyond: A Scientific Quest for

                              Ultimate Reality (2011)

  Understanding Quantum Physics: An Advanced Guide for the Perplexed

                                          (2011)

    Consciousness Encounters Quantum Physics: A Scientific Argument for

                                  Panpsychism (2012)

          Understanding Gravity: Newton, Einstein, Verlinde? (2012) 

 

Those  who  are  not  shocked  when  they  first  come  across  quantum  theory

cannot possibly have understood it. — Niels Bohr 

 

I  think  I  can  safely  say  that  nobody  understands  quantum  mechanics.  —

Richard Feynman

 Contents

 

  Preface

    Acknowledgements

 

  1. Quantum Mechanics in a Nutshell

 

  2. Understanding the theory (I): The Schrödinger equation

      How come the equation?

      Time translation and its invariance

      Space translation and its invariance

      The equation derived

        Further discussions

 

  3. Understanding the theory (II): The wave function

        Measuring the state of a quantum system

        Electrons are particles

        Particles move in a discontinuous and random way

        Meaning of the wave function

        Momentum, energy and spin

 

  4.  Understanding  the  theory  (III):  Wavefunction  collapse  and  the

  Born rule

      The measurement problem

        Wavefunction collapse is real

      Who collapses the wave function?

      Why the Born rule?

      A toy model of wavefunction collapse

 

  5. Examples and Applications

      A particle in a box

      The double-slit experiment

        Schrödinger’s cat

        Quantum entanglement and nonlocality

        Unification of two worlds

     Bibliography

  NotesPreface

    Quite different from classical mechanics, quantum mechanics is full of

mysteries  and  paradoxes.  It  has  even  been  regarded  as  the  most  difficult

subject to understand. This is partly because the realms the theory deals with

are far removed from our everyday experience, and especially, its standard

formulation  taught  in  textbooks  is  incomplete  and  plagued  by  serious

problems such as the measurement problem. But the most important reason

may  be  that,  unlike  classical  mechanics,  quantum  mechanics  provides  no

visualizable spatial-temporal images for the physical processes it describes. It

is well understood that classical mechanics describes the continuous motion

of particles in space and time. In quantum mechanics, however, it is still

unclear how microscopic particles such as electrons move in space and time,

and in fact, it is even unknown whether these microscopic particles are really

particles or waves or something else.

    Based on a penetrating analysis of the wave function and its evolution,

this book presents a new, comprehensible formulation of quantum mechanics.

It turns out that, like classical mechanics, quantum mechanics also deals with

the motion of particles in space and time. The difference only lies in that the

former  describes  continuous  motion  of  particles,  while  the  later  describes

random  discontinuous  motion  of  particles.  Microscopic  particles  such  as

electrons are indeed particles, but they move in a discontinuous and random

way. For example, a single electron passes through two slits at the same time

in a discontinuous way in the double-slit experiment with electrons.

    The  new  formulation  of  quantum  mechanics  gives a  clear  and

visualizable  picture  of  the  quantum  world.  This  makes  the  theory  as

comprehensible as classical mechanics. However, the quantum phenomena

are still strange for us who live in a classical world. The strangeness results

from  the  new  motion  of  particles  and  the  new  laws  of  motion,  e.g.  the

discontinuity  and  randomness  of  motion,  the  superposition  principle,  the

collapse  of  the  wave  function  etc.  To  help  readers  understand  quantum

mechanics  more  deeply,  this  book  also  gives  some  typical  examples  to

illustrate and explain the fundamental theory.

    With very few exceptions, most quantum mechanics textbooks do not

mention the conceptual issues of quantum mechanics at all or only discuss

them very briefly (these discussions are usually postponed to the last part ofthe  book  such  as  Afterword).  The  purpose  of  this  book  is  to  provide  a

complementary material for students. It focuses mainly on the understanding

of quantum mechanics, and especially, its contents are also accessible for

readers  with  only  a  background  in  high  school  physics  and  calculus.

Quantum mechanics is no longer mysterious. If you can understand classical

mechanics, you will be able to understand quantum mechanics too.

 

Shan Gao

Beijing

August 2013

 

 
 Acknowledgements

    During the past twenty years, I have benefited from discussions with

many physicists and philosophers of physics who care about the way the

world  really  is.  They  are:  Stephen  Adler,  Bernard  d’Espagnat,  Shelly

Goldstein, Basil Hiley, Gerard ’t Hooft, Frederick M. Kronz, David Miller,

Philip Pearle, Roger Penrose, Huw Price, Alastair Rae, Dean Rickles, Abner

Shimony,  Henry  P.  Stapp,  Antoine  Suarez,  Antony  Valentini,  and  Heinz-

Dieter Zeh, among others. I thank them all deeply.

    My  deepest  gratitude  goes  to  my  parents,  QingFeng  Gao  and  LiHua

Zhao, who spared no effort to provide the best possible environment for me

to grow up in and their constant support during my extended studies. They

have always allowed me to have the freedom of choice, and for that I am

truly grateful. Finally, I am deeply indebted to my wife, HuiXia, and my

lovely daughter, RuiQi, for their unflagging love and support throughout my

study  and  writing;  this  book  would  have  been  impossible  without  them.

Moreover, they have never let me forget the true values of life.
 1. Quantum Mechanics in a Nutshell

    Mechanics is the science dealing with the motions of material objects. It

consists essentially of two parts: the first part specifies the state of motion of

a mechanical system at a given instant, and the second part specifies how the

state of motion evolves with time, namely the equations of motion. There are

two types of mechanics: classical mechanics and quantum mechanics. For

simplicity  we  mainly  consider  the  motion  of  point  particles  in  one  space

dimension.

  In classical mechanics, particles move on continuous trajectories, and the

state of motion of a particle at any given instant is represented by its position

and velocity at the instant, x(t) and v(t), where v(t)≡dx(t)/dt. The state of

motion of the particle evolves according to Newton’s second law of motion:
                                    22
                                  mdx(t)/dt=-dV/dx,

where m is the mass of the particle, and V(x) is an external potential.

 










                        Figure 1.1 Continuous motion of a particle

 

    The  state  of  a  classical  system  of  N  particles  is  represented  by  the

positions  and  velocities  of  these  particles.  Equivalently,  the  state  of  the

system can also be represented by a point moving with a definite velocity in

an N-dimensional configuration space, denoted by (x, x…, x), where the
                                                                12N

value of the first coordinate represents the position of particle 1, and so on for

the other particles. The motion of the representative point is given by
                                    22
                                  mdx(t)/dt=-dV/dx,
                                  iii

where m stands for the mass of the particle whose coordinate is x. This
        ii

means that each of the N coordinates evolves according to Newton’s second

law of motion.

  In classical mechanics, we have a clear physical picture of the motion ofparticles  in  space  and  time.  This  makes  the  theory comprehensible.  How

about quantum mechanics then?

  In quantum mechanics, the state of a quantum particle is described by a

wave function, ψ(x, t). Although the value of the wave function is complex in

general, it is composed of two real functions R(x, t) and S(x, t):
                                                    iS(x,t)/ħ
                                ψ(x, t)=R(x,t)e,

where ħ, the reduced Planck constant (i.e. Planck’s constant divided by 2π),

is  introduced  for  convenience.  As  we  will  demonstrate  later,  the  wave

function represents the state of random discontinuous motion of the particle.

At any given instant, the quantum particle is still in one position in space. But

unlike the classical situation, its motion is not continuous but discontinuous

and random.

    For a quantum particle, there is no continuous trajectory, and there exist

no  equations  of  motion  in  terms  of  x(t)  either.  Rather,  the  random

discontinuous  motion  of  the  particle  forms  a  particle  “cloud”  extending

throughout space (in an infinitesimal time interval), and the state of motion of

the  particle  is  represented  by  the  density  and  flux  density  of  the  cloud,

denoted by ρ(x, t) and j(x, t), respectively. This is similar to the description of

a classical fluid in hydrodynamics. But their physical meanings are different.

The particle cloud is formed by the random discontinuous motion of a single

particle,  and  the  density  of  the  cloud,  ρ(x,  t),  represents  the  objective

probability density of the particle appearing in position x at instant t.

 










                    Figure 1.2 Random discontinuous motion of a particle

 

    It turns out that the wave function ψ(x, t) is a mathematical complex

composed of ρ(x, t) and j(x, t):namely




    The above description of the motion of a single particle can be naturally

extended to the motion of many particles. At each instant the quantum system

of  N  particles  can  be  represented  by  a  point  in  an  N-dimensional

configuration space, and the motion of these particles forms a cloud in the

configuration space. Then, similar to the single particle case, the state of the

system  is  represented  by  the  density  and  flux  density  of  the  cloud  in

configuration space, ρ(x, x…, x) and j(x, x…, x). The density ρ(x, x…, x)
                            12N12N12N

represents the probability density of particle 1 appearing in position x and
                                                                                    1

particle 2 appearing in position x, …, and particle N appearing in position x.
                                      2N

Moreover,  the  state  of  the  quantum  system  of  N  particles  can  also  be

represented by a wave function in the N-dimensional configuration space,

ψ(x, x…, x), which is composed of ρ(x, x…, x) and j(x, x…, x) in the way
  12N12N12N

similar to the single particle case.

  In classical mechanics, the evolution of the state of motion of a classical

particle, x(t), is governed by Newton’s second law of motion. In quantum

mechanics, as we will demonstrate later, the evolution of the state of motion

of  a  quantum  particle, ρ(x,  t)  and  j(x,  t)  or  ψ(x,  t),  is  governed  by  the

Schrödinger equation:




where m is the mass of the particle, and V(x) is an external potential. In other

words, the  equation  of  motion  is  Schrödinger’s  equation  in  quantum

mechanics. For a quantum system of N particles, the evolution of its state is

governed by the Schrödinger equation in the N-dimensional configuration

space:




  In  addition,  as  we  will  demonstrate  later,  the  wave  function  alsoundergoes  a  stochastic  nonlinear  evolution,  which  results  from  the

randomness  and  discontinuity  of  motion,  besides  the deterministic  linear

evolution governed by the Schrödinger equation. Although the precise law of

the stochastic evolution is still unknown, its general effects have been known

from experiments. First of all, the effect of the stochastic evolution is so tiny

that it can be ignored for microscopic systems such as electrons. Next, the

effect of the stochastic evolution is significant for macroscopic systems such

as everyday objects and especially measuring devices.

    The stochastic evolution will lead to the localization of everyday objects

and create the appearance of continuous motion in the macroscopic world. It

can be shown that by Ehrenfest’s theorem the resulting (effective) law of

motion is Newton’s second law:





where m is the mass of a macroscopic object,  is


the effective position of the object, and  is

the  effective  external  potential  the  object  moves  in.  Therefore,  quantum

mechanics is a more fundamental theory that applies not only to microscopic

particles but also to macroscopic objects, while classical mechanics is only its

approximation for the description of the motion of macroscopic objects.

    Moreover, the stochastic evolution will lead to the so-called collapse of

the  wave  function  during  a  conventional  measurement  involving  a  strong

interaction  between  a  microscopic  system  and  a  measuring  device.  The

measurement  result  is  in  general  random,  and  its  probability  satisfies  the

Born  rule.  Concretely  speaking,  if  a  physical  system  is  in  a  quantum

superposition of the eigenstates of a dynamical variable A, i.e., |ψ>=Σc|a>,
                                                                                    iii

then  a  conventional  measurement  of  the  variable  A  will  (almost)

instantaneously collapse the state into one of the eigenstates |a>[1]. This is
                                                                            i

called  the  collapse  postulate  in  the  standard  formulation  of  quantum

mechanics.  Furthermore,  the  probability  of  the  measurement  yielding  the
              2
result a is |c|. This is the Born rule. Independent of the collapse postulate,
      ii

the  Born  rule  has  been  confirmed  by  precise  experiments  and  is  an

established part of quantum mechanics.

    To sum up, we have presented a new, comprehensible formulation ofquantum mechanics. In the following chapters, we will further explain the

physical basis of this formulation. First of all, we will answer why the (linear)

evolution  of  the  state  of  a  physical  system  is  governed  by  the

Schrödinger  equation  in  the  nonrelativistic  domain.  Then,  based  on  the

equation,  we  will  demonstrate  that  the  wave  function  in  the  equation

represents the state of random discontinuous motion of particles. Lastly, we

will  explain  why  the  wave  function  collapses  during  a  conventional

measurement and why the probability of the measurement result satisfies the

Born rule.

 2. Understanding the theory (I): The Schrödinger

equation

    Many quantum mechanics textbooks provide a heuristic “derivation” of

the Schrödinger equation. It begins with the assumption that the state of a
                                                              i(kx−ωt)
free quantum system has the form of a plane wave e. When combining

with the de Broglie relations for momentum and energy p = ħk and E = ħω,
                      i(px−Et)/ħ
this state becomes e. Then it uses the nonrelativistic energy-momentum
                2
relation  E  =  p/2m  in  classical  mechanics  to  obtain  the  free  Schrödinger

equation. Lastly, this equation is generalized to include an external potential,

and the end result is the Schrödinger equation.


How come the equation?


    There are at least two mysteries in the textbook “derivation” based on

analogy and the correspondence with classical mechanics. First of all, even if

a  microscopic  particle  behaves  like  a  wave  and  thus  a  wave  function  is

needed to describe them, it is unclear why the wave function must assume a

complex form in general. Indeed, when Schrödinger invented his equation, he

was very puzzled by the inevitable appearance of the imaginary unit i in the

equation.  Next,  one  doesn’t  know  how  come  the  de  Broglie  relations  for

momentum  and  energy  and  why  the  non-relativistic  energy-momentum
                          2
relation must be E = p/2m. Usually one can only resort to experience and

classical mechanics to answer these questions. This is unsatisfactory in logic,

as  quantum  mechanics  is  a  more  fundamental  theory,  of  which  classical

mechanics is only an approximation.

  In this chapter, we will show that these mysteries can be unveiled and the

textbook “derivation” of the free Schrödinger equation can be turned into a

real derivation by resorting to spacetime translation invariance and relativistic

invariance.  Spacetime  translation  gives  the  definitions  of  momentum  and

energy, and spacetime translation invariance entails that the state of a free or

isolated quantum system with definite momentum and energy assumes the
                      i(px−Et)/ħ
plane wave form e. Moreover, the relativistic invariance of the state

further  determines  the  relativistic  energy-momentum  relation,  whose
                                            2
nonrelativistic approximation is E = p/2m. Though the requirements of these

invariances are already well known, an explicit and complete derivation ofthe free Schrödinger equation using them seems still missing in the literature

and textbooks. The new integrated analysis may be helpful in understanding

the physical origin of the Schrödinger equation.


Time translation and its invariance


  Let the state of an isolated system at a given instant t be ψ(x, t). The state

of  continuous  motion,  x(t),  can  be  regarded  as  a  special  form  of  ψ(x,  t),

namely ψ(x, t) = δ(x-x(t)), where δ is the Dirac function. We need not to

know what physical state ψ(x, t) represents here.

  Let the evolution equation be the following form:

                                U(t)ψ(x, 0) = ψ(x, t),

where U(t) is the evolution operator that needs to be determined. Since the

time evolution of a state is just the time translation of the state, U(t) is also

called time translation operator.

    This evolution equation can also be written in a differential form:

                                i∂ψ(x, t)/∂t = Hψ(x, t).

                                                                              2
For  the  convenience  of  later  analysis,  the  imaginary  unit i  (i  =  −1)  is

introduced in the equation. By assuming the operator H is independent of the

evolved state, namely the evolution is linear, the time translation operator
                                        −itH
U(t) can be expressed as U(t) = e. H is thus called the generator of time

translation. In quantum mechanics, H is also called energy operator or the

Hamiltonian of the studied system.

  In order to be able to derive the (linear) evolution equation for isolated

systems or the equation of free motion, we need to know the requirements

that the equation must satisfy. One important requirement comes from the

uniformity or homogeneity of space and time. It is an experimental fact that

the same experiment repeated at two different times gives the same result,

and the same experiment performed at two different places also gives the

same result. This fact reflects the homogeneity of space and time. It also

indicates that the evolution law (for isolated systems) is the same at different

times and places, namely that it satisfies time translation invariance and space

translation invariance. Now let’s analyze the implications of the requirement

of spacetime translation invariance for the evolution equation[2].

    Suppose the above isolated system is in state ψ at time t and evolves for
                                                            01

an infinitesimal time δt. The state of the system at time t+ δt, to first order in
                                                                  1δt, will be

                          ψ(x, t + δt) = [I − iδtH(t)]ψ.
                                  110

If the evolution is repeated at time t, beginning with the same initial state,
                                          2

the state at t + δt will be
            2

                          ψ(x, t + δt) = [I − iδtH(t)]ψ.
                                  220

Time translational invariance requires the outcome state should be the same:

            ψ (x, t + δt) − ψ(x, t + δt) = iδt[H(t) − H(t)]ψ = 0.
                    21120

  Since  the  initial  state  ψ  is  arbitrary,  it  follows  that  H(t)  =  H(t).
                                  012

Moreover,  since  t  and  t  are  also  arbitrary,  it  follows  that  H  is  time-
                    12

independent[3].  Therefore,  time  translational  invariance  requires  that  the

evolution operator H has no time dependence, namely dH/dt = 0.

    When  dH/dt  =  0,  the  solutions  of  the  evolution  equation  assume  the

following form
                                                    −iEt
                                  ψ(x, t) =ϕ(x)e,
                                              E

whereϕ(x),  called  the  eigenstate  of  H,  satisfies  the  time-independent
        E

equation:

                                  Hϕ(x) = Eϕ(x).
                                      EE

In  quantum  mechanics,  E,  the  eigenvalue  of  the  time-independent  H,  is

defined as the energy of a system whose state of motion is an eigenstate of

H,ϕ(x). Note that the concrete form of the energy operator H depends on
    E

the studied system in general. As a result, the energy eigenstates and energy

eigenvalues can only be determined for concrete situations (see below).


Space translation and its invariance


    Let’s further analyze the requirement of space translation invariance. A

space translation operator can be defined as follows:

                              T(a) ψ(x, t) = ψ(x − a, t).

It means translating rigidly the state of an isolated system, ψ(x, t), by an

amount a in the positive xdirection. The operator T(a) preserves the norm of
                      ∗∗
the state because ∫ψ(x, t)ψ(x, t)dx = ∫ψ(x − a, t)ψ(x − a, t)dx. This implies
                                    †
that T(a) is unitary, satisfying T(a)T(a) = I. As a unitary operator, T(a) can

be further expressed as

                                                −iaP
                                      T(a) = e,where P is the  generator  of  space  translation,  and  it  is  Hermitian  and  its

eigenvalues  are  real.  In  quantum  mechanics,  P  is  also  called  momentum

operator.  Substituting  this  relation  into  the  above  definition  of  space

translation operator and expanding both sides to order a, we find

                                      P = −i∂/∂x.

This immediately leads to

                                        ipx ipx
                                    P e= p e.

        ipx
where e is the eigenstate of P with eigenvalue p. In quantum mechanics, p

is  defined  as  the  momentum  of  a  system  whose  state  of  motion  is  a
                            ipx
momentum  eigenstate  e.  Note  that  unlike  energy  operator,  the  form  of

momentum operator does not depend on the studied system.

  In the following, we will demonstrate that space translational invariance

requires  that  space  translation  operator  and  time  translation  operator  are

commutative, namely [T(a), U(t)] = 0.

    Suppose  at  t  =  0  two  observers  A  and  B  prepare  identical  isolated

systems at x = 0 and x = a, respectively. Let ψ(x, 0) be the state of the system

prepared by A. Then T(a)ψ(x, 0) is the state of the system prepared by B,

which is obtained by translating (without distortion) the state ψ(x, 0) by an

amount a to the right. The two systems look identical to the observers who

prepared  them.  After  time  t,  the  states  evolve  into  U(t)ψ(x,  0)  and

U(t)T(a)ψ(x, 0). Since the time evolution of each identical system at different

places should appear the same to the local observers, the above two systems,

which differed only by a spatial translation at t = 0, should differ only by the

same spatial translation at future times. Thus the state U(t)T(a)ψ(x, 0) should

be  the  translated  version  of  A’s  system  at  time  t,  namely  we  have

U(t)T(a)ψ(x, 0) = T(a)U(t)ψ(x, 0). This relation holds true for any initial state

ψ(x, 0), and thus we have [T(a), U(t)] = 0[4]. This result further leads to [P,

H] = 0.

  In conclusion, space translational invariance requires [P, H] = 0 for an

isolated system. Thus the eigenstate of H,ϕ(x), is also the eigenstate of P,
                                                    E
                  ipx
namelyϕ(x) = e. Then the solution of the evolution equation i∂ψ(x, t)/∂t =
          E
                                        −iEti(px−Et)i(px−Et)
Hψ(x, t) will be ψ(x, t) =ϕ(x)e = e. This means that the state e
                                E

describes  an  isolated  system  (e.g.  a  free  electron)  with  momentum  p  and

energy E.


The equation derived  The  final  step  in  deriving  the  equation  of  free  motion  is  to  find  the

relation between momentum p and energy E for isolated systems. It can be

shown that the relation is determined by the relativistic invariance of the state
i(px−Et)22224
e, and it turns out to be E = pc + mc, where m is the mass of the

system,  and c  is  the  speed  of  light[5].  In  the  nonrelativistic  domain,  the
                                                  2
energy-momentum relation reduces to E = p/2m.

                            2i(px−Et)
    The relation E = p/2m  for  the  state  e  implies  that  the  operator
                                        2
relation between H and P is H = P/2m for an isolated system, where H is the

free Hamiltonian of the system. Note that since the value of E is real by the

energy-momentum  relation,  H  is  Hermitian  and  U(t)  is  unitary  for  free

evolution. By substituting this operator relation into the evolution equation,

we can finally obtain the equation of free motion, which assumes the same

form as the free Schrödinger equation:




    It is worth noting that unlike the free Schrödinger equation, the reduced

Planck  constant ħ  with  dimension  of  action  is  missing  in  this  equation.

However, this is in fact not a problem. The reason is that the dimension of ħ

can be absorbed into the dimension of the mass m. For example, we can
                                                                              2
stipulate the dimensional relations as p = 1/L, E = 1/T and m = T/L, where L

and  T  represents  the  dimensions  of  space  and  time,  respectively[6].

Moreover, the value of ħ can be set to the unit of number 1 in principle. Thus

the above equation is essentially the free Schrödinger equation in quantum

mechanics.

    By requiring an appropriate expectation value correspondence, d<P>/dt

=  <F>  =  <∂V/∂x>  and  including  the  reduced  Planck  constant ħ,  we  can

further obtain the Schrödinger equation under an external potential[7]:




Note that the concrete form of a classical potential is determined by the non-

relativistic approximation of the quantum interactions involved, which are

described by the relativistic quantum field theory. Since the potential V(x, t)
                                            2
is real-valued, the Hamiltonian H = P/2m + V(x, t) is Hermitian, and as a

result, the time translation operator U(t) is also unitary.

    For a N-body system, the state of the system may be represented by ψ(x,
                                                                                          1x,x,t), where xrepresents the coordinate of sub-system 1, and so on for
2 … N 1 

the  other  sub-systems.  When  the  N  sub-systems  are  independent,  we  can

derive the equation of motion in a similar way as above:




where ψ(x, x,x,t) = ψ(x,t)ψ(x,t)ψ(x,t), and m is the mass of sub-
          12 … N 1122 …NNi

system i. When the N sub-systems are not independent and have interactions,

this equation of motion still holds true. However, the state of the system

cannot be written as a product of sub-system states. Besides, the potential V

will contain the interactions between the sub-systems, and its general form is

V(x, x,x,t).
  12 … N 

    The equation of motion for a system of two interacting sub-systems is

particularly useful for our later analysis of measurement. It is




Equivalently, the total Hamiltonian of the system is H = H + H+ H, where
                                                                      12 I
      22
H= P/2m and H= P/2m are the free Hamiltonians of sub-systems 1 and
1 112 22

2,  respectively,  and  H  =  V(x, x)  is  the  interaction  Hamiltonian,  whose
                          I12

general form is V(|x-x|).
                      12


Further discussions


    We  have  derived  the  free  Schrödinger  equation  based  on  the

requirements of spacetime translation invariance and relativistic invariance.

The derivation can be summarized as follows.

    The  key  step  is  to  analyze  the  origin  of  momentum  and  energy.

According  to  the  modern  understanding,  spacetime  translation  gives  the

definitions of momentum and energy. The momentum operator P is defined

as the generator of space translation, and it is Hermitian and its eigenvalues

are  real.  Moreover,  the  form  of  momentum  operator  can  be  uniquely
                                                                              ipx
determined by its definition. It is P = −i∂/∂x, and its eigenstate is e, where p

is  a  real  eigenvalue.  Similarly,  the  energy  operator  H  is  defined  as  the

generator of time translation. But its form depends on the studied system.

Fortunately,  for  an  isolated  system  the  form  of  energy  operator,  which

determines  the  evolution  equation,  can  be  fixed  by  the  requirements  of

spacetime translation invariance and relativistic invariance (when assumingthe evolution is linear). Concretely speaking, time translational invariance

requires  that  dH/dt  =  0,  and  thus  the  solutions  of  the  evolution  equation
                                                                              −iEt
i∂ψ(x,  t)/∂t  =  Hψ(x,  t)  must  assume  the  form  ψ(x,  t) =ϕ(x)e. Space
                                                                        E

translational  invariance  requires  [P,  H]  =  0,  and  this  further  determines
                                                                  ipx
thatϕ(x)  is  the  eigenstate  of  P,  namelyϕ(x)  =  e.  Thus  spacetime
      EE

translation invariance entails that the state of an isolated system with definite
                                                                i(px−Et)
momentum and energy assumes the plane wave form e. Furthermore, the

relation  between  p  and  E  or  the  energy-momentum  relation  can  be
                                                                    i(px−Et)
determined  by  the  relativistic  invariance  of  the  state  e,  and  its  non-
                                                        2
relativistic approximation turns out to be E = p/2m. Then we can obtain the
                                                                    2
form  of  energy  operator  for  an  isolated  system,  H  =  P/2m,  and  the  free

Schrödinger equation.

    The new integrated analysis may unveil several mysteries in the textbook

“derivation” of the Schrödinger equation, e.g. it may answer why the state of

a free quantum system has the form of a plane wave and why there are the de

Broglie  relations.  This  makes  the  Schrödinger  equation  more

comprehensible. However, there are still two important questions that need to

be answered. The first one is the physical meaning of the function (or wave

function  as  usually  called)  ψ(x,  t)  in  the  Schrödinger  equation.  We  have

derived the equation, but it is unknown what the wave function ψ(x, t) in the

equation represent. We will answer this question in the next chapter.

    The second question is whether there exists nonlinear evolution of the

wave function besides the linear Schrödinger evolution. As noted earlier, the

above  derivation  of  the  (free)  Schrödinger  equation  relies  on  the

presupposition that the Hamiltonian H is independent of the evolved state,

i.e., that the evolution is linear. In other words, the derivation only shows that

the linear part of evolution, if satisfying spacetime translation invariance and

relativistic  invariance,  must  assume  the  same  form  as  the  Schrödinger

equation  in  the  non-relativistic  domain.  Obviously,  the  derivation  cannot

exclude  the  existence  of  nonlinear  quantum  evolution.  It  seems  to  be  a

reasonable assumption that the nonlinear evolution and linear evolution both

exist, and moreover, they satisfy spacetime translation invariance respectively

because their effects cannot counteract each other in general. However, since

a  general  nonlinear  evolution  can  readily  satisfy  spacetime  translation

invariance, the invariance requirement can no longer determine the concrete

form of possible nonlinear evolution. We will analyze the possible nonlinear

evolution of the wave function in Chapter 4.3. Understanding the theory (II): The wave function

    We have succeeded in deriving the Schrödinger equation. Unfortunately,

however,  the  derivation  cannot  tell  us  the  physical  meaning  of  the  wave

function  in  the  equation.  Exactly  what  does  the  wave  function  represent?

Without  answering  this  important  question,  the  previous  analysis  seems

vacuous in physics. In this chapter, we will further derive the meaning of the

wave function based on the Schrödinger equation.

    According to the standard probability interpretation taught in textbooks,

the wave function is a probability amplitude, and its modulus square gives the

probability density of finding a particle in a given position at a given instant.

Notwithstanding the success of this standard interpretation, our derivation of

the (free) Schrödinger equation seems to suggest that the wave function is a

description of the objective physical state of a quantum system, rather than

the  probability  amplitude  relating  only  to  measurement  outcomes.  In  the

derivation we never refer to the measurement of the studied system at all.

Moreover, the derivation seems to further suggest that the wave function is a

complete description of the physical state of the system.

    Then what physical state does the wave function really represent? In

order  to  answer  this  question,  we  need  to  measure  the  state  of  a  single

quantum  system.  Fortunately,  the  Schrödinger  equation  is  enough  for  the

analysis of the measurement and the derivation of the meaning of the wave

function. Since the equation has been precisely confirmed for microscopic

systems such as electrons, atoms and molecules, the derived meaning of the

wave function will have a firm basis too.


Measuring the state of a quantum system


    As a simple example, consider a quantum system (e.g. an electron) in a

discrete nondegenerate energy eigenstate ψ(x) (e.g. the ground state of the

Hydrogen atom)[8]. The standard procedure for measuring an observable A

in the state involves an interaction Hamiltonian:

                                      H = g(t)PA
                                        I

coupling the measured system to an appropriate measuring system, where P

is  the  conjugate  momentum  of  the  pointer  variable  of  the  measuring

system[9]. (We will soon see why the interaction Hamiltonian assumes thisform.)  The  time-dependent  coupling  strength  g(t)  is  a  smooth  function

normalized to ∫dtg(t) = 1 during the interaction interval τ, and g(0) = g(τ) = 0.

The initial state of the pointer is supposed to be a Gaussian wave packet of

width w centered at initial position 0, denoted by |φ(0)>. According to the
        0

Schrödinger  equation  for  a  two-body  system,  the  state  of  the  combined

system at the end of the interaction is[10]

                                          -i∫dtH(t)
                              |t=τ> = e|ψ>|φ(0)>,

where H(t) = H + H + H is the total Hamiltonian of the combined system,
                SDI

H  and  H  are  the  free  Hamiltonians  of  the  measured  system  and  the
SD

measuring system, respectively.

  If the interaction Hamiltonian H is of very short duration and so strong
                                          I

that  it  dominates  the  rest  of  the  Hamiltonian  (i.e.  the  effect  of  the  free

Hamiltonians  of  the  measuring  system  and  the  measured  system  can  be

neglected), then the state of the combined system at the end of the interaction

is

                                          -iPA
                                |t=τ> = e|ψ>|φ(0)>.

By expanding |ψ> in the eigenstates of A, |a>, we obtain
                                                  i
                                          -iPai
                              |t=τ> = Σec|a>|φ(0)>,
                                        i ii

where c are the expansion coefficients. By the translation property of the
        i

Fourier transform (between position and momentum), the exponential term

shifts the center of the pointer by a:
                                        i

                                |t=τ> = Σc|a>|φ(a)>.
                                          i iii

This  is  an  entangled superposition,  where  the  eigenstates  of  A  with

eigenvalues a get correlated to measuring system states in which the pointer
              i

is shifted by these values a (but the width of the pointer wavepacket is not
                                i

changed).

              Since the measured state is entangled with the state of the measuring

system  and  thus  it  is  changed,  such  an  impulsive  measurement  cannot

measure the actual state of a single quantum system[11]. Fortunately, it has

been realized that, due to the important works of Yakir Aharonov et al, the

conventional  impulse  measurements  are  only  one  kind  of  quantum

measurements, for which the coupling between the measured system and the

measuring system is of very short duration and so strong. We can also do

other  kinds  of  measurements  by  adjusting  the  coupling  strength  and  themeasuring time. In particular, we can indeed measure the actual state of a

single  quantum  system  by  utilizing  an  extremely  weak  and  slow

measurement if the system is in a discrete nondegenerate energy eigenstate.

Moreover, the measurement is only based on the Schrödinger evolution, and

it does not depend on additional assumptions such as the collapse postulate in

standard quantum mechanics[12]. Let’s see how this can be done.

    When the interaction between the measuring system and the measured

system is very weak and lasts for a long time, the coupling strength g(t) is

very small. For simplicity we let g(t)=1/T for most of the measuring time T

and assume that g(t) goes to zero gradually before and after the interaction.

Then the total Hamiltonian can be regarded as H = H + Hperturbed by H
                                                          0SD I

= PA/T. For g(t) smooth enough we obtain an adiabatic process in which the

system cannot make a transition from one energy eigenstate to another, as

there  is  a  minimum  energy  gap  between  them  due  to  the  discreteness  of

energy  eigenvalues.  Moreover,  in  the  limit  T  →  ∞,  the  interaction

Hamiltonian  does  not  change  the  measured  energy  eigenstate  either.

According to first order perturbation theory (for nondegenerate states), for

any given value of P, the energy of the measured energy eigenstate shifts by

an infinitesimal amount:

                              ΔE = < H > = P<A>/T.
                                          I
                    2-i∫dtΔE -iP<A>
where <A> = Σ|c|a. The corresponding time evolution e= e then
                iii

shifts the pointer by the average value [13].

    To  know  what <A>  means  as  a  measurement  result,  we  let  the

observable  An  be  (normalized)  projection  operators  on  small  regions  V
                                                                                          n

having volume v:
                  n






The above measurement of A then yields
                                  n




          22
where |ψ| is the average of the density ρ(x) = |ψ(x)| over the small region
        n

V. When v→ 0 and after performing measurements in sufficiently many
nnregions V we can measure the density ρ(x) everywhere in space[14].
          n

    Since the measured energy eigenstate ψ(x) is not changed during the

above measurement (in the limit T → ∞), the measurement result, namely the

density ρ(x), reflects (one part of) the actual physical state of the measured

system.  What  density  is ρ(x)  then?  If  the  physical  realization  of  the

observable A and the corresponding interaction Hamiltonian resorts to the
              n

electromagnetic or gravitational interaction between the measured system and

the measuring system, then the measured density ρ(x) (multiplied by the total

charge or mass of the measured system) will be the charge density or mass

density of the measured system. In other words, the measurement will show

that  the  mass  and  charge  of  a  quantum  system  such  as  an  electron  is

distributed  throughout  space,  and  the  mass  and  charge  density  in  each

position is proportional to the modulus square of the wave function of the

system  there.  In  the  following,  we  will  give  a  more  specific example  to

illustrate this important result.

    Consider a quantum system with negative charge Q (e.g. Q = -e) in a

superposition state:

                            ψ(x, t) = aψ(x, t) + bψ(x, t),
                                          12

where ψ(x, t) and ψ(x, t) are the ground states of the system in two small
        12
                                  22
identical boxes 1 and 2, and |a| + |b| = 1. An electron, which initial state is a

narrow Gaussian wave packet, is shot along a straight line near box 1 and

perpendicular to the line of separation between the boxes. The electron is

detected on a screen after passing by box 1. Suppose the separation between

the boxes is large enough so that a charge Q in box 2 has no observable
                                                                                    2
influence on the electron. Then if the system were in box 2, namely |a| = 0,

the trajectory of the electron wave packet would be a straight line as indicated

by  position  “0”  in  Figure  3.1.  By  contrast,  if  the  system  were  in  box  1,
          2
namely |a| = 1, the trajectory of the electron wave packet would be deviated

by the electric field of the system by a maximum amount as indicated by

position “Q” in Figure 3.1.

   Figure 3.1 Scheme of a protective measurement of the charge density of a quantum system

 

    As  we  have  said,  the  above  method  to  measure  the  state  of  a  single

quantum system applies only to discrete nondegenerate energy eigenstates.

Since the measured state ψ(x, t) is degenerate with its orthogonal state ψ(x, t)
    ∗∗
= bψ(x,  t)  − aψ(x,  t),  we  need  an  artificial  protection  procedure  to
      12

remove the degeneracy, e.g. joining the two boxes with an appropriate long

tube (whose role is to change the energy of the orthogonal state but keep the

measured state unchanged). This is the reason why such measurements are

called protective measurements by its proponents[15]. By this protection ψ(x,

t) is a discrete nondegenerate energy eigenstate. The required adiabaticity

condition and the weakly interacting condition (as represented above by the

smallness and smoothness of g(t)) can be further satisfied when assuming that

(1) the measuring time of the electron is long compared to h/∆E, where ∆E is

the smallest of the energy differences between ψ(x, t) and the other energy

eigenstates, and (2) at all times the potential energy of interaction between

the electron and the system is small compared to ∆E.

    Then according to the previous analysis, the motion of the electron wave

packet is only influenced by the average value of the charge of the system in
                                                    2
box 1, and thus it will reach the position “|a|Q” between “0” and “Q” on the
                                                2 
screen as denoted in Figure 3.1, where |a|Qis the average value of the charge

Q in the state ψ(x, t) in box 1, namely the integral of the charge density Q|
                  1
    2
ψ(x)| in the region of box 1. This measurement result reflects the actualcharge distribution of the measured system in box 1, and it indicates that
                          2
there exists a charge |a|Q in box 1. By comparison, a conventional impulse

measurement of ψ(x, t) without protection can only obtain two alternative

results; the electron will be detected in either position “Q” or position “0” on

the screen randomly, indicating that the charge Q is in box 1 or 2 after the

detection. Such a measurement cannot tell us the actual charge distribution of

the measured system in each box before the measurement.

    It is worth pointing out that reading the center position of the electron

wave  packet  on  the  screen  is  not  an  issue  for  the  above  protective

measurement. In principle, we can make the width of the wave packet of the

measuring  system  as  small  as  possible.  Even  if  the  uncertainty  of  its

momentum and the value of P are thus increased, the interaction Hamiltonian

H = g(t)PA can still be small by making g(t) = 1/T much smaller or the
I

measuring time T much longer. Moreover, the spreading of the wave packet

during the slow protective measurement can also be made arbitrarily small by

increasing the mass of the measuring system, and this will not increase the

strength of the involved electrostatic interaction and thus the measurement

can still be weak and adiabatic. Then the extremely narrow wave packet will
                                          2
always be detected in the position “|a|Q” on the screen.


Electrons are particles


    We have shown that the charge of a charged quantum system such as an

electron  is  distributed  throughout  space,  and  the  charge  density  in  each

position is equal to its total charge multiplied by the modulus square of the

wave function of the system there. In this section, we will investigate the

physical origin of the charge distribution. As we will see, the answer may

provide an important clue to the meaning of the wave function.

    The charge distribution of a quantum system has two possible existent

forms: it is either real or effective. The distribution is real means that it exists

throughout space at the same time, e.g. there are different charges in different

positions at any instant. The distribution is effective means that there is only

a localized particle with the total charge of the system in one position at every

instant,  and  the  time  average  of  its  motion  (during  an  infinitesimal  time

interval) forms the effective distribution in the whole space. Moreover, since

the integral of the formed charge density in any region is required to be equal

to  the  average  value  of  the  total  charge  in  the  region,  the  motion  of  theparticle is ergodic.

    These two existent forms of the charge distribution of a quantum system

have  different  effects,  and  thus  they  can  be  distinguished  in  physics.

Experiments  show  that  different  charges  in  different  positions  at  a  given

instant  have  electrostatic  interaction,  while  the  same  charges  at  different

instants have no electrostatic interaction (i.e. a charge at one instant has no

electrostatic interaction with it at another instant). Therefore, if the charge

distribution is effective, then there will exist no electrostatic self-interaction

of the effective distribution, while if the charge distribution is real, then there

will exist electrostatic self-interaction of the real distribution. In short, the

first form entails the existence of electrostatic self-interaction of the charge

distribution of a quantum system such as an electron, while the second form

does not.

    The  existence  of  the  electrostatic  self-interaction  is  obviously

inconsistent with the superposition principle of quantum mechanics, which is

manifested  by  the  linear  Schrödinger  equation  and  has  been  verified  for

microscopic particles with astonishing precision. In fact, we can also show

that  the  existence  of  the  electrostatic  self-interaction  for  the  charge

distribution of an electron already contradicts experimental observations.

  If there is an electrostatic self-interaction, then the equation of motion for

a free quantum system with mass m and charge Q will be




where k is the Coulomb constant. Note that the electrostatic self-interaction is

repulsive.  The  measure  of  the  potential  strength  of  the  electrostatic  self-
                222
interaction is ε = (4kQ/ħc). This quantity represents the strength of the

influence of the self-interaction on the normal evolution of the wave function;
      2 
when ε≈ 1 the influence is significant. For a free electron, the potential
                                                              222−3
strength of the electrostatic self-interaction will be ε = (4ke/ħc) ≈ 1 × 10.

This indicates that the electrostatic self-interaction will have a remarkable

influence on the evolution of the wave function of a free electron[16]. If such

an interaction did exist, it would have been detected by precise interference

experiments on electrons. As another example, consider the electron in the

hydrogen atom. Since the potential of the electrostatic self-interaction is of

the same order as the Coulomb potential produced by the nucleus, the energy

levels of hydrogen atoms will be remarkably different from those predicted

by quantum mechanics and confirmed by experiments.  In  conclusion,  the  existence  of  the  electrostatic  self-interaction  for

electrons  is  inconsistent  with  the  superposition  principle  of  quantum

mechanics and also contradicts experimental observations. Accordingly, the

charge distribution of an electron cannot be real but must be effective. This

means that at every instant there is only a localized particle with the total

mass and charge of the electron, and during an infinitesimal time interval the

time average of the ergodic motion of the particle forms the effective mass

and charge distributions of the electron. In short, electrons are particles, and

their  charge  distributions  in  space,  which  are  measureable  by  protective

measurements, are formed by the ergodic motion of these particles.


Particles move in a discontinuous and random way


    Which sort of ergodic motion then? If the ergodic motion of a particle is

continuous, then it can only form the effective mass and charge distributions

during a finite time interval. But the effective mass and charge distributions

are required to be formed by the ergodic motion of the particle during an

infinitesimal time interval (not during a finite time interval) at a given instant.

Thus it seems that the ergodic motion of the particle cannot be continuous.

This is at least what the existing quantum mechanics says. However, there

may exist a possible loophole here. Although the classical ergodic models

that assume continuous motion are inconsistent with quantum mechanics due

to the existence of a finite ergodic time, they cannot be completely precluded

by experiments if only the ergodic time is extremely short. After all quantum

mechanics  is  only  an  approximation  of  a  more  fundamental  theory  of

quantum gravity, in which there may exist a minimum time scale such as the

Planck time. Therefore, we need to investigate the classical ergodic models

more thoroughly.

    Consider an electron in a one-dimensional box in the first excited state

ψ(x). Its wave function has a node at the center of the box, where its charge

density is zero[17].  Assume  the  electron  performs  a  very  fast  continuous

motion in the box, and during a very short time interval its motion generates

an effective charge distribution. Let’s see whether the formed density can be
      2
e|ψ(x)|. Since the effective charge density is proportional to the amount of

time the electron spends in a given position, the electron must be in the left

half of the box half of the time and in the right half of the box half of the

time. But it can spend no time at the center of the box where the effectivecharge density is zero; in other words, it must move at infinite velocity at the

center. Certainly, the appearance of velocity faster than light or even infinite

velocity  may  be  not  a  fatal  problem,  as  our  discussion  is  entirely  in  the

context  of  non-relativistic  quantum  mechanics,  and  especially  the  infinite

potential in the example is also an ideal situation. However, it seems difficult

to explain why the electron speeds up at the node and where the infinite

energy  required  for  the  acceleration  comes  from.  Moreover,  the  sudden

acceleration of the electron near the node may also result in large radiation,

which is inconsistent with the predictions of quantum mechanics. Again, it

seems very difficult to explain why the accelerating electron does not radiate

here.

    Let’s  further  consider  an  electron  in  a  superposition  of  two  energy

eigenstates in two separated boxes ψ(x) + ψ(x). In this example, even if one
                                          12

assumes that the electron can move with infinite velocity (e.g. at the nodes), it

cannot continuously move from one box to another due to the restriction of

box  walls.  Therefore,  any  sort  of  continuous  motion  cannot  generate  the
                                                2
effective charge density e|ψ(x) + ψ(x)|. One may still object that this is
                                12

merely an artifact of the idealization of infinite potential. However, even in

this ideal situation, the model should also be able to generate the effective

charge density by means of some sort of ergodic motion of the electron;

otherwise it will be inconsistent with quantum mechanics. On the other hand,

it is very common in quantum optics experiments that a single-photon wave

packet is split into two branches moving along two well separated paths in

space. The wave function of the photon disappears outside the two paths for

all practical purposes. Moreover, the experimental results are not influenced

by the environment and setup between the two paths of the photon. Thus it is

very  difficult  to  imagine  that  the  photon  performs  a  continuous  ergodic

motion back and forth in the space between its two paths.

  In view of these serious drawbacks of the classical ergodic models and

their inconsistency with quantum mechanics, we conclude that the ergodic

motion  of  particles  cannot  be  continuous. If  the  motion  of  a  particle  is

discontinuous,  then  the  particle  can  readily  move  throughout  all  regions

where the wave function is nonzero during an arbitrarily short time interval at

a  given  instant.  Furthermore,  if  the  probability  density  of  the  particle

appearing in each position is proportional to the modulus square of its wave

function there at every instant, the discontinuous motion can also generate the

right  effective  mass  and  charge  distributions.  This  will  solve  the  aboveproblems plagued by the classical ergodic models. The discontinuous ergodic

motion requires no existence of a finite ergodic time. A particle undergoing

discontinuous motion can also move from one region to another spatially

separated region, no matter whether there is an infinite potential wall between

them, and such discontinuous motion is not influenced by the environment

and setup between these regions either. Moreover, discontinuous motion can

also solve the problems of infinite velocity and accelerating radiation. The

reason  is  that  no  classical  velocity  and  acceleration  can  be  defined  for

discontinuous  motion,  and  energy  and  momentum  will  require  new

definitions and understandings (see Chapter 2).

    The above analysis demonstrates that the ergodic motion of a particle is

discontinuous.  Yet  it  doesn’t  say  that  the  discontinuous  motion  must  be

random. In particular, the randomness of the result of a conventional quantum

measurement may be only apparent. In order to know whether the motion of

particles  is  random  or  not,  we  need  to  analyze  the  cause  of  motion.  For

example, if motion has no deterministic cause, then it will be random, only

determined by a probabilistic cause. This may also be the right way to find

how particles move. Since motion involves change in position, if we can find

the cause or instantaneous condition determining the change[18], we will be

able to find how particles move in reality.

    Let’s consider the simplest states of motion of a free particle, for which

the  instantaneous  condition  determining  the  change  of  its  position  is  a

constant during the motion. In logic the instantaneous condition can only be

deterministic  or  indeterministic.  That  the  instantaneous  condition  is

deterministic means that it leads to a deterministic change of the position of a

particle at a given instant. That the instantaneous condition is indeterministic

means that it only determines the probability density of the particle appearing

in each position in space at a given instant. If the instantaneous condition is

deterministic, then the simplest states of motion of the free particle will have

two possible forms. The first one is continuous motion with constant velocity,

and the equation of motion for the particle is x(t + dt) = x(t) + vdt, where the

deterministic instantaneous condition v is a constant[19]. The second one is

discontinuous motion with infinite average velocity; the particle performs a

finite jump along a fixed direction at every instant, where the jump distance is

a constant, determined by the constant instantaneous condition[20]. On the

other hand, if the instantaneous condition is indeterministic, then the simplest

states of motion of the free particle, for which the probability density of theparticle  appearing  in  every  position  is  the  same  at  each  instant,  will  be

random discontinuous motion with even mass and charge density.

  In order to know whether the instantaneous condition is deterministic or

not, we need to determine which sort of simplest states of motion are the

solutions of the equation of free motion in quantum mechanics (i.e. the free

Schrödinger  equation).  According  to  the  analysis  in  the  last  section,  the

momentum eigenstates of a free particle, which are the solutions of the free

Schrödinger equation, describe the ergodic motion of the particle with even
                                                            ipx2 
mass  and  charge  density  in  space  (i.e.  ρ(x)  =  |e|=  1).  Therefore,  the

simplest  states  of  motion  with  a  constant  probabilistic  instantaneous

condition are the solutions of the equation of free motion, while the simplest

states of motion with a constant deterministic instantaneous condition are not.

    It is reasonable to assume that (1) the simplest states of motion of a free

particle  are  the  solutions  of  the  equation  of  free  motion;  and  (2)  the

instantaneous  condition  determining  the  position  change  of  a  particle  is

always  deterministic  or  indeterministic  for  any  state  of  motion.  Then  the

above  result  implies  that  motion,  no  matter  it  is  free  or  forced,  has  no

deterministic cause, and thus it is random and discontinuous, only determined

by a probabilistic cause.

    To sum up, we have demonstrated that the mass and charge distributions

of a quantum system are formed by the random discontinuous motion of a

localized  particle  with  the  total  mass  and  charge  of  the  system,  and  the

probability density of the particle appearing in each position is proportional

to the modulus square of its wave function there.


Meaning of the wave function


  In classical mechanics, we have a clear physical picture of motion. It is

well  understood  that  the  trajectory  function  x(t)  describes  the  continuous

motion of a particle. In quantum mechanics, the trajectory function x(t) is

replaced by a wave function ψ(x, t). If the particle ontology is still viable in

the quantum domain, then it seems natural that the wave function should

describe  some  sort  of  more  fundamental  motion  of  particles,  of  which

continuous  motion  is  only  an  approximation  in  the  classical  domain,  as

quantum mechanics is a more fundamental theory of the physical world, of

which  classical  mechanics  is  an  approximation.  The  analysis  of  the  last

section provides a strict proof of this conjecture, and it convincingly showsthat the wave function describes the more fundamental motion of particles,

which is essentially discontinuous and random. In this section, we will give a

more detailed analysis of the meaning of the wave function.

An analysis of random discontinuous motion

    Let’s first make clearer what we mean when we say an electron is a

particle. The picture of particle appears from our analysis of the mass and

charge distributions of an electron. As we have shown in the last section, the

mass  and  charge  distributions  of  an  electron,  which  are  measurable  by

protective measurement, are not real but effective; they are formed by the

ergodic motion of a localized particle with the total mass and charge of the

electron. If the charge distribution is real, i.e., if the charge distribution exists

throughout space at the same time, then there will exist electrostatic self-

interactions of the distribution, the existence of which not only contradicts

experiments  but  also  violates  the  superposition  principle  of  quantum

mechanics.  It  is  this  analysis  that  reveals  the  basic  existent  form  of  an

electron in space and time. An electron is a particle[21]. Here the concept of

particle is used in its usual sense. A particle is a small localized object with

mass  and  charge,  and  it  is  only  in  one  position  in  space  at  an  instant.

Moreover, as we have argued above, the motion of an electron described by

its wave function is not continuous but discontinuous and random in nature.

We may say that an electron is a quantum particle in the sense that its motion

is  not  continuous  motion  described  by  classical  mechanics,  but  random

discontinuous motion described by quantum mechanics.

    Next, let’s analyze the random discontinuous motion of particles. From a

logical point of view, for the random discontinuous motion of a particle, there

should  exist  a  probabilistic  instantaneous  condition  that  determines  the

probability  density  of  the  particle  appearing  in  every  position  in  space,

otherwise it would not “know” how frequently they should appear in each

position  in  space.  This  condition  cannot  come  from  otherwhere  but  must

come  from  the  particle  itself.  In  other  words,  the  particle  must  have  an

instantaneous property that determines its motion in a probabilistic way. This

property  is  usually  called  indeterministic  disposition  or  propensity  in  the

literature[22],  and  it  can  be  represented  by  Ρ(x,  t),  which  satisfies  the

nonnegative condition Ρ(x, t) ≥ 0 and the normalization relation ∫Ρ(x, t)dx =

1. As a result, the position of the particle at every instant is random, and its

trajectory formed by the random position series is not continuous at everyinstant[23]. In short, the motion of the particle is essentially discontinuous

and random[24].

    Unlike the deterministic continuous motion, the trajectory function x(t)

can no longer provide a useful description for random discontinuous motion.

In the following, we will give a strict description of random discontinuous

motion of particles based on measure theory. For simplicity we will mainly

analyze the one-dimensional motion that corresponds to the point set in two-

dimensional space and time. The results can be readily extended to the three-

dimensional situation.

 













        Figure 3.2 The description of random discontinuous motion of a single particle

 

    We first analyze the random discontinuous motion of a single particle.

Consider the state of motion of the particle in finite intervals ∆t and ∆x near a

space-time point (t, x) as shown in Figure 3.2. The positions of the particle
                    ij

form a random, discontinuous trajectory in this square region. We study the

projection of this trajectory in the t-axis, which is a dense instant set in the

time interval ∆t. Let W be the discontinuous trajectory of the particle and Q

be the square region [x, x + ∆x]× [t, t+ ∆t]. The dense instant set can be
                          jjii

denoted  by  π(W  ∩  Q)∈  R,  where  π  is  the  projection  on  the  t-axis.
              t t

According to the measure theory, we can define the Lebesgue measure:




Since  the  sum  of  the  measures  of  all  such  dense  instant  sets  in  the  time

interval ∆t is equal to the length of the continuous time interval ∆t, we have:Then we can define the measure density as follows:




    This quantity provides a strict description of the position distribution of

the  particle  or  the  relative  frequency  of  the  particle  appearing  in  an

infinitesimal space interval dx near position x during an infinitesimal interval

dt near instant t, and it satisfies the normalization relation ∫ρ(x, t)dx = 1 by

the  above  definition.  Note  that  the  existence  of  the  limit  relies  on  the

continuity  of  the  evolution  of  Ρ(x,  t),  the  property  of  the  particle  that

determines the probability density of it appearing in every position in space.

In fact, ρ(x, t) is determined by Ρ(x, t), and there exists the relation ρ(x, t) =

Ρ(x, t). We call ρ(x, t) position measure density or position density in brief.

    Since  the  position  density  will  change  with  time  in  general,  we  may

further define the position flux density j(x, t) through the relation j(x, t) = ρ(x,

t)v(x, t), where v(x, t) is the velocity of the local position density. It describes

the change rate of the position density. Due to the conservation of measure,

ρ(x, t) and j(x, t) satisfy the continuity equation:




The  position  density  ρ(x,  t)  and  position  flux  density  j(x,  t)  provide  a

complete description of the state of random discontinuous motion of a single

particle.

    The description of the motion of a single particle can be extended to the

motion  of  many  particles.  For  the  random  discontinuous  motion  of  N

particles,  we  can  define  joint  position  density  ρ(x, x,  ...x,  t)  and  joint
                                                              12N

position flux density j(x, x, ...x, t) = ρ(x, x, ...x, t) v(x, x, ...x, t). They
                            12N12N12N

also satisfy the continuity equation:





When these N particles are independent, the joint position density can bereduced to the direct product of the position density for each particle. Note

that the joint position density ρ(x, x, ...x, t) and joint position flux density
                                      12N

j(x, x, ...x,  t)  are  not  defined  in  the  real  three-dimensional  space,  but
  12N

defined in the 3N-dimensional configuration space.

Interpreting the wave function

    Although  the  motion  of  particles  is  essentially  discontinuous  and

random, the discontinuity and randomness of motion is absorbed into the

state of motion, which is defined during an infinitesimal time interval, by the

descriptive quantities of position density ρ(x, t) and position flux density j(x,

t). Therefore, the evolution of the state of motion of particles may obey a

deterministic  continuous  equation.  As  we  have  demonstrated  in  the  last

chapter,  the  linear  evolution  of  the  state  is  governed  by  the  Schrödinger

equation in quantum mechanics. Based on this equation, both ρ(x, t) and j(x,

t) can be expressed by the wave function in a unique way[25]:







Correspondingly, the wave function ψ(x, t) can be uniquely expressed by ρ(x,

t) and j(x, t) (except for a constant phase factor):




In this way, the wave function ψ(x, t) also provides a complete description of

the  state  of  motion.  For  the  motion  of  many  particles,  the  joint  position

density  and  joint  position  flux  density  are  defined  in  the  3N-dimensional

configuration  space,  and  thus  the  many-particle  wave  function,  which  is

composed  of  these  two  quantities,  is  also  defined  in  the  3N-dimensional

configuration space.

    One important point needs to be stressed here. Since the wave function in

quantum mechanics is defined at a given instant, not during an infinitesimal

time interval, it should be regarded not simply as a description of the state of

motion of particles, but more suitably as a description of the probabilistic

instantaneous  condition  or  dispositional  property  of  the  particles  that

determines  their  random  discontinuous  motion  at  a  deeper  level[26].  In

particular,  the  modulus  square  of  the  wave  function  determines  theprobability density of the particles appearing in every position in space. By

contrast, the position density and position flux density, which are defined

during an infinitesimal time interval at a given instant, are only a description

of the state of the resulting random discontinuous motion of particles, and

they are determined by the wave function. In this sense, we may say that the

motion of particles is “guided” by their wave function in a probabilistic way.


Momentum, energy and spin


    We have been discussing random discontinuous motion of particles in

real space. Does the picture of random discontinuous motion exist for other

dynamical  variables  such  as  momentum  and  energy?  Since  there  are  also

wave functions of these variables in quantum mechanics, it seems tempting to

assume that the interpretation of the wave function in position space may also

apply to the wave function in momentum space etc. Moreover, due to the

randomness of change for each variable, the probability distributions of all

variables  for  an  arbitrary  wave  function  can  indeed  be  consistent  with

quantum  mechanics[27].  As  we  think,  however,  the  picture  of  random

discontinuous motion may exist only for position, and momentum, energy etc

do not undergo random discontinuous change among their eigenvalues.

  In classical mechanics, a particle moves along a continuous trajectory,

and it has velocity defined as the first time derivative of its trajectory[28].

Moreover,  the  particle  has  momentum,  which  is  defined  as  its  velocity

multiplied by its mass, namely p = mv, and the particle also has (kinetic)

energy, which is defined as the square of its momentum divided by twice its
                      22
mass, namely E = p/2m = mv/2.

  In  quantum  mechanics,  since  the  motion  of  a  particle  is  essentially

discontinuous,  the  particle  has  no  velocity  at  every  instant.  However,  a

particle still has momentum and energy. As noted in the last chapter, they

relate no longer to velocity but to spacetime translation. For example, the

momentum operator is defined as the generator of space translation, namely P

= −i∂/∂x. If a particle is in a momentum eigenstate, we say it has a definite

momentum  whose  value  is  the  corresponding  momentum  eigenvalue.

According to expectation, the quantum definitions of momentum and energy

lead to their classical formulations. By Ehrenfest’s theorem, we have:

                                  d<x>/dt = <p>/m,

where  <x>,  <p>  are  the  average  position  and  average  momentum  of  aparticle, respectively. For a macroscopic object, whose state is a wave packet

narrow  in  both  position  and  momentum,  <x>  and  <p>  will  represent  the

effective position and momentum of the object. Then this formula naturally

leads to the classical definition of momentum, p = mv. Similarly, for a free
                                    2
particle  we  have  <E>  =  <p>/m  by  the  free Schrödinger  equation. This
                                                                                2
formula then leads to the classical definition of kinetic energy, E = p/2m.

    From the definitions of momentum and energy it can be seen that they

are distinct from position. The position of a particle is its primary property

defined at instants, while momentum and energy are the secondary properties

relating only to its state of motion (e.g. momentum and energy eigenstates),

which is formed by the motion of the particle. In other words, position is an

instantaneous property of a particle, while momentum and energy are only

manifestations of its state of motion during an infinitesimal time interval.

Certainly, we can still talk about momentum and energy. For example, when

a particle is in the eigenstate of the momentum or energy operator, we say the

particle has definite momentum or energy, whose value is the corresponding

eigenvalue, and when the particle is in a superposition of these eigenstates,

we say the particle has no definite momentum and energy.

    Lastly, we note that spin is a more distinct property. Like momentum and

energy, the spin of a particle does not undergo random discontinuous change

either for any spin state. The main reason is that the spin of a particle is

always  definite  along  one  direction,  though  the  spin  state  can  always  be

decomposed into two eigenstates of spin along another direction. However,

different from momentum and energy, spin has its own state space, irrelevant

to  the  (spatial)  state  of  motion,  and  thus  it  may  be  regarded  as  an

instantaneous property like position. As a result, if the spin state of a particle

is entangled with its spatial state due to interaction and the branches of the

entangled state are well separated in space, the particle, which has different

spin in different branches, will also undergo random discontinuous motion

between these different spin states. This is the situation that usually happens

during a spin measurement.

 

 4.  Understanding  the  theory  (III):  Wavefunction

collapse and the Born rule

    We have demonstrated in chapter 2 that the linear evolution of the wave

function  is  governed  by  the  Schrödinger  equation  in  the  nonrelativistic

domain. As noted there, however, the derivation cannot exclude the existence

of possible nonlinear quantum evolution. Then does the wave function also

undergo nonlinear evolution besides the linear Schrödinger evolution? After

unveiling the physical meaning of the wave function in the last chapter, we

will be able to answer this important question.

    The analysis is closely related to the so-called measurement problem.

The derived Schrödinger equation has been precisely tested for microscopic

systems  such  as  photons,  electrons,  atoms  and  molecules  etc.  Yet  for

macroscopic objects such as a cat or the pointer of a measuring device, there

has  been  a  hot  debate  whether  the  equation  is  complete.  For  example,  it

seems that the linear Schrödinger evolution is blatantly inconsistent with the

emergence of definite measurement results.

  In this chapter, we will show that the interpretation of the wave function

in terms of random discontinuous motion of particles may help to solve the

measurement problem. It is argued that the random discontinuous motion of

particles may bring on a stochastic nonlinear evolution of the wave function,

which can lead to the collapse of the wave function during a conventional

measurement  and  thus  explain  the  emergence  of  definite  measurement

results. Moreover, the picture of random discontinuous motion of particles

may also make the Born rule more comprehensible.

    However,  it  must  be  warned  that the  precise  law  of  the  stochastic

nonlinear evolution is still unknown. Moreover, since some arguments of this

chapter concern new physics that has not been tested by experiments, they are

more speculative. Certainly, the positive aspect is that this will make the

contents more exciting, as the final solution to the measurement problem may

ignite the next revolution in physics.


The measurement problem


    Let’s  first  see  the  notorious  measurement  problem.  To  illustrate  the

problem, consider a microscopic particle such as an electron in a quantumsuperposition of two positions:

                                |ψ> = a|x> + b|x>.
                                            12

The standard procedure for measuring the position of the particle involves an

interaction Hamiltonian:

                                      H = g(t)PX
                                        I

coupling the measured particle to an appropriate measuring device, where X

is the position operator of the particle, P is the momentum operator of the

pointer  of  the  measuring  device.  The  coupling  strength  g(t)  is  a  smooth

function normalized to ∫dtg(t) = 1 during the interaction interval τ, and g(0) =

g(τ) = 0. The initial state of the pointer is supposed to be a Gaussian wave

packet centered at initial position 0, denoted by |φ(0)>.

    For a conventional position measurement, the interaction H is of very
                                                                              I

short duration and so strong that it dominates the rest of the Hamiltonian.

Then the state of the combined system at the end of the interaction is:

          -i∫dtHI(t) 
|t=τ> = e|ψ>|φ(0)>

        -iPX 
  = e(a|x> + b|x>) |φ(0)>
                12

          -iPx1-iPx2
  = (ae|x> + be|x>) |φ(0)>
                12

  = a|x>|φ(x)> + b|x>|φ(x)>.
          1122

This  is  an  entangled  superposition,  where  the  position  eigenstates  of  the

particle with eigenvalues x get correlated to measuring device states in which
                              i

the pointer is shifted by these values x (i = 1, 2).
                                            i

    Therefore, according to the linear Schrödinger equation (for many-body

systems), the initial superposition state of a microscopic particle evolves to a

superposition  state  of  a  macroscopic  device.  To  make  the  situation  more

dramatic, we can further introduce an observer who observes the position of

the  pointer.  Then  the  state  of  the  combined  system  at  the  end  of  the

observation will be

              |t=τ> = a|x>|φ(x)> |Ф(x)> + b|x>|φ(x)>|Ф(x)>,
                            111222

where |Ф(x)> and |Ф(x)> represent the states of the observer who perceived
            12

that  the  pointer  is  shifted  by  x  and  x,  respectively.  Thus  the  linear
                                        12

Schrödinger  evolution  can  further  lead  to  the  superposition  states  of  an

observer’s perception.

  If  the  above  superposition  state  is  indeed  the  outcome  state  of  anappropriate measurement, then it seems that the measurement did not obtain a

definite  result  at  all.  However,  experiments show  that  the  result  of  a

conventional measurement is always definite. Thus a conventional position

measurement on a particle in the superposition state a|x> + b|x> should
                                                                    12

obtain a definite result x or x, that is, the pointer of the measuring device
                            12

should be shifted by a definite value x or x. (Strictly speaking, an observer
                                            12

should perceive that the pointer of the device is shifted by a definite value x
                                                                                          1

or x.) Furthermore, the probability of the measurement result should satisfy
  2

the Born rule, namely the probabilities of the result being x and x should be
                                                                      12
22
|a|  and  |b|.  The  apparent  inconsistency  between  the  linear  Schrödinger

equation and the emergence of definite measurement results is the so-called

measurement problem.

  In  order  to  solve  the measurement  problem,  the  standard  quantum

mechanics  taught  in  textbooks resorts  to  an  additional  collapse  postulate,

which says that when a wave function is measured by a macroscopic device,

it will no longer follow the linear Schrödinger equation, but instantaneously

collapse  to  one  of  the  wave  functions  that  correspond  to  definite

measurement results. Unfortunately, however, this collapse postulate is ad

hoc, and the theory does not tell us why and how a wave function collapses.

In fact, in the absence of any satisfactory account of wavefunction collapse,

the standard quantum mechanics does not have any exact empirical content,

though it can still be used for most practical purposes.

    There  are  two  possible  ways  to  complete  the  standard  quantum

mechanics. The first one is to integrate the collapse evolution with the normal

Schrödinger evolution into a unified dynamics, e.g. in the dynamical collapse

theories. The second way is to reject the collapse postulate and assume that

the  Schrödinger  equation  completely  describes  the  evolution  of  the  wave

function. There are two alternative theories for avoiding collapse. The first

one is the de Broglie-Bohm theory, which takes the wave function as an

incomplete  description  and  adds  some  hidden  variables  to  explain  the

emergence  of  definite  measurement  results.  The  second  one  is  the  many-

worlds  interpretation,  which  assumes  the  existence  of  many  equally  real

worlds corresponding to different possible results of quantum experiments

and  still  regards  the  unitarily  evolving  wave  function  as  a  complete

description of the total worlds. In the next section, we will analyze these

solutions in detail.Wavefunction collapse is real


The de Broglie-Bohm theory goes astray

    Let's first see the de Broglie-Bohm theory. According to the theory, a

complete realistic description of a quantum system is provided by its wave

function  together  with  the  configuration  defined  by  the  positions  of  its

particles.  The  wave  function  follows  the  linear  Schrödinger  equation  and

never collapses. The particles, called Bohmian particles, are guided by the

wave  function  to  undergo  deterministic  continuous  motion  via  a  guiding

equation. For example, in the minimum formulation of the de Broglie-Bohm

theory, which is usually called Bohmian mechanics, the guiding equation for

a system of N Bohmian particles is




where ρ and j are the density and flux density of the wave function that
                k

satisfy the continuity equation[29], though it is often written in an equivalent

but more implicit form:




where m, x, v are the mass, position and velocity of the k-th Bohmian
        kkk

particle, respectively, ψ(x, x, …x, t) is the wave function of the system that
                            12k

obeys the Schrödinger equation, and Im() represents the imaginary part of

a complex-valued function.

  In the de Broglie-Bohm theory, the result of a measurement is assumed

to be indicated by the positions of the Bohmian particles representing the

pointer of the measuring device (and not by the wave function of the pointer),

and thus it is always definite. Moreover, it can be shown that the theory gives

the same predictions of measurement results as standard quantum mechanics

by means of a quantum equilibrium hypothesis (so long as the latter gives

unambiguous  predictions).  Concretely  speaking,  the  quantum  equilibrium

hypothesis provides the initial conditions for the guidance equation which

make  the  de  Broglie-Bohm  theory  obey  Born's  rule  in  terms  of  position

distributions. Moreover, since all measurements can be finally expressed in

terms of position, e.g. pointer positions, this amounts to full accordance withall  predictions  of  quantum  mechanics.  In  this  way,  it  seems  that  the  de

Broglie-Bohm  theory  can  succeed  in  avoiding  the  collapse  of  the  wave

function.

    However,  although  the  de  Broglie-Bohm  theory  is  mathematically

equivalent to quantum mechanics, there is no clear consensus with regard to

its physical interpretation.  In  the  following,  we  will  examine  whether  the

theory  is  consistent  with  the  meaning  of  the  wave  function,  namely  the

interpretation of the wave function in terms of random discontinuous motion

of particles.

    First of all, it can be seen that the guiding responsibility of the wave

function assumed by the theory is inconsistent with the meaning of the wave

function. As noted above, the wave function represents the property of the

particles of a quantum system that determines their random discontinuous

motion. Accordingly, the wave function indeed guides the motion of these

particles in some sense. However, the wave function guides the motion of the

particles not in a deterministic and continuous way as assumed by the de

Broglie-Bohm  theory,  but  in  a  probabilistic  and  discontinuous  way;  the

modulus square of the wave function determines the probability density of

the particles appearing in certain positions in space. Moreover, the motion of

these particles is ergodic. By contrast, the motion of the Bohmian particles is

not  ergodic,  and  the  time  averages  of  the  Bohmian  particles’  positions

typically differ remarkably from the ensemble averages.

    Next,  although  one  may  assume  that  a  quantum  system  contains

additional  Bohmian  particles  besides  its  particles  that  undergo  random

discontinuous motion, the motion of the Bohmian particles cannot be guided

by the wave function of the system. For the wave function of the system

represents the property of the non-Bohmian particles of the system, and its

efficiency is to guide the motion of these particles in a probabilistic way. In

particular, the wave function is not a field-like entity distributing throughout

configuration space (e.g. an information field) or a property of the Bohmian

particles that may guide their motion, and at every instant there are only non-

Bohmian particles being in positions that are usually far from the positions of

the hypothetical Bohmian particles. Note also that the non-Bohmian particles

cannot  have  known  interactions  such  as  gravitational  and  electromagnetic

interactions  with  the  Bohmian  particles  either;  otherwise  the  theory  will

contradict quantum mechanics and experiments. Without being guided by the

wave function in a proper way, the motion of the Bohmian particles will beunable  to  generate  the  right  measurement  results  in  conventional  impulse

measurements.

    Last  but  not  least, the  positions  of  the  Bohmian  particles  as  added

(hidden)  variables  seem  redundant  too.  In  some  sense,  there  are  already

additional variables besides the wave function for the random discontinuous

motion  of  particles.  It  is  the  definite  positions  of  these  particles  at  each

instant. Though these variables are not continuous and deterministic, their

random motion might lead to the stochastic collapse of the wave function and

further account for the emergence of random measurement results. We will

consider this possibility later on.

  In  conclusion,  the  de  Broglie-Bohm  theory  is  inconsistent  with  the

meaning of the wave function when considering its physical contents. As a

result, the theory as an approach to avoid wavefunction collapse cannot be a

satisfactory solution to the measurement problem.

There are no many-worlds

    Now let's turn to the second approach to avoid wavefunction collapse,

the many-worlds interpretation. Although this theory is widely acknowledged

as one of the main alternatives to quantum mechanics, its many fundamental

issues, e.g. the preferred basis problem and the interpretation of probability,

have not been completely solved yet. In this subsection, we will show that the

existence  of  many  worlds  is  inconsistent  with  the  results  of  protective

measurement and the picture of random discontinuous motion of particles.

    According  to  the  many-worlds  interpretation,  each  component  of  the

wave function of a measuring device that represents a definite measurement

result corresponds to each world among the many worlds. This means that in

one world there is only one component of the superposed wave function and

the  other  components  do  not  exist,  and  thus  these  components  that

correspond to the other worlds cannot be observed in this world. As a result,

in every world the whole superposed wave function of the measuring device

cannot be measured. If all components of the superposed wave function of

the device can be observed in one world, then they will all exist in this world,

which obviously contradicts the many-worlds interpretation.

    It  is  unsurprising  that  the  existence  of  such  many  worlds  may  be

consistent with the results of conventional (impulse) measurements, as the

many-worlds interpretation is just invented to explain the emergence of these

results, e.g. the definite measurement result in each world always denotes theresult  of  a  conventional  (impulse)  measurement.  However,  this  does  not

guarantee consistency for all types of measurements. Indeed, it can be seen

that the existence of the many worlds defined above is inconsistent with the

results of protective measurements. The reason is that the whole superposed

wave function of a quantum system including a measuring device can be

measured by a protective measurement (see the example given in section 3.1)

[30].  The  result  of  the  protective  measurement  as  predicted  by  quantum

mechanics indicates that all components of the superposed wave function of

the  measuring  device  exist  in  the  same  world  where  the  protective

measurement is made. Therefore, according to protective measurement, the

components of the superposed wave function of a measuring device, each of

which represents a definite measurement result, do not correspond to many

worlds, in each of which there is only one such component and a copy of the

measuring device that obtains a definite result; rather, the whole superposed

wave function of the measuring device, if it exists, only exists in one world,

namely our world, and in this world there is only one measuring device that

obtains no definite result. In this way, protective measurement provides a

strong argument against the many-worlds interpretation.

    Four points are worth stressing. First of all, the above argument does not

depend on how the many worlds are precisely defined in the many-worlds

interpretation. For example, it is irrelevant to whether the many worlds are

fundamental or emergent, and in particular, it also applies to Wallace’s recent

formulation of the many-worlds interpretation based on a structuralist view

on macro-ontology. The key point is that all components of the superposed

wave  function  of  a  measuring  device  can  be  detected  by  protective

measurement in one world, namely our world, and thus they all exist in this

world. Therefore, it is impossible that the superposed wave function of a

measuring  device  corresponds  to  many  worlds,  only  one  of  which  is  our

world[31].

    Next,  the  above  argument  is  not  influenced  by  environment-induced

decoherence. On the one hand, even if the superposition state of a measuring

device is entangled with the states of other systems, the entangled state of the

whole system can also be measured by protective measurement in principle.

The  method  is  by  adding  appropriate  protection  procedure  to  the  whole

system so that its entangled state is a nondegenerate eigenstate of the total

Hamiltonian  of  the  system  together  with  the  added  potential.  Then  the

entangled  state  can  be  protectively  measured.  On  the  other  hand,environment-induced decoherence is not an essential element of the many-

worlds  interpretation.  Even  when  a  measuring  device  is  isolated  from

environment  (and  the  measured  particle  is  absorbed  by  the  device),  the

interpretation also requires that each component of the wave function of the

measuring device in which there is a definite measurement result corresponds

to  each  world  among  the  many  worlds;  otherwise  the  many-worlds

interpretation will not give the same predictions of measurement results as

standard  quantum  mechanics  (so  long  as  the  latter  gives  unambiguous

predictions).

    Thirdly, the above argument does not require protective measurement to

be able to distinguish the superposed wave function of a measuring device (in

each component of which there is a definite measurement result) from one of

its components, or whether the superposed wave function collapses or not

during  a  conventional  impulse  measurement.  Since  the  determination

demands  the  distinguishability  of  two  non-orthogonal  states,  which  is

prohibited  by  quantum  mechanics,  no  measurements  consistent  with  the

theory  including  protective  measurement  can  do  this.  What  protective

measurement  tells  us  is  that  such  a  superposed  wave  function,  which

existence is assumed by the many-worlds interpretation, does not correspond

to  the  many  worlds  defined  by  the  many-worlds  interpretation.  In  other

words,  protective  measurement  reveals  inconsistency  of  the  many-worlds

interpretation.

    Lastly, we stress again that the principle of protective measurement is

irrelevant  to  the  controversial  process  of  wavefunction  collapse  and  only

depends  on  the  linear  Schrödinger  evolution.  As  a  result,  protective

measurement can (at least) be used to examine the internal consistency of the

no-collapse  solutions  to  the  measurement  problem,  e.g.  the  many-worlds

interpretation, before experiments give the last verdict.

  In the following, we will further show that the existence of many worlds

is not consistent with the picture of random discontinuous motion of particles

either[32]. In order to examine the many-worlds interpretation, it is necessary

to know exactly what a quantum superposition is. No matter how to define

the  many  worlds,  they  correspond  to  some  components  of  a  quantum

superposition after all (e.g. the components where measuring devices obtain

definite  results,  and  in  particular,  observers  have  definite  conscious

experience).  According  to  the  picture  of  random  discontinuous  motion  of

particles, for a superposition of two positions A and B of a quantum system(e.g.  the  pointer  of  a  measuring  device),  the  system  randomly  and

discontinuously jumps between these two positions. At some random and

discontinuous instants the system is in position A, and at other instants it is in

position B. In this picture of quantum superposition, it is obvious that there is

only  one  system  all  along,  which  randomly  and  discontinuously  moves

throughout all components of the superposition, no matter the system is a

microscopic particle or a measuring device or an observer. In other words,

there is only one world whose instantaneous state is constantly changing in a

random and discontinuous way.

    This  conclusion  is  also  supported  by  a  comparison  between

discontinuous  motion  and  continuous  motion.  For  a  quantum  particle

undergoing  discontinuous  motion,  the  position  of  the  particle  changes

discontinuously. For a classical particle, its position changes continuously.

There is no essential difference between these two kinds of changes. For both

cases the position of the particle is always definite at each instant, and the

positions of the particle at different instants may be different. Moreover, the

discontinuous change, like the continuous change, does not create the many

worlds, because, among other reasons, the change happens all the while but

the creating process only happens once. Therefore, if there is only one world

in classical mechanics, then there is also one world in quantum mechanics

according  to  the  picture  of  random  discontinuous  motion  of  particles,  no

matter how the many worlds are precisely defined.

    To sum up, the above analysis shows that the de Broglie-Bohm theory

and the many-worlds interpretation are inconsistent with the meaning of the

wave function. If there are no hidden variables such as the trajectories of the

Bohmian particles besides the wave function, then the state of a quantum

system including a measuring device will be represented only by its wave

function. If there are no many worlds either, then a definite measurement

result, which is usually denoted by a definite position of the pointer of a

measuring device, will be represented by a local wave packet of the pointer,

rather  than  by  a  superposition  of  local  wave  packets.  As  a  result,  the

transition  from  microscopic  uncertainty  to  macroscopic  certainty  (e.g.  the

emergence  of  definite  measurement  results)  can  only  be  achieved  by  the

collapse of the wave function. In other words, wavefunction collapse will be

a real physical process.

  In the following sections, we will first analyze the physical origin of

wavefunction collapse and then propose a toy collapse model in terms ofrandom discontinuous motion of particles. Since these contents concern new

physics, they are more speculative.


Who collapses the wave function?


  In the existing dynamical collapse theories, it is generally assumed that

the wave function is collapsed by an unknown classical noise field. If what

the wave function describes is the random discontinuous motion of particles,

then it seems natural to assume that the random motion of particles is the

appropriate noise source to collapse the wave function. This has three merits

at  least.  First,  the  noise  source  and  its  properties  are  already  known.  For

example, the probability of the particles being in certain positions at each

instant is given by the modulus square of their wave function at the instant.

Next, this noise source is not a classical field, and thus the model can avoid

the problems introduced by the field such as the problem of infinite energy

etc. Last but not least, the random discontinuous motion of particles can also

manifest itself in the equation of motion by introducing the collapse evolution

of the wave function. In the following, we will give a more detailed argument

for this claim.

    As we have demonstrated in the last chapter, the wave function of a

quantum particle is an instantaneous dispositional property of the particle that

determines its random discontinuous motion. However, the wave function is

not  a  complete  description  of  the  instantaneous  state  of  the  particle.  The

instantaneous state of the particle at a given instant also includes its random

position  at  the  instant,  which  may  be  called  the  random  part  of  the

instantaneous state of the particle. Although the probability density of the

particle  being  in  every  position  is  completely  determined  by  the  wave

function,  its  random  position  at  each  instant  is  a  new  physical  fact

independent of the wave function. Therefore, it seems natural to assume that

the random stays of the particle have certain physical efficiency[33]. Since

the motion of the particle is essentially random, its stay at an instant does not

influence its stays at other instants in any direct way. Then the random stays

of  the  particle  can  only  manifest  themselves  by  their  influences  on  the

evolution of the wave function[34]. This forms a feedback in some sense; the

wave function of a particle determines the probabilities of its stays in certain

position, while its random stay at each instant also influences the evolution of

the wave function in a stochastic way[35].    There may exist a deeper reason for the existence of such a feedback.

According to the picture of random discontinuous motion, a particle stays in a

position  at  a  discrete  instant,  and  at next  instant  it  may  jump  to  another

position. It is a reasonable assumption that the particle has both the tendency

to  jump  among  different  positions  and  the  tendency  to  stay  in  the  same

position, and their relative strength is determined by the state of motion of the

particle.  This  is  satisfactory  in  logic,  as  there  should  exist  two  opposite

tendencies  in  general,  and  their  relative  strength  is  determined  by  certain

condition. In some sense, the two tendencies of a particle are related to the

two parts of its instantaneous state; the jumping tendency is related to the

wave function, and it is needed to manifest the superposition of different

positions, while the staying tendency is related to the random stays. These

two opposite tendencies together constitute the complete “temperament” of a

particle.

    It  can  be  seen  that  the  tendency  to  stay  in  the  same  position  for

individual particles might be the deeper origin of wavefunction collapse. For

the staying tendency of a particle will increase its probability of being in the

current position, and correspondingly decrease the probabilities of being in

other positions pro rata. A toy model given later will show that such random

changes of position probability distribution may continuously accumulate to

lead to the collapse of a superposition of different positions to one of them.

    Since  it  has  been widely  conjectured  that  the  Planck  scale  is  the

minimum  spacetime  scale  in  a  complete  quantum  theory  incorporating

gravity, from now on we will assume that the real motion of particles is

random discontinuous motion in discrete spacetime, where the size of each

discrete instant is the Planck time and the size of each discrete position is the

Planck  length[36].  In  discrete  spacetime,  a  particle  randomly  stays  in  a

discrete position at each discrete instant, with a probability determined by the

modulus square of its wave function at the instant. Each random stay of the

particle has a stochastic influence on the evolution of its wave function. As

we  will  show  later,  the  accumulation  of  such  discrete  and  stochastic

influences may lead to the correct collapse of the wave function, which can

then explain the emergence of definite measurement results.


Why the Born rule?


    The Born rule in quantum mechanics says that for a quantum system in asuperposition of the eigenstates of a dynamical variable A, i.e., |ψ> = Σc|a>,
                                                                                    iii

the probability of the measurement of the variable A yielding the result a is
                                                                                        i
2
|c|. The rule has been precisely tested by experiments, and it is the second
i

established  part  of  quantum  mechanics  besides  the  Schrödinger  equation.

However,  it  remains  a  mystery  why  the  probability  of  a  particular

measurement result must satisfy the Born rule.

    After we have known the meaning of the wave function, this mystery

may be unveiled. According to the picture of random discontinuous motion

of particles, for a particle described by a wave function ψ(x, t), the quantity |
      2
ψ(x,  t)|  gives  the  objective  probability  density  of  the  particle being  in
                                                                            2
position  x  at  instant  t.  According  to  the  Born  rule,  |ψ(x,  t)|  gives  the

probability density of the particle being found in position x at instant t. Then

under  the  reasonable  assumption  that  the  probability  distribution  of  the

results of the measurements of a property such as position is the same as the

objective probability distribution of the property in the measured state, the

Born rule for position measurements is necessitated by the interpretation of

the  wave  function  in  terms  of  random  discontinuous  motion  of  particles.

Since the measurements of other dynamical variables can be finally reduced

to the measurements of position such as pointer positions, the Born rule will

hold true for the measurements of any dynamical variable.

    There  is,  arguably,  a  stricter  restriction  than  the  Born  rule  for  the

stochastic  collapse  evolution  of  the  wave  function  that  results  in  the

emergence of definite measurement results. It is a reasonable postulate that

the laws of nature should permit nature to manifest itself. Otherwise we will

be unable to find the laws of nature and verify them by experiments, and our

scientific investigations will be also pointless. By this postulate, when an

initial superposition of positions undergoes the stochastic collapse evolution,

the  position  probability  distribution  should  manifest  itself  through  the

collapse  results  for  an  ensemble  of  identical  systems,  i.e.,  the  position

collapse results should satisfy the Born rule. Moreover, since the collapse

evolution of individual systems is completely random and irreversible, the

diagonal density matrix elements for an ensemble of identical systems must

be precisely the same as the initial probability distribution at every step of the

evolution. Otherwise the frequency distribution of the collapse results in the

ensemble cannot reflect the initial probability distribution, or in other words,

the probability information contained in the initial state will be completely

lost due to the random and irreversible collapse[37]. As we will see in thenext section, this restriction is an important part of the collapse law.


A toy model of wavefunction collapse


    After  giving  a  speculative  analysis  of  the  origin  of  wavefunction

collapse, we will propose a toy model of wavefunction collapse based on the

results obtained from the analysis.

    Consider a particle in a superposition of two positions[38].  Its  initial

state is:

                              |ψ(0)> = c(0)|x> + c(0)|x>.
                                          1122

where |x> is the discrete position eigenstate of the particle, and c(0) satisfies
        ii
                                          2
the normalization relation Σ|c(0)| = 1. According to our analysis of the
                                i=1,2i

origin  of  wavefunction  collapse,  this  superposition  of  two  position

eigenstates will collapse to one of the position eigenstates after a discrete

dynamical process, and the collapse result satisfies the Born rule.

    The physical picture of the dynamical collapse process is as follows. At

the initial instant t = t (where t is the Planck time), the particle randomly
                    0PP
                                                                      2
stays in a position branch |x> with probability P(0) ≡ |c(0)|. This finite stay
                                iii

slightly  increases  the  probability  of  the  staying  branch  and  decreases  the

probability of the other branch pro rata. Similarly, at any instant t = nt the
                                                                                      P
                                                                                2
particle randomly stays in a branch |x> with probability P(t) ≡ |c(t)|, and the
                                          iii

random  stay  also  changes  the  probabilities  of  the  branches  slightly.  Then

during  a  finite  time  interval  much  larger  than  t,  the  probability  of  each
                                                          P

branch  will  undergo  a  discrete  and  stochastic  evolution.  In  the  end,  the

probability of one branch will be close to one, and the probability of the other

branch will be close to zero. In other words, the initial superposition will

randomly collapse to one of the position branches in the superposition.

    Now we will give a concrete analysis of this dynamical collapse process.

For simplicity we omit the linear Schrödinger evolution that also changes the

position probability distribution. Suppose the particle stays in branch |x> at
                                                                                      1

instant t = nt, and the stay changes the probability of this branch, P(t), to
            P1

                                P(t+Tp) = P(t) + ΔP,
                                1111

where ΔP is a functional of P(t). Due to the conservation of probability,
          11

P(t) correspondingly turns to be
2

                                P(t+Tp) = P(t) - ΔP.
                                2121The probability of this stay (i.e.  the  probability  of  the  particle  staying  in

branch |x> at instant t) is p(x,t) = P(t). Similarly, the stay of the particle in
          111

branch |x> at instant t = nt changes the probability of the branch, P(t), to
        2P2

                                P(t+Tp) =P(t) + ΔP.
                                2222

P(t) correspondingly turns to be
1

                                P(t+Tp) =P(t) - ΔP.
                                  1212

The  probability  of  this  stay  is  p(x,t) = P(t).  Then  we  can  work  out  the
                                          22

diagonal density matrix elements of the evolution:

ρ(t+Tp) = ∑ p(x,t)P(t +Tp)
11i=1,2i1i

= P(t)[P(t) +ΔP] + P(t)[P(t)-ΔP]
  111212

= P(t) +[P(t)ΔP - P(t)ΔP]
  11122

= ρ(t) + [P(t)ΔP - P(t)ΔP];
  111122

ρ(t+Tp) = ρ(t) + [P(t)ΔP- P(t)ΔP].
222222 11

    According to the analysis of the Born rule in the last section, we have

ρ(t+Tp)  =  ρ(t)  and  ρ(t+Tp)  =  ρ(t).  In  this  way,  the  probability
11112222

distribution  of  the  collapse  results  can  reflect  the  actual  probability

distribution of the collapsed state. Then we can obtain the following relation:

                                  PΔP - PΔP = 0.
                                    1122

Using the conservation relation P + P = 1, this relation can be rewritten as
                                      12

follows:

                            ΔP/(1-P) = ΔP/(1-P) = k,
                                1122

where k∈[0,1]  is  a  dimensionless  quantity  determined  by  the  collapsed

state. This is an important relation describing the dynamical collapse of the

wave function in discrete spacetime. By using the above relation, we can

further work out the non-diagonal density matrix elements of the evolution.

But it is more convenient to calculate the following variant of non-diagonal

density matrix elements:

ρ(t +Tp) = ∑ p(x,t)P(t+Tp) P(t+Tp)
12i=1,2i1i2i

= P(t)[P(t)+ΔP][P(t)-ΔP] + P(t)[P(t)-ΔP][P(t) +ΔP]
    1112121222
      22
=(1- k)P(t)P(t) = (1- k)ρ(t);
          1212
                  2
ρ(t +Tp) = (1- k)ρ(t).
2121

    Since  the  usual  collapse  time,  τ,  is  defined  by  the  relation  ρ(τ)
                                              cijc

=1/2ρ(0), we may use a proper approximation, where k is assumed to be the
    ij

same  as  its  initial  value  during  the  time  interval  [0,  τ],  to  simplify  the
                                                                    ccalculation of the collapse time. Then we have:

                                              2t/Tp
                              ρ(t) ≈ [1- k]ρ(0).
                                1212

The corresponding collapse time is of the order of
                                                2
                                      τ ≈ Tp/k.

    It  should  be  pointed  out  that  the  determination  of  k  is  an  important

unsolved problem. However, it can be reasonably expected that k is closely

related to the mass of the studied system, e.g. it may be proportional to the

mass of the system, i.e. k∝m. Then for a microscopic system whose mass is

very small, the collapse time of its position superposition states will be very

long, and the collapse effect can be ignored for all practical purposes. In other

words,  the  Schrödinger  equation  will  precisely  hold  true  for  microscopic

systems. But for a macroscopic system whose mass is very large, the collapse

time of its position superposition states will be very short, and the collapse

effect can then explain the emergence of definite measurement results and the

classical world. A more detailed analysis will be given in the next chapter.

 
 5. Examples and Applications

    According to the new formulation of quantum mechanics presented in

previous chapters, the theory, like classical mechanics, also deals with the

motion of particles in space and time. The difference only lies in that classical

mechanics  describes  deterministic  continuous  motion  of  particles,  while

quantum mechanics describes random discontinuous motion of particles.

    Although the new formulation of quantum mechanics makes the theory

as comprehensible as classical mechanics, the quantum phenomena are still

strange for us who live in a classical world. In this chapter, we will give

several examples to illustrate that the weirdness of the quantum world, which

is  lacking  in  the  everyday  world,  all  originates  from  the  new  motion  of

particles and its new laws, e.g. the discontinuity and randomness of motion,

the  superposition  principle,  the  collapse  of  the  wave  function  etc.  These

examples may help people understand quantum mechanics more deeply.


A particle in a box


    Why is quantum mechanics called quantum mechanics? This is the first

question one may ask when he or she begins to learn the subject. Indeed, it

seems strange to call the theory quantum mechanics, for the wave function

and  the  Schrödinger  equation  in  the  theory  are  obviously  continuous,

irrelevant to any discrete quantum. Admittedly the use of the name is partly

due to the history of the theory, and there should exist a better name for the

theory.  Anyway,  the  answer  to  the  above  question  is  not  complex;  it  is

because the values of some properties of a particle such as energy cannot be

continuous but must have a minimum quantum for some states of motion.

Let’s  see  how  the  quantum  of  energy  appears  according  to  quantum

mechanics.

    As a simple example, consider a particle in a box represented by an

infinite potential well. The potential is:

                                  V(x) = 0, |x|<L/2;

                                  V(x) = ∞, |x|≥L/2.

For a classical particle that obeys Newton’s laws of motion, the particle is

either at rest in certain position or moving back and forth with a constant

speed  in  the  box.  The  kinetic  energy  of  the  particle  can  be  continuous,ranging from zero to an arbitrarily large value. For a quantum particle that

obeys the Schrödinger equation, the situation is quite different.

                                                          2
    Since the Hamiltonian of the particle, H = P/2m + V, is independent of

time, the solutions of the Schrödinger equation assume the following form

                                                    −iEt/ħ
                                ψ(x, t) = ψ(x)e,
                                              E

where ψ(x) satisfies the eigenvalue equation Hψ(x) = Eψ(x), namely
        EEE




When |x|≥L/2, V(x) = ∞, and thus ψ(x) can only be zero due to the finiteness
                                        E

of ψ(x) and its derivatives. This leads to ψ(L/2) = 0 and ψ(-L/2) = 0. When
    EEE

|x|<L/2, V(x)=0, and the above equation becomes




Its general solutions are




Application of the boundary condition at x=±L/2 gives



Thus we have


Since  and  cannot be both zero for a given value of  or ,

there are two possible classes of solutions:


and


Thus we obtain , where n is an odd number for the first class and

an even number for the second class. The two classes of solutions and their

corresponding energy eigenvalues are thenThe constants A and B can be chosen in each case so that the eigenstates 

 are normalized:




There is thus an infinite sequence of discrete energy; the quantum of energy

naturally  appears  as  a  consequence  of  the  laws  of  motion  in  quantum

mechanics. The  existence  of  a  minimum  discrete  energy  also  has  some

important consequences such as making the bound quantum systems such as

atoms stable.

    The quantum particle in a box can be in one of these energy eigenstates

or  a  superposition  of  them.  When  the  particle  is  in  one  of  these  energy

eigenstates, its energy is definite and assumes a discrete value. According to

the picture of random discontinuous motion, its state of motion, which is

defined during an infinitesimal time interval and described by density and

flux density, does not change with time. For example, for the ground state
                                        2
(n=1), the density is ρ(x) = 2/Lcos(πx/L), and the flux density is j(x)=0. This

is the reason why energy eigenstates are also called stationary states. In the

language of particle cloud, when a particle is in a stationary state, the particle

cloud  formed  by  the  random  discontinuous  motion  of  the  particle  is

stationary. It can be seen that the stationary states for a quantum particle

correspond to the rest states of a classical particle in certain sense. However,

it  should  be  stressed  that  the  particle  in  a  stationary  state  still  moves

constantly  in  a  discontinuous  and  random  way,  and  in  fact,  it  is  just  the

ergodic  motion  of  the  localized  particle  that  forms  the  spreading  particle

cloud.

    When  the  particle  is  in  a  superposition  of  the  energy  eigenstates,  its

energy is indefinite, and its state of motion is no longer stationary. In some

cases,  the  superposition  can  form  a  local  wave  packet  or  particle  cloudmoving back and forth in the box. This is very like the situation where a

classical particle is freely moving in the box. Different from the classical

particle, however, the wave packet will inevitably spread as time goes on due

to  the  linear  Schrödinger  evolution.  Moreover,  when  the  energy  of  the

particle is measured by a conventional measurement, the measured value of

energy is still discrete, not continuous.

    As a more specific example, let’s consider the electron in a hydrogen

atom. In a similar way as above (though a little more complex), we can solve

the more complex Schrödinger equation with Coulomb potential and obtain

the energy eigenstates of the electron. The random discontinuous motion of

the electron near the nucleus forms an electron cloud around the nucleus.

When the electron is in an energy eigenstate or stationary state, the electron

cloud is stationary, and its density and flux density do not change with time.

Different stationary electron clouds in a hydrogen atom have different density

patterns,  corresponding  to  different  discrete  energies  of  the  electron.  The

density of an electron cloud in each position represents the frequency of the

electron appearing in that position. The electron cloud is denser in the region

where the electron appears more frequently. For instance, the density of the

electron cloud for the ground state 1S is




where r  is  the  distance  between  the  electron  and  the  nucleus,  and  a  ≈
                                                                                        0
        −11
5.29×10m  is  the  Bohr  radius.  The  electron  cloud  has a  spherically-

symmetric distribution centered on the nucleus, and its density is largest at

the center and reduces exponentially at larger distances. This indicates that

the electron appears more frequently at the center and less frequently at larger

distances from the center.

  
              Figure 5.1 Three stationary electron clouds in a hydrogen atom

 

    It should be noted that the appellation “electron cloud” has been widely

used in physics and chemistry textbooks, but with different meaning. It is

only an imaginary probability cloud there, whose density is proportional to

the  probability  density  for  the  electron  being found  around  the  atomic  or

molecular nucleus.


The double-slit experiment


    The  double-slit  experiment  has  been  widely  discussed  since  the

beginning  of  quantum  mechanics.  Many  textbooks  use  the  experiment  to

illustrate the wave-particle duality of light and matter. According to Richard

Feynman, the double-slit experiment contains the only mystery of quantum

mechanics. The predictions of quantum mechanics agree with the results of

the double-slit experiment to astonishing precision. What is the mystery then?

The mystery lies in understanding the counterintuitive results and their origin.

How on earth does a single particle pass through two slits at the same time?

Exactly  what  is  an  electron?  In  this  section,  we  will  show  that  random

discontinuous motion of particles and its laws may finally unveil the mystery.

    Consider a typical double-slit experiment with single electrons. In the

experiment, the single electron is emitted from a source one after the other,

and  then  passes  through  two  slits  to  arrive  at  the  detecting  screen.  Each

electron is detected only as a random spot on the screen. But when a large

number of electrons with the same energy arrive at the screen, these spots

collectively form an undulant double-slit pattern. The ridges in the pattern are

formed in the positions where more electrons reach, and the valleys in the

pattern are formed in the positions where nearly no electrons reach.

                               Figure 5.2 A double-slit pattern

 

    Let’s first see why classical mechanics is unable to explain the observed

double-list  pattern.  Assume  electrons  are  localized  particles.  This  is

consistent with the intuition of most people; an electron is just a tiny charged

ball. According to classical mechanics, motion is continuous, and each single

electron can only pass through one of the two slits. Then the passing process

of each electron in a double-slit experiment will be exactly the same as that in

one of the one-slit experiments. For instance, if an electron passes through

the left slit and then arrives at one position of the screen in the double-slit

experiment, then this process will also happen in the same way in the one-slit

experiment  in  which  the  right  slit  is  shut.  Note  that  the  gravitational

interaction between the shutter and the electron is so weak that it does not

influence the motion of the electron in any observable way. Therefore, the

double-slit  pattern  will  be  the  same  as  the  direct  mixture  of  two  one-slit

patterns,  each  of  which  is  formed  by  opening  each  of  the  two  slits

independently.    However,  experiments  show  that  the  patterns  for  the  above  two

situations,  namely  the  double-slit  pattern  and  the  mixture  of  two  one-slit

patterns,  are remarkably  different.  The  difference  cannot  be  explained  in

terms  of  continuous  motion  of  electrons.  In  fact,  we  can  see  where  the

perplexity lies more obviously from the following fact, i.e., that when one of

the two slits is shut, the electron can reach some positions on the screen (e.g.

the positions where the valleys in the double-slit pattern are formed), but

when the shut slit is opened, it will prevent the electron from reaching these

positions on the screen.

 



























                        Figure 5.3 A mixture of two one-slit patterns

 

    Next,  assume  a  single  electron  is  a  wave,  continuously  spreading  in

space like a water wave. The observed double-slit interference pattern seems

to support this assumption, though it is very counterintuitive for most people

to assume electron is a wave. Then the single electron as a wave will passthrough both slits, and the passing waves will also superpose with each other.

Finally, when the superposed wave reaches the screen, an interference pattern

will  be  detected  on  the  screen,  even  for  a  single  electron.  However,  this

obviously  contradicts  experimental  observations;  each  electron  is  detected

only as a tiny spot on the screen.

    Therefore, electrons (and atoms etc) are neither localized particles nor

spreading waves that undergo continuous motion, and classical mechanics

inevitably fails in explaining the double-slit experiment. Can the standard

quantum  mechanics  taught  in  textbooks  explain  the  experiment  then?

Unfortunately,  the  answer  is  negative.  Although  its  predictions  for  the

probability distribution of measurement results such as spots on the screen

agree  with  the  double-slit  interference  pattern,  it  keeps  silent  as  to  what

physical process happens from the preparation to the measurement of a single

electron during the experiment; there is only a mathematical wave function

that spreads, superposes and collapses during the whole process.

    Now the new formulation of quantum mechanics in terms of random

discontinuous motion of particles can give us a clear, visualizable picture for

the physical process taking place in the double-slit experiment. In this sense,

it can explain the experiment. Concretely speaking, an electron as a localized

particle is prepared and emitted from the source of electrons. The motion of

the electron is random and discontinuous, and its motion forms a spreading

electron  cloud,  which  is  described  by  the  density  and  flux  density  of  the

cloud or a complex wave function composed of them. The electron cloud

passes  through  both  slits,  and  its  evolution  is  governed  by  the  linear

Schrödinger equation for the wave function. At last, the superposed electron

cloud  reaches  the  detecting  screen  and  is  measured  there.  During  the

measurement  process,  the  stochastic  evolution  of  the  wave  function  takes

effect,  and  the  spreading  electron  cloud  (almost)  instantaneously  and

randomly collapses into a local electron cloud (usually bound in an atom of

the  detecting  screen),  which  corresponds  to  a  determinate,  random

measurement result, a spot on the screen. Moreover, the probability density

of the appearance of the spot in each position is given by the density of the

electron  cloud  or  the  modulus  square  of  the  wave  function  (immediately

before the measurement) there.


Schrödinger’s cat  In 1935, inspired by the famous paper written by Einstein, Podolsky and

Rosen, Schrödinger proposed the more famous Gedanken experiment, which

is later called Schrödinger’s cat paradox. The experiment was described by

Schrödinger as follows:
    A cat is penned up in a steel chamber, along with the following diabolical device (which must be
secured against direct interference by the cat); in a Geiger counter there is a tiny bit of radioactive
substance, so small that perhaps in the course of one hour one of the atoms decays, but also, with equal
probability, perhaps none; if it happens, the counter tube discharges and through a relay releases a
hammer which shatter a small flask of hydrocyanic acid. If one has left this entire system to itself for an
hour, one would say that the cat still lives if meanwhile no atom has decayed. The first atomic decay

would have poisoned it. The ψ-function of the entire system would express this by having in it the
living and the dead cat (pardon the expression) mixed or smeared out in equal parts.

  In short, when a decaying atom interacts with a cat via a set of devices

including a detector, a hammer, and a small flask of hydrocyanic acid etc, the

whole system will be in an entangled superposition containing two branches

according to the linear Schrödinger equation. In one branch the atom decays

and poisons the cat, while in the other branch the atom doesn’t decay and the

cat still lives. As a consequence, the cat will be in a superposition of dead

state and living state.

    Let’s first see what Schrödinger’s cat looks like according to the picture

of random discontinuous motion of particles. The following figure depicts

Schrödinger’s cat at six neighboring instants. At each instant the cat is either

alive or dead in a purely random way.

 







                    Figure 5.4 Instantaneous pictures of Schrödinger’s cat

 

However, during a time interval, the random discontinuous motion of the cat

will form a cat cloud, which is quite like an electron cloud. In one branch the

cat is alive, and in the other the cat is dead.

    The problem is how to reconcile the bizarre state of Schrödinger’s cat

with  our  macroscopic  experience.  This  is  essentially  the  measurement

problem.  The  new  formulation  of  quantum  mechanics  provides  a  clear

solution  to  this  problem,  though  some  details  are  still  missing.  In

Schrödinger’s cat experiment, the atom is indeed in a superposition of theundecayed  state  and  the  decayed  state.  The  evolution  of  the  state  is  also

governed by the linear Schrödinger equation very precisely, as the effect of

the  stochastic  evolution  is  extremely  small,  e.g.  the  collapse  time  of  this

superposition state may be longer than the age of our universe. However,

when  the  atom  interacts  with  the  Geiger  counter  or  the  cat  and  its

superposition state is entangled with the state of the later, the effect of the

stochastic evolution becomes significant, and thus the whole superposition

almost immediately collapses into one of its branches. As a result, the Geiger

counter and the cat will always be in a definite state; the Geiger counter either

registers a particle or registers no particle, and the cat is either living or dead.


Quantum entanglement and nonlocality


  In  this  section,  we  will  present  a  clear  physical  picture  of  quantum

entanglement  and  nonlocality,  which  are  widely  regarded  as  the  most

puzzling phenomena of the quantum world.

    Let’s first recall the single particle picture. For the random discontinuous

motion  of  a  particle,  the  particle  has  a  propensity  to  be  in  any  possible

position  at  a  given  instant,  and  the  probability  density  of  the  particle

appearing in each position x at a given instant t is determined by the modulus
                                                            2
square of its wave function, namely ρ(x, t) = |ψ(x, t)|. The physical picture of

the motion of the particle is as follows. At an instant the particle randomly

stays in a position, and at the next instant it will still stay there or randomly

appear in another position, which is probably not in the neighborhood of the

previous position. In this way, during a time interval much larger than the

duration  of  one  discrete  instant,  the  particle  will  move  discontinuously

throughout the whole space with position density ρ(x, t). Since the distance

between the locations occupied by the particle at two neighboring instants

may be very large, the jumping process is obviously nonlocal[39]. In other

words,  two  staying  events  of  the  particle  (t, x) and (t, x)  may  readily
                                                      1122

satisfy the spacelike separation condition |x− x| > c|t− t|.
                                                  2121

    Next, let’s turn to the motion of two entangled particles. For the random

discontinuous motion of two particles in an entangled state, the two particles

have  a  joint  propensity  to  be  in  any  two  possible  positions,  and  the

probability density of the two particles appearing in each position pair x and
                                                                                      1

x at a given instant t is determined by the modulus square of their wave
2
                                                                2
function at the instant, namely ρ(x, x, t) = |ψ(x, x, t)|.
                                        1212 










                        Figure 5.5 Two particles in an entangled state

 

    Suppose two particles are in an entangled state ψϕ+ψϕ, where ψ
                                                                  uuddu

and ψare  two  spatially  separated  states  of  particle  1,ϕ and ϕ  are  two
      dud

spatially separated states of particle 2, and particle 1 and particle 2 are also in

separated regions A and B. The physical picture of this entangled state is as

follows. Particles 1 and 2 are randomly in the state ψϕ or ψϕ at an
                                                                    uudd

instant, and then they will still stay in this state or jump to the other state at

the  next  instant.  During  a  very  short  time  interval,  the  two  particles  will

discontinuously move throughout the states ψϕ and ψϕ with the same
                                                        uudd

probability 1/2.

  In  this  way,  the  two  particles  form  an  inseparable  whole,  and  they

undergo the simultaneous jumping. At an arbitrary instant, if particle 1 is in

the state ψ or ψ, then particle 2 must be in the stateϕorϕ, and vice versa.
          udud

Moreover, when particle 1 jumps from ψ to ψ or from ψ to ψ, particle 2
                                                uddu

must  simultaneously  jump  fromϕtoϕor  fromϕtoϕ,  and  vice  versa.
                                          uddu

Note that this kind of random synchronicity between the motion of particle 1

and the motion of particle 2 is irrelevant to the distance between them, and it

can only be explained by the existence of joint propensity of the two particles

as a whole. This gives us a clear physical picture of quantum entanglement.

    Thirdly, let’s analyze the nonlocal characteristic of the collapse of the

above  entangled  superposition  during  a  measurement.  The  property  of

quantum  nonlocality  was  first  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  physics

community by Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen in 1935. Later John Bell made a

big stride forward in the study of quantum nonlocality in the 1960s. The

famous Bell theorem shows the contradiction between locality and quantum

mechanics (especially its collapse postulate). Many experiments have beenconducted to test Bell's theorem up to now. Although the results basically

confirm the predictions of quantum mechanics and reveal the actual existence

of quantum nonlocality, its nature is still a mystery. As Bell once said, “The

scientific  attitude  is  that  correlations  cry  out  for  explanation.”  Now  the

random discontinuous motion of particles and its laws may provide a true

explanation of quantum nonlocal correlations.

    Suppose we make a position measurement on particle 1 in region A. Let

the initial state of the measuring device be φ. When the measuring device
                                                      0

interacts with particle 1 in a local region, the state of the measuring device

will be entangled with the entangled state of particles 1 and 2, and the state of

the  combined  system  will  become  ψϕφ+ψϕφ.  Since  the  stochastic
                                              uuuddd

evolution of the state will take effect during the measurement process, the

state  of  the  combined  system  will  soon  collapse  to  one  of  the  branches

ψϕφ or ψϕφ with the same probability 1/2. As a result, the combined
uuuddd

system as an entangled whole is disassembled into three independent parts:

the measuring device, particle 1, and particle 2. At the same time, the original

two-particle whole no longer exists either, and its state collapses to ψϕ or
                                                                                    uu

ψϕ, i.e., the state of particle 1 collapses to ψor ψ, and the state of particle
ddu d

2  collapses  toϕorϕ.  It  can  be  seen  that  the  local  measurement  of  the
                  ud

measuring device brings a nonlocal influence on the two-particle system and

especially  on  particle  2.  The  distance  between  the  measuring  device  and

particle 2 can be arbitrarily large, and the collapse time can be arbitrarily

short in principle. Thus the effective speed of the nonlocal influence can be

close to infinite. Note that there exists no causal influence between the state

changes  of  particle  1  and  particle  2,  and  they  both  result  from  the

measurement of the measuring device, which is the common cause.

    Since  the  measurement  simultaneously  results  in  the  collapse  of  the

entangled  state  of  particle  1  and  particle  2,  there  also  exists  a  nonlocal

correlation  between  the  collapse  states  of  particles  1  and  2.  Concretely

speaking, if the state of particle 1 collapses to ψ, then the state of particle 2
                                                        u

must collapse toϕ, whereas if the state of particle 1 collapses to ψ, then the
                    ud

state of particle 2 must collapse to ϕ. Since the state changes of particle 1
                                            d

and  particle  2  are  simultaneous,  and  the  further  measurements  on  their

collapse  states  can  be  made  in  two  space-like  separated  regions,  the

correlation between the results of these measurements may be still nonlocal.

Such  nonlocal  correlations  can  be  analyzed  by  some  inequalities  such  asBell’s inequality.

    Note that there also exist classical nonlocal correlations between two

classical  events  happening  in  space-like  separated  regions.  Different  from

quantum nonlocal correlations, the classical correlations are completely pre-

determined by some common causes in the past via the continuous processes

with finite transmission speed, and there exist no randomness and nonlocal

influence in the measurements of such correlations.


Unification of two worlds


    We  live  in  a  classical  world.  The  objects  around  us  appear  to  move

continuously.  In  the  quantum  world,  however,  every  particle  moves  in  a

purely  random  and  discontinuous  way.  If  the  motion  of  all  objects  is

essentially  discontinuous  and  random,  then  why  does  the  motion  of

macroscopic  objects  appear  continuous?  In  this  section,  we  will  briefly

explain  how  the  transition  from  quantum  to  classical  happens,  and  why

random discontinuous motion of particles may provide a uniform picture for

both the microscopic and macroscopic worlds.

    We  will  first state  the  laws  of  random  discontinuous  motion  more

explicitly. Although the complete laws of motion are still unknown, we can

formulate  its  general  form.  According  to  our  previous  analysis,  the

(nonrelativistic) evolution of the wave function will be governed by a revised

Schrödinger equation that contains two kinds of evolution terms. The first is

the deterministic linear Schrödinger evolution term, and the second is the

stochastic nonlinear evolution term that results in the dynamical collapse of

the wave function. The equation can be formally written in a discrete form:



where Tp  is  the  Planck  time,  the  duration  of  a  discrete  instant, H is  the

Hamiltonian of the system for the linear Schrödinger evolution, and S is the

stochastic evolution operator for the stochastic nonlinear evolution. Note that

all  quantities  in  the  evolution  equation  should  be  defined  in  discrete

spacetime.

  In  the complete  evolution  equation,  the  linear  Schrödinger  evolution

term will lead to the spreading of the wave function, while the nonlinear

stochastic evolution term will lead to the collapse or localization of the wave

function. Accordingly, the evolution of the wave function will be a certaincombination of the spreading process and the localizing process. The relative

strength of these two processes may be mainly determined by the mass or

energy of the studied system. If the energy of the system is very small, then

the evolution will be dominated by the spreading process. This is just what

happens in the microscopic world; a particle can pass through two slits sat the

same time in the double-slit experiment.

    By contrast, if the energy of the system is very large as for macroscopic

objects,  then  the  linear  spreading  of  the  wave  function  will  be  greatly

suppressed, and the evolution of the wave function will be dominated by the

localizing process. The localizing process proceeds continually, and thus the

density ρ(x,t) will always concentrate in a very small local region. As a result,

a macroscopic object will always be in a local region, and it can only be

approximately at rest or in continuous motion. This is just the appearance of

continuous motion in the macroscopic world. Since the minimum space and

time intervals that we can perceive are much larger than the typical scales of

the stochastic evolution for macroscopic objects, what we perceived in the

macroscopic world also appears to be a continuous flux.

    Furthermore,  the equation  of  (apparent)  continuous  motion  for

macroscopic objects may also be derived from the complete laws of motion

as an approximation. Here is a simple explanation using Ehrenfest’s theorem

in quantum mechanics, which can be formulated as follows:

                                  d<x>/dt = <p>/m,

                              d<p>/dt = <-∇V(x, t)>.

Since the  position  density  does  not  spread  for  a  macroscopic  object,  the

average terms in the above formulae will represent the effective description

quantities for the (apparent) continuous motion of a macroscopic object. Then

the classical laws of motion can be derived. The result is: dx/dt = p/m, the

definition  of  the  classical  momentum,  and  dp/dt  = -∇V  =  F,  Newton’s

second law of motion[40]. We note that there should also exist a stochastic

term  in  the  above  equations,  which  comes  from  the  stochastic  nonlinear

evolution term in the complete equation of motion. Although this term must

be  very  small  in  most  situations,  it  may  be  detected  by  more  precise

experiments.

  In  a  word, random  discontinuous  motion  of  particles  may  provide  a

uniform realistic picture for the microscopic and macroscopic worlds. The

most familiar continuous motion is only its approximate manifestation in the

everyday world. Bibliography

Aharonov, Y. and Vaidman, L. (1993). Measurement of the Schrödinger wave of a single particle,
Phys. Lett. A 178, 38.
Aharonov, Y., Anandan, J. and Vaidman, L. (1993). Meaning of the wave function, Phys. Rev. A 47,
4616.
Aharonov, Y., Anandan, J. and Vaidman, L. (1996). The meaning of protective measurements, Found.
Phys. 26, 117.
Barrett,  J.  (2011).  Everett's  Relative-State  Formulation  of  Quantum  Mechanics,  The  Stanford
Encyclopedia  of  Philosophy  (Spring  2011  Edition),  Edward  N.  Zalta  (ed.),  URL  =
  http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2011/entries/qm-everett/.
Bell, J. S. (2004). Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bohm, D. (1952). A suggested interpretation of quantum theory in terms of "hidden" variables, I and II.
Phys. Rev. 85, 166-193.
Bohm D. and Hiley, B. J. (1993). The Undivided Universe: An Ontological Interpretation of Quantum
Theory. London: Routledge.
de  Broglie,  L.  (1928).  in:  Electrons  et  photons:  Rapports  et  discussions  du  cinquime  Conseil  de
Physique Solvay, eds. J. Bordet. Paris: Gauthier-Villars. pp.105. English translation: G. Bacciagaluppi
and  A.  Valentini  (2009),  Quantum  Theory  at  the  Crossroads:  Reconsidering  the  1927  Solvay
Conference. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
DeWitt, B. S. and Graham, N. (eds.) (1973). The Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Dirac, P. A. M. (1930). The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Duff, M. J., Okun, L. B., and Veneziano, G. (2002). Trialogue on the number of fundamental constants.
Journal of High Energy Physics, 0203, 23.
Everett, H. (1957). ‘Relative state’ formulation of quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 454-462.
Gao,  S.  (2006).  Quantum  Motion:  Unveiling  the  Mysterious  Quantum  World.  Bury  St  Edmunds,
Suffolk U.K.: Arima Publishing.
Gao,  S.  (2008).  God  Does  Play  Dice  with  the  Universe.  Bury  St  Edmunds,  Suffolk  U.K.:  Arima
Publishing.
Gao, S (2011). Understanding Quantum Physics: An Advanced Guide for the Perplexed.
Garay, L. J. (1995). Quantum gravity and minimum length. International Journal of Modern Physics A
10, 145.
Ghirardi,  G.  C.  (2008).  Collapse  Theories,  The  Stanford  Encyclopedia  of  Philosophy  (Fall  2008
Edition), Edward N. Zalta (eds.), http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2008/entries/qmcollapse/.
Goldstein, S. (2009). Bohmian Mechanics, Stanford (Spring 2009 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (eds.),
  http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2009/entries/qmbohm/.
Moore, W. J. (1994). Schrödinger: Life and Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Penrose, R. (2004). The Road to Reality: A Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe. London:
Jonathan Cape.
Saunders, S., Barrett, J., Kent, A. and Wallace, D. (eds.) (2010) Many Worlds? Everett, Quantum
Theory, and Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shankar, R. (1994). Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 2nd ed. New York: Plenum.
Tooley, M. (1988). In defence of the existence of states of motion. Philosophical Topics 16, 225-254.
von  Neumann,  J.  (1955).  Mathematical  Foundations  of  Quantum  Mechanics,  Princeton:  Princeton
University  Press.  (Translated  by  R.  Beyer  from  Mathematische  Grundlagen  der  Quantenmechanik,
Springer: Berlin, 1932) 
 Back Cover

Quantum  mechanics  is  full  of  mysteries  and  paradoxes.  It  has  even  been

regarded as the most difficult subject to understand. The main reason is that,

unlike  classical  mechanics,  quantum  mechanics  provides  no  visualizable

spatial-temporal  images  for  the  physical  processes  it  describes.  It  is  well

understood  that  classical  mechanics  describes  the  continuous  motion  of

particles in space and time. In quantum mechanics, however, it is still unclear

how microscopic particles such as electrons move in space and time, and in

fact,  it  is  even  unknown  whether  these  microscopic  particles  are  really

particles or not.

 

Based on a penetrating analysis of the wave function and its evolution, this

book presents a new, comprehensible formulation of quantum mechanics. It

turns out that, like classical mechanics, quantum mechanics also deals with

the motion of particles in space and time. The difference only lies in that the

former  describes  continuous  motion  of  particles,  while  the  later  describes

random  discontinuous  motion  of  particles.  Microscopic  particles  such  as

electrons are indeed particles, but they move in a discontinuous and random

way. For example, a single electron passes through two slits at the same time

in a discontinuous way in the double-slit experiment with electrons.

 

If you are not wholly satisfied with the quantum mechanics as “explained” by

textbooks, and if you still keep your curiosities and want to know what the

most  fundamental  theory  really  means,  then  this  book  is  for  you.  After

reading it, you will find quantum mechanics is no longer mysterious. If you

can understand classical mechanics, you will be able to understand quantum

mechanics too.

 

 

 Notes


[1] Here we use the Dirac ket-bra notation, which is a standard notation for describing quantum states
in quantum mechanics.

[2] For a more detailed introduction see Chapter 1 and Chapter 11 of Shankar (1994).

[3] Note that this result relies on the linearity of evolution. If H depends on the state, then obviously
we cannot obtain dH/dt = 0 because the state is related to time, though we still have H(t, ψ) = H(t,
                                                                                102
ψ), which means that the state-dependent H also satisfies time translational invariance.
0

[4] Again, we stress that this result presupposes the linearity of evolution. If U(t) depends on the state,
then the space translational invariance will only lead to U(t, Tψ)T(a)ψ(x, 0) = T(a)U(t, ψ)ψ(x, 0), from
which we cannot obtain [T(a), U(t)] = 0.

[5] For a derivation of this relativistic energy-momentum relation, see Chapter 3 of Gao (2011).

[6] See Duff, Okun and Veneziano (2002) for more discussions.

[7] In  order  to  derive  the  complete  Schrödinger  equation  in  a  fundamental  way,  we  need  a
fundamental theory of interactions such as quantum field theory. We will not discuss this issue in this
book.

[8] The word “nondegenerate” means that the energy eigenstate is the only state that has the energy
eigenvalue. Two or more different quantum states are said to be degenerate if they are all at the same
energy level.

[9] As we will see later, the measuring system is not necessarily a macroscopic device.

[10] In the following analysis the reduced Planck constant is set to one, otherwise stated.

[11] The  above  outcome  state  according  to  the  Schrödinger  equation  does  not  tell  us  a  definite
measurement result. This leads us to the notorious measurement problem for conventional impulsive
measurements. (Nearly all quantum measurements made by experimental physicists in laboratories are
such measurements. This is the reason why they are called conventional measurements.) Experiments
show that the result of the above impulsive measurement is one of the eigenvalues of the measured
                                              2
observable A, say a, with a certain probability |c|. However, it is still unknown how the definite
                ii
measurement  result  emerges  from  the  superposed  outcome  state.  We  will  discuss  this  important
measurement  problem  in  detail  in  the  next  chapter,  which  may  involve  the  controversial  collapse
postulate.

[12] Note that the possible existence of very slow collapse of the wave function for microscopic
systems does not influence the principle of this kind of measurement.

[13] It  is  a  necessary  condition  for  this  result  to  hold  true  that  the  measured  state  is  a  discrete
nondegenerate energy eigenstate. See Gao (2011) for a more detailed derivation of the result.

[14] Similarly, we can also measure the flux density j(x) everywhere in space. In this way, we can
measure or reconstruct the complex wave function of the measured system.

[15] A typical method of protective measurement is to let the measured system be in a nondegenerate
eigenstate  of  the  whole  Hamiltonian  using  a  suitable  protective  interaction,  and  then  make  the
measurement adiabatically so that the state of the system neither collapses nor becomes entangled with
the measuring system appreciably. In this way, protective measurement can measure the expectation
values  of  observables  on  a  single  quantum  system.  For  a  more  detailed  introduction  of  protectivemeasurement, see Gao (2011).

[16] By contrast, the potential strength of the gravitational self-interaction for a free electron is about
    −89
4 × 10.

[17] See the example “A particle in a box” given in chapter 5.

[18] The word “cause” used here only denotes a certain instantaneous condition determining the
change of position, which may appear in the laws of motion. Our analysis is irrelevant to whether the
condition has causal power or not.

[19] This deterministic instantaneous condition has been called intrinsic velocity (Tooley 1988).

[20] In discrete spacetime, the motion will be a discrete jump across space along a fixed direction at
each time unit, and thus it will become continuous motion with constant velocity in the continuous
limit.

[21] However, the analysis cannot tell us the precise size and possible structure of electron.

[22] It is worth stressing that the propensities possessed by particles relate to their objective motion,
not to the measurements on them as in the existing propensity interpretations of quantum mechanics.

[23] Recall that a function x(t) is continuous if and only if for every t and every real number ε > 0,
there exists a real number δ > 0 such that whenever a point t has distance less than δ to t, the point
                                                      0
x(t) has distance less than ε to x(t).
0

[24] However, there is an exception. When the probability density function is a special δ-function
such as δ(x − x(t)), where x(t) is a continuous function of t, the motion of the particle is deterministic
and continuous (though this case is excluded by the laws of motion). In addition, even for a general
probability  density  function  it  is  still  possible  that  the  random  position  series  forms  a  continuous
trajectory, though the happening probability is zero.

[25] Note that the relation between j(x, t) and ψ(x, t) depends on the concrete evolution under an
                                                                                          2
external potential such as electromagnetic vector potential. By contrast, the relation ρ(x, t) = |ψ(x, t)|
holds true universally, independent of the concrete evolution.

[26] For a many-particle system in an entangled state, the propensity property is possessed by the
whole system. See Chapter 5 for a detailed analysis of quantum entanglement.

[27] Note that for random discontinuous motion the properties (e.g. position) of a quantum system in a
superposed state are indeterminate in the sense of usual hidden variables, though they do have definite
values at each instant. This makes the theorems that restrict hidden variables such as the Kochen-
Specker theorem irrelevant.

[28] In theory there are some special sorts of motion such as the Brownian motion, for which the
trajectory  of  a  particle  undergoing  such  motion  is  continuous,  but  the  first  time  derivative  of  the
trajectory does not exist, that is to say, the particle has no velocity.

[29] Note that the guiding equation is only a mathematical transformation of the relation between the
density ρ and flux density j for the wave function; the relation is j = ρv, while the guiding equation is
v=j/ρ. Since the wave function of a quantum system is not merely a probability amplitude for the
predictions of measurement results (as in standard quantum mechanics), but also a realistic description
of the physical state of the system as implied by our previous analysis (which is also admitted by most
interpretations of the de Broglie-Bohm theory), the guiding equation already has a physical explanation
relating only to the realistic wave function. Inasmuch as a fundamental mathematical equation in a
physical theory has a unique physical explanation, the additional explanation of the guiding equation
relating to the hypothetical Bohmian particles will be improper.

[30] Note that protective measurement in general requires that the measured wave function is knownbeforehand so that an appropriate protective interaction can be added. But this requirement does not
influence our argument, as the superposed wave function of a measuring device can be prepared in a
known form before the protective measurement.

[31] This objection is more serious than the problem of approximate decoherence for the many-worlds
interpretation. The interference between the nonorthogonal components of a quantum state can not be
detected for individual states, but only be detected for an ensemble of identical states. Moreover, the
presence of tiny interference terms in a (local) quantum state does not imply that all components of the
state wholly exist in one world.

[32] For a detailed analysis of the variants of the many-worlds interpretation such as the many-minds
theory, see Chapter 4 of Gao (2011).

[33] This is distinct from the case of continuous motion. For the latter, the position of a particle at
each instant is completely determined by the deterministic instantaneous condition at the instant, and
thus the position of the particle has no influence on the deterministic instantaneous condition.

[34] In fact, since the random stays of a particle as one part of its instantaneous state are completely
random, the complete evolution equation of the instantaneous state of the particle is only about the
evolution  of  the  wave  function.  Therefore,  the  random  stays  of  the  particle  can  only  manifest
themselves in the complete equation of motion by their stochastic influences on the evolution of the
wave function.

[35] In other words, the wave function of a particle determines its random discontinuous motion,
while the motion also influences the evolution of the wave function reciprocally.

[36] It has been conjectured that a fundamental theory of physics may be formulated by three natural
constants: the Planck time (t), the Planck length (l) and the Planck constant (h), and all other physical
                        PP
constants are expressed by the combinations of them (Gao 2006). For example, the speed of light is c =
l/t, and the Einstein gravitational constant is κ = 8πlt/ħ. In this sense, the random discontinuous
PPPP
motion in discrete spacetime, represented by the above three constants, is more fundamental than the
phenomena described by the special and general theory of relativity, represented by the speed of light
and the gravitational constant, respectively. However, even if this conjecture turns out to be right, it is
still a big challenge how to work out the details.

[37] Note that the reversible Schrödinger evolution conserves the information even for individual
isolated systems.

[38] This simple toy model can be extended to more complex cases where the collapsed state is
composed of arbitrarily many discrete position eigenstates. For details see Gao (2011).

[39] In the non-relativistic domain where time is absolute, the nonlocal jumping process is the same in
every inertial frame. But in the relativistic domain, the jumping process will look different in different
inertial frames due to the Lorentz transformation. For a detailed analysis see Gao (2011).

[40] The derivation presupposes that the external potential is uniform enough along the width of the
wave packet of a macroscopic object.