Relativity: The Special and General


Theory





Albert Einstein


Translated by Robert W. Lawson                              First published in 1916 

                      English edition first published in 1920

    This edition published by Amazon Kindle Direct Publishing, 2013 

                                    www.amazon.com


This book is copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to provisions of

relevant collective licensing agreements, no part of this publication may be

reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any

means, without the prior written permission of the author. 


                                  Copyright © 2013

                                  All rights reserved 


Cover Image: Albert Einstein (1921) standing beside a blackboard with

chalk-marked mathematical calculations written across it. Copyright - Photo

Courtesy of Hulton Archive/Getty Images.Contents




Preface 

Biographical Note 

Translator's Note 



Part I: The Special Theory of Relativity



1. Physical Meaning of Geometrical Propositions 

2. The System of Co-ordinates 

3. Space and Time in Classical Mechanics 

4. The Galilean System of Co-ordinates 

5. The Principle of Relativity (In the Restricted Sense) 

6. The Theorem of the Addition of Velocities Employed in Classical

Mechanics 

7. The Apparent Incompatibility of the Law of Propagation of Light with the

Principle of Relativity 

8. On the Idea of Time in Physics 

9. The Relativity of Simultaneity 

10. On the Relativity of the Conception of Distance 

11. The Lorentz Transformation 

12. The Behaviour of Measuring-Rods and Clocks in Motion 

13. Theorem of the Addition of Velocities. The Experiment of Fizeau 

14. The Heuristic Value of the Theory of Relativity 

15. General Results of the Theory 

16. Experience and the Special Theory of Relativity 

17. Minkowski's Four-Dimensional Space 



Part II: The General Theory of Relativity18. Special and General Principle of Relativity 

19. The Gravitational Field 

20. The Equality of Inertial and Gravitational Mass as an Argument for the

General Postulate of Relativity 

21. In What Respects Are the Foundations of Classical Mechanics and of the

Special Theory of Relativity Unsatisfactory? 

22. A Few Inferences from the General Theory of Relativity 

23. Behaviour of Clocks and Measuring Rods on a Rotating Body of

Reference 

24. Euclidean and Non-Euclidean Continuum 

25. Gaussian Co-ordinates 

26. The Space-Time Continuum of the Special Theory of Relativity

Considered as a Euclidean Continuum 

27. The Space-Time Continuum of the General Theory of Relativity is not a

Euclidean Continuum 

28. Exact Formulation of the General Principle of Relativity 

29. The Solution of the Problem of Gravitation on the Basis of the General

Principle of Relativity 



Part III: Considerations on the Universe as a Whole



30. Cosmological Difficulties of Newton's Theory 

31. The Possibility of a “Finite” and Yet “Unbounded” Universe 

32. The Structure of Space According to the General Theory of Relativity 



Appendices



A1. Simple Derivation of the Lorentz Transformation 

A2. Minkowski's Four-Dimensional Space (“World”) 

A3. The Experimental Confirmation of the General Theory of Relativity BibliographyPreface




The present book is intended, as far as possible, to give an exact insight into

the theory of Relativity to those readers who, from a general scientific and

philosophical point of view, are interested in the theory, but who are not
                                                                            1
conversant with the mathematical apparatus of theoretical physics. The work

presumes a standard of education corresponding to that of a university

matriculation examination, and, despite the shortness of the book, a fair

amount of patience and force of will on the part of the reader. The author has

spared himself no pains in his endeavour to present the main ideas in the

simplest and most intelligible form, and on the whole, in the sequence and

connection in which they actually originated. In the interest of clearness, it

appeared to me inevitable that I should repeat myself frequently, without

paying the slightest attention to the elegance of the presentation. I adhered

scrupulously to the precept of that brilliant theoretical physicist, L.

Boltzmann, according to whom matters of elegance ought to be left to the

tailor and to the cobbler. I make no pretence of having withheld from the

reader difficulties which are inherent to the subject. On the other hand, I have

purposely treated the empirical physical foundations of the theory in a “step-

motherly” fashion, so that readers unfamiliar with physics may not feel like

the wanderer who was unable to see the forest for trees. May the book bring

some one a few happy hours of suggestive thought! 

                                    A. EINSTEIN

                                  DECEMBER, 1916



1
 The mathematical fundaments of the special theory of relativity are to be found in the original papers
of H. A. Lorentz, A. Einstein, H. Minkowski published under the title Das Relativitäts-prinzip (The
Principle of Relativity) in B. G. Teubner's collection of monographs Fortschritte der mathematischen
Wissenschaften (Advances in the Mathematical Sciences), also in M. Laue's exhaustive book Das
Relativitäts prinzip—published by Friedr. Vieweg & Son, Braunschweig. The general theory of
relativity, together with the necessary parts of the theory of invariants, is dealt with in the author's book
Die Grundlagen der allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie (The Foundations of the General Theory of
Relativity)—Joh. Ambr. Barth, 1916; this book assumes some familiarity with the special theory of
relativity.NOTE TO THE THIRD EDITION



In the present year (1918) an excellent and detailed manual on the general

theory of relativity, written by H. Weyl, was published by the firm Julius

Springer (Berlin). This book, entitled Raum—Zeit—Materie (Space—Time

—Matter), may be warmly recommended to mathematicians and physicists.Biographical Note




Albert Einstein is the son of German-Jewish parents. He was born in 1879 in

the town of Ulm, Würtemberg, Germany. His schooldays were spent in

Munich, where he attended the Gymnasium until his sixteenth year. After

leaving school at Munich, he accompanied his parents to Milan, whence he

proceeded to Switzerland six months later to continue his studies. 


From 1896 to 1900 Albert Einstein studied mathematics and physics at the

Technical High School in Zurich, as he intended becoming a secondary

school (Gymnasium) teacher. For some time afterwards he was a private

tutor, and having meanwhile become naturalised, he obtained a post as

engineer in the Swiss Patent Office in 1902, which position he occupied till

1909. The main ideas involved in the most important of Einstein's theories

date back to this period. Amongst these may be mentioned: The Special

Theory of Relativity, Inertia of Energy, Theory of the Brownian Movement,

and the Quantum Law of the Emission and Absorption of Light (1905). These

were followed some years later by the Theory of the Specific Heat of Solid

Bodies, and the fundamental idea of the General Theory of Relativity.


During the interval 1909 to 1911 he occupied the post of Professor

Extraordinarius at the University of Prague, Bohemia, where he remained as

Professor Ordinarius until 1912. In the latter year Professor Einstein accepted

a similar chair at the Polytechnikum, Zurich, and continued his activities

there until 1914, when he received a call to the Prussian Academy of Science,

Berlin, as successor to Van't Hoff. Professor Einstein is able to devote

himself freely to his studies at the Berlin Academy, and it was here that he

succeeded in completing his work on the General Theory of Relativity (1915-

17). Professor Einstein also lectures on various special branches of physics at

the University of Berlin, and, in addition, he is Director of the Institute for

Physical Research of the Kaiser Wilhelm Gesellschaft.


Professor Einstein has been twice married. His first wife, whom he married at

Berne in 1903, was a fellow-student from Serbia. There were two sons of thismarriage, both of whom are living in Zurich, the elder being sixteen years of

age. Recently Professor Einstein married a widowed cousin, with whom he is

now living in Berlin.


                                        R. W. L.Translator's Note




In presenting this translation to the English reading public, it is hardly

necessary for me to enlarge on the Author's prefatory remarks, except to draw

attention to those additions to the book which do not appear in the original. 


At my request, Professor Einstein kindly supplied me with a portrait of

himself, by one of Germany's most celebrated artists. Appendix III, on “The

Experimental Confirmation of the General Theory of Relativity,” has been

written specially for this translation. Apart from these valuable additions to

the book, I have included a biographical note on the Author, and, at the end

of the book, an Index and a list of English references to the subject. This list,

which is more suggestive than exhaustive, is intended as a guide to those

readers who wish to pursue the subject farther.


I desire to tender my best thanks to my colleagues Professor S. R. Milner,

D.Sc., and Mr. W. E. Curtis, A.R.C.Sc., F.R.A.S., also to my friend Dr.

Arthur Holmes, A.R.C.SC., F.G.S., of the Imperial College, for their kindness

in reading through the manuscript, for helpful criticism, and for numerous

suggestions. I owe an expression of thanks also to Messrs. Methuen for their

ready counsel and advice, and for the care they have bestowed on the work

during the course of its publication.


                                  ROBERT W. LAWSON
                              THE PHYSICS LABORATORY 
                            THE UNIVERSITY OF SHEFFIELD
                                      JUNE 12, 1920Part I: The Special Theory of


Relativity1. Physical Meaning of Geometrical


Propositions




In your schooldays most of you who read this book made acquaintance with

the noble building of Euclid's geometry, and you remember— perhaps with

more respect than love—the magnificent structure, on the lofty staircase of

which you were chased about for uncounted hours by conscientious teachers.

By reason of your past experience, you would certainly regard every one with

disdain who should pronounce even the most out-of-the-way proposition of

this science to be untrue. But perhaps this feeling of proud certainty would

leave you immediately if some one were to ask you: “What, then, do you

mean by the assertion that these propositions are true?” Let us proceed to

give this question a little consideration.


Geometry sets out from certain conceptions such as “plane,” “point,” and

“straight line,” with which we are able to associate more or less definite

ideas, and from certain simple propositions (axioms) which, in virtue of these

ideas, we are inclined to accept as “true.” Then, on the basis of a logical

process, the justification of which we feel ourselves compelled to admit, all

remaining propositions are shown to follow from those axioms, i.e. they are

proven. A proposition is then correct (“true”) when it has been derived in the

recognised manner from the axioms. The question of the “truth” of the

individual geometrical propositions is thus reduced to one of the “truth” of

the axioms. Now it has long been known that the last question is not only

unanswerable by the methods of geometry, but that it is in itself entirely

without meaning. We cannot ask whether it is true that only one straight line

goes through two points. We can only say that Euclidean geometry deals with

things called “straight line,” to each of which is ascribed the property of

being uniquely determined by two points situated on it. The concept “true”

does not tally with the assertions of pure geometry, because by the word

“true” we are eventually in the habit of designating always the

correspondence with a “real” object; geometry, however, is not concerned

with the relation of the ideas involved in it to objects of experience, but onlywith the logical connection of these ideas among themselves. 


It is not difficult to understand why, in spite of this, we feel constrained to

call the propositions of geometry “true.” Geometrical ideas correspond to

more or less exact objects in nature, and these last are undoubtedly the

exclusive cause of the genesis of those ideas. Geometry ought to refrain from

such a course, in order to give to its structure the largest possible logical

unity. The practice, for example, of seeing in a “distance” two marked

positions on a practically rigid body is something which is lodged deeply in

our habit of thought. We are accustomed further to regard three points as

being situated on a straight line, if their apparent positions can be made to

coincide for observation with one eye, under suitable choice of our place of

observation.


If, in pursuance of our habit of thought, we now supplement the propositions

of Euclidean geometry by the single proposition that two points on a

practically rigid body always correspond to the same distance (line interval),

independently of any changes in position to which we may subject the body,

the propositions of Euclidean geometry then resolve themselves into
                                                                                    2
propositions on the possible relative position of practically rigid bodies. 

Geometry which has been supplemented in this way is then to be treated as a

branch of physics. We can now legitimately ask as to the “truth” of

geometrical propositions interpreted in this way, since we are justified in

asking whether these propositions are satisfied for those real things we have

associated with the geometrical ideas. In less exact terms we can express this

by saying that by the “truth” of a geometrical proposition in this sense we

understand its validity for a construction with ruler and compasses.


Of course the conviction of the “truth” of geometrical propositions in this

sense is founded exclusively on rather incomplete experience. For the present

we shall assume the “truth” of the geometrical propositions, then at a later

stage (in the general theory of relativity) we shall see that this “truth” is

limited, and we shall consider the extent of its limitation.



2
 It follows that a natural object is associated also with a straight line. Three points A, B and C on a
rigid body thus lie in a straight when, the points A and C being given, B is chosen such that the sum of
the distances AB and BC is as short as possible. This incomplete suggestion will suffice for our presentpurpose.2. The System of Co-ordinates




On the basis of the physical interpretation of distance which has been

indicated, we are also in a position to establish the distance between two

points on a rigid body by means of measurements. For this purpose we

require a “distance” (rod S) which is to be used once and for all, and which

we employ as a standard measure. If, now, A and B are two points on a rigid

body, we can construct the line joining them according to the rules of

geometry; then, starting from A, we can mark off the distance S time after

time until we reach B. The number of these operations required is the

numerical measure of the distance AB. This is the basis of all measurement of
      3
length. 


Every description of the scene of an event or of the position of an object in

space is based on the specification of the point on a rigid body (body of

reference) with which that event or object coincides. This applies not only to

scientific description, but also to everyday life. If I analyse the place
                                                4
specification “Trafalgar Square, London,” I arrive at the following result.

The earth is the rigid body to which the specification of place refers;

“Trafalgar Square, London” is a well-defined point, to which a name has
                                                                      5
been assigned, and with which the event coincides in space.


This primitive method of place specification deals only with places on the

surface of rigid bodies, and is dependent on the existence of points on this

surface which are distinguishable from each other. But we can free ourselves

from both of these limitations without altering the nature of our specification

of position. If, for instance, a cloud is hovering over Trafalgar Square, then

we can determine its position relative to the surface of the earth by erecting a

pole perpendicularly on the Square, so that it reaches the cloud. The length of

the pole measured with the standard measuring-rod, combined with the

specification of the position of the foot of the pole, supplies us with a

complete place specification. On the basis of this illustration, we are able to

see the manner in which a refinement of the conception of position has been

developed.(a) We imagine the rigid body, to which the place specification is referred,

supplemented in such a manner that the object whose position we require is

reached by the completed rigid body.


(b) In locating the position of the object, we make use of a number (here the

length of the pole measured with the measuring-rod) instead of designated

points of reference.


(c) We speak of the height of the cloud even when the pole which reaches the

cloud has not been erected. By means of optical observations of the cloud

from different positions on the ground, and taking into account the properties

of the propagation of light, we determine the length of the pole we should

have required in order to reach the cloud.


From this consideration we see that it will be advantageous if, in the

description of position, it should be possible by means of numerical measures

to make ourselves independent of the existence of marked positions

(possessing names) on the rigid body of reference. In the physics of

measurement this is attained by the application of the Cartesian system of co-

ordinates.


This consists of three plane surfaces perpendicular to each other and rigidly

attached to a rigid body. Referred to a system of coordinates, the scene of any

event will be determined (for the main part) by the specification of the

lengths of the three perpendiculars or co-ordinates (x, y, z) which can be

dropped from the scene of the event to those three plane surfaces. The lengths

of these three perpendiculars can be determined by a series of manipulations

with rigid measuring-rods performed according to the rules and methods laid

down by Euclidean geometry.


In practice, the rigid surfaces which constitute the system of co-ordinates are

generally not available; furthermore, the magnitudes of the co-ordinates are

not actually determined by constructions with rigid rods, but by indirect

means. If the results of physics and astronomy are to maintain their clearness,

the physical meaning of specifications of position must always be sought in
                                                6
accordance with the above considerations.


We thus obtain the following result: Every description of events in spaceinvolves the use of a rigid body to which such events have to be referred. The

resulting relationship takes for granted that the laws of Euclidean geometry

hold for “distances,” the “distance” being represented physically by means of

the convention of two marks on a rigid body.



3
 Here we have assumed that there is nothing left over, i.e. that the measurement gives a whole number.
This difficulty is got over by the use of divided measuring-rods, the introduction of which does not

demand any fundamentally new method. 
4
 I have chosen this as being more familiar to the English reader than the “Potsdamer Platz, Berlin,”

which is referred to in the original. (R. W. L.) 
5
 It is not necessary here to investigate further the significance of the expression “coincidence in
space.” This conception is sufficiently obvious to ensure that differences of opinion are scarcely likely

to arise as to its applicability in practice. 
6
 A refinement and modification of these views does not become necessary until we come to deal with
the general theory of relativity, treated in the second part of this book.3. Space and Time in Classical


Mechanics




“The purpose of mechanics is to describe how bodies change their position in

space with time.” I should load my conscience with grave sins against the

sacred spirit of lucidity were I to formulate the aims of mechanics in this

way, without serious reflection and detailed explanations. Let us proceed to

disclose these sins. 


It is not clear what is to be understood here by “position” and “space.” I stand

at the window of a railway carriage which is travelling uniformly, and drop a

stone on the embankment, without throwing it. Then, disregarding the

influence of the air resistance, I see the stone descend in a straight line. A

pedestrian who observes the misdeed from the footpath notices that the stone

falls to earth in a parabolic curve. I now ask: Do the “positions” traversed by

the stone lie “in reality” on a straight line or on a parabola? Moreover, what is

meant here by motion “in space”? From the considerations of the previous

section the answer is self-evident. In the first place, we entirely shun the

vague word “space,” of which, we must honestly acknowledge, we cannot

form the slightest conception, and we replace it by “motion relative to a

practically rigid body of reference.” The positions relative to the body of

reference (railway carriage or embankment) have already been defined in

detail in the preceding section. If instead of “body of reference” we insert

“system of co-ordinates,” which is a useful idea for mathematical description,

we are in a position to say: The stone traverses a straight line relative to a

system of co-ordinates rigidly attached to the carriage, but relative to a

system of co-ordinates rigidly attached to the ground (embankment) it

describes a parabola. With the aid of this example it is clearly seen that there
                                                                                      7
is no such thing as an independently existing trajectory (lit. “path-curve”),

but only a trajectory relative to a particular body of reference.


In order to have a complete description of the motion, we must specify how

the body alters its position with time; i.e. for every point on the trajectory itmust be stated at what time the body is situated there. These data must be

supplemented by such a definition of time that, in virtue of this definition,

these time-values can be regarded essentially as magnitudes (results of

measurements) capable of observation. If we take our stand on the ground of

classical mechanics, we can satisfy this requirement for our illustration in the

following manner. We imagine two clocks of identical construction; the man

at the railway-carriage window is holding one of them, and the man on the

footpath the other. Each of the observers determines the position on his own

reference-body occupied by the stone at each tick of the clock he is holding

in his hand. In this connection we have not taken account of the inaccuracy

involved by the finiteness of the velocity of propagation of light. With this

and with a second difficulty prevailing here we shall have to deal in detail

later.



7
That is, a curve along which the body moves.4. The Galilean System of Co-


ordinates




As is well known, the fundamental law of the mechanics of Galilei-Newton,

which is known as the law of inertia, can be stated thus: A body removed

sufficiently far from other bodies continues in a state of rest or of uniform

motion in a straight line. This law not only says something about the motion

of the bodies, but it also indicates the reference-bodies or systems of co-

ordinates, permissible in mechanics, which can be used in mechanical

description. The visible fixed stars are bodies for which the law of inertia

certainly holds to a high degree of approximation. Now if we use a system of

co-ordinates which is rigidly attached to the earth, then, relative to this

system, every fixed star describes a circle of immense radius in the course of

an astronomical day, a result which is opposed to the statement of the law of

inertia. So that if we adhere to this law we must refer these motions only to

systems of co-ordinates relative to which the fixed stars do not move in a

circle. A system of co- ordinates of which the state of motion is such that the

law of inertia holds relative to it is called a “Galilean system of co-ordinates.”

The laws of the mechanics of Galilei-Newton can be regarded as valid only

for a Galilean system of co-ordinates. 5. The Principle of Relativity (In the


Restricted Sense)




In order to attain the greatest possible clearness, let us return to our example

of the railway carriage supposed to be travelling uniformly. We call its

motion a uniform translation (“uniform” because it is of constant velocity and

direction, “translation” because although the carriage changes its position

relative to the embankment yet it does not rotate in so doing). Let us imagine

a raven flying through the air in such a manner that its motion, as observed

from the embankment, is uniform and in a straight line. If we were to observe

the flying raven from the moving railway carriage, we should find that the

motion of the raven would be one of different velocity and direction, but that

it would still be uniform and in a straight line. Expressed in an abstract

manner we may say: If a mass m is moving uniformly in a straight line with

respect to a co-ordinate system K, then it will also be moving uniformly and

in a straight line relative to a second co-ordinate system K' , provided that the

latter is executing a uniform translatory motion with respect to K. In

accordance with the discussion contained in the preceding section, it follows

that: 


If K is a Galilean co- ordinate system, then every other co-ordinate system K'

is a Galilean one, when, in relation to K, it is in a condition of uniform

motion of translation. Relative to K' the mechanical laws of Galilei-Newton

hold good exactly as they do with respect to K.


We advance a step farther in our generalisation when we express the tenet

thus: If, relative to K, K' is a uniformly moving coordinate system devoid of

rotation, then natural phenomena run their course with respect to K' according

to exactly the same general laws as with respect to K. This statement is called

the principle of relativity (in the restricted sense).


As long as one was convinced that all natural phenomena were capable of

representation with the help of classical mechanics, there was no need todoubt the validity of this principle of relativity. But in view of the more

recent development of electrodynamics and optics it became more and more

evident that classical mechanics affords an insufficient foundation for the

physical description of all natural phenomena. At this juncture the question of

the validity of the principle of relativity became ripe for discussion, and it did

not appear impossible that the answer to this question might be in the

negative.


Nevertheless, there are two general facts which at the outset speak very much

in favour of the validity of the principle of relativity. Even though classical

mechanics does not supply us with a sufficiently broad basis for the

theoretical presentation of all physical phenomena, still we must grant it a

considerable measure of “truth,” since it supplies us with the actual motions

of the heavenly bodies with a delicacy of detail little short of wonderful. The

principle of relativity must therefore apply with great accuracy in the domain

of mechanics. But that a principle of such broad generality should hold with

such exactness in one domain of phenomena, and yet should be invalid for

another, is a priori not very probable.


We now proceed to the second argument, to which, moreover, we shall return

later. If the principle of relativity (in the restricted sense) does not hold, then

the Galilean coordinate systems K, K' , K'' , etc., which are moving uniformly

relative to each other, will not be equivalent for the description of natural

phenomena. In this case we should be constrained to believe that natural laws

are capable of being formulated in a particularly simple manner, and of

course only on condition that, from amongst all possible Galilean co-ordinate

systems, we should have chosen one (K) of a particular state of motion as
                                              0

our body of reference. We should then be justified (because of its merits for

the description of natural phenomena) in calling this system “absolutely at

rest,” and all other Galilean systems K “in motion.” If, for instance, our

embankment were the system K, then our railway carriage would be a
                                    0

system K, relative to which less simple laws would hold than with respect to

K. This diminished simplicity would be due to the fact that the carriage K
0

would be in motion (i.e. “really”) with respect to K. In the general laws of
                                                          0

natural phenomena which have been formulated with reference to K, the

magnitude and direction of the velocity of the carriage would necessarily play

a part. We should expect, for instance, that the note emitted by an organ-pipeplaced with its axis parallel to the direction of travel would be different from

that emitted if the axis of the pipe were placed perpendicular to this direction.

Now in virtue of its motion in an orbit round the sun, our earth is comparable

with a railway carriage travelling with a velocity of about 30 kilometres per

second. If the principle of relativity were not valid we should therefore expect

that the direction of motion of the earth at any moment would enter into the

laws of nature, and also that physical systems in their behaviour would be

dependent on the orientation in space with respect to the earth. For owing to

the alteration in direction of the velocity of rotation of the earth in the course

of a year, the earth cannot be at rest relative to the hypothetical system K
                                                                                    0

throughout the whole year. However, the most careful observations have

never revealed such anisotropic properties in terrestrial physical space, i.e. a

physical nonequivalence of different directions. This is a very powerful

argument in favour of the principle of relativity.6. The Theorem of the Addition of


Velocities Employed in Classical


Mechanics


Let us suppose our old friend the railway carriage to be travelling along the

rails with a constant velocity v, and that a man traverses the length of the

carriage in the direction of travel with a velocity w. How quickly, or, in other

words, with what velocity W does the man advance relative to the

embankment during the process? The only possible answer seems to result

from the following consideration: If the man were to stand still for a second,

he would advance relative to the embankment through a distance v equal

numerically to the velocity of the carriage. As a consequence of his walking,

however, he traverses an additional distance w relative to the carriage, and

hence also relative to the embankment, in this second, the distance w being

numerically equal to the velocity with which he is walking. Thus in total he

covers the distance W= v + w relative to the embankment in the second

considered. We shall see later that this result, which expresses the theorem of

the addition of velocities employed in classical mechanics, cannot be

maintained; in other words, the law that we have just written down does not

hold in reality. For the time being, however, we shall assume its correctness.7. The Apparent Incompatibility of


the Law of Propagation of Light


with the Principle of Relativity


There is hardly a simpler law in physics than that according to which light is

propagated in empty space. Every child at school knows, or believes he

knows, that this propagation takes place in straight lines with a velocity c

=300000 km./sec. At all events we know with great exactness that this

velocity is the same for all colours, because if this were not the case, the

minimum of emission would not be observed simultaneously for different

colours during the eclipse of a fixed star by its dark neighbour. By means of

similar considerations based on observations of double stars, the Dutch

astronomer De Sitter was also able to show that the velocity of propagation of

light cannot depend on the velocity of motion of the body emitting the light.

The assumption that this velocity of propagation is dependent on the direction

“in space” is in itself improbable.


In short, let us assume that the simple law of the constancy of the velocity of

light c (in vacuum) is justifiably believed by the child at school. Who would

imagine that this simple law has plunged the conscientiously thoughtful

physicist into the greatest intellectual difficulties? Let us consider how these

difficulties arise.


Of course we must refer the process of the propagation of light (and indeed

every other process) to a rigid reference-body (co-ordinate system). As such a

system let us again choose our embankment. We shall imagine the air above

it to have been removed. If a ray of light be sent along the embankment, we

see from the above that the tip of the ray will be transmitted with the velocity

c relative to the embankment. Now let us suppose that our railway carriage is

again travelling along the railway lines with the velocity v, and that its

direction is the same as that of the ray of light, but its velocity of course much

less. Let us inquire about the velocity of propagation of the ray of light

relative to the carriage. It is obvious that we can here apply the considerationof the previous section, since the ray of light plays the part of the man

walking along relatively to the carriage. The velocity W of the man relative to

the embankment is here replaced by the velocity of light relative to the

embankment. w is the required velocity of light with respect to the carriage,

and we have


                                      w = c − v.


The velocity of propagation of a ray of light relative to the carriage thus

comes out smaller than c.


But this result comes into conflict with the principle of relativity set forth in

Section V. For, like every other general law of nature, the law of the

transmission of light in vacuo must, according to the principle of relativity,

be the same for the railway carriage as reference body as when the rails are

the body of reference. But, from our above consideration, this would appear

to be impossible. If every ray of light is propagated relative to the

embankment with the velocity c, then for this reason it would appear that

another law of propagation of light must necessarily hold with respect to the

carriage—a result contradictory to the principle of relativity.


In view of this dilemma there appears to be nothing else for it than to

abandon either the principle of relativity or the simple law of the propagation

of light in vacuo. Those of you who have carefully followed the preceding

discussion are almost sure to expect that we should retain the principle of

relativity, which appeals so convincingly to the intellect because it is so

natural and simple. The law of the propagation of light in vacuo would then

have to be replaced by a more complicated law conformable to the principle

of relativity. The development of theoretical physics shows, however, that we

cannot pursue this course. The epoch-making theoretical investigations of

H.A.Lorentz on the electrodynamical and optical phenomena connected with

moving bodies show that experience in this domain leads conclusively to a

theory of electromagnetic phenomena, of which the law of the constancy of

the velocity of light in vacuo is a necessary consequence. Prominent

theoretical physicists were therefore more inclined to reject the principle of

relativity, in spite of the fact that no empirical data had been found which

were contradictory to this principle.At this juncture the theory of relativity entered the arena. As a result of an

analysis of the physical conceptions of time and space, it became evident that

in reality there is not the least incompatibility between the principle of

relativity and the law of propagation of light, and that by systematically

holding fast to both these laws a logically rigid theory could be arrived at.

This theory has been called the special theory of relativity to distinguish it

from the extended theory, with which we shall deal later. In the following

pages we shall present the fundamental ideas of the special theory of

relativity.8. On the Idea of Time in Physics


Lightning has struck the rails on our railway embankment at two places A and

B far distant from each other. I make the additional assertion that these two

lightning flashes occurred simultaneously. If now I ask you whether there is

sense in this statement, you will answer my question with a decided “Yes.”

But if I now approach you with the request to explain to me the sense of the

statement more precisely, you find after some consideration that the answer

to this question is not so easy as it appears at first sight.


After some time perhaps the following answer would occur to you: “The

significance of the statement is clear in itself and needs no further

explanation; of course it would require some consideration if I were to be

commissioned to determine by observations whether in the actual case the

two events took place simultaneously or not.” I cannot be satisfied with this

answer for the following reason. Supposing that as a result of ingenious

considerations an able meteorologist were to discover that the lightning must

always strike the places A and B simultaneously, then we should be faced

with the task of testing whether or not this theoretical result is in accordance

with the reality. We encounter the same difficulty with all physical statements

in which the conception “simultaneous” plays a part. The concept does not

exist for the physicist until he has the possibility of discovering whether or

not it is fulfilled in an actual case. We thus require a definition of

simultaneity such that this definition supplies us with the method by means of

which, in the present case, he can decide by experiment whether or not both

the lightning strokes occurred simultaneously. As long as this requirement is

not satisfied, I allow myself to be deceived as a physicist (and of course the

same applies if I am not a physicist), when I imagine that I am able to attach a

meaning to the statement of simultaneity. (I would ask the reader not to

proceed farther until he is fully convinced on this point.)


After thinking the matter over for some time you then offer the following

suggestion with which to test simultaneity. By measuring along the rails, the

connecting line AB should be measured up and an observer placed at the mid-

point M of the distance AB. This observer should be supplied with an                                                  ◦
arrangement (e.g. two mirrors inclined at 90) which allows him visually to

observe both places A and B at the same time. If the observer perceives the

two flashes of lightning at the same time, then they are simultaneous.


I am very pleased with this suggestion, but for all that I cannot regard the

matter as quite settled, because I feel constrained to raise the following

objection: “Your definition would certainly be right, if I only knew that the

light by means of which the observer at M perceives the lightning flashes

travels along the length A → M with the same velocity as along the length B

→ M. But an examination of this supposition would only be possible if we

already had at our disposal the means of measuring time. It would thus

appear as though we were moving here in a logical circle.”


After further consideration you cast a somewhat disdainful glance at me—

and rightly so—and you declare: “I maintain my previous definition

nevertheless, because in reality it assumes absolutely nothing about light.

There is only one demand to be made of the definition of simultaneity,

namely, that in every real case it must supply us with an empirical decision as

to whether or not the conception that has to be defined is fulfilled. That my

definition satisfies this demand is indisputable. That light requires the same

time to traverse the path A → M as for the path B → M is in reality neither a

supposition nor a hypothesis about the physical nature of light, but a

stipulation which I can make of my own freewill in order to arrive at a

definition of simultaneity.”


It is clear that this definition can be used to give an exact meaning not only to

two events, but to as many events as we care to choose, and independently of

the positions of the scenes of the events with respect to the body of reference
                                    8
(here the railway embankment). We are thus led also to a definition of

“time” in physics. For this purpose we suppose that clocks of identical

construction are placed at the points A, B and C of the railway line (co-

ordinate system), and that they are set in such a manner that the positions of

their pointers are simultaneously (in the above sense) the same. Under these

conditions we understand by the “time” of an event the reading (position of

the hands) of that one of these clocks which is in the immediate vicinity (in

space) of the event. In this manner a time-value is associated with every event

which is essentially capable of observation.This stipulation contains a further physical hypothesis, the validity of which

will hardly be doubted without empirical evidence to the contrary. It has been

assumed that all these clocks go at the same rate if they are of identical

construction. Stated more exactly: When two clocks arranged at rest in

different places of a reference-body are set in such a manner that a particular

position of the pointers of the one clock is simultaneous (in the above sense)

with the same position of the pointers of the other clock, then identical

“settings” are always simultaneous (in the sense of the above definition).


8
 We suppose further that, when three events A, B and C take place in different places in such a manner
that, if A is simultaneous with B, and B is simultaneous with C (simultaneous in the sense of the above
definition), then the criterion for the simultaneity of the pair of events A, C is also satisfied. This
assumption is a physical hypothesis about the law of propagation of light; it must certainly be fulfilled
if we are to maintain the law of the constancy of the velocity of light in vacuo.9. The Relativity of Simultaneity


Up to now our considerations have been referred to a particular body of

reference, which we have styled a “railway embankment.” We suppose a very

long train travelling along the rails with the constant velocity v and in the

direction indicated in Fig. 1. People travelling in this train will with

advantage use the train as a rigid reference-body (co-ordinate system); they

regard all events in reference to the train. Then every event which takes place

along the line also takes place at a particular point of the train. Also the

definition of simultaneity can be given relative to the train in exactly the

same way as with respect to the embankment. As a natural consequence,

however, the following question arises:


Are two events ( e.g. the two strokes of lightning A and B) which are

simultaneous with reference to the railway embankment also simultaneous

relatively to the train? We shall show directly that the answer must be in the

negative.








                                        FIG. 1.


When we say that the lightning strokes A and B are simultaneous with respect

to the embankment, we mean: the rays of light emitted at the places A and B,

where the lightning occurs, meet each other at the mid-point M of the length

A → B of the embankment. But the events A and B also correspond to

positions A and B on the train. Let M' be the mid-point of the distance A → B
                                                                        9
on the travelling train. Just when the flashes of lightning occur, this point M'

naturally coincides with the point M, but it moves towards the right in the

diagram with the velocity v of the train. If an observer sitting in the position

M' in the train did not possess this velocity, then he would remain

permanently at M, and the light rays emitted by the flashes of lightning A andB would reach him simultaneously, i.e. they would meet just where he is

situated. Now in reality (considered with reference to the railway

embankment) he is hastening towards the beam of light coming from B,

whilst he is riding on ahead of the beam of light coming from A. Hence the

observer will see the beam of light emitted from B earlier than he will see that

emitted from A. Observers who take the railway train as their reference-body

must therefore come to the conclusion that the lightning flash B took place

earlier than the lightning flash A. We thus arrive at the important result:


Events which are simultaneous with reference to the embankment are not

simultaneous with respect to the train, and vice versa (relativity of

simultaneity). Every reference body (co-ordinate system) has its own

particular time; unless we are told the reference-body to which the statement

of time refers, there is no meaning in a statement of the time of an event.


Now before the advent of the theory of relativity it had always tacitly been

assumed in physics that the statement of time had an absolute significance,

i.e. that it is independent of the state of motion of the body of reference. But

we have just seen that this assumption is incompatible with the most natural

definition of simultaneity; if we discard this assumption, then the conflict

between the law of the propagation of light in vacuo and the principle of

relativity (developed in Section VII) disappears.


We were led to that conflict by the considerations of Section VI, which are

now no longer tenable. In that section we concluded that the man in the

carriage, who traverses the distance w per second relative to the carriage,

traverses the same distance also with respect to the embankment in each

second of time. But, according to the foregoing considerations, the time

required by a particular occurrence with respect to the carriage must not be

considered equal to the duration of the same occurrence as judged from the

embankment (as reference-body). Hence it cannot be contended that the man

in walking travels the distance w relative to the railway line in a time which is

equal to one second as judged from the embankment.


Moreover, the considerations of Section VI are based on yet a second

assumption, which, in the light of a strict consideration, appears to be

arbitrary, although it was always tacitly made even before the introduction of

the theory of relativity.9
As judged from the embankment.10. On the Relativity of the


Conception of Distance


Let us consider two particular points on the train travelling along the
                                      10
embankment with the velocity v, and inquire as to their distance apart. We

already know that it is necessary to have a body of reference for the

measurement of a distance, with respect to which body the distance can be

measured up. It is the simplest plan to use the train itself as the reference-

body (co-ordinate system). An observer in the train measures the interval by

marking off his measuring-rod in a straight line (e.g. along the floor of the

carriage) as many times as is necessary to take him from the one marked

point to the other. Then the number which tells us how often the rod has to be

laid down is the required distance.


It is a different matter when the distance has to be judged from the railway

line. Here the following method suggests itself. If we call A' and B' the two

points on the train whose distance apart is required, then both of these points

are moving with the velocity v along the embankment. In the first place we

require to determine the points A and B of the embankment which are just

being passed by the two points A' and B' at a particular time t— judged from

the embankment. These points A and B of the embankment can be determined

by applying the definition of time given in Section VIII. The distance

between these points A and B is then measured by repeated application of the

measuring-rod along the embankment.


A priori it is by no means certain that this last measurement will supply us

with the same result as the first. Thus the length of the train as measured from

the embankment may be different from that obtained by measuring in the

train itself. This circumstance leads us to a second objection which must be

raised against the apparently obvious consideration of Section VI. Namely, if

the man in the carriage covers the distance w in a unit of time—measured

from the train,— then this distance—as measured from the embankment—is

not necessarily also equal to w.10
E.g. the middle of the first and of the hundredth carriage.11. The Lorentz Transformation


The results of the last three sections show that the apparent incompatibility of

the law of propagation of light with the principle of relativity (Section VII)

has been derived by means of a consideration which borrowed two

unjustifiable hypotheses from classical mechanics; these are as follows: The

time-interval (time) between two events is independent of the condition of

motion of the body of reference. The space-interval (distance) between two

points of a rigid body is independent of the condition of motion of the body

of reference.


If we drop these hypotheses, then the dilemma of Section VII disappears,

because the theorem of the addition of velocities derived in Section VI

becomes invalid. The possibility presents itself that the law of the

propagation of light in vacuo may be compatible with the principle of

relativity, and the question arises: How have we to modify the considerations

of Section VI in order to remove the apparent disagreement between these

two fundamental results of experience? This question leads to a general one.

In the discussion of Section VI we have to do with places and times relative

both to the train and to the embankment. How are we to find the place and

time of an event in relation to the train, when we know the place and time of

the event with respect to the railway embankment? Is there a thinkable

answer to this question of such a nature that the law of transmission of light

in vacuo does not contradict the principle of relativity? In other words: Can

we conceive of a relation between place and time of the individual events

relative to both reference bodies, such that every ray of light possesses the

velocity of transmission c relative to the embankment and relative to the

train? This question leads to a quite definite positive answer, and to a

perfectly definite transformation law for the space-time magnitudes of an

event when changing over from one body of reference to another.


Before we deal with this, we shall introduce the following incidental

consideration. Up to the present we have only considered events taking place

along the embankment, which had mathematically to assume the function of

a straight line. In the manner indicated in Section II we can imagine thisreference-body supplemented laterally and in a vertical direction by means of

a framework of rods, so that an event which takes place anywhere can be

localised with reference to this framework. Similarly, we can imagine the

train travelling with the velocity v to be continued across the whole of space,

so that every event, no matter how far off it may be, could also be localised

with respect to the second framework. Without committing any fundamental

error, we can disregard the fact that in reality these frameworks would

continually interfere with each other, owing to the impenetrability of solid

bodies. In every such framework we imagine three surfaces perpendicular to

each other marked out, and designated as “co-ordinate planes” (“co-ordinate

system”). A co-ordinate system K then corresponds to the embankment, and a

co-ordinate system K' to the train. An event, wherever it may have taken

place, would be fixed in space with respect to K by the three perpendiculars

x, y, z on the co-ordinate planes, and with regard to time by a time-value t.

Relative to K' , the same event would be fixed in respect of space and time by

corresponding values x' , y' , z' , t' , which of course are not identical with x, y,

z, t. It has already been set forth in detail how these magnitudes are to be

regarded as results of physical measurements.


Obviously our problem can be exactly formulated in the following manner.

What are the values x' , y' , z' , t' of an event with respect to K' , when the

magnitudes x, y, z, t, of the same event with respect to K are given? The

relations must be so chosen that the law of the transmission of light in vacuo

is satisfied for one and the same ray of light (and of course for every ray)

with respect to K and K' . For the relative orientation in space of the co-

ordinate systems indicated in the diagram (Fig. 2), this problem is solved by

means of the equations:                                                                              11
This system of equations is known as the “Lorentz transformation.”



















 

                                        FIG. 2.


If in place of the law of transmission of light we had taken as our basis the

tacit assumptions of the older mechanics as to the absolute character of times

and lengths, then instead of the above we should have obtained the following

equations:








This system of equations is often termed the “Galilei transformation.” The

Galilei transformation can be obtained from the Lorentz transformation by

substituting an infinitely large value for the velocity of light c in the latter

transformation.


Aided by the following illustration, we can readily see that, in accordance

with the Lorentz transformation, the law of the transmission of light in vacuo

is satisfied both for the reference-body K and for the reference body K' . A

light-signal is sent along the positive x-axis, and this light-stimulus advancesin accordance with the equation




i.e. with the velocity c. According to the equations of the Lorentz

transformation, this simple relation between x and t involves a relation

between x' and t' . In point of fact, if we substitute for x the value ct in the

first and fourth equations of the Lorentz transformation, we obtain









from which, by division, the expression




immediately follows. If referred to the system K' , the propagation of light

takes place according to this equation. We thus see that the velocity of

transmission relative to the reference-body K' is also equal to c. The same

result is obtained for rays of light advancing in any other direction

whatsoever. Of course this is not surprising, since the equations of the

Lorentz transformation were derived conformably to this point of view.
11
A simple derivation of the Lorentz transformation is given in Appendix I.12. The Behaviour of Measuring-


Rods and Clocks in Motion


I place a metre-rod in the x' -axis of K' in such a manner that one end (the

beginning) coincides with the point x'= 0, whilst the other end (the end of the

rod) coincides with the point x' = 1. What is the length of the metrerod

relatively to the system K? In order to learn this, we need only ask where the

beginning of the rod and the end of the rod lie with respect to K at a particular

time t of the system K. By means of the first equation of the Lorentz

transformation the values of these two points at the time t = 0 can be shown

to be








the distance between the points being






But the metre-rod is moving with the velocity v relative to K. It therefore

follows that the length of a rigid metre-rod moving in the direction of its

length with a velocity v is





of a metre. The rigid rod is thus shorter when in motion than when at rest,

and the more quickly it is moving, the shorter is the rod. For the velocity v =

c we should haveand for still greater velocities the square-root becomes imaginary. From this

we conclude that in the theory of relativity the velocity c plays the part of a

limiting velocity, which can neither be reached nor exceeded by any real

body.


Of course this feature of the velocity c as a limiting velocity also clearly

follows from the equations of the Lorentz transformation, for these become

meaningless if we choose values of v greater than c.


If, on the contrary, we had considered a metre-rod at rest in the x-axis with

respect to K, then we should have found that the length of the rod as judged

from K' would have been





this is quite in accordance with the principle of relativity which forms the

basis of our considerations.


A priori it is quite clear that we must be able to learn something about the

physical behaviour of measuring-rods and clocks from the equations of

transformation, for the magnitudes x, y, z, t, are nothing more nor less than

the results of measurements obtainable by means of measuring-rods and

clocks. If we had based our considerations on the Galilei transformation we

should not have obtained a contraction of the rod as a consequence of its

motion.


Let us now consider a seconds-clock which is permanently situated at the

origin (x'= 0) of K' . t' = 0 and t' = 1 are two successive ticks of this clock.

The first and fourth equations of the Lorentz transformation give for these

two ticks:




andAs judged from K, the clock is moving with the velocity v ; as judged from

this reference body, the time which elapses between two strokes of the clock

is not one second, but






seconds, i.e. a somewhat larger time. As a consequence of its motion the

clock goes more slowly than when at rest. Here also the velocity c plays the

part of an unattainable limiting velocity.13. Theorem of the Addition of


Velocities. The Experiment of


Fizeau


Now in practice we can move clocks and measuring-rods only with velocities

that are small compared with the velocity of light; hence we shall hardly be

able to compare the results of the previous section directly with the reality.

But, on the other hand, these results must strike you as being very singular,

and for that reason I shall now draw another conclusion from the theory, one

which can easily be derived from the foregoing considerations, and which has

been most elegantly confirmed by experiment.


In Section VI we derived the theorem of the addition of velocities in one

direction in the form which also results from the hypotheses of classical

mechanics. This theorem can also be deduced readily from the Galilei trans

formation (Section XI). In place of the man walking inside the carriage, we

introduce a point moving relatively to the co-ordinate system K' in

accordance with the equation




By means of the first and fourth equations of the Galilei transformation we

can express x' and t' in terms of x and t, and we then obtain




This equation expresses nothing else than the law of motion of the point with

reference to the system K (of the man with reference to the embankment). We

denote this velocity by the symbol W, and we then obtain, as in Section VI,


     (1)


But we can carry out this consideration just as well on the basis of the theoryof relativity. In the equation




we must then express x' and t' in terms of x and t, making use of the first and

fourth equations of the Lorentz transformation. Instead of the equation (1) we

then obtain the equation



     (2)


which corresponds to the theorem of addition for velocities in one direction

according to the theory of relativity. The question now arises as to which of

these two theorems is the better in accord with experience. On this point we

are enlightened by a most important experiment which the brilliant physicist

Fizeau performed more than half a century ago, and which has been repeated

since then by some of the best experimental physicists, so that there can be no

doubt about its result. The experiment is concerned with the following

question. Light travels in a motionless liquid with a particular velocity w.

How quickly does it travel in the direction of the arrow in the tube T (see the

accompanying diagram, Fig. 3) when the liquid above mentioned is flowing

through the tube with a velocity v?









                                        FIG. 3.


In accordance with the principle of relativity we shall certainly have to take

for granted that the propagation of light always takes place with the same

velocity w with respect to the liquid, whether the latter is in motion with

reference to other bodies or not. The velocity of light relative to the liquid

and the velocity of the latter relative to the tube are thus known, and we

require the velocity of light relative to the tube.It is clear that we have the problem of Section VI again before us. The tube

plays the part of the railway embankment or of the coordinate system K, the

liquid plays the part of the carriage or of the co-ordinate system K' , and

finally, the light plays the part of the man walking along the carriage, or of

the moving point in the present section. If we denote the velocity of the light

relative to the tube by W, then this is given by the equation (1) or (2),

according as the Galilei transformation or the Lorentz transformation

corresponds to the facts. Experiment decides in favour of equation (2)
                                          12
derived from the theory of relativity, and the agreement is, indeed, very

exact. According to recent and most excellent measurements by Zeeman, the

influence of the velocity of flow v on the propagation of light is represented

by formula (2) to within one per cent.


Nevertheless we must now draw attention to the fact that a theory of this

phenomenon was given by H. A. Lorentz long before the statement of the

theory of relativity. This theory was of a purely electrodynamical nature, and

was obtained by the use of particular hypotheses as to the electromagnetic

structure of matter. This circumstance, however, does not in the least

diminish the conclusiveness of the experiment as a crucial test in favour of

the theory of relativity, for the electrodynamics of Maxwell-Lorentz, on

which the original theory was based, in no way opposes the theory of

relativity. Rather has the latter been developed from electrodynamics as an

astoundingly simple combination and generalisation of the hypotheses,

formerly independent of each other, on which electrodynamics was built.


12
Fizeau found




where




is the index of refraction of the liquid. On the other hand, owing to the smallness of




as compared with 1, we can replace (2) in the first place byor to the same order of approximation by




which agrees with Fizeau's result.14. The Heuristic Value of the


Theory of Relativity


Our train of thought in the foregoing pages can be epitomised in the

following manner. Experience has led to the conviction that, on the one hand,

the principle of relativity holds true, and that on the other hand the velocity of

transmission of light in vacuo has to be considered equal to a constant c. By

uniting these two postulates we obtained the law of transformation for the

rectangular co-ordinates x, y, z and the time t of the events which constitute

the processes of nature. In this connection we did not obtain the Galilei

transformation, but, differing from classical mechanics, the Lorentz

transformation.


The law of transmission of light, the acceptance of which is justified by our

actual knowledge, played an important part in this process of thought. Once

in possession of the Lorentz transformation, however, we can combine this

with the principle of relativity, and sum up the theory thus:


Every general law of nature must be so constituted that it is transformed into

a law of exactly the same form when, instead of the space-time variables x, y,

z, t of the original co-ordinate system K, we introduce new space-time

variables x' , y' , z' , t' of a coordinate system K' . In this connection the

relation between the ordinary and the accented magnitudes is given by the

Lorentz transformation. Or, in brief: General laws of nature are co-variant

with respect to Lorentz transformations.


This is a definite mathematical condition that the theory of relativity demands

of a natural law, and in virtue of this, the theory becomes a valuable heuristic

aid in the search for general laws of nature. If a general law of nature were to

be found which did not satisfy this condition, then at least one of the two

fundamental assumptions of the theory would have been disproved. Let us

now examine what general results the latter theory has hitherto evinced.15. General Results of the Theory


It is clear from our previous considerations that the (special) theory of

relativity has grown out of electrodynamics and optics. In these fields it has

not appreciably altered the predictions of theory, but it has considerably

simplified the theoretical structure, i.e. the derivation of laws, and—what is

incomparably more important—it has considerably reduced the number of

independent hypotheses forming the basis of theory. The special theory of

relativity has rendered the Maxwell-Lorentz theory so plausible, that the

latter would have been generally accepted by physicists even if experiment

had decided less unequivocally in its favour.


Classical mechanics required to be modified before it could come into line

with the demands of the special theory of relativity. For the main part,

however, this modification affects only the laws for rapid motions, in which

the velocities of matter v are not very small as compared with the velocity of

light. We have experience of such rapid motions only in the case of electrons

and ions; for other motions the variations from the laws of classical

mechanics are too small to make themselves evident in practice. We shall not

consider the motion of stars until we come to speak of the general theory of

relativity. In accordance with the theory of relativity the kinetic energy of a

material point of mass m is no longer given by the well-known expression





but by the expression






This expression approaches infinity as the velocity v approaches the velocity

of light c. The velocity must therefore always remain less than c, however

great may be the energies used to produce the acceleration. If we develop the

expression for the kinetic energy in the form of a series,When





is small compared with unity, the third of these terms is always small in

comparison with the second, which last is alone considered in classical
                                2
mechanics. The first term mc does not contain the velocity, and requires no

consideration if we are only dealing with the question as to how the energy of

a point-mass depends on the velocity. We shall speak of its essential

significance later.


The most important result of a general character to which the special theory

of relativity has led is concerned with the conception of mass. Before the

advent of relativity, physics recognised two conservation laws of

fundamental importance, namely, the law of the conservation of energy and

the law of the conservation of mass; these two fundamental laws appeared to

be quite independent of each other. By means of the theory of relativity they

have been united into one law. We shall now briefly consider how this

unification came about, and what meaning is to be attached to it.


The principle of relativity requires that the law of the conservation of energy

should hold not only with reference to a co-ordinate system K, but also with

respect to every coordinate system K' which is in a state of uniform motion of

translation relative to K, or, briefly, relative to every “Galilean” system of co-

ordinates. In contrast to classical mechanics, the Lorentz transformation is the

deciding factor in the transition from one such system to another.


By means of comparatively simple considerations we are led to draw the

following conclusion from these premises, in conjunction with the

fundamental equations of the electrodynamics of Maxwell: A body moving

with the velocity v, which absorbs an amount of energy E in the form of
                                                                  0

radiation without suffering an alteration in velocity in the process, has, as a
              13
consequence, its energy increased by an amountIn consideration of the expression given above for the kinetic energy of the

body, the required energy of the body comes out to be






Thus the body has the same energy as a body of mass





moving with the velocity v. Hence we can say: If a body takes up an amount

of energy E, then its inertial mass increases by an amount
            0





the inertial mass of a body is not a constant, but varies according to the

change in the energy of the body. The inertial mass of a system of bodies can

even be regarded as a measure of its energy. The law of the conservation of

the mass of a system becomes identical with the law of the conservation of

energy, and is only valid provided that the system neither takes up nor sends

out energy. Writing the expression for the energy in the form






                          2
we see that the term mc, which has hitherto attracted our attention, is nothing

else than the energy possessed by the body before it absorbed the energy
  14
E
0.


A direct comparison of this relation with experiment is not possible at the

present time, owing to the fact that the changes in energy E to which we can
                                                                    0subject a system are not large enough to make themselves perceptible as a

change in the inertial mass of the system.





is too small in comparison with the mass m, which was present before the

alteration of the energy. It is owing to this circumstance that classical

mechanics was able to establish successfully the conservation of mass as a

law of independent validity.


Let me add a final remark of a fundamental nature. The success of the

Faraday-Maxwell interpretation of electromagnetic action at a distance

resulted in physicists becoming convinced that there are no such things as

instantaneous actions at a distance (not involving an intermediary medium) of

the type of Newton's law of gravitation. According to the theory of relativity,

action at a distance with the velocity of light always takes the place of

instantaneous action at a distance or of action at a distance with an infinite

velocity of transmission. This is connected with the fact that the velocity c

plays a fundamental rôle in this theory. In Part II we shall see in what way

this result becomes modified in the general theory of relativity.


13
E is the energy taken up, as judged from a coordinate system moving with the body.
  0
14
As judged from a co-ordinate system moving with the body.16. Experience and the Special


Theory of Relativity


To what extent is the special theory of relativity supported by experience?

This question is not easily answered for the reason already mentioned in

connection with the fundamental experiment of Fizeau. The special theory of

relativity has crystallised out from the Maxwell-Lorentz theory of

electromagnetic phenomena. Thus all facts of experience which support the

electromagnetic theory also support the theory of relativity. As being of

particular importance, I mention here the fact that the theory of relativity

enables us to predict the effects produced on the light reaching us from the

fixed stars. These results are obtained in an exceedingly simple manner, and

the effects indicated, which are due to the relative motion of the earth with

reference to those fixed stars, are found to be in accord with experience. We

refer to the yearly movement of the apparent position of the fixed stars

resulting from the motion of the earth round the sun (aberration), and to the

influence of the radial components of the relative motions of the fixed stars

with respect to the earth on the colour of the light reaching us from them. The

latter effect manifests itself in a slight displacement of the spectral lines of

the light transmitted to us from a fixed star, as compared with the position of

the same spectral lines when they are produced by a terrestrial source of light

(Doppler principle). The experimental arguments in favour of the Maxwell-

Lorentz theory, which are at the same time arguments in favour of the theory

of relativity, are too numerous to be set forth here. In reality they limit the

theoretical possibilities to such an extent, that no other theory than that of

Maxwell and Lorentz has been able to hold its own when tested by

experience.


But there are two classes of experimental facts hitherto obtained which can be

represented in the Maxwell-Lorentz theory only by the introduction of an

auxiliary hypothesis, which in itself—i.e. without making use of the theory of

relativity—appears extraneous.


It is known that cathode rays and the so-called β-rays emitted by radioactivesubstances consist of negatively electrified particles (electrons) of very small

inertia and large velocity. By examining the deflection of these rays under the

influence of electric and magnetic fields, we can study the law of motion of

these particles very exactly.


In the theoretical treatment of these electrons, we are faced with the difficulty

that electrodynamic theory of itself is unable to give an account of their

nature. For since electrical masses of one sign repel each other, the negative

electrical masses constituting the electron would necessarily be scattered

under the influence of their mutual repulsions, unless there are forces of

another kind operating between them, the nature of which has hitherto
                          15
remained obscure to us. If we now assume that the relative distances

between the electrical masses constituting the electron remain unchanged

during the motion of the electron (rigid connection in the sense of classical

mechanics), we arrive at a law of motion of the electron which does not agree

with experience. Guided by purely formal points of view, H. A. Lorentz was

the first to introduce the hypothesis that the particles constituting the electron

experience a contraction in the direction of motion in consequence of that

motion, the amount of this contraction being proportional to the expression






This hypothesis, which is not justifiable by any electrodynamical facts,

supplies us then with that particular law of motion which has been confirmed

with great precision in recent years.


The theory of relativity leads to the same law of motion, without requiring

any special hypothesis whatsoever as to the structure and the behaviour of the

electron. We arrived at a similar conclusion in Section XIII in connection

with the experiment of Fizeau, the result of which is fore-told by the theory

of relativity without the necessity of drawing on hypotheses as to the physical

nature of the liquid.


The second class of facts to which we have alluded has reference to the

question whether or not the motion of the earth in space can be made

perceptible in terrestrial experiments. We have already remarked in Section Vthat all attempts of this nature led to a negative result. Before the theory of

relativity was put forward, it was difficult to become reconciled to this

negative result, for reasons now to be discussed. The inherited prejudices

about time and space did not allow any doubt to arise as to the prime

importance of the Galilei transformation for changing over from one body of

reference to another. Now assuming that the Maxwell-Lorentz equations hold

for a reference-body K, we then find that they do not hold for a reference-

body K' moving uniformly with respect to K, if we assume that the relations

of the Galilean transformation exist between the co-ordinates of K and K' . It

thus appears that of all Galilean co-ordinate systems one (K) corresponding to

a particular state of motion is physically unique. This result was interpreted

physically by regarding K as at rest with respect to a hypothetical aether of

space. On the other hand, all co-ordinate systems K' moving relatively to K

were to be regarded as in motion with respect to the aether. To this motion of

K' against the aether (“aether-drift” relative to K' ) were assigned the more

complicated laws which were supposed to hold relative to K' . Strictly

speaking, such an aether-drift ought also to be assumed relative to the earth,

and for a long time the efforts of physicists were devoted to attempts to detect

the existence of an aether-drift at the earth's surface.


In one of the most notable of these attempts Michelson devised a method

which appears as though it must be decisive. Imagine two mirrors so arranged

on a rigid body that the reflecting surfaces face each other. A ray of light

requires a perfectly definite time T to pass from one mirror to the other and

back again, if the whole system be at rest with respect to the aether. It is

found by calculation, however, that a slightly different time T' is required for

this process, if the body, together with the mirrors, be moving relatively to

the aether. And yet another point: it is shown by calculation that for a given

velocity v with reference to the aether, this time T' is different when the body

is moving perpendicularly to the planes of the mirrors from that resulting

when the motion is parallel to these planes. Although the estimated difference

between these two times is exceedingly small, Michelson and Morley

performed an experiment involving interference in which this difference

should have been clearly detectable. But the experiment gave a negative

result— a fact very perplexing to physicists. Lorentz and FitzGerald rescued

the theory from this difficulty by assuming that the motion of the body

relative to the aether produces a contraction of the body in the direction ofmotion, the amount of contraction being just sufficient to compensate for the

difference in time mentioned above. Comparison with the discussion in

Section XII shows that from the standpoint also of the theory of relativity this

solution of the difficulty was the right one. But on the basis of the theory of

relativity the method of interpretation is incomparably more satisfactory.

According to this theory there is no such thing as a “specially favoured”

(unique) co-ordinate system to occasion the introduction of the aether-idea,

and hence there can be no aether-drift, nor any experiment with which to

demonstrate it. Here the contraction of moving bodies follows from the two

fundamental principles of the theory without the introduction of particular

hypotheses; and as the prime factor involved in this contraction we find, not

the motion in itself, to which we cannot attach any meaning, but the motion

with respect to the body of reference chosen in the particular case in point.

Thus for a co-ordinate system moving with the earth the mirror system of

Michelson and Morley is not shortened, but it is shortened for a co-ordinate

system which is at rest relatively to the sun.


15
 The general theory of relativity renders it likely that the electrical masses of an electron are held
together by gravitational forces.17. Minkowski's Four-Dimensional


Space


The non-mathematician is seized by a mysterious shuddering when he hears

of “four-dimensional” things, by a feeling not unlike that awakened by

thoughts of the occult. And yet there is no more common-place statement

than that the world in which we live is a four-dimensional space-time

continuum.


Space is a three-dimensional continuum. By this we mean that it is possible

to describe the position of a point (at rest) by means of three numbers (co-

ordinates) x, y, z, and that there is an indefinite number of points in the

neighbourhood of this one, the position of which can be described by co-

ordinates such as x, y, z, which may be as near as we choose to the
                    111

respective values of the coordinates x, y, z of the first point. In virtue of the

latter property we speak of a “continuum,” and owing to the fact that there

are three co-ordinates we speak of it as being “three-dimensional.”


Similarly, the world of physical phenomena which was briefly called “world”

by Minkowski is naturally four-dimensional in the space-time sense. For it is

composed of individual events, each of which is described by four numbers,

namely, three space coordinates x, y, z and a time co-ordinate, the time-value

t. The “world” is in this sense also a continuum; for to every event there are

as many “neighbouring” events (realised or at least thinkable) as we care to

choose, the coordinates x, y, z, t of which differ by an indefinitely small
                            1111

amount from those of the event x, y, z, t originally considered. That we have

not been accustomed to regard the world in this sense as a four-dimensional

continuum is due to the fact that in physics, before the advent of the theory of

relativity, time played a different and more independent rôle, as compared

with the space co-ordinates. It is for this reason that we have been in the habit

of treating time as an independent continuum. As a matter of fact, according

to classical mechanics, time is absolute, i.e. it is independent of the position

and the condition of motion of the system of co-ordinates. We see thisexpressed in the last equation of the Galilean transformation (t' = t).


The four-dimensional mode of consideration of the “world” is natural in the

theory of relativity, since according to this theory time is robbed of its

independence. This is shown by the fourth equation of the Lorentz

transformation:






Moreover, according to this equation the time difference ∆t' of two events

with respect to K' does not in general vanish, even when the time difference

∆t of the same events with reference to K vanishes. Pure “space distance” of

two events with respect to K results in “time-distance” of the same events

with respect to K' . But the discovery, of Minkowski, which was of

importance for the formal development of the theory of relativity, does not lie

here. It is to be found rather in the fact of his recognition that the four-

dimensional space-time continuum of the theory of relativity, in its most

essential formal properties, shows a pronounced relationship to the three-
                                                                  16
dimensional continuum of Euclidean geometrical space. In order to give

due prominence to this relationship, however, we must replace the usual time

co-ordinate t by an imaginary magnitude  proportional to it. Under

these conditions, the natural laws satisfying the demands of the (special)

theory of relativity assume mathematical forms, in which the time co-ordinate

plays exactly the same rôle as the three space coordinates. Formally, these

four co-ordinates correspond exactly to the three space coordinates in

Euclidean geometry. It must be clear even to the non-mathematician that, as a

consequence of this purely formal addition to our knowledge, the theory

perforce gained clearness in no mean measure.


These inadequate remarks can give the reader only a vague notion of the

important idea contributed by Minkowski. Without it the general theory of

relativity, of which the fundamental ideas are developed in the following

pages, would perhaps have got no farther than its long clothes. Minkowski's

work is doubtless difficult of access to anyone inexperienced in mathematics,

but since it is not necessary to have a very exact grasp of this work in order to

understand the fundamental ideas of either the special or the general theory ofrelativity, I shall at present leave it here, and shall revert to it only towards

the end of Part II.


16
Cf. the somewhat more detailed discussion in Appendix II.Part II: The General Theory of


Relativity18. Special and General Principle of


Relativity


The basal principle, which was the pivot of all our previous considerations,

was the special principle of relativity, i.e. the principle of the physical

relativity of all uniform motion. Let us once more analyse its meaning

carefully.


It was at all times clear that, from the point of view of the idea it conveys to

us, every motion must only be considered as a relative motion. Returning to

the illustration we have frequently used of the embankment and the railway

carriage, we can express the fact of the motion here taking place in the

following two forms, both of which are equally justifiable: The carriage is in

motion relative to the embankment. The embankment is in motion relative to

the carriage.


In (a) the embankment, in (b) the carriage, serves as the body of reference in

our statement of the motion taking place. If it is simply a question of

detecting or of describing the motion involved, it is in principle immaterial to

what reference-body we refer the motion. As already mentioned, this is self-

evident, but it must not be confused with the much more comprehensive

statement called “the principle of relativity,” which we have taken as the

basis of our investigations.


The principle we have made use of not only maintains that we may equally

well choose the carriage or the embankment as our reference-body for the

description of any event (for this, too, is self-evident). Our principle rather

asserts what follows: If we formulate the general laws of nature as they are

obtained from experience, by making use of the embankment as reference-

body, the railway carriage as reference-body, then these general laws of

nature (e.g. the laws of mechanics or the law of the propagation of light in

vacuo) have exactly the same form in both cases. This can also be expressed

as follows: For the physical description of natural processes, neither of the

reference-bodies K, K' is unique (lit. “specially marked out”) as comparedwith the other. Unlike the first, this latter statement need not of necessity hold

a priori; it is not contained in the conceptions of “motion” and “reference-

body” and derivable from them; only experience can decide as to its

correctness or incorrectness.


Up to the present, however, we have by no means maintained the equivalence

of all bodies of reference K in connection with the formulation of natural

laws. Our course was more on the following lines. In the first place, we

started out from the assumption that there exists a reference-body K, whose

condition of motion is such that the Galilean law holds with respect to it: A

particle left to itself and sufficiently far removed from all other particles

moves uniformly in a straight line. With reference to K (Galilean reference-

body) the laws of nature were to be as simple as possible. But in addition to

K, all bodies of reference K' should be given preference in this sense, and

they should be exactly equivalent to K for the formulation of natural laws,

provided that they are in a state of uniform rectilinear and non-rotary motion

with respect to K; all these bodies of reference are to be regarded as Galilean

reference-bodies. The validity of the principle of relativity was assumed only

for these reference-bodies, but not for others (e.g. those possessing motion of

a different kind). In this sense we speak of the special principle of relativity,

or special theory of relativity.


In contrast to this we wish to understand by the “general principle of

relativity” the following statement: All bodies of reference K, K' , etc., are

equivalent for the description of natural phenomena (formulation of the

general laws of nature), whatever may be their state of motion. But before

proceeding farther, it ought to be pointed out that this formulation must be

replaced later by a more abstract one, for reasons which will become evident

at a later stage.


Since the introduction of the special principle of relativity has been justified,

every intellect which strives after generalisation must feel the temptation to

venture the step towards the general principle of relativity. But a simple and

apparently quite reliable consideration seems to suggest that, for the present

at any rate, there is little hope of success in such an attempt. Let us imagine

ourselves transferred to our old friend the railway carriage, which is

travelling at a uniform rate. As long as it is moving uniformly, the occupantof the carriage is not sensible of its motion, and it is for this reason that he

can un-reluctantly interpret the facts of the case as indicating that the carriage

is at rest, but the embankment in motion. Moreover, according to the special

principle of relativity, this interpretation is quite justified also from a physical

point of view.


If the motion of the carriage is now changed into a non-uniform motion, as

for instance by a powerful application of the brakes, then the occupant of the

carriage experiences a correspondingly powerful jerk forwards. The retarded

motion is manifested in the mechanical behaviour of bodies relative to the

person in the railway carriage. The mechanical behaviour is different from

that of the case previously considered, and for this reason it would appear to

be impossible that the same mechanical laws hold relatively to the non-

uniformly moving carriage, as hold with reference to the carriage when at rest

or in uniform motion. At all events it is clear that the Galilean law does not

hold with respect to the non-uniformly moving carriage. Because of this, we

feel compelled at the present juncture to grant a kind of absolute physical

reality to non-uniform motion, in opposition to the general principle of

relativity. But in what follows we shall soon see that this conclusion cannot

be maintained.19. The Gravitational Field


“If we pick up a stone and then let it go, why does it fall to the ground?” The

usual answer to this question is: “Because it is attracted by the earth.”

Modern physics formulates the answer rather differently for the following

reason. As a result of the more careful study of electromagnetic phenomena,

we have come to regard action at a distance as a process impossible without

the intervention of some intermediary medium. If, for instance, a magnet

attracts a piece of iron, we cannot be content to regard this as meaning that

the magnet acts directly on the iron through the intermediate empty space, but

we are constrained to imagine—after the manner of Faraday—that the

magnet always calls into being something physically real in the space around

it, that something being what we call a “magnetic field.” In its turn this

magnetic field operates on the piece of iron, so that the latter strives to move

towards the magnet. We shall not discuss here the justification for this

incidental conception, which is indeed a somewhat arbitrary one. We shall

only mention that with its aid electromagnetic phenomena can be

theoretically represented much more satisfactorily than without it, and this

applies particularly to the transmission of electromagnetic waves. The effects

of gravitation also are regarded in an analogous manner.


The action of the earth on the stone takes place indirectly. The earth produces

in its surroundings a gravitational field, which acts on the stone and produces

its motion of fall. As we know from experience, the intensity of the action on

a body diminishes according to a quite definite law, as we proceed farther

and farther away from the earth. From our point of view this means: The law

governing the properties of the gravitational field in space must be a perfectly

definite one, in order correctly to represent the diminution of gravitational

action with the distance from operative bodies. It is something like this: The

body (e.g. the earth) produces a field in its immediate neighbourhood

directly; the intensity and direction of the field at points farther removed from

the body are thence determined by the law which governs the properties in

space of the gravitational fields themselves.


In contrast to electric and magnetic fields, the gravitational field exhibits amost remarkable property, which is of fundamental importance for what

follows. Bodies which are moving under the sole influence of a gravitational

field receive an acceleration, which does not in the least depend either on the

material or on the physical state of the body. For instance, a piece of lead and

a piece of wood fall in exactly the same manner in a gravitational field (in

vacuo), when they start off from rest or with the same initial velocity. This

law, which holds most accurately, can be expressed in a different form in the

light of the following consideration.


According to Newton's law of motion, we have (Force) = (inertial mass) ×

(acceleration), where the “inertial mass” is a characteristic constant of the

accelerated body. If now gravitation is the cause of the acceleration, we then
                                                                      17
have (Force)=(gravitational mass) ×(gravitational intensity), where the

“gravitational mass” is likewise a characteristic constant for the body. From

these two relations follows: (acceleration)=(gravitational mass)/(inertial

mass)×(gravitational intensity).


If now, as we find from experience, the acceleration is to be independent of

the nature and the condition of the body and always the same for a given

gravitational field, then the ratio of the gravitational to the inertial mass must

likewise be the same for all bodies. By a suitable choice of units we can thus

make this ratio equal to unity. We then have the following law: The

gravitational mass of a body is equal to its inertial mass.


It is true that this important law had hitherto been recorded in mechanics, but

it had not been interpreted. A satisfactory interpretation can be obtained only

if we recognise the following fact: The same quality of a body manifests

itself according to circumstances as “inertia” or as “weight” (lit. “heaviness”).

In the following section we shall show to what extent this is actually the case,

and how this question is connected with the general postulate of relativity.


17
 For editing reasons, in the following two expressions the phrase “intensity of the gravitational field”
has been replaced by the phrase “gravitational intensity”—R. Burkey.20. The Equality of Inertial and


Gravitational Mass as an Argument


for the General Postulate of


Relativity


We imagine a large portion of empty space, so far removed from stars and

other appreciable masses that we have before us approximately the conditions

required by the fundamental law of Galilei. It is then possible to choose a

Galilean reference-body for this part of space (world), relative to which

points at rest remain at rest and points in motion continue permanently in

uniform rectilinear motion. As reference-body let us imagine a spacious chest

resembling a room with an observer inside who is equipped with apparatus.

Gravitation naturally does not exist for this observer. He must fasten himself

with strings to the floor, otherwise the slightest impact against the floor will

cause him to rise slowly towards the ceiling of the room.


To the middle of the lid of the chest is fixed externally a hook with rope

attached, and now a “being” (what kind of a being is immaterial to us) begins

pulling at this with a constant force. The chest together with the observer then

begin to move “upwards” with a uniformly accelerated motion. In course of

time their velocity will reach unheard-of values— provided that we are

viewing all this from another reference-body which is not being pulled with a

rope.


But how does the man in the chest regard the process? The acceleration of the

chest will be transmitted to him by the reaction of the floor of the chest. He

must therefore take up this pressure by means of his legs if he does not wish

to be laid out full length on the floor. He is then standing in the chest in

exactly the same way as anyone stands in a room of a house on our earth. If

he release a body which he previously had in his hand, the acceleration of the

chest will no longer be transmitted to this body, and for this reason the body

will approach the floor of the chest with an accelerated relative motion. Theobserver will further convince himself that the acceleration of the body

towards the floor of the chest is always of the same magnitude, whatever kind

of body he may happen to use for the experiment.


Relying on his knowledge of the gravitational field (as it was discussed in the

preceding section), the man in the chest will thus come to the conclusion that

he and the chest are in a gravitational field which is constant with regard to

time. Of course he will be puzzled for a moment as to why the chest does not

fall in this gravitational field. Just then, however, he discovers the hook in the

middle of the lid of the chest and the rope which is attached to it, and he

consequently comes to the conclusion that the chest is suspended at rest in the

gravitational field.


Ought we to smile at the man and say that he errs in his conclusion? I do not

believe we ought if we wish to remain consistent; we must rather admit that

his mode of grasping the situation violates neither reason nor known

mechanical laws. Even though it is being accelerated with respect to the

“Galilean space” first considered, we can nevertheless regard the chest as

being at rest. We have thus good grounds for extending the principle of

relativity to include bodies of reference which are accelerated with respect to

each other, and as a result we have gained a powerful argument for a

generalised postulate of relativity.


We must note carefully that the possibility of this mode of interpretation rests

on the fundamental property of the gravitational field of giving all bodies the

same acceleration, or, what comes to the same thing, on the law of the

equality of inertial and gravitational mass. If this natural law did not exist, the

man in the accelerated chest would not be able to interpret the behaviour of

the bodies around him on the supposition of a gravitational field, and he

would not be justified on the grounds of experience in supposing his

reference-body to be “at rest.”


Suppose that the man in the chest fixes a rope to the inner side of the lid, and

that he attaches a body to the free end of the rope. The result of this will be to

stretch the rope so that it will hang “vertically” downwards. If we ask for an

opinion of the cause of tension in the rope, the man in the chest will say:

“The suspended body experiences a downward force in the gravitational

field, and this is neutralised by the tension of the rope; what determines themagnitude of the tension of the rope is the gravitational mass of the

suspended body.” On the other hand, an observer who is poised freely in

space will interpret the condition of things thus: “The rope must perforce take

part in the accelerated motion of the chest, and it transmits this motion to the

body attached to it. The tension of the rope is just large enough to effect the

acceleration of the body. That which determines the magnitude of the tension

of the rope is the inertial mass of the body.” Guided by this example, we see

that our extension of the principle of relativity implies the necessity of the

law of the equality of inertial and gravitational mass. Thus we have obtained

a physical interpretation of this law.


From our consideration of the accelerated chest we see that a general theory

of relativity must yield important results on the laws of gravitation. In point

of fact, the systematic pursuit of the general idea of relativity has supplied the

laws satisfied by the gravitational field. Before proceeding farther, however, I

must warn the reader against a misconception suggested by these

considerations. A gravitational field exists for the man in the chest, despite

the fact that there was no such field for the co-ordinate system first chosen.

Now we might easily suppose that the existence of a gravitational field is

always only an apparent one. We might also think that, regardless of the kind

of gravitational field which may be present, we could always choose another

reference-body such that no gravitational field exists with reference to it. This

is by no means true for all gravitational fields, but only for those of quite

special form. It is, for instance, impossible to choose a body of reference such

that, as judged from it, the gravitational field of the earth (in its entirety)

vanishes.


We can now appreciate why that argument is not convincing, which we

brought forward against the general principle of relativity at the end of

Section XVIII. It is certainly true that the observer in the railway carriage

experiences a jerk forwards as a result of the application of the brake, and

that he recognises in this the non-uniformity of motion (retardation) of the

carriage. But he is compelled by nobody to refer this jerk to a “real”

acceleration (retardation) of the carriage. He might also interpret his

experience thus: “My body of reference (the carriage) remains permanently at

rest. With reference to it, however, there exists (during the period of

application of the brakes) a gravitational field which is directed forwards andwhich is variable with respect to time. Under the influence of this field, the

embankment together with the earth moves non-uniformly in such a manner

that their original velocity in the backwards direction is continuously

reduced.”21. In What Respects Are the


Foundations of Classical Mechanics


and of the Special Theory of


Relativity Unsatisfactory?


We have already stated several times that classical mechanics starts out from

the following law: Material particles sufficiently far removed from other

material particles continue to move uniformly in a straight line or continue in

a state of rest. We have also repeatedly emphasised that this fundamental law

can only be valid for bodies of reference K which possess certain unique

states of motion, and which are in uniform translational motion relative to

each other. Relative to other reference-bodies K the law is not valid. Both in

classical mechanics and in the special theory of relativity we therefore

differentiate between reference-bodies K relative to which the recognised

“laws of nature” can be said to hold, and reference-bodies K relative to which

these laws do not hold.


But no person whose mode of thought is logical can rest satisfied with this

condition of things. He asks: “How does it come that certain reference-bodies

(or their states of motion) are given priority over other reference bodies (or

their states of motion)? What is the reason for this preference?” In order to

show clearly what I mean by this question, I shall make use of a comparison.


I am standing in front of a gas range. Standing alongside of each other on the

range are two pans so much alike that one may be mistaken for the other.

Both are half full of water. I notice that steam is being emitted continuously

from the one pan, but not from the other. I am surprised at this, even if I have

never seen either a gas range or a pan before. But if I now notice a luminous

something of bluish colour under the first pan but not under the other, I cease

to be astonished, even if I have never before seen a gas flame. For I can only

say that this bluish something will cause the emission of the steam, or at least

possibly it may do so. If, however, I notice the bluish something in neithercase, and if I observe that the one continuously emits steam whilst the other

does not, then I shall remain astonished and dissatisfied until I have

discovered some circumstance to which I can attribute the different behaviour

of the two pans.


Analogously, I seek in vain for a real something in classical mechanics (or in

the special theory of relativity) to which I can attribute the different

behaviour of bodies considered with respect to the reference-systems K and
  18
K' . Newton saw this objection and attempted to invalidate it, but without

success. But E. Mach recognised it most clearly of all, and because of this

objection he claimed that mechanics must be placed on a new basis. It can

only be got rid of by means of a physics which is conformable to the general

principle of relativity, since the equations of such a theory hold for every

body of reference, whatever may be its state of motion.


18
 The objection is of importance more especially when the state of motion of the reference-body is of
such a nature that it does not require any external agency for its maintenance, e.g. in the case when the
reference-body is rotating uniformly.22. A Few Inferences from the


General Theory of Relativity


The considerations of Section XX show that the general theory of relativity

puts us in a position to derive properties of the gravitational field in a purely

theoretical manner. Let us suppose, for instance, that we know the space-time

“course” for any natural process whatsoever, as regards the manner in which

it takes place in the Galilean domain relative to a Galilean body of reference

K. By means of purely theoretical operations (i.e. simply by calculation) we

are then able to find how this known natural process appears, as seen from a

reference-body K' which is accelerated relatively to K. But since a

gravitational field exists with respect to this new body of reference K' , our

consideration also teaches us how the gravitational field influences the

process studied.


For example, we learn that a body which is in a state of uniform rectilinear

motion with respect to K (in accordance with the law of Galilei) is executing

an accelerated and in general curvilinear motion with respect to the

accelerated reference-body K' (chest). This acceleration or curvature

corresponds to the influence on the moving body of the gravitational field

prevailing relatively to K' . It is known that a gravitational field influences the

movement of bodies in this way, so that our consideration supplies us with

nothing essentially new.


However, we obtain a new result of fundamental importance when we carry

out the analogous consideration for a ray of light. With respect to the

Galilean reference-body K, such a ray of light is transmitted rectilinearly with

the velocity c. It can easily be shown that the path of the same ray of light is

no longer a straight line when we consider it with reference to the accelerated

chest (reference-body K' ). From this we conclude, that, in general, rays of

light are propagated curvilinearly in gravitational fields. In two respects this

result is of great importance.


In the first place, it can be compared with the reality. Although a detailedexamination of the question shows that the curvature of light rays required by

the general theory of relativity is only exceedingly small for the gravitational

fields at our disposal in practice, its estimated magnitude for light rays

passing the sun at grazing incidence is nevertheless 1.7 seconds of arc. This

ought to manifest itself in the following way. As seen from the earth, certain

fixed stars appear to be in the neighbourhood of the sun, and are thus capable

of observation during a total eclipse of the sun. At such times, these stars

ought to appear to be displaced outwards from the sun by an amount

indicated above, as compared with their apparent position in the sky when the

sun is situated at another part of the heavens. The examination of the

correctness or otherwise of this deduction is a problem of the greatest
                                                                                      19
importance, the early solution of which is to be expected of astronomers.


In the second place our result shows that, according to the general theory of

relativity, the law of the constancy of the velocity of light in vacuo, which

constitutes one of the two fundamental assumptions in the special theory of

relativity and to which we have already frequently referred, cannot claim any

unlimited validity. A curvature of rays of light can only take place when the

velocity of propagation of light varies with position. Now we might think that

as a consequence of this, the special theory of relativity and with it the whole

theory of relativity would be laid in the dust. But in reality this is not the

case. We can only conclude that the special theory of relativity cannot claim

an unlimited domain of validity; its result hold only so long as we are able to

disregard the influences of gravitational fields on the phenomena (e.g. of

light).


Since it has often been contended by opponents of the theory of relativity that

the special theory of relativity is overthrown by the general theory of

relativity, it is perhaps advisable to make the facts of the case clearer by

means of an appropriate comparison. Before the development of

electrodynamics the laws of electrostatics and the laws of electricity were

regarded indiscriminately. At the present time we know that electric fields

can be derived correctly from electrostatic considerations only for the case,

which is never strictly realised, in which the electrical masses are quite at rest

relatively to each other, and to the co-ordinate system. Should we be justified

in saying that for this reason electrostatics is overthrown by the field

equations of Maxwell in electrodynamics? Not in the least. Electrostatics iscontained in electrodynamics as a limiting case; the laws of the latter lead

directly to those of the former for the case in which the fields are invariable

with regard to time. No fairer destiny could be allotted to any physical theory,

than that it should of itself point out the way to the introduction of a more

comprehensive theory, in which it lives on as a limiting case.


In the example of the transmission of light just dealt with, we have seen that

the general theory of relativity enables us to derive theoretically the influence

of a gravitational field on the course of natural processes, the laws of which

are already known when a gravitational field is absent. But the most attractive

problem, to the solution of which the general theory of relativity supplies the

key, concerns the investigation of the laws satisfied by the gravitational field

itself. Let us consider this for a moment.


We are acquainted with space-time domains which behave (approximately) in

a “Galilean” fashion under suitable choice of reference-body, i.e. domains in

which gravitational fields are absent. If we now refer such a domain to a

reference-body K' possessing any kind of motion, then relative to K' there
                                                                                        20
exists a gravitational field which is variable with respect to space and time.

The character of this field will of course depend on the motion chosen for K' .

According to the general theory of relativity, the general law of the

gravitational field must be satisfied for all gravitational fields obtainable in

this way. Even though by no means all gravitational fields can be produced in

this way, yet we may entertain the hope that the general law of gravitation

will be derivable from such gravitational fields of a special kind. This hope

has been realised in the most beautiful manner. But between the clear vision

of this goal and its actual realisation it was necessary to surmount a serious

difficulty, and as this lies deep at the root of things, I dare not withhold it

from the reader. We require to extend our ideas of the space-time continuum

still farther.


19
 By means of the star photographs of two expeditions equipped by a Joint Committee of the Royal
and Royal Astronomical Societies, the existence of the deflection of light demanded by theory was
confirmed during the solar eclipse of 29th May, 1919. (Cf. Appendix III.)

20
This follows from a generalisation of the discussion in Section XX.23. Behaviour of Clocks and


Measuring Rods on a Rotating Body


of Reference


Hitherto I have purposely refrained from speaking about the physical

interpretation of space- and time-data in the case of the general theory of

relativity. As a consequence, I am guilty of a certain slovenliness of

treatment, which, as we know from the special theory of relativity, is far from

being unimportant and pardonable. It is now high time that we remedy this

defect; but I would mention at the outset, that this matter lays no small claims

on the patience and on the power of abstraction of the reader.


We start off again from quite special cases, which we have frequently used

before. Let us consider a space-time domain in which no gravitational fields

exists relative to a reference-body K whose state of motion has been suitably

chosen. K is then a Galilean reference-body as regards the domain

considered, and the results of the special theory of relativity hold relative to

K. Let us suppose the same domain referred to a second body of reference K'

, which is rotating uniformly with respect to K. In order to fix our ideas, we

shall imagine K' to be in the form of a plane circular disc, which rotates

uniformly in its own plane about its centre. An observer who is sitting

eccentrically on the disc K' is sensible of a force which acts outwards in a

radial direction, and which would be interpreted as an effect of inertia

(centrifugal force) by an observer who was at rest with respect to the original

reference-body K. But the observer on the disc may regard his disc as a

reference body which is “at rest”; on the basis of the general principle of

relativity he is justified in doing this. The force acting on himself, and in fact

on all other bodies which are at rest relative to the disc, he regards as the

effect of a gravitational field. Nevertheless, the space-distribution of this

gravitational field is of a kind that would not be possible on Newton's theory
              21
of gravitation. But since the observer believes in the general theory of

relativity, this does not disturb him; he is quite in the right when he believes

that a general law of gravitation can be formulated—a law which not onlyexplains the motion of the stars correctly, but also the field of force

experienced by himself.


The observer performs experiments on his circular disc with clocks and

measuring-rods. In doing so, it is his intention to arrive at exact definitions

for the signification of time and space-data with reference to the circular disc

K' , these definitions being based on his observations. What will be his

experience in this enterprise?


To start with, he places one of two identically constructed clocks at the centre

of the circular disc, and the other on the edge of the disc, so that they are at

rest relative to it. We now ask ourselves whether both clocks go at the same

rate from the standpoint of the non-rotating Galilean reference-body K. As

judged from this body, the clock at the centre of the disc has no velocity,

whereas the clock at the edge of the disc is in motion relative to K in

consequence of the rotation. According to a result obtained in Section XII, it

follows that the latter clock goes at a rate permanently slower than that of the

clock at the centre of the circular disc, i.e. as observed from K. It is obvious

that the same effect would be noted by an observer whom we will imagine

sitting alongside his clock at the centre of the circular disc. Thus on our

circular disc, or, to make the case more general, in every gravitational field, a

clock will go more quickly or less quickly, according to the position in which

the clock is situated (at rest). For this reason it is not possible to obtain a

reasonable definition of time with the aid of clocks which are arranged at rest

with respect to the body of reference. A similar difficulty presents itself when

we attempt to apply our earlier definition of simultaneously in such a case,

but I do not wish to go any farther into this question.


Moreover, at this stage the definition of the space co-ordinates also presents

unsurmountable difficulties. If the observer applies his standard measuring-

rod (a rod which is short as compared with the radius of the disc) tangentially

to the edge of the disc, then, as judged from the Galilean system, the length

of this rod will be less than 1, since, according to Section XII, moving bodies

suffer a shortening in the direction of the motion. On the other hand, the

measuring-rod will not experience a shortening in length, as judged from K,

if it is applied to the disc in the direction of the radius. If, then, the observer

first measures the circumference of the disc with his measuring-rod and thenthe diameter of the disc, on dividing the one by the other, he will not obtain
                                                                            22
as quotient the familiar number π = 3.14 . . ., but a larger number, whereas

of course, for a disc which is at rest with respect to K, this operation would

yield π exactly. This proves that the propositions of Euclidean geometry

cannot hold exactly on the rotating disc, nor in general in a gravitational field,

at least if we attribute the length 1 to the rod in all positions and in every

orientation. Hence the idea of a straight line also loses its meaning. We are

therefore not in a position to define exactly the co-ordinates x, y, z relative to

the disc by means of the method used in discussing the special theory, and as

long as the co-ordinates and times of events have not been defined we cannot

assign an exact meaning to the natural laws in which these occur.


Thus all our previous conclusions based on general relativity would appear to

be called in question. In reality we must make a subtle detour in order to be

able to apply the postulate of general relativity exactly. I shall prepare the

reader for this in the following paragraphs.


21
 The field disappears at the centre of the disc and increases proportionally to the distance from the
centre as we proceed outwards.

22
 Throughout this consideration we have to use the Galilean (non-rotating) system K as reference-
body, since we may only assume the validity of the results of the special theory of relativity relative to
K (relative to K a gravitational field prevails).24. Euclidean and Non-Euclidean


Continuum


The surface of a marble table is spread out in front of me. I can get from any

one point on this table to any other point by passing continuously from one

point to a “neighbouring” one, and repeating this process a (large) number of

times, or, in other words, by going from point to point without executing

jumps. I am sure the reader will appreciate with sufficient clearness, what I

mean here by “neighbouring” and by “jumps” (if he is not too pedantic). We

express this property of the surface by describing the latter as a continuum.


Let us now imagine that a large number of little rods of equal length have

been made, their lengths being small compared with the dimensions of the

marble slab. When I say they are of equal length, I mean that one can be laid

on any other without the ends overlapping. We next lay four of these little

rods on the marble slab so that they constitute a quadrilateral figure (a

square), the diagonals of which are equally long. To ensure the equality of the

diagonals, we make use of a little testing-rod. To this square we add similar

ones, each of which has one rod in common with the first. We proceed in like

manner with each of these squares until finally the whole marble slab is laid

out with squares. The arrangement is such, that each side of a square belongs

to two squares and each corner to four squares.


It is a veritable wonder that we can carry our this business without getting

into the greatest difficulties. We only need to think of the following. If at any

moment three squares meet at a corner, then two sides of the fourth square

are already laid, and as a consequence, the arrangement of the remaining two

sides of the square is already completely determined. But I am now no longer

able to adjust the quadrilateral so that its diagonals may be equal. If they are

equal of their own accord, then this is an especial favour of the marble slab

and of the little rods about which I can only be thankfully surprised. We must

needs experience many such surprises if the construction is to be successful.


If everything has really gone smoothly, then I say that the points of themarble slab constitute a Euclidean continuum with respect to the little rod,

which has been used as a “distance” (line-interval). By choosing one corner

of a square as “origin,” I can characterise every other corner of a square with

reference to this origin by means of two numbers. I only need state how many

rods I must pass over when, starting from the origin, I proceed towards the

“right” and then “upwards,” in order to arrive at the corner of the square

under consideration. These two numbers are then the “Cartesian co-

ordinates” of this corner with reference to the “Cartesian co-ordinate system”

which is determined by the arrangement of little rods.


By making use of the following modification of this abstract experiment, we

recognise that there must also be cases in which the experiment would be

unsuccessful. We shall suppose that the rods “expand” by an amount

proportional to the increase of temperature. We heat the central part of the

marble slab, but not the periphery, in which case two of our little rods can

still be brought into coincidence at every position on the table. But our

construction of squares must necessarily come into disorder during the

heating, because the little rods on the central region of the table expand,

whereas those on the outer part do not.


With reference to our little rods—defined as unit lengths—the marble slab is

no longer a Euclidean continuum, and we are also no longer in the position of

defining Cartesian co-ordinates directly with their aid, since the above

construction can no longer be carried out. But since there are other things

which are not influenced in a similar manner to the little rods (or perhaps not

at all) by the temperature of the table, it is possible quite naturally to maintain

the point of view that the marble slab is a “Euclidean continuum.” This can

be done in a satisfactory manner by making a more subtle stipulation about

the measurement or the comparison of lengths.


But if rods of every kind ( i.e. of every material) were to behave in the same

way as regards the influence of temperature when they are on the variably

heated marble slab, and if we had no other means of detecting the effect of

temperature than the geometrical behaviour of our rods in experiments

analogous to the one described above, then our best plan would be to assign

the distance one to two points on the slab, provided that the ends of one of

our rods could be made to coincide with these two points; for how elseshould we define the distance without our proceeding being in the highest

measure grossly arbitrary? The method of Cartesian co-ordinates must then

be discarded, and replaced by another which does not assume the validity of
                                          23
Euclidean geometry for rigid bodies. The reader will notice that the

situation depicted here corresponds to the one brought about by the general

postulate of relativity (Section XXIII).


NOTE:—Gauss undertook the task of treating this two-dimensional geometry

from first principles, without making use of the fact that the surface belongs

to a Euclidean continuum of three dimensions. If we imagine constructions to

be made with rigid rods in the surface (similar to that above with the marble

slab), we should find that different laws hold for these from those resulting

on the basis of Euclidean plane geometry. The surface is not a Euclidean

continuum with respect to the rods, and we cannot define Cartesian

coordinates in the surface. Gauss indicated the principles according to which

we can treat the geometrical relationships in the surface, and thus pointed out

the way to the method of Riemann of treating multi-dimensional, non-

Euclidean continua. Thus it is that mathematicians long ago solved the

formal problems to which we are led by the general postulate of relativity.


23
 Mathematicians have been confronted with our problem in the following form. If we are given a
surface (e.g. an ellipsoid) in Euclidean three-dimensional space, then there exists for this surface a two-
dimensional geometry, just as much as for a plane surface.25. Gaussian Co-ordinates




















                                        FIG. 4.


According to Gauss, this combined analytical and geometrical mode of

handling the problem can be arrived at in the following way. We imagine a

system of arbitrary curves (see Fig. 4) drawn on the surface of the table.

These we designate as u-curves, and we indicate each of them by means of a

number. The curves u = 1, u = 2 and u = 3 are drawn in the diagram. Between

the curves u = 1 and u = 2 we must imagine an infinitely large number to be

drawn, all of which correspond to real numbers lying between 1 and 2. We

have then a system of u-curves, and this “infinitely dense” system covers the

whole surface of the table. These u-curves must not intersect each other, and

through each point of the surface one and only one curve must pass. Thus a

perfectly definite value of u belongs to every point on the surface of the

marble slab. In like manner we imagine a system of v-curves drawn on the

surface. These satisfy the same conditions as the u-curves, they are provided

with numbers in a corresponding manner, and they may likewise be of

arbitrary shape. It follows that a value of u and a value of v belong to every

point on the surface of the table. We call these two numbers the co-ordinatesof the surface of the table (Gaussian co-ordinates). For example, the point P

in the diagram has the Gaussian co-ordinates u = 3, v = 1. Two neighbouring

points P and P' on the surface then correspond to the co-ordinates





where du and dv signify very small numbers. In a similar manner we may

indicate the distance (line-interval) between P and P' , as measured with a

little rod, by means of the very small number ds. Then according to Gauss we

have




where g, g, g, are magnitudes which depend in a perfectly definite way
        111222

on u and v. The magnitudes g, g, and g determine the behaviour of the
                                  111222

rods relative to the u-curves and v-curves, and thus also relative to the surface

of the table. For the case in which the points of the surface considered form a

Euclidean continuum with reference to the measuring-rods, but only in this

case, it is possible to draw the u-curves and v-curves and to attach numbers to

them, in such a manner, that we simply have:




Under these conditions, the u-curves and v-curves are straight lines in the

sense of Euclidean geometry, and they are perpendicular to each other. Here

the Gaussian co-ordinates are simply Cartesian ones. It is clear that Gauss co-

ordinates are nothing more than an association of two sets of numbers with

the points of the surface considered, of such a nature that numerical values

differing very slightly from each other are associated with neighbouring

points “in space.”


So far, these considerations hold for a continuum of two dimensions. But the

Gaussian method can be applied also to a continuum of three, four or more

dimensions. If, for instance, a continuum of four dimensions be supposed

available, we may represent it in the following way. With every point of the

continuum we associate arbitrarily four numbers, x, x, x, x, which are
                                                            1234known as “coordinates.” Adjacent points correspond to adjacent values of the

co-ordinates. If a distance ds is associated with the adjacent points P and P' ,

this distance being measurable and well-defined from a physical point of

view, then the following formula holds:





where the magnitudes g etc., have values which vary with the position in
                          11

the continuum. Only when the continuum is a Euclidean one is it possible to

associate the coordinates x. . . x with the points of the continuum so that we
                              14

have simply




In this case relations hold in the four-dimensional continuum which are

analogous to those holding in our three-dimensional measurements.


                                          2
However, the Gauss treatment for ds which we have given above is not

always possible. It is only possible when sufficiently small regions of the

continuum under consideration may be regarded as Euclidean continua. For

example, this obviously holds in the case of the marble slab of the table and

local variation of temperature. The temperature is practically constant for a

small part of the slab, and thus the geometrical behaviour of the rods is

almost as it ought to be according to the rules of Euclidean geometry. Hence

the imperfections of the construction of squares in the previous section do not

show themselves clearly until this construction is extended over a

considerable portion of the surface of the table.


We can sum this up as follows: Gauss invented a method for the

mathematical treatment of continua in general, in which “size relations”

(“distances” between neighbouring points) are defined. To every point of a

continuum are assigned as many numbers (Gaussian co-ordinates) as the

continuum has dimensions. This is done in such a way, that only one meaning

can be attached to the assignment, and that numbers (Gaussian co-ordinates)

which differ by an indefinitely small amount are assigned to adjacent points.

The Gaussian co-ordinate system is a logical generalisation of the Cartesian

co-ordinate system. It is also applicable to non-Euclidean continua, but onlywhen, with respect to the defined “size” or “distance,” small parts of the

continuum under consideration behave more nearly like a Euclidean system,

the smaller the part of the continuum under our notice.26. The Space-Time Continuum of


the Special Theory of Relativity


Considered as a Euclidean


Continuum


We are now in a position to formulate more exactly the idea of Minkowski,

which was only vaguely indicated in Section XVII. In accordance with the

special theory of relativity, certain co-ordinate systems are given preference

for the description of the four-dimensional, space-time continuum. We called

these “Galilean co-ordinate systems.” For these systems, the four co-

ordinates x, y, z, t, which determine an event or—in other words—a point of

the four-dimensional continuum, are defined physically in a simple manner,

as set forth in detail in the first part of this book. For the transition from one

Galilean system to another, which is moving uniformly with reference to the

first, the equations of the Lorentz transformation are valid. These last form

the basis for the derivation of deductions from the special theory of relativity,

and in themselves they are nothing more than the expression of the universal

validity of the law of transmission of light for all Galilean systems of

reference.


Minkowski found that the Lorentz transformations satisfy the following

simple conditions. Let us consider two neighbouring events, the relative

position of which in the four-dimensional continuum is given with respect to

a Galilean reference-body K by the space co-ordinate differences dx, dy, dz

and the time-difference dt. With reference to a second Galilean system we

shall suppose that the corresponding differences for these two events are dx' ,
                                                                          24
dy' , dz' , dt' . Then these magnitudes always fulfil the condition





The validity of the Lorentz transformation follows from this condition. Wecan express this as follows: The magnitude




which belongs to two adjacent points of the four-dimensional space-time

continuum, has the same value for all selected (Galilean) reference-bodies. If

we replace x, y, z,, by x, x, x, x, we also obtain the result that
                                  1234




is independent of the choice of the body of reference. We call the magnitude

ds the “distance” apart of the two events or four-dimensional points.


Thus, if we choose as time-variable the imaginary variable  instead of

the real quantity t, we can regard the space-time continuum—in accordance

with the special theory of relativity—as a “Euclidean” four-dimensional

continuum, a result which follows from the considerations of the preceding

section.


24
 Cf. Appendices I and II. The relations which are derived there for the co-ordinates themselves are
valid also for co-ordinate differences, and thus also for coordinate differentials (indefinitely small
differences).27. The Space-Time Continuum of


the General Theory of Relativity is


not a Euclidean Continuum


In the first part of this book we were able to make use of space-time co-

ordinates which allowed of a simple and direct physical interpretation, and

which, according to Section XXVI, can be regarded as four-dimensional

Cartesian co-ordinates. This was possible on the basis of the law of the

constancy of the velocity of light. But according to Section XXI, the general

theory of relativity cannot retain this law. On the contrary, we arrived at the

result that according to this latter theory the velocity of light must always

depend on the coordinates when a gravitational field is present. In connection

with a specific illustration in Section XXIII, we found that the presence of a

gravitational field invalidates the definition of the co-ordinates and the time,

which led us to our objective in the special theory of relativity.


In view of the results of these considerations we are led to the conviction that,

according to the general principle of relativity, the space-time continuum

cannot be regarded as a Euclidean one, but that here we have the general

case, corresponding to the marble slab with local variations of temperature,

and with which we made acquaintance as an example of a two-dimensional

continuum. Just as it was there impossible to construct a Cartesian co-

ordinate system from equal rods, so here it is impossible to build up a system

(reference body) from rigid bodies and clocks, which shall be of such a

nature that measuring-rods and clocks, arranged rigidly with respect to one

another, shall indicate position and time directly. Such was the essence of the

difficulty with which we were confronted in Section XXIII.


But the considerations of Sections XXV and XXVI show us the way to

surmount this difficulty. We refer the four-dimensional space-time continuum

in an arbitrary manner to Gauss co-ordinates. We assign to every point of the

continuum (event) four numbers, x, x, x, x (co-ordinates), which have not
                                        1234

the least direct physical significance, but only serve the purpose ofnumbering the points of the continuum in a definite but arbitrary manner.

This arrangement does not even need to be of such a kind that we must regard

x, x, x as “space” co-ordinates and x as a “time” co-ordinate.
1234


The reader may think that such a description of the world would be quite

inadequate. What does it mean to assign to an event the particular co-

ordinates x, x, x, x, if in themselves these co-ordinates have no
            1234

significance? More careful consideration shows, however, that this anxiety is

unfounded. Let us consider, for instance, a material point with any kind of

motion. If this point had only a momentary existence without duration, then it

would be described in space-time by a single system of values x, x, x, x.
                                                                          1234

Thus its permanent existence must be characterised by an infinitely large

number of such systems of values, the co-ordinate values of which are so

close together as to give continuity; corresponding to the material point, we

thus have a (uni-dimensional) line in the four-dimensional continuum. In the

same way, any such lines in our continuum correspond to many points in

motion. The only statements having regard to these points which can claim a

physical existence are in reality the statements about their encounters. In our

mathematical treatment, such an encounter is expressed in the fact that the

two lines which represent the motions of the points in question have a

particular system of co-ordinate values, x, x, x, x, in common. After
                                                1234

mature consideration the reader will doubtless admit that in reality such

encounters constitute the only actual evidence of a time-space nature with

which we meet in physical statements.


When we were describing the motion of a material point relative to a body of

reference, we stated nothing more than the encounters of this point with

particular points of the reference-body. We can also determine the

corresponding values of the time by the observation of encounters of the

body with clocks, in conjunction with the observation of the encounter of the

hands of clocks with particular points on the dials. It is just the same in the

case of space-measurements by means of measuring-rods, as a little

consideration will show.


The following statements hold generally: Every physical description resolves

itself into a number of statements, each of which refers to the space-time

coincidence of two events A and B. In terms of Gaussian co-ordinates, everysuch statement is expressed by the agreement of their four co-ordinates x, x,
                                                                                      12

x, x. Thus in reality, the description of the spacetime continuum by means
34

of Gauss coordinates completely replaces the description with the aid of a

body of reference, without suffering from the defects of the latter mode of

description; it is not tied down to the Euclidean character of the continuum

which has to be represented.28. Exact Formulation of the


General Principle of Relativity


We are now in a position to replace the provisional formulation of the general

principle of relativity given in Section XVIII by an exact formulation. The

form there used, “All bodies of reference K, K' , etc., are equivalent for the

description of natural phenomena (formulation of the general laws of nature),

whatever may be their state of motion,” cannot be maintained, because the

use of rigid reference-bodies, in the sense of the method followed in the

special theory of relativity, is in general not possible in space-time

description. The Gauss co-ordinate system has to take the place of the body

of reference. The following statement corresponds to the fundamental idea of

the general principle of relativity: “All Gaussian co-ordinate systems are

essentially equivalent for the formulation of the general laws of nature.”


We can state this general principle of relativity in still another form, which

renders it yet more clearly intelligible than it is when in the form of the

natural extension of the special principle of relativity. According to the

special theory of relativity, the equations which express the general laws of

nature pass over into equations of the same form when, by making use of the

Lorentz transformation, we replace the space-time variables x, y, z, t, of a

(Galilean) reference-body K by the spacetime variables x' , y' , z' , t' , of a new

reference body K' . According to the general theory of relativity, on the other

hand, by application of arbitrary substitutions of the Gauss variables x, x,
                                                                                  12

x, x, the equations must pass over into equations of the same form; for
34

every transformation (not only the Lorentz transformation) corresponds to the

transition of one Gauss coordinate system into another.


If we desire to adhere to our “old-time” three-dimensional view of things,

then we can characterise the development which is being undergone by the

fundamental idea of the general theory of relativity as follows: The special

theory of relativity has reference to Galilean domains, i.e. to those in which

no gravitational field exists. In this connection a Galilean reference-bodyserves as body of reference, i.e. a rigid body the state of motion of which is

so chosen that the Galilean law of the uniform rectilinear motion of “isolated”

material points holds relatively to it.


Certain considerations suggest that we should refer the same Galilean

domains to non-Galilean reference-bodies also. A gravitational field of a

special kind is then present with respect to these bodies (cf. Sections XX and

XXIII).


In gravitational fields there are no such things as rigid bodies with Euclidean

properties; thus the fictitious rigid body of reference is of no avail in the

general theory of relativity. The motion of clocks is also influenced by

gravitational fields, and in such a way that a physical definition of time which

is made directly with the aid of clocks has by no means the same degree of

plausibility as in the special theory of relativity.


For this reason non-rigid reference-bodies are used which are as a whole not

only moving in any way whatsoever, but which also suffer alterations in form

ad lib. during their motion. Clocks, for which the law of motion is any kind,

however irregular, serve for the definition of time. We have to imagine each

of these clocks fixed at a point on the non-rigid reference-body. These clocks

satisfy only the one condition, that the “readings” which are observed

simultaneously on adjacent clocks (in space) differ from each other by an

indefinitely small amount. This non-rigid reference-body, which might

appropriately be termed a “reference-mollusk,” is in the main equivalent to a

Gaussian four-dimensional co-ordinate system chosen arbitrarily. That which

gives the “mollusk” a certain comprehensibleness as compared with the

Gauss co-ordinate system is the (really unqualified) formal retention of the

separate existence of the space co-ordinate. Every point on the mollusk is

treated as a space-point, and every material point which is at rest relatively to

it as at rest, so long as the mollusk is considered as reference-body. The

general principle of relativity requires that all these mollusks can be used as

reference-bodies with equal right and equal success in the formulation of the

general laws of nature; the laws themselves must be quite independent of the

choice of mollusk.


The great power possessed by the general principle of relativity lies in the

comprehensive limitation which is imposed on the laws of nature inconsequence of what we have seen above.29. The Solution of the Problem of


Gravitation on the Basis of the


General Principle of Relativity


If the reader has followed all our previous considerations, he will have no

further difficulty in understanding the methods leading to the solution of the

problem of gravitation.


We start off from a consideration of a Galilean domain, i.e. a domain in

which there is no gravitational field relative to the Galilean reference-body K.

The behaviour of measuring-rods and clocks with reference to K is known

from the special theory of relativity, likewise the behaviour of “isolated”

material points; the latter move uniformly and in straight lines.


Now let us refer this domain to a random Gauss co-ordinate system or to a

“mollusk” as reference-body 'K . Then with respect to K' there is a

gravitational field G (of a particular kind). We learn the behaviour of

measuring rods and clocks and also of freely-moving material points with

reference to K simply by mathematical transformation. We interpret this

behaviour as the behaviour of measuring rods, clocks and material points

under the influence of the gravitational field G. Hereupon we introduce a

hypothesis: that the influence of the gravitational field on measuring-rods,

clocks and freely-moving material points continues to take place according to

the same laws, even in the case when the prevailing gravitational field is not

derivable from the Galilean special case, simply by means of a transformation

of co-ordinates.


The next step is to investigate the spacetime behaviour of the gravitational

field G, which was derived from the Galilean special case simply by

transformation of the coordinates. This behaviour is formulated in a law,

which is always valid, no matter how the reference-body (mollusk) used in

the description may be chosen.This law is not yet the general law of the gravitational field, since the

gravitational field under consideration is of a special kind. In order to find out

the general law-of-field of gravitation we still require to obtain a

generalisation of the law as found above. This can be obtained without

caprice, however, by taking into consideration the following demands: The

required generalisation must likewise satisfy the general postulate of

relativity. If there is any matter in the domain under consideration, only its

inertial mass, and thus according to Section XV only its energy is of

importance for its effect in exciting a field. Gravitational field and matter

together must satisfy the law of the conservation of energy (and of impulse).


Finally, the general principle of relativity permits us to determine the

influence of the gravitational field on the course of all those processes which

take place according to known laws when a gravitational field is absent, i.e.

which have already been fitted into the frame of the special theory of

relativity. In this connection we proceed in principle according to the method

which has already been explained for measuring-rods, clocks and freely-

moving material points.


The theory of gravitation derived in this way from the general postulate of

relativity excels not only in its beauty; nor in removing the defect attaching to

classical mechanics which was brought to light in Section XXI; nor in

interpreting the empirical law of the equality of inertial and gravitational

mass; but it has also already explained a result of observation in astronomy,

against which classical mechanics is powerless.


If we confine the application of the theory to the case where the gravitational

fields can be regarded as being weak, and in which all masses move with

respect to the co-ordinate system with velocities which are small compared

with the velocity of light, we then obtain as a first approximation the

Newtonian theory. Thus the latter theory is obtained here without any

particular assumption, whereas Newton had to introduce the hypothesis that

the force of attraction between mutually attracting material points is inversely

proportional to the square of the distance between them. If we increase the

accuracy of the calculation, deviations from the theory of Newton make their

appearance, practically all of which must nevertheless escape the test of

observation owing to their smallness.We must draw attention here to one of these deviations. According to

Newton's theory, a planet moves round the sun in an ellipse, which would

permanently maintain its position with respect to the fixed stars, if we could

disregard the motion of the fixed stars, themselves and the action of the other

planets under consideration. Thus, if we correct the observed motion of the

planets for these two influences, and if Newton's theory be strictly correct, we

ought to obtain for the orbit of the planet an ellipse, which is fixed with

reference to the fixed stars. This deduction, which can be tested with great

accuracy, has been confirmed for all the planets save one, with the precision

that is capable of being obtained by the delicacy of observation attainable at

the present time. The sole exception is Mercury, the planet which lies nearest

the sun. Since the time Leverrier, it has been known that the ellipse

corresponding to the orbit of Mercury, after it has been corrected for the

influences mentioned above, is not stationary with respect to the fixed stars,

but that it rotates exceedingly slowly in the plane of the orbit and in the sense

of the orbital motion. The value obtained for this rotary movement of the

orbital ellipse was 43 seconds of arc per century, an amount ensured to be

correct to within a few seconds of arc. This effect can be explained by means

of classical mechanics only on the assumption of hypotheses which have little

probability, and which were devised solely for this purpose.


On the basis of the general theory of relativity, it is found that the ellipse of

every planet round the sun must necessarily rotate in the manner indicated

above; that for all the planets, with the exception of Mercury, this rotation is

too small to be detected with the delicacy of observation possible at the

present time; but that in the case of Mercury it must amount to 43 seconds of

arc per century, a result which is strictly in agreement with observation.


Apart from this one, it has hitherto been possible to make only two

deductions from the theory which admit of being tested by observation, to
                                                                              25
wit, the curvature of light rays by the gravitational field of the sun, and a

displacement of the spectral lines of light reaching us from large stars, as

compared with the corresponding lines for light produced in an analogous

manner terrestrially (i.e. by the same kind of molecule). I do not doubt that

these deductions from the theory will be confirmed also.


25
Observed by Eddington and others in 1919. (Cf. Appendix III.)Part III: Considerations on the


Universe as a Whole30. Cosmological Difficulties of


Newton's Theory


Apart from the difficulty discussed in Section XXI, there is a second

fundamental difficulty attending classical celestial mechanics, which, to the

best of my knowledge, was first discussed in detail by the astronomer

Seeliger. If we ponder over the question as to how the universe, considered as

a whole, is to be regarded, the first answer that suggests itself to us is surely

this: As regards space (and time) the universe is infinite. There are stars

everywhere, so that the density of matter, although very variable in detail, is

nevertheless on the average everywhere the same. In other words: However

far we might travel through space, we should find everywhere an attenuated

swarm of fixed stars of approximately the same kind and density.


This view is not in harmony with the theory of Newton. The latter theory

rather requires that the universe should have a kind of centre in which the

density of the stars is a maximum, and that as we proceed outwards from this

centre the group-density of the stars should diminish, until finally, at great

distances, it is succeeded by an infinite region of emptiness. The stellar
                                                                            26
universe ought to be a finite island in the infinite ocean of space.


This conception is in itself not very satisfactory. It is still less satisfactory

because it leads to the result that the light emitted by the stars and also

individual stars of the stellar system are perpetually passing out into infinite

space, never to return, and without ever again coming into interaction with

other objects of nature. Such a finite material universe would be destined to

become gradually but systematically impoverished.


In order to escape this dilemma, Seeliger suggested a modification of

Newton's law, in which he assumes that for great distances the force of

attraction between two masses diminishes more rapidly than would result

from the inverse square law. In this way it is possible for the mean density of

matter to be constant everywhere, even to infinity, without infinitely large

gravitational fields being produced. We thus free ourselves from thedistasteful conception that the material universe ought to possess something

of the nature of centre. Of course we purchase our emancipation from the

fundamental difficulties mentioned, at the cost of a modification and

complication of Newton's law which has neither empirical nor theoretical

foundation. We can imagine innumerable laws which would serve the same

purpose, without our being able to state a reason why one of them is to be

preferred to the others; for any one of these laws would be founded just as

little on more general theoretical principles as is the law of Newton.


26
 Proof.—According to the theory of Newton, the number of “lines of force” which come from
infinity and terminate in a mass m is proportional to the mass m. If, on the average, the mass-density P
                                                                                          0
is constant throughout the universe, then a sphere of volume V will enclose the average mass PV .
                                                                                  0
Thus the number of lines of force passing through the surface F of the sphere into its interior is
proportional to PV . For unit area of the surface of the sphere the number of lines of force which enters
            0
the sphere is thus proportional to P · V/F or PR. Hence the intensity of the field at the surface would
                              00
ultimately become infinite with increasing radius R of the sphere, which is impossible.31. The Possibility of a “Finite” and


Yet “Unbounded” Universe


But speculations on the structure of the universe also move in quite another

direction. The development of non-Euclidean geometry led to the recognition

of the fact, that we can cast doubt on the infiniteness of our space without

coming into conflict with the laws of thought or with experience (Riemann,

Helmholtz). These questions have already been treated in detail and with

unsurpassable lucidity by Helmholtz and Poincaré, whereas I can only touch

on them briefly here.


In the first place, we imagine an existence in two-dimensional space. Flat

beings with flat implements, and in particular flat rigid measuring-rods, are

free to move in a plane. For them nothing exists outside of this plane: that

which they observe to happen to themselves and to their flat “things” is the

all-inclusive reality of their plane. In particular, the constructions of plane

Euclidean geometry can be carried out by means of the rods, e.g. the lattice

construction, considered in Section XXIV. In contrast to ours, the universe of

these beings is two-dimensional; but, like ours, it extends to infinity. In their

universe there is room for an infinite number of identical squares made up of

rods, i.e. its volume (surface) is infinite. If these beings say their universe is

“plane,” there is sense in the statement, because they mean that they can

perform the constructions of plane Euclidean geometry with their rods. In this

connection the individual rods always represent the same distance,

independently of their position.


Let us consider now a second two-dimensional existence, but this time on a

spherical surface instead of on a plane. The flat beings with their measuring-

rods and other objects fit exactly on this surface and they are unable to leave

it. Their whole universe of observation extends exclusively over the surface

of the sphere. Are these beings able to regard the geometry of their universe

as being plane geometry and their rods withal as the realisation of “distance”?

They cannot do this. For if they attempt to realise a straight line, they will

obtain a curve, which we “three-dimensional beings” designate as a greatcircle, i.e. a self-contained line of definite finite length, which can be

measured up by means of a measuring-rod. Similarly, this universe has a

finite area, that can be compared with the area of a square constructed with

rods. The great charm resulting from this consideration lies in the recognition

of the fact that the universe of these beings is finite and yet has no limits.


But the spherical-surface beings do not need to go on a world-tour in order to

perceive that they are not living in a Euclidean universe. They can convince

themselves of this on every part of their “world,” provided they do not use

too small a piece of it. Starting from a point, they draw “straight lines” (arcs

of circles as judged in three-dimensional space) of equal length in all

directions. They will call the line joining the free ends of these lines a

“circle.” For a plane surface, the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its

diameter, both lengths being measured with the same rod, is, according to

Euclidean geometry of the plane, equal to a constant value π, which is

independent of the diameter of the circle. On their spherical surface our flat

beings would find for this ratio the value




i.e. a smaller value than π, the difference being the more considerable, the

greater is the radius of the circle in comparison with the radius R of the

“world-sphere.” By means of this relation the spherical beings can determine

the radius of their universe (“world”), even when only a relatively small part

of their world-sphere is available for their measurements. But if this part is

very small indeed, they will no longer be able to demonstrate that they are on

a spherical “world” and not on a Euclidean plane, for a small part of a

spherical surface differs only slightly from a piece of a plane of the same

size.


Thus if the spherical-surface beings are living on a planet of which the solar

system occupies only a negligibly small part of the spherical universe, they

have no means of determining whether they are living in a finite or in an

infinite universe, because the “piece of universe” to which they have access is

in both cases practically plane, or Euclidean. It follows directly from this

discussion, that for our sphere-beings the circumference of a circle first

increases with the radius until the “circumference of the universe” is reached,and that it thenceforward gradually decreases to zero for still further

increasing values of the radius. During this process the area of the circle

continues to increase more and more, until finally it becomes equal to the

total area of the whole “world-sphere.”


Perhaps the reader will wonder why we have placed our “beings” on a sphere

rather than on another closed surface. But this choice has its justification in

the fact that, of all closed surfaces, the sphere is unique in possessing the

property that all points on it are equivalent. I admit that the ratio of the

circumference C of a circle to its radius r depends on r, but for a given value

of r it is the same for all points of the “world-sphere”; in other words, the

“world-sphere” is a “surface of constant curvature.”


To this two-dimensional sphere-universe there is a three-dimensional

analogy, namely, the three-dimensional spherical space which was

discovered by Riemann. Its points are likewise all equivalent. It possesses a
                                                              23
finite volume, which is determined by its “radius” (2πR). Is it possible to

imagine a spherical space? To imagine a space means nothing else than that

we imagine an epitome of our “space” experience, i.e. of experience that we

can have in the movement of “rigid” bodies. In this sense we can imagine a

spherical space.


Suppose we draw lines or stretch strings in all directions from a point, and

mark off from each of these the distance r with a measuring rod. All the free

end-points of these lengths lie on a spherical surface. We can specially
                                2
measure up the area (F = 4πr) of this surface by means of a square made up
                                                                      2
of measuring-rods. If the universe is Euclidean, then F= 4πr; if it is
                                              2
spherical, then F is always less than 4πr. With increasing values of r, F

increases from zero up to a maximum value which is determined by the

“world-radius,” but for still further increasing values of r, the area gradually

diminishes to zero. At first, the straight lines which radiate from the starting

point diverge farther and farther from one another, but later they approach

each other, and finally they run together again at a “counterpoint” to the

starting point. Under such conditions they have traversed the whole spherical

space. It is easily seen that the three-dimensional spherical space is quite

analogous to the two-dimensional spherical surface. It is finite (i.e. of finite

volume), and has no bounds.It may be mentioned that there is yet another kind of curved space: “elliptical

space.” It can be regarded as a curved space in which the two “counter-

points” are identical (indistinguishable from each other). An elliptical

universe can thus be considered to some extent as a curved universe

possessing central symmetry.


It follows from what has been said, that closed spaces without limits are

conceivable. From amongst these, the spherical space (and the elliptical)

excels in its simplicity, since all points on it are equivalent. As a result of this

discussion, a most interesting question arises for astronomers and physicists,

and that is whether the universe in which we live is infinite, or whether it is

finite in the manner of the spherical universe. Our experience is far from

being sufficient to enable us to answer this question. But the general theory

of relativity permits of our answering it with a moderate degree of certainty,

and in this connection the difficulty mentioned in Section XXX finds its

solution.32. The Structure of Space


According to the General Theory of


Relativity


According to the general theory of relativity, the geometrical properties of

space are not independent, but they are determined by matter. Thus we can

draw conclusions about the geometrical structure of the universe only if we

base our considerations on the state of the matter as being something that is

known. We know from experience that, for a suitably chosen co-ordinate

system, the velocities of the stars are small as compared with the velocity of

transmission of light. We can thus as a rough approximation arrive at a

conclusion as to the nature of the universe as a whole, if we treat the matter

as being at rest.


We already know from our previous discussion that the behaviour of

measuring-rods and clocks is influenced by gravitational fields, i.e. by the

distribution of matter. This in itself is sufficient to exclude the possibility of

the exact validity of Euclidean geometry in our universe. But it is conceivable

that our universe differs only slightly from a Euclidean one, and this notion

seems all the more probable, since calculations show that the metrics of

surrounding space is influenced only to an exceedingly small extent by

masses even of the magnitude of our sun. We might imagine that, as regards

geometry, our universe behaves analogously to a surface which is irregularly

curved in its individual parts, but which nowhere departs appreciably from a

plane: something like the rippled surface of a lake. Such a universe might

fittingly be called a quasi-Euclidean universe. As regards its space it would

be infinite. But calculation shows that in a quasi-Euclidean universe the

average density of matter would necessarily be nil. Thus such a universe

could not be inhabited by matter everywhere; it would present to us that

unsatisfactory picture which we portrayed in Section XXX.


If we are to have in the universe an average density of matter which differs

from zero, however small may be that difference, then the universe cannot bequasi-Euclidean. On the contrary, the results of calculation indicate that if

matter be distributed uniformly, the universe would necessarily be spherical

(or elliptical). Since in reality the detailed distribution of matter is not

uniform, the real universe will deviate in individual parts from the spherical,

i.e. the universe will be quasispherical. But it will be necessarily finite. In

fact, the theory supplies us with a simple connection between the space-
                                                                        27
expanse of the universe and the average density of matter in it.


27
For the “radius” R of the universe we obtain the equation




The use of the C.G.S. system in this equation gives is the average density of the matter.AppendicesA1. Simple Derivation of the


Lorentz Transformation


For the relative orientation of the co-ordinate systems indicated in Fig. 2, the

x-axes of both systems permanently coincide. In the present case we can

divide the problem into parts by considering first only events which are

localised on the x-axis. Any such event is represented with respect to the co-

ordinate system K by the abscissa x and the time t, and with respect to the

system K' by the abscissa x' and the time t' , when x and t are given.


A light-signal, which is proceeding along the positive axis of x, is transmitted

according to the equation




or


      (3)


Since the same light-signal has to be transmitted relative to K' with the

velocity c, the propagation relative to the system K' will be represented by the

analogous formula


     (4)


Those space-time points (events) which satisfy (3) must also satisfy (4).

Obviously this will be the case when the relation


     (5)


is fulfilled in general, where λ indicates a constant; for, according to (5), the

disappearance of (x − ct) involves the disappearance of (x' − ct' ).


If we apply quite similar considerations to light rays which are beingtransmitted along the negative x-axis, we obtain the condition


     (6)


By adding (or subtracting) equations (5) and (6), and introducing for

convenience the constants a and b in place of the constants λ and µ where





and





we obtain the equations


     (7)


     (8)


We should thus have the solution of our problem, if the constants a and b

were known. These result from the following discussion.


For the origin of K' we have permanently x'= 0, and hence according to the

first of the equations (7) and (8)





If we call v the velocity with which the origin of K' is moving relative to K,

we then have




     (9)


The same value v can be obtained from equations (7) and (8), if we calculate

the velocity of another point of K' relative to K, or the velocity (directedtowards the negative x-axis) of a point of K with respect to K' . In short, we

can designate v as the relative velocity of the two systems.


Furthermore, the principle of relativity teaches us that, as judged from K, the

length of a unit measuring-rod which is at rest with reference to K' must be

exactly the same as the length, as judged from K' , of a unit measuring-rod

which is at rest relative to K. In order to see how the points of the x -axis

appear as viewed from K, we only require to take a “snapshot” of K' from K;

this means that we have to insert a particular value of t (time of K), e.g. t = 0.

For this value of t we then obtain from the equation (7)


                                        x' = ax.


Two points of the x' -axis which are separated by the distance x'= 1 when

measured in the K' system are thus separated in our instantaneous photograph

by the distance



     (10)


But if the snapshot be taken from K' (t' = 0), and if we eliminate t from the

equations (7) and (8), taking into account the expression (9), we obtain





From this we conclude that two points on the x-axis and separated by the

distance 1 (relative to K) will be represented on our snapshot by the distance



     (11)


But from what has been said, the two snapshots must be identical; hence ∆x

in (10) must be equal to ∆x' in (11), so that we obtain




     (12)The equations (9) and (12) determine the constants a and b. By inserting the

values of these constants in (7) and (8), we obtain the first and the fourth of

the equations given in Section XI.




     (13)




     (14)


Thus we have obtained the Lorentz transformation for events on the x-axis. It

satisfies the condition


     (15)


The extension of this result, to include events which take place outside the x-

axis, is obtained by retaining equations (13) and (14) and supplementing

them by the relations




     (16)


In this way we satisfy the postulate of the constancy of the velocity of light in

vacuo for rays of light of arbitrary direction, both for the system K and for the

system K' . This may be shown in the following manner.


We suppose a light-signal sent out from the origin of K at the time t = 0. It

will be propagated according to the equation





or, if we square this equation, according to the equation


     (17)It is required by the law of propagation of light, in conjunction with the

postulate of relativity, that the transmission of the signal in question should

take place—as judged from K' —in accordance with the corresponding

formula




or,


     (18)


In order that equation (18) may be a consequence of equation (17), we must

have


      (19)


Since equation (15) must hold for points on the x-axis, we thus have σ = 1;

for (19) is a consequence of (15) and (16), and hence also of (13) and (16).

We have thus derived the Lorentz transformation.


The Lorentz transformation represented by (13) and (16) still requires to be

generalised. Obviously it is immaterial whether the axes of K' be chosen so

that they are spatially parallel to those of K. It is also not essential that the

velocity of translation of K' with respect to K should be in the direction of the

x-axis. A simple consideration shows that we are able to construct the

Lorentz transformation in this general sense from two kinds of

transformations, viz. from Lorentz transformations in the special sense and

from purely spatial transformations, which corresponds to the replacement of

the rectangular co-ordinate system by a new system with its axes pointing in

other directions.


Mathematically, we can characterise the generalised Lorentz transformation

thus: It expresses x' , y' , z' , t' , in terms of linear homogeneous functions of x,

y, z, t, of such a kind that the relation


     (20)


is satisfied identically. That is to say: If we substitute their expressions in x, y,z, t, in place of x' , y' , z' , t' , on the left-hand side, then the left-hand side of

(20) agrees with the right-hand side.A2. Minkowski's Four-Dimensional


Space (“World”)


We can characterise the Lorentz transformation still more simply if we

introduce the imaginary  in place of t, as time variable. If, in

accordance with this, we insert








and similarly for the accented system K' , then the condition which is

identically satisfied by the transformation can be expressed thus:


     (21)


That is, by the afore-mentioned choice of “co-ordinates” (20) is transformed

into this equation.


We see from (21) that the imaginary time co-ordinate x enters into the
                                                                4

condition of transformation in exactly the same way as the space co-ordinates

x, x, x. It is due to this fact that, according to the theory of relativity, the
123

“time” x enters into natural laws in the same form as the space co-ordinates
        4

x, x, x.
123


A four-dimensional continuum described by the “co-ordinates” x, x, x, x,
                                                                            1234

was called “world” by Minkowski, who also termed a point-event a “world-

point.” From a “happening” in three-dimensional space, physics becomes, as

it were, an “existence” in the four-dimensional “world.”


This four-dimensional “world” bears a close similarity to the three-

dimensional “space” of (Euclidean) analytical geometry. If we introduce intothe latter a new Cartesian co-ordinate system (x', x', x') with the same
                                                        123

origin, then x', x', x', are linear homogeneous functions of x, x, x, which
              123123

identically satisfy the equation





The analogy with (21) is a complete one. We can regard Minkowski's

“world” in a formal manner as a four-dimensional Euclidean space (with

imaginary time co-ordinate); the Lorentz transformation corresponds to a

“rotation” of the co-ordinate system in the four-dimensional “world.”A3. The Experimental Confirmation


of the General Theory of Relativity


From a systematic theoretical point of view, we may imagine the process of

evolution of an empirical science to be a continuous process of induction.

Theories are evolved, and are expressed in short compass as statements of a

large number of individual observations in the form of empirical laws, from

which the general laws can be ascertained by comparison. Regarded in this

way, the development of a science bears some resemblance to the

compilation of a classified catalogue. It is, as it were, a purely empirical

enterprise.


But this point of view by no means embraces the whole of the actual process;

for it slurs over the important part played by intuition and deductive thought

in the development of an exact science. As soon as a science has emerged

from its initial stages, theoretical advances are no longer achieved merely by

a process of arrangement. Guided by empirical data, the investigator rather

develops a system of thought which, in general, is built up logically from a

small number of fundamental assumptions, the so-called axioms. We call

such a system of thought a theory. The theory finds the justification for its

existence in the fact that it correlates a large number of single observations,

and it is just here that the “truth” of the theory lies.


Corresponding to the same complex of empirical data, there may be several

theories, which differ from one another to a considerable extent. But as

regards the deductions from the theories which are capable of being tested,

the agreement between the theories may be so complete, that it becomes

difficult to find such deductions in which the two theories differ from each

other. As an example, a case of general interest is available in the province of

biology, in the Darwinian theory of the development of species by selection

in the struggle for existence, and in the theory of development which is based

on the hypothesis of the hereditary transmission of acquired characters.


We have another instance of far-reaching agreement between the deductionsfrom two theories in Newtonian mechanics on the one hand, and the general

theory of relativity on the other. This agreement goes so far, that up to the

present we have been able to find only a few deductions from the general

theory of relativity which are capable of investigation, and to which the

physics of pre-relativity days does not also lead, and this despite the profound

difference in the fundamental assumptions of the two theories. In what

follows, we shall again consider these important deductions, and we shall

also discuss the empirical evidence appertaining to them which has hitherto

been obtained.(a) MOTION OF THE PERIHELION OF

MERCURY


According to Newtonian mechanics and Newton's law of gravitation, a planet

which is revolving round the sun would describe an ellipse round the latter,

or, more correctly, round the common centre of gravity of the sun and the

planet. In such a system, the sun, or the common centre of gravity, lies in one

of the foci of the orbital ellipse in such a manner that, in the course of a

planet-year, the distance sun-planet grows from a minimum to a maximum,

and then decreases again to a minimum. If instead of Newton's law we insert

a somewhat different law of attraction into the calculation, we find that,

according to this new law, the motion would still take place in such a manner

that the distance sun-planet exhibits periodic variations; but in this case the

angle described by the line joining sun and planet during such a period (from

perihelion— closest proximity to the sun—to perihelion) would differ from
  ◦
360. The line of the orbit would not then be a closed one, but in the course of

time it would fill up an annular part of the orbital plane, viz. between the

circle of least and the circle of greatest distance of the planet from the sun.


According also to the general theory of relativity, which differs of course

from the theory of Newton, a small variation from the Newton-Kepler motion

of a planet in its orbit should take place, and in such a way, that the angle

described by the radius sun-planet between one perihelion and the next

should exceed that corresponding to one complete revolution by an amount

given by





( N.B.—One complete revolution corresponds to the angle 2π in the absolute

angular measure customary in physics, and the above expression gives the

amount by which the radius sun-planet exceeds this angle during the interval

between one perihelion and the next.) In this expression a represents the

major semi-axis of the ellipse, e its eccentricity, c the velocity of light, and T

the period of revolution of the planet. Our result may also be stated asfollows: According to the general theory of relativity, the major axis of the

ellipse rotates round the sun in the same sense as the orbital motion of the

planet. Theory requires that this rotation should amount to 43 seconds of arc

per century for the planet Mercury, but for the other planets of our solar

system its magnitude should be so small that it would necessarily escape
          28
detection.


In point of fact, astronomers have found that the theory of Newton does not

suffice to calculate the observed motion of Mercury with an exactness

corresponding to that of the delicacy of observation attainable at the present

time. After taking account of all the disturbing influences exerted on Mercury

by the remaining planets, it was found (Leverrier—1859—and Newcomb—

1895) that an unexplained perihelial movement of the orbit of Mercury

remained over, the amount of which does not differ sensibly from the

abovementioned +43 seconds of arc per century. The uncertainty of the

empirical result amounts to a few seconds only.


28
 Especially since the next planet Venus has an orbit that is almost an exact circle, which makes it
more difficult to locate the perihelion with precision.(b) DEFLECTION OF LIGHT BY A

GRAVITATIONAL FIELD


In Section XXII it has been already mentioned that, according to the general

theory of relativity, a ray of light will experience a curvature of its path when

passing through a gravitational field, this curvature being similar to that

experienced by the path of a body which is projected through a gravitational

field. As a result of this theory, we should expect that a ray of light which is

passing close to a heavenly body would be deviated towards the latter. For a

ray of light which passes the sun at a distance of ∆ sun-radii from its centre,

the angle of deflection (α) should amount to





It may be added that, according to the theory, half of this deflection is

produced by the Newtonian field of attraction of the sun, and the other half

by the geometrical modification (“curvature”) of space caused by the sun.                                        FIG. 5.


This result admits of an experimental test by means of the photographic

registration of stars during a total eclipse of the sun. The only reason why we

must wait for a total eclipse is because at every other time the atmosphere is

so strongly illuminated by the light from the sun that the stars situated near

the sun's disc are invisible. The predicted effect can be seen clearly from the

accompanying diagram. If the sun (S) were not present, a star which is

practically infinitely distant would be seen in the direction D, as observed
                                                                      1

from the earth. But as a consequence of the deflection of light from the star

by the sun, the star will be seen in the direction D, i.e. at a somewhat greater
                                                          2

distance from the centre of the sun than corresponds to its real position.


In practice, the question is tested in the following way. The stars in theneighbourhood of the sun are photographed during a solar eclipse.


In addition, a second photograph of the same stars is taken when the sun is

situated at another position in the sky, i.e. a few months earlier or later. As

compared with the standard photograph, the positions of the stars on the

eclipse-photograph ought to appear displaced radially outwards (away from

the centre of the sun) by an amount corresponding to the angle α.


We are indebted to the Royal Society and to Royal Astronomical Society for

the investigation of this important deduction. Undaunted by the war and by

difficulties of both a material and a psychological nature aroused by the war,

these societies equipped two expeditions—to Sobral (Brazil) and to the island

of Principe (West Africa)—and sent several of Britain's most celebrated

astronomers (Eddington, Cottingham, Crommelin, Davidson), in order to

obtain photographs of the solar eclipse of 29th May, 1919. The relative

descrepancies to be expected between the stellar photographs obtained during

the eclipse and the comparison photographs amounted to a few hundredths of

a millimetre only. Thus great accuracy was necessary in making the

adjustments required for the taking of the photographs, and in their

subsequent measurement.


The results of the measurements confirmed the theory in a thoroughly

satisfactory manner. The rectangular components of the observed and of the

calculated deviations of the stars (in seconds of arc) are set forth in the
                            29
following table of results:














29
For editorial reasons, the format of the table has been slightly modified—Ron Burkey.(c) DISPLACEMENT OF SPECTRAL LINES

TOWARDS THE RED


In Section XXIII it has been shown that in a system K' which is in rotation

with regard to a Galilean system K, clocks of identical construction and

which are considered at rest with respect to the rotating reference-body, go at

rates which are dependent on the positions of the clocks. We shall now

examine this dependence quantitatively. A clock, which is situated at a

distance r from the centre of the disc, has a velocity relative to K which is

given by




where ω represents the velocity of rotation of the disc K' with respect to K. If

v represents the number of ticks of the clock per unit time (“rate” of the
0

clock) relative to K when the clock is at rest, then the “rate” of the clock (v)

when it is moving relative to K with a velocity v, but at rest with respect to

the disc, will, in accordance with Section XII, be given by






or with sufficient accuracy by





This expression may also be stated in the following form:





If we represent the difference of potential of the centrifugal force between the

position of the clock and the centre of the disc by φ, i.e. the work, considered

negatively, which must be performed on the unit of mass against thecentrifugal force in order to transport it from the position of the clock on the

rotating disc to the centre of the disc, then we have





From this it follows that





In the first place, we see from this expression that two clocks of identical

construction will go at different rates when situated at different distances

from the centre of the disc. This result is also valid from the standpoint of an

observer who is rotating with the disc.


Now, as judged from the disc, the latter is in a gravitational field of potential

φ, hence the result we have obtained will hold quite generally for

gravitational fields. Furthermore, we can regard an atom which is emitting

spectral lines as a clock, so that the following statement will hold:


An atom absorbs or emits light of a frequency which is dependent on the

potential of the gravitational field in which it is situated.

The frequency of an atom situated on the surface of a heavenly body will be

somewhat less than the frequency of an atom of the same element which is

situated in free space (or on the surface of a smaller celestial body). Now φ =

−K · M/r where K is Newton's constant of gravitation, and M is the mass of

the heavenly body. Thus a displacement towards the red ought to take place

for spectral lines produced at the surface of stars as compared with the

spectral lines of the same element produced at the surface of the earth, the

amount of this displacement being






For the sun, the displacement towards the red predicted by theory amounts to

about two millionths of the wave-length. A trustworthy calculation is not

possible in the case of the stars, because in general neither the mass M nor theradius r is known.


It is an open question whether or not this effect exists, and at the present time

astronomers are working with great zeal towards the solution. Owing to the

smallness of the effect in the case of the sun, it is difficult to form an opinion

as to its existence. Whereas Grebe and Bachem (Bonn), as a result of their

own measurements and those of Evershed and Schwarzschild on the

cyanogen bands, have placed the existence of the effect almost beyond doubt,

other investigators, particularly St. John, have been led to the opposite

opinion in consequence of their measurements.


Mean displacements of lines towards the less refrangible end of the spectrum

are certainly revealed by statistical investigations of the fixed stars; but up to

the present the examination of the available data does not allow of any

definite decision being arrived at, as to whether or not these displacements

are to be referred in reality to the effect of gravitation. The results of

observation have been collected together, and discussed in detail from the

standpoint of the question which has been engaging our attention here, in a

paper by E. Freundlich entitled “Zur Prüfungder allgemeinen Relativitäts-

Theorie” (Die Naturwissenschaften, 1919, No. 35, p. 520: Julius Springer,

Berlin).


At all events, a definite decision will be reached during the next few years. If

the displacement of spectral lines towards the red by the gravitational

potential does not exist, then the general theory of relativity will be

untenable. On the other hand, if the cause of the displacement of spectral

lines be definitely traced to the gravitational potential, then the study of this

displacement will furnish us with important information as to the mass of the

heavenly bodies.BibliographyINTRODUCTORY


The Foundations of Einstein's Theory of Gravitation: Erwin Freundlich

(translation by H. L. Brose). Camb. Univ. Press, 1920.


Space and Time in Contemporary Physics : Moritz Schlick (translation by H.

L. Brose). Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1920.THE SPECIAL THEORY


The Principle of Relativity : E. Cunningham. Camb. Univ. Press.


Relativity and the Electron Theory: E. Cunningham, Monographs on Physics.

Longmans, Green & Co.


The Theory of Relativity: L. Silberstein. Macmillan & Co.


“The Space-Time Manifold of Relativity”: E. B. Wilson and G. N. Lewis,

Proc. Amer. Soc. Arts & Science, vol. xlviii., No. 11, 1912.THE GENERAL THEORY


Report on the Relativity Theory of Gravitation: A. S. Eddington. Fleetway

Press Ltd., Fleet Street, London.


“On Einstein's Theory of Gravitation and its Astronomical Consequences”:

W. de Sitter, M. N. Roy. Astron. Soc., lxxvi. p. 699, 1916; lxxvii. p. 155,

1916; lxxviii. p. 3, 1917.


“On Einstein's Theory of Gravitation”: H. A. Lorentz, Proc. Amsterdans

Acad., vol. xix. p. 1341, 1917.


Space, Time and Gravitation : W. de Sitter: The Observatory, No. 505, p.

412. Taylor & Francis, Fleet Street, London.


“The Total Eclipse of 29th May 1919, and the Influence of Gravitation on

Light”: A. S. Eddington, ibid., March, 1919.


“Discussion on the Theory of Relativity”: M. N. Roy. Astron. Soc., vol. lxxx.,

No. 2., p. 96, December 1919.


“The Displacement of Spectrum Lines and the Equivalence Hypothesis”: W.

G. Duffield, M. N. Roy. Astron. Soc., vol. lxxx.; No. 3, p. 262, 1920.


Space, Time and Gravitation: A. S. Eddington. Camb. Univ. Press, 1920.ALSO, CHAPTERS IN


The Mathematical Theory of Electricity and Magnetism: J. H. Jeans (4th

edition). Camb. Univ. Press, 1920.


The Electron Theory of Matter: O. W. Richardson. Camb. Univ. Press.