The Project Gutenberg EBook of On Riemann's Theory of Algebraic Functions
and their Integrals, by Felix Klein

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: On Riemann's Theory of Algebraic Functions and their Integrals
A Supplement to the Usual Treatises

Author: Felix Klein

Translator: Frances Hardcastle

Release Date: August 3, 2011 [EBook #36959]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON RIEMANN'S THEORY ***Produced by Andrew D. Hwang











      transcriber's note

The camera-quality les for this public-domain ebook
may be downloaded gratis at

  www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/36959.

This ebook was produced using scanned images and
OCR text generously provided by the University of
Toronto Gerstein Library through the Internet Archive.


Minor typographical corrections and presentational
changes have been made without comment.

This PDF le is optimized for screen viewing, but may
be recompiled for printing. Please consult the preamble
of the LATX source le for instructions and other
E
particulars.ON RIEMANN'S THEORY

              OF

ALGEBRAIC FUNCTIONS

          AND THEIR

        INTEGRALS.

A SUPPLEMENT TO THE USUAL TREATISES.



              BY

          FELIX KLEIN.



TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN, WITH THE AUTHOR'S
          PERMISSION,


              BY
    FRANCES HARDCASTLE,
      GIRTON COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.



            Cambridge:
      MACMILLAN AND BOWES.
              1893            Cambridge:
    PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A. & SONS,
        AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.    TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

The aim of this translation is to reproduce, as far as pos-

sible, the ideas and style of the original in idiomatic English,

rather than to give a literal rendering of its contents. Even

the verbal deviations, however, are few in number. So little

has been written in English on the subject that a standard set

of technical terms as yet hardly exists. Where there was any

choice between equivalent words, I have followed the usage of

Dr Forsyth in his recently published work on the Theory of

Functions. A Glossary of the principal technical terms is ap-

pended, giving the original German word together with the

English adopted in the text.

Prof. Klein had originally intended to revise the proofs, but

owing to his absence in America he kindly waived his right

to do so, in order not to delay the publication. The proofs

have therefore not been submitted to him, though it was with

considerable reluctance that I determined to publish without

this nal revision.

My thanks are due to Miss C. A. Scott, D.Sc., Professor of

Mathematics in Bryn Mawr College, for many valuable sugges-

tions in di cult passages and for her interest in the progress of

the translation, and also for help in the reading of the proof-

sheets. I must also express my thanks to Mr James Hark-

ness, M.A., Associate Professor of Mathematics in Bryn Mawr

College, for helpful advice given from time to time; and to Miss

P. G. Fawcett, of Newnham College, Cambridge, for reading

over in manuscript the earlier parts which deal more especially        translator's note.iv


with the subject of Electricity.


                FRANCES HARDCASTLE.

Bryn Mawr College,
Pennsylvania,
June 1, 1893.          CONTENTS.



            PART I.

    INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.

SECT.PAGE

1. Steady Streamings in the Plane as an Interpretation of
the Functions of x + iy.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1

2. Consideration of the Innities of w = f(z). . . . . . . . . . . . .6

3. Rational Functions and their Integrals. Innities of
higher Order derived from those of lower Order. . . . 12

4. Experimental Production of these Streamings. . . . . . . . . . 16

5. Transition to the Surface of a Sphere. Streamings on
arbitrary curved Surfaces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

6. Connection between the foregoing Theory and the Func-
tions of a complex Argument. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

7. Streamings on the Sphere resumed. Riemann's general
Problem. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29          contents.vi


            PART II.

        RIEMANN'S THEORY.

SECT.PAGE

8. Classication of closed Surfaces according to the Value
of the Integer p. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

9. Preliminary Determination of steady Streamings on ar-
bitrary Surfaces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

10. The most general steady Streaming. Proof of the Impos-
sibility of other Streamings.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

11. Illustration of the Streamings by means of Examples. . . 43

12. On the Composition of the most general Function of Po-
sition from single Summands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50

13. On the Multiformity of the Functions. Special Treatment
of uniform Functions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54

14. The ordinary Riemann's Surfaces over the x + iy Plane. 59

15. The Anchor-ring, p = 1, and the two-sheeted Surface
over the Plane with four Branch-points.. . . . . . . . . . . . 62

16. Functions of x + iy which correspond to the Streamings
already investigated. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70

17. Scope and Signicance of the previous Investigations. . . 74

18. Extension of the Theory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77


            PART III.

          CONCLUSIONS.

19. On the Moduli of Algebraical Equations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80          contents.vii


SECT.PAGE

20. Conformed Representation of closed Surfaces upon
themselves. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86

21. Special Treatment of symmetrical Surfaces. . . . . . . . . . . . . 90

22. Conformal Representation of di erent closed Surfaces
upon each other. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96

23. Surfaces with Boundaries and unifacial Surfaces. . . . . . . . 98

24. Conclusion.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102            PREFACE.

The pamphlet which I here lay before the public, has
                                     
grown from lectures delivered during the past year,in which,

among other objects, I had in view a presentation of Riemann's
                                  y
theory of algebraic functions and their integrals.Lectures on

higher mathematics o er peculiar di culties; with the best

will of the lecturer they ultimately full a very modest pur-

pose. Being usually intended to give a systematic development

of the subject, they are either conned to the elements or are

lost amid details. I thought it well in this case, as previously

in others, to adopt the opposite course. I assumed that the

ordinary presentation, as given in text-books on the elements

of Riemann's theory, was known; moreover, when particular

points required to be more fully dealt with, I referred to the

fundamental monographs. But to compensate for this, I de-

voted great care to the presentation of the true train of thought,

and endeavoured to obtain a general view of the scope and ef-

ciency of the methods. I believe I have frequently obtained

good results by these means, though, of course, only with a

gifted audience; experience will show whether this pamphlet,

 
Theory of Functions treated geometrically. Part i, Winter-semester
1880{81, Part ii, Summer-semester 1881.
y
I denote thus the contents of the investigations with which Riemann
was concerned in the rst part of his Theory of the Abelian Functions.
The theory of the  -functions, as developed in the second part of the
same treatise, is in the rst place, as we know, of an essentially di erent
character, and is excluded from the following presentation as it was from
my course of lectures.            preface.ix


based on the same principles, will prove equally useful.

A presentation of the kind attempted is necessarily very

subjective, and the more so in the case of Riemann's theory,

since but scanty material for the purpose is to be found explic-

itly given in Riemann's papers. I am not sure that I should ever

have reached a well-dened conception of the whole subject,

had not Herr Prym, many years ago (1874), in the course of

an opportune conversation, made me a communication which

has increased in importance to me the longer I have thought

over the matter. He told me that Riemann's surfaces origi-

nally are not necessarily many-sheeted surfaces over the plane,

but that, on the contrary, complex functions of position can

be studied on arbitrarily given curved surfaces in exactly the

same way as on the surfaces over the plane. The following

presentation will su ciently show how valuable this remark

has been to me. In natural combination with this there are

certain physical considerations which have been lately devel-

oped, although restricted to simpler cases, from various points
 
of view.I have not hesitated to take these physical concep-

tions as the starting-point of my presentation. Riemann, as

we know, used Dirichlet's Principle in their place in his writ-

ings. But I have no doubt that he started from precisely those

physical problems, and then, in order to give what was physi-

cally evident the support of mathematical reasoning, he after-

wards substituted Dirichlet's Principle. Anyone who clearly

 
Cf. C. Neumann, Math. Ann., t. x., pp. 569{571. Kirchho , Berl.
Monatsber., 1875, pp. 487{497. Topler, Pogg. Ann., t. clx., pp. 375{388.            preface.x


understands the conditions under which Riemann worked in

Gottingen, anyone who has followed Riemann's speculations
                                       
as they have come down to us, partly in fragments,will, I

think, share my opinion.|However that may be, the physical

method seemed the true one for my purpose. For it is well

known that Dirichlet's Principle is not su cient for the actual

foundation of the theorems to be established; moreover, the

heuristic element, which to me was all-important, is brought

out far more prominently by the physical method. Hence the

constant introduction of intuitive considerations, where a proof

by analysis would not have been di cult and might have been

simpler, hence also the repeated illustration of general results

by examples and gures.

In this connection I must not omit to mention an important

restriction to which I have adhered in the following pages. We

all know the circuitous and di cult considerations by which, of

late years, part at least of those theorems of Riemann which
                                              y
are here dealt with have been proved in a reliable manner.

These considerations are entirely neglected in what follows and

I thus forego the use of any except intuitive bases for the the-

 
Ges. Werke, pp. 494 et seq.
y
Compare in particular the investigations on this subject by C. Neu-
mann and Schwarz. The general case of closed surfaces (which is the
most important for us in what follows) is indeed, as yet, nowhere ex-
plicitly and completely dealt with. Herr Schwarz contents himself with
a few indications with respect to these surfaces (Berl. Monatsber., 1870,
pp. 767 et seq.) and Herr C. Neumann only considers those cases in which
functions are to be determined by means of known values on the bound-
ary.            preface.xi


orems to be enunciated. In fact such proofs must in no way be

mixed up with the sequence of thought I have attempted to

preserve; otherwise the result is a presentation unsatisfactory

from all points of view. But they should assuredly follow after,

and I hope, when opportunity o ers, to complete in this sense

the present pamphlet.

For the rest, the scope and limits of my presentation speak

for themselves. The frequent use of my friends' publications

and of my own on kindred subjects had a secondary purpose

important to me for personal reasons: I wished to give my au-

dience a guide, to help them to nd for themselves the recip-

rocal connections among these papers, and their position with

respect to the general conception put forth in these pages. As

for the new problems which o er themselves in great number,

I have only allowed myself to investigate them as far as seemed

consistent with the general aim of this pamphlet. Nevertheless

I should like to draw attention to the theorems on the confor-

mal representation of arbitrary surfaces which I have worked

out in the last Part; I followed these out the more readily that

Riemann makes a remarkable statement about this subject at

the end of his Dissertation.

One more remark in conclusion to obviate a misunder-

standing which might otherwise arise from the foregoing words.

Although I have attempted, in the case of algebraic functions

and their integrals, to follow the original chain of ideas which I

assumed to be Riemann's, I by no means include the whole of

what he intended in the theory of functions. The said functions

were for him an example only, in the treatment of which, it is            preface.xii


true, he was particularly fortunate. Inasmuch as he wished to

include all possible functions of complex variables, he had in

mind far more general methods of determination than those

we employ in the following pages; methods of determination in

which physical analogy, here deemed a su cient basis, fails us.

Compare, in this connection, x 19 of his Dissertation, compare

also his work on the hypergeometrical series.|With reference

to this, I must explain that I have no wish to draw aside from

these more general considerations by giving a presentation of

a special part, complete in itself. My innermost conviction

rather is that they are destined to play, in the developments

of the modern Theory of Functions, an important and promi-

nent part.


Borkum,
Oct. 7, 1881.            PART I.

    Introductory Remarks.

x 1. Steady Streamings in the Plane as an Interpretation

of the Functions of x + iy.

The physical interpretation of those functions of x + iy
                                               
which are dealt with in the following pages is well known.

The principles on which it is based are here indicated, solely

for completeness.

Let w = u + iv, z = x + iy, w = f(z). Then we have,

primarily,

    @u@v@u @v
(1)=;=;
    @x@y@y@x

and hence

          22
        @u@u
(2)+= 0;
        @x2@y2

and also, for v,

          22
        @v@v
(3)+= 0:
        @x2@y2

 
In particular, reference should be made to Maxwell's Treatise on
Electricity and Magnetism (Cambridge, 1873). So far as the intuitive
treatment of the subject is concerned, his point of view is exactly that
adopted in the text.[sect i.] introductory remarks.2


In these equations we take u to be the velocity-potential, so
@u@u
that,are the components of the velocity of a uid mov-
@x@y
ing parallel to the xy plane. We may either suppose this uid

to be contained between two planes, parallel to the xy plane, or

we may imagine it to be itself an innitely thin homogeneous

sheet extending over this plane. Then equation (2)|and this

is the chief point in the physical interpretation|shows that

the streaming is steady. The curves u = const. are called

the equipotential curves, while the curves v = const., which,

by (1), are orthogonal to the rst system, are the stream-lines.

For the purposes of this interpretation it is of course indi erent

of what nature we may imagine the uid to be, but for many

reasons it will be convenient to identify it here with the elec-

tric uid; u is then proportional to the electrostatic potential

which gives rise to the streaming, and the apparatus of exper-

imental physics provide su cient means for the production of

many interesting systems of streamings.

Moreover, if we increase u throughout by a constant the

streaming itself remains unchanged, since the di erential co-
@u@u
e cients,alone appear explicitly; this is also true of v.
@x@y
Hence the function u + iv, whose physical interpretation is in

question, is thus determined only to an additive constant pr es,

a fact which requires to be carefully observed in what follows.

Further, we may observe that equations (1){(3) remain un-

altered if we replace u by v, and v by u. Corresponding to

this we get a second system of streamings in which v is the[sect i.] introductory remarks.3


velocity-potential and the curves u = const. are the stream-

lines; in the sense explained above this represents the func-

tion viu. It is often of use to consider this new streaming as

well as the original one in which u was the velocity-potential;

we shall speak of it, for brevity, as the conjugate streaming.

It is true that the name is somewhat inaccurate, since u bears

the same relation to v, as v does to u, but it is su ciently

intelligible for our purpose.

The di erential equations (1){(3), and hence also the whole

preceding discussion, apply in the rst place solely to that

portion of the plane (otherwise an arbitrary portion) in which

u+iv is uniform and in which neither u+iv nor its di erential

coe cients become innite. In order then that the correspond-

ing physical conditions maybe clearly comprehended, a region

of this kind must be marked o  and then by suitable appliances

on the boundary the steady motion within its limits must be

preserved.

In a bounded region of this description points z0at which
            @w
the di erential coe cientvanishes call for special atten-
            @z
                                            2
                                          @w
tion To be perfectly general, I will assume at once that,
                                          @z2
3 
@w@w
, : : :, up toare all zero as well. To determine the
@z3@z 
course of the equipotential curves, or of the stream-lines in the

vicinity of such a point, let w be expanded in a series of as-

cending powers of z z0; in this series, the term immediately
                                 +1
after the constant term is the term in (z z0). Transform-[sect i.] introductory remarks.4


ing to polar-coordinates we obtain the following result: at the

point z0,  +1 curves u = const. intersect at equal angles, while

the same number of curves v = const. are the bisectors of these

angles. In consequence of this property I call such a point a

cross-point, and moreover a cross-point of multiplicity  .

The following gure (which is of course only diagrammatic)

illustrates this for   = 2, and explains, in particular, how

a cross-point makes its appearance in the orthogonal system














formed by the curves u = const., v = const.

The stream-lines v = const. are the heavy lines in the g-

ure and the direction of motion in each is indicated by an

arrow; the equipotential curves are given by dotted lines. We

see how the uid ows in towards the cross-point from three

directions, and ows out again in three other directions, this

being possible because the velocity of the streaming is zero[sect i.] introductory remarks.5


at the cross-point, or, as we may say, by analogy with known

occurrences, because the uid is at a standstill, the expression
      s
                     
             
                22
            @u@u
for the velocity being+.
            @x@y

Further, it is useful to consider a cross-point of multiplic-

ity   as the limiting case of   simple cross-points. The ana-

lytical treatment shows this to be permissible. For at an  -ple
          @w
cross-point the equation= 0 has an  -ple root and this is
          @z
caused, as we know, by the coalescence of   simple roots. The

following gures su ciently explain this view:













For simplicity, I have here drawn the stream-lines only. On

the left we have the same cross-point of multiplicity two as in

Fig. 1; on the right we have a streaming with two simple cross-

points close together. It is at once evident that the one gure

is produced by continuous changes from the other.[sect ii.] introductory remarks.6


Throughout the foregoing discussion it has been tacitly as-

sumed that the region in question does not extend to innity.

It is true that no fundamental di culties present themselves

when we take the point z = 1 into account exactly as we take

any other point z = z0; instead of the expansion in ascending

powers of z z0, we obtain, by known methods, an expan-
              1
sion in ascending powers of; there is an  -ple cross-point
              z
at z = 1 when the term immediately following the constant
                          
                               +1
                          1
term in this expansion is the term in. But we need
                          z
dwell no further on the geometrical relations corresponding to

a streaming of this kind, for the separate treatment of z = 1,

which here presents itself, will be obviated once and for all by

a method to be explained shortly, and for this reason the point

z = 1 will be left out of consideration in the following sec-

tions (xx 2{4), although, if a complete treatment were desired,

it ought to be specially mentioned.


x 2. Consideration of the Innities of w = f(z).

We now further include in this region points z0at which

w = f(z) becomes innite. But, since we are about to con-

sider only a special class of functions, we restrict ourselves in

this direction by the following condition, viz.: the di eren-
@w
tial coe cientmust have no essential singularities, or, in
@z
other words, w is to be innite only in the same manner as an[sect ii.] introductory remarks.7


expression of the following form:

        A1A2A 
Alog(z z0) +++ : : : +;
      z z0(z z0)2(z z0) 

in which   is a determinate nite quantity.

Corresponding to the various forms which this expression

assumes, we say that at z = z0di erent discontinuities are

superposed; a logarithmic innity, an algebraic innity of order

one, etc. For simplicity we here consider each separately, but

it is also a useful exercise to form a clear idea of the result of

the superposition in individual examples.

In the rst instance, let z = z0be a logarithmic innity;

we then have:

                                    2
w = Alog(z z0) + C0+ C1(z z0) + C2(z z0)+ : : : :

Here A is that quantity which when multiplied by 2i  is called,

in Cauchy's notation, the residue of the logarithmic innity,

a term which will be occasionally employed in what follows.

In the investigation of a streaming in the vicinity of the dis-

continuity it is of primary importance to know whether A is

real, imaginary, or complex. The third case can obviously be

regarded as a superposition of the rst two and may therefore

be neglected. There are then only two distinct possibilities to

be considered.

(1) If A is real, let C0= a + ib. Then, to a rst approxi-
                                  i 
mation, we have, writing w = u + iv, z z0= re,

  u = Alogr + a; v = a  + b:[sect ii.] introductory remarks.8


Thus the curves u = const. are small circles round the innity,

and the curves v = const. radiate from it in all directions

according to the variable values of  . The motion is such that

z = z0is a source of a certain positive or negative strength. To

calculate this strength, multiply the element of arc of a small

circle described about the discontinuity with radius r, by the

proper velocity and integrate this expression round the circle.

Sinces
            
              22
          @u@u
                +
          @x@y

                        @uA
coincides to a rst approximation with, that is with, we
                        @rr
obtain for the strength the expression

      Z
        2 
          A
              r d  = 2A :
        0r

The strength is therefore equal to the residue, divided by i; it

is positive or negative with A.

(2) Let A be purely imaginary, equal to iA. Then, with

the same notation as before, we have to a rst approximation,

  u = A  + b; v = A logr + b:

The parts played by the curves u = const., v = const. are

thus exactly interchanged; the equipotential curves now radi-

ate from z = z0, while the stream-lines are small circles round

the innity. The uid circulates in these curves round the

point z = z0; I call the point a vortex-point for this reason.[sect ii.] introductory remarks.9


The sense and intensity of the circulation are measured by A.

Since the velocity
      s
           
                   
              22
          @u@u
                +
          @x@y

                        @u
is, to a rst approximation, equal to, the circulation is
                        @ 
clockwise or counter-clockwise according as A is positive or

negative. We may call the intensity of the vortex-point 2A ,

it is then equal and opposite to the residue of the innity in

question.

Further, bearing in mind the denition in the last section of

a conjugate streaming and the ambiguity of sign attached to it,

we may say: If one of two conjugate streamings has a source of

a certain strength at z = z0, the other has, at the same point,

a vortex-point of equal, or equal and opposite, intensity.

Next, consider algebraic discontinuities. The general char-

acter of the streaming is independent of the nature of the coef-

cient of the rst term of the power-series, be it real, imaginary

or complex. Let

    A1
w =+ C0+ C1(z z0) + : : : :
  z z0

To a rst approximation, writing

              i i 
    z z0= re; A1=  e;
                                  	
        
w C0=cos(   ) + isin(   ):
      r[sect ii.] introductory remarks.10


Let us rst consider the real part on the right. When
 
r is very small,cos(   ) may still, by proper choice of  
r
be made to assume any given arbitrary value; the function u

therefore assumes every value in the immediate vicinity of the

discontinuity. For more exact determination, let us, for the

moment, consider r and   as variables and write

     
        cos(   ) = const:
    r

We obtain a pencil of circles, all touching the xed line

                     
            =   +
                    2

and becoming smaller as the modulus of the constant increases.

Then, in the vicinity of the discontinuity, the curves u = const.

are of a similar description, and, in particular, for very large

positive or negative values of the constant they take the form

of small, closed, simple ovals.

A similar discussion applies to the imaginary part on the

right and hence to the curves v = const., but the line touched

by all the curves in this case is   =  . The following gure, in

which the equipotential curves are, as before, dotted lines and

the stream-lines heavy lines, will now be intelligible.

An analogous discussion gives the requisite graphic rep-

resentation of a  -ple algebraic discontinuity. It is su cient

merely to state the result: Every curve u = const. passes

  times through the discontinuity and touches   xed tan-

gents, intersecting at equal angles. Similarly with the curves[sect ii.] introductory remarks.11












v = const. For very great positive or negative values of the

constant both systems of curves are closed in the immediate












vicinity of the discontinuity. For illustration the gure is given

for   = 2.

These higher singularities, as may be surmised, can be de-

rived from those of lower order by proceeding to the limit. I

postpone this discussion, however, to the next section, since a[sect iii.] introductory remarks.12


certain class of functions will then easily supply the necessary

examples.


x 3. Rational Functions and their Integrals. Innities of

higher Order derived from those of lower Order.

The foregoing sections have enabled us to picture to our-

selves the whole course of such functions as have no innities

other than those we have just considered and are with these

exceptions uniform over the whole plane. These are, as we

know, the rational functions and their integrals. I briey state,

without gures, the theorems respecting the cross-points and

innities of these functions, and, for reasons already stated, I

conne myself to the cases in which z = 1 is not a critical

point. This limitation, as was before pointed out, will after-

wards disappear automatically.

(1) The rational function about to be considered presents

itself in the form
                 (z)
          w =;
 (z)

where   and   are integral functions of the same order which

may be assumed to have no common factor. If this order

is n, and if every algebraic innity is counted as often as its

order requires, we obtain, corresponding to the roots of   =

0, n algebraic discontinuities. The cross-points are given by
00
      = 0, an equation of degree 2n 2. The sum of the

orders of the cross-points is then 2n 2, where, however, it

must be noticed that every  -fold root of   = 0 is a (  1)-[sect iii.] introductory remarks.13


0
fold root of  = 0, and hence that every  -fold innity of the

function counts as a (  1)-fold cross-point.

(2) If the integral of a rational function
              Z
                 (z)
        W =dz
                	(z)

is to be nite at z = 1, the degree of   must be less by two

than that of 	. It is assumed that   and 	 have no com-

mon factor. Then   = 0 gives the free cross-points, i.e. those

which do not coincide with innities. The roots of 	 = 0

give the innities of the integral; and, moreover, to a simple

root of 	 = 0 corresponds a logarithmic innity, to a double

root an innity which is, in general, due to the superposition

of a logarithmic discontinuity and a simple algebraic discon-

tinuity, etc. If then every innity is counted as often as the

order of the corresponding factor in 	 requires, the sum of the

orders of the cross-points is less by two than the sum of the

orders of the innities. We must also draw attention to the

known theorem, that the sum of the logarithmic residues of all

the discontinuities is zero.

The foregoing gives two possible methods for the deriva-

tion of discontinuities of higher order from those of lower or-

der. First|and this is the more important method for our

purpose|we may start from the integrals of rational func-

tions. In this case an algebraic discontinuity of order   makes

its appearance when   + 1 factors of 	 become equal, that is,

when   + 1 logarithmic discontinuities coalesce in the proper

manner. It is clear that the sum of the residues of the latter[sect iii.] introductory remarks.14


must be zero, if the resulting innity is to be purely algebraic.

The two following gures, in which only the stream-lines are

drawn, show how to proceed to the limit in the case of the

simple algebraic discontinuity of Fig. 4.










Two di erent processes are here indicated; in the left-hand

gure two sources are about to coalesce, while in the right-

hand gure these are replaced by vortex-points. Fig. 4 is the

resulting limiting position after either process. The two fol-

lowing gures bear the corresponding relation to Fig. 5.

The second possible method is suggested by considering
         
the rational functionitself. Logarithmic discontinuities
 
are thereby excluded. The  -fold algebraic discontinuity now

arises from   simple algebraic discontinuities, for   simple lin-

ear factors of   in coalescing form a  -fold factor. But at the

same time a number of cross-points coalesce and the sum of
            00
their orders is  1. For     = 0 has, as was pointed out

before, a (  1)-fold factor at the same instant that a  -fold

factor appears in  . The following gure explains the produc-[sect iv.] introductory remarks.15












tion by this method of the two-fold algebraic discontinuity of

Fig. 5.










It is of course easy to include these two methods of pro-

ceeding to the limit in one common and more general method.

If   +   + 1 logarithmic innities and   cross-points coalesce

successively or simultaneously, a  -fold algebraic discontinuity

will in every case make its appearance. But this is not the

place to enlarge on the idea thus suggested.[sect iv.] introductory remarks.16


x 4. Experimental Production of these Streamings.

We now give a di erent direction to our investigations and

consider how to bring about the physical production of those

states of motion which are associated, as we have just seen,

with rational functions and their integrals. Let it be assumed

that the principle of superposition may be freely used, so that

we need only consider the simplest cases. From the theory of

partial fractions it follows that each of the functions in question

can be compounded additively of single parts, which fall under

one of the two following types:

                      A
    Alog(z z0);:
                    (z z0) 

But since log(z z0) is discontinuous at z = 1, the rst type

is unnecessarily specialised, and may be replaced by the more

general one
                z z0
          Alog;
                z z1

and this again, as in x 2, may be divided into two parts|viz.:
                        z z0z z0
writing A = A + iB, we discuss A logand iB log
                        z z1z z1
separately. Hence there are in all three cases to be distin-

guished.
                            z z0
(1) Corresponding to the type A loga source of
                            z z1
strength 2A  must be produced at z0, and one of strength

2A  at z1. To e ect this, conceive the xy plane to be covered

with an innitely thin, homogeneous conducting lm. Then it[sect iv.] introductory remarks.17


is clear that the required state of motion will be produced by

placing the two poles of a galvanic battery of proper strength
 
at z0and z1.The reason that the residue of z0must be equal

and opposite to that of z1is now at once evident: the stream-

ing is to be steady, hence the amount of electricity owing in

at one point must be equal to that owing out at the other.

There is obviously an analogous reason for the corresponding

theorem concerning any number of logarithmic innities, but

applying in the rst place only to the purely imaginary parts

of the respective residues (these being associated with sources

at the innities).
                          z z0
(2) In the second case, where iB logis given, the
                          z z1
experimental construction is rather more di cult. The sim-

plest arrangement is to join z0to z1by a simple arc of a curve

and make this the seat of a constant electromotive force. A

streaming is then set up in the xy plane with vortex-points

at z0, z1, but otherwise continuous, and from this, by integra-

tion, we obtain as velocity-potential a function whose value is

increased by a certain modulus of periodicity for every circuit

round z0or z1. We must carefully distinguish between this

velocity-potential and the necessarily one-valued electrostatic

potential. The curve joining z0to z1is a curve of disconti-

nuity for the latter, and this very fact makes the electrostatic
      y
potential one-valued.

 
See Kirchho 's fundamental memoir: \Ueber den Durchgang eines
elektrischen Stromes durch eine Ebene," Pogg. Ann. t. lxiv. (1845).
y
The statements in the text are intimately connected, as we know,[sect iv.] introductory remarks.18


I cannot say whether there are any experimental means of

producing this simplest arrangement. It would appear that

we must go to work in a more roundabout way. Let us rst

think of thermo-electric currents. Let the xy plane be cov-

ered, partly with material I, partly with material II, and let

the strength of the lms be so arranged that the conductivity

shall be everywhere the same. If we now contrive that the

two parts of the contour separated by z0and z1may be kept

at constant and di erent temperatures, an electric streaming

of the kind required will be set up. And the electrostatic po-

tential, by the principles of the theory of thermo-electricity,

exhibits discontinuities on both parts of the said contour. It

would apparently be still more complicated to use electric cur-

rents produced by the ordinary galvanic elements. The plane

must then be divided by at least three curves drawn from z0

to z1, and two of these parts must be covered by a metallic

lm, the other by a conducting liquid lm. See Fig. 12.

In all these constructions it is clear, ab initio, that the

vortex-points at z0and z1must have equal and opposite inten-

sities. For similar reasons the total intensity of all the vortex-

points must always be zero, and thus the theorem that the

sum of the logarithmic residues must vanish has been placed

on a physically evident basis as regards the real, as well as the

with the theory of \Doppelbelegungen" for which cf. Helmholtz, Pogg.
Ann. (1853) t. lxxxix. pp. 224 et seq. (Ueber einige Gesetze der Ver-
theilung elektrischer Strome in korperlichen Leitern), and C. Neumann's
treatise Untersuchungen uber das Logarithmische und Newton'sche Po-
tential (Leipzig, Teubner, 1877).[sect iv.] introductory remarks.19















imaginary, parts of these residues.

(3) The states of motion associated with the algebraic types
A
can, by the results of x 3, be derived from those just
(z z0) 
established, by proceeding to the limit. This is, of course, only

possible to a certain degree of approximation. For example,

let   + 1 wires, connected with the poles of a galvanic battery,

be placed close together on the xy plane. Then a streaming is

set up which at a little distance from the ends of the wires sen-

sibly resembles that associated with an algebraic discontinuity

of multiplicity  . At the same time an additional fact in con-

nection with the above construction is brought to light. The

galvanic battery must be very strong if an electric streaming of

even medium strength is to be originated. This corresponds to

the well-known analytical theorem that the residues of the log-

arithmic innities must increase to an innite degree in order[sect v.] introductory remarks.20


that the conjunction of logarithmic discontinuities may lead

to an algebraic discontinuity. No further details need be here

given as it is only necessary for what follows that the general

principles should be grasped by means of Figs. 6{9.


x 5. Transition to the Surface of a Sphere. Streamings on

arbitrary curved Surfaces.

To extend the treatment of nite values of z to innitely
                                 
great values, the use of the surface of a spherederived from

the xy plane by stereographic projection is now adopted in all

text-books. The simple geometrical relations involved in this
          y
representation are known,and we are also perfectly familiar

 
Following the example of C. Neumann, Vorlesungen uber Riemann's
Theorie der Abel'schen Integrale, Leipzig, 1865.|The introduction of the
                                            z1
sphere is, so to speak, parallel to the substitution for z of the ratioof
                                            z2
two variables, whereby the treatment of innitely great values of z is, as
we know, formally included in that of the nite values.
y
If  ,  ,   are rectangular coordinates, let the equation of the sphere
be  2+ 2+ (  1)2=1. Project from the point   = 0,   = 0,   = 1, let
24
the plane of projection be the xy plane, and the opposite tangent-plane
the    plane. Then we have

xy1
  =;   =;   =:
x2+ y2+ 1x2+ y2+ 1x2+ y2+ 1

If ds is the element of arc on the plane, d  that corresponding to it on
the sphere, we have
                ds
        d  =;
              x2+ y2+ 1[sect v.] introductory remarks.21


with the fact that the innitely distant parts of the plane are

drawn together to one point of the sphere, the point from

which we project, so that it is no longer merely symbolical to

speak of the point z = 1 on the sphere. It appears however to

be a matter of far less general knowledge that by means of this

representation the functions of x+iy acquire a signication on

the sphere exactly analogous to that they had on the plane,

and hence, that in the foregoing sections the sphere may be

substituted everywhere for the plane and that thus, from the

outset, there is no question of exceptional conditions for the
 
value z = 1.The propositions of the theory of surfaces from

which this statement follows are now briey set forth in a form

su ciently general to serve for certain future purposes.

In the study of uid motions parallel to the xy plane we

have already had occasion to assume the lm of uid under

investigation to be innitely thin. The general question of

uid motion on any surface may obviously be similarly re-

garded. An example is a orded by the displacements of uid-

membranes, freely extended in space, over themselves, as may

a formula of great importance hereafter, inasmuch as it indicates the
conformal character of the representation.
 
In connection with this and with the following discussion compare
Beltrami, \Delle variabili complesse sopra una supercie qualunque,"
Ann. di Mat. ser. 2, t. i., pp. 329 et seq.|The particular remark that
surface-potentials remain such after a conformal transformation is to be
found in the treatises cited in the preface, by C. Neumann, Kirchho , and
Topler, as well as e.g. in Haton de la Goupilli ere, \M ethodes de trans-
formation en G eom etrie et en Physique Math ematique," Journ. de l' Ec.
Poly. t. xxv. 1867, pp. 169 et seq.[sect v.] introductory remarks.22


be particularly well observed in Plateau's experiments.

We shall attempt to dene such states of motion also by a

potential and we shall especially enquire what is the case in

steady motion.

The proper extension of our conception of a potential

presents itself at once. Let u be a function of position on the

surface and let the curves u = const. be drawn; moreover let

the direction of uid-motion on the surface at every point be

perpendicular to the curve u = const. passing through that
                @u
point, and let the velocity be, where @n is the element of
                @n
arc drawn on the surface normal to the curve. Then u, as in

the plane, is called the velocity-potential.

This streaming, so dened, is now to be steady. To be def-

inite, let us make use on the surface of a system of curvilinear

coordinates p, q, and let the expression for the element of arc

in this system be

  222
(1)ds= E dp+ 2F dp dq + G dq:

Then by a few simple steps similar throughout to those usually

employed in the plane, we nd that if u is to give rise to

a steady streaming, it must satisfy the following di erential

equation of the second order:

@u@u@u@u
F GF E
@q@p@p@q
@p@p
  EG F2EG F2
(2)+= 0:
  @p@q[sect v.] introductory remarks.23


A short discussion in connection with this di erential equa-

tion will now bring out the full analogy with the results for the

plane. From the form of (2) it follows that for every u which

satises (2) another function v can be found having the known

reciprocal relation to u. For, by (2), the following equations

hold simultaneously:
    8
                @u@u
    >
    >
              F E
    >
    >
      @v
                @p@q
    >
    >
              p
          =;
    <
                        2
      @p
                EG F
(3)
    >@u@u
    >
    >
            G
                       F
    >
    >
      @v
                @p@q
    >
    :
              p
          =;
        @qEG F2

and they dene v, save as to a necessarily indeterminate con-

stant. But solving (3) we have

    8
                @v
                        @v
    >
    >
              F
                       E
    >
    >
        @u
                @p@q
    >
    >
              p
            =;
    <
                          2
        @p
                  EG F
(4)
    >@v@v
    >
    >
              G
                       F
    >
    >
        @u
                @p@q
    >
    :
              p
            =
                            ;
        @qEG F2

and hence,

@v@v@v@v
F GF E
@q@p@p@q
@p@p
  EG F2EG F2
(5)+= 0;
  @p@q[sect v.] introductory remarks.24


so that, on the one hand, u bears to v the same relation as

v to u, and on the other hand v, as well as u, satises the

partial di erential equation (2). At the same time the geomet-

rical meaning of equations (3) and (4) respectively shows that

the systems of curves u = const., v = const. are in general

orthogonal.

As regards the statement at the beginning of this section

with respect to the stereographic projection of the sphere on

the plane, it follows at once from the fact that the equations
                                               
(2){(5) are homogeneous in E, F, G, and of zero dimensions.

If two surfaces can be mapped conformally upon one another,

and if corresponding curvilinear coordinates are employed, the

expression for the element of arc on the one surface di ers

from that on the other only by a factor; but this factor simply

disappears from equations (2){(5) for the reason just assigned.

We have therefore a general theorem, including, as a special

case, the above statement relating to a sphere and a plane.

Forming the combination u+iv from u and v and calling this

a complex function of position on the surface, this theorem

may be stated as follows:

If one surface is conformally mapped upon another, every

complex function of position which exists on the rst is changed

into a function of the same kind on the second.

It may perhaps be as well to obviate a misunderstanding

 
This statement can also be easily veried without the use of formul ;
reference may be made to the works of C. Neumann and of Topler, already
cited.[sect vi.] introductory remarks.25


which might arise at this point. To the same function u + iv

there corresponds a motion of the uid on the one surface and

on the other; it might be imagined that the one arose from the

other by the transformation. This is of course true as regards

the position of the equipotential curves and the stream-lines,

but it is in no wise true of the velocity. Where the element

of arc of one surface is greater than the element of arc of the

other, there the velocity is correspondingly smaller. This is

precisely the reason that the value z = 1 loses its critical

character on the sphere. At innity on the plane, the velocity

of the streaming, as we see at once, is innitely small of the

second order, and if innity is a singular point, still the velocity

there is less by two degrees than the velocity at a similar point

in the nite part of the plane. Now let us refer to the formula

given in the foot-note at the beginning of this section:

                  ds
      d  =;
              x2+ y2+ 1

giving the element of arc of the sphere in terms of the element
          22
of arc of the plane. Here x+y+1 is a quantity of precisely the

second order and is cancelled in the transition to the sphere.


x 6. Connection between the foregoing Theory and the

Functions of a complex Argument.

Since we have now obtained the sphere as basis of oper-

ations, the theorems of xx 3, 4 respecting rational functions

and their integrals must be restated; we hereby gain in gener-

ality, the previously established theorems holding for innitely[sect vi.] introductory remarks.26


great values of z and being thus valid with no exceptions. This

makes it the more interesting to trace the course of any par-

ticular rational function on the sphere and to consider means
             
for its physical production.But another important question

 
A good example of not too elementary a character is the Icosahedron
equation (cf. Math. Ann., t. xii. pp. 502 et seq.),

                                 
                                  3
      (z20+ 1) + 228(z15 z5) 494z10
w =;
          1728z5(z10+ 11z5 1)5

which is of the 60th degree in z. The innities of w are coincident by ves
at each of 12 points which form the vertices of an icosahedron inscribed
in the sphere on which we represent the values of z. Corresponding to
the 20 faces of this icosahedron, the sphere is divided into 20 equilateral
spherical triangles. The middle points of these triangles are given by
w = 0 and form cross-points of multiplicity two for the function w. Hence
of the 2   60 2 = 118 cross-points, we already know (including the
innities) 4   12 + 2   20 = 88.










The remaining 30 are given by the middle points of the 30 sides of those
20 spherical triangles. The annexed gure is a diagram of one of these
20 triangles with the stream-lines drawn in; the remaining 19 are similar.[sect vi.] introductory remarks.27


suggests itself during these investigations:|the di erent func-

tions of position on the sphere are at the same time functions

of the argument x + iy; whence this connection?

It must rst be noticed that x+iy is itself a complex func-

tion of position on the sphere, for the quantities x and y satisfy

the di erential equations already established in x 1 for u and v;

while working in the plane we may imagine that this function

has an essential advantage over all other functions, but when

the scene of operations is transferred to the sphere there is

no longer any inducement to think so. In fact we are at once

led to a generalisation of the remark which gave rise to this

enquiry. If u + iv and u1+ iv1are both functions of x + iy,

u1+iv1is also a function of u+iv; hence for plane and sphere

we have the general theorem: Of two complex functions of po-

sition, with the usual meaning of this expression in the theory

of functions, each is a function of the other.

But is this a peculiarity of these surfaces alone? It is cer-

tainly transferable to all such surfaces as can be conformally

mapped upon part of a plane or of a sphere; this follows from

the last theorem of the preceding section. But I maintain that

this peculiarity belongs to all surfaces, whereby it is implicitly

stated that a part of any arbitrary surface can be conformally

mapped upon the plane or the sphere.

The proof follows at once, if we take x, y, the real and imag-

inary parts of a complex function of position on a surface, for

curvilinear coordinates on that surface. For then the coe -

cients E, F, G, in the expression for the element of arc, must

be such that equations (2){(5) of the preceding section are[sect vi.] introductory remarks.28


identically satised when x and y are substituted for p and q

and also for u and v. This, as we see at a glance, imposes

the conditions F = 0, E = G. But then the equations are

transformed into the well-known ones,

22
@u@u@u@v@u @v
+= 0;=;=; etc.;
@x2@y2@x@y@y@x

and these are the equations by which functions of the argument

x + iy are dened; hence u + iv is a function of x + iy, as was

to be shown.

At the same time the statement respecting conformal rep-

resentation is conrmed. For, from the form of the expression

for the element of arc,

        222
      ds= E (dx+ dy);

it follows at once that the surface can be conformally mapped

upon the xy plane by x + iy. This result may be expressed in

a somewhat more general form, thus:

If two complex functions of position on two surfaces are

known, and the surfaces are so mapped upon one another that

corresponding points give rise to the same values of the func-

tions, the surfaces are conformally mapped upon each other.

This is the converse of the theorem established at the end

of the last section.

These theorems have all, as far as regards arbitrary sur-

faces, a denite meaning only when the attention is conned

to small portions of the surface, within which the complex[sect vii.] introductory remarks.29


functions of position have neither innities nor cross-points. I

have therefore spoken provisionally of parts of surfaces only.

But it is natural to enquire concerning the behaviour of these

relations when the whole of any closed surface is taken into

consideration. This is a question which is intimately connected

with the line of argument presently to be developed; xx 19{21

are specially devoted to it.


x 7. Streamings on the Sphere resumed. Riemann's general

Problem.

A point has now been reached from which it is possible to

start afresh and to take up the discussion contained in the rst

sections of this introduction in an entirely di erent manner;

this leads us to a general and most important problem, in fact

to Riemann's problem, the exact statement and solution of

which form the real subject-matter of the present pamphlet.

The most important position in the previous presentation

of the subject has been occupied by the function of x + iy;

this has been interpreted by a steady streaming on the sphere,

and characteristics of the function have been recognized in

those of the streaming. Rational functions in particular, and

their integrals have led to one simple class of streamings|

one-valued streamings|in which one streaming only exists

at every point of the sphere. Moreover, subject to the con-

dition that no discontinuities other than those dened in x 2

may present themselves, these are the most general one-valued

streamings possible on a sphere.[sect vii.] introductory remarks.30


Now it seems possible, ab initio, to reverse the whole order

of this discussion; to study the streamings in the rst place and

thence to work out the theory of certain analytical functions.

The question as to the most general admissible streamings can

be answered by physical considerations; the experimental con-

structions of x 4 and the principle of superposition giving us,

in fact, means of dening each and every such streaming. The

individual streamings dene, to a constant of integration pr es,

a complex function of position whose variations can be thereby

followed throughout their whole range. Every such function is

an analytical function of every other. From the connection

between any two complex functions of position forms of ana-

lytical dependence are found, considered initially as to their

characteristics and only afterwards identied|to complete the

connection|with the usual form of analytical dependence.

This is all too clear to need a more minute explanation;

let us proceed at once to the proposed generalisation. And

even this, after the previous discussion, is almost self-evident.

All the problems just stated for the sphere may be stated in

exactly the same terms if instead of the sphere any arbitrary

closed surface is given. On this surface one-valued streamings

and hence complex functions of position can be dened and

their properties grasped by means of concrete demonstrations.

The simultaneous consideration of various functions of position

thus changes the results obtained into so many theorems of

ordinary analysis. The fullment of this design constitutes

Riemann's Theory; the chief divisions into which the following

exposition falls have been mentioned incidentally.            PART II.

      Riemann's Theory.

x 8. Classication of closed Surfaces according to the Value
 
of the Integer p.

All closed surfaces which can be conformally represented

upon each other by means of a uniform correspondence, are,

of course, to be regarded as equivalent for our purposes. For

every complex function of position on the one surface will be

changed by this representation into a similar function on the

other surface; hence, the analytical relation which is graphi-

cally expressed by the co-existence of two complex functions on

the one surface is entirely una ected by the transition to the

other surface. For instance, the ellipsoid may be conformally

represented, by virtue of known investigations, on a sphere, in

such a way that each point of the former corresponds to one

and only one point of the latter; this shows us that the ellip-

soid is as suitable for the representation of rational functions

and their integrals as the sphere.

It is of still greater importance to nd an element which

is unchanged, not only by a conformal transformation, but by

 
The presentation of the subject in this section di ers occasionally
from Riemann's, since surfaces with boundaries are not at rst taken into
account, and thus, instead of cross-cuts from one point on the boundary
to another, so-called loop-cuts are used (cf. C. Neumann, Vorlesungen
uber Riemann's Theorie der Abel'schen Integrale, pp. 291 et seq.).[sect viii.] riemann's theory.32


                           
any uniform transformation of the surface.Such an element is

Riemann's p, the number of loop-cuts which can be drawn on a

surface without resolving it into distinct pieces. The simplest

examples will su ce to impress this idea on our minds. For

the sphere, p = 0, since it is divided into two disconnected

regions by any closed curve drawn on its surface. For the

ordinary anchor-ring, p = 1; a cut can be made along one, and

only one, closed curve|though this may have a very arbitrary

form|without resolving the surface into distinct portions.

That it is impossible to represent surfaces having di er-

ent p's upon one another, the correspondence being uniform,
y
seems evident.

It is more di cult to prove the converse, that the equality of

the p's is a su cient condition for the possibility of a uniform

correspondence between the two surfaces. For proof of this

 
Deformations by means of continuous functions only are considered
here. Moreover in the arbitrary surfaces of the text certain particular
occurrences are for the present excluded. It is best to imagine them
without singular points; branch-points and hence the penetration of one
sheet by another will be considered later on (x 13). The surfaces must
not be unifacial, i.e. it must not be possible to pass continuously on the
surface from one side to the other (cf. however x 23). It is also assumed|
as is usual when a surface is completely given|that it can be separated
into simply-connected portions by a nite number of cuts.
y
It is not meant, however, that this kind of geometrical certainty
needs no further investigation; cf. the explanations of G. Cantor (Crelle,
t. lxxxiv. pp. 242 et seq.). But these investigations are meanwhile
excluded from consideration in the text, since the principle there insisted
upon is to base all reasoning ultimately on intuitive relations.[sect viii.] riemann's theory.33


important proposition I must here conne myself to references
 
in a foot-note.In consequence of this, when investigating

closed surfaces, we are justied, so long as purely descriptive

general relations are involved, in adopting the simplest possible

type of surface for each p. We shall speak of these as normal

surfaces. For the determination of quantitative properties the

normal surfaces are of course insu cient, but even here they

provide a means of orientation.

Let the normal surface for p = 0 be the sphere, for p = 1,

the anchor-ring. For greater values of p we may imagine a

sphere with p appendages (handles) as in the following gure

for p = 3.













There is, of course, a similar normal surface for p = 1;

 
See C. Jordan: \Sur la d eformation des surfaces," Liouville's Jour-
nal, ser. 2, t. xi. (1866). A few points, which seemed to me to call for
elucidation, are discussed in Math. Ann., t. vii. p. 549, and t. ix. p. 476.[sect ix.] riemann's theory.34


the surfaces being, by hypothesis, not rigid, but capable of

undergoing arbitrary distortions.

On these normal surfaces there must now be assigned cer-

tain cross-cuts which will be needed in the sequel. For the

case p = 0 these do not present themselves. For p = 1, i.e. on

the anchor-ring, they may be taken as a meridian A combined

with a curve of latitude B.













In general 2p cross-cuts will be needed. It will, I think,

be intelligible, with reference to the following gure, to speak

of a meridian and a curve of latitude in connection with each

handle of a normal surface.

We choose the 2p cross-cuts such that there is a meridian

and a curve of latitude to each handle. These cross-cuts will

be denoted in order by A1, A2, : : :, Ap, and B1, B2, : : :, Bp.[sect ix.] riemann's theory.35












x 9. Preliminary Determination of steady Streamings on

arbitrary Surfaces.

We have now before us the task of dening on arbitrary

(closed) surfaces, the most general, one-valued, steady stream-

ings, having velocity-potentials, and subject to the condition
                                               
that no innities are admitted other than those named in x 2.

For this purpose we turn to the normal surfaces of the last

section and once more employ the experimental methods of

the theory of electricity. We imagine the given surface to be

 
These innities were rst dened for the plane (or the sphere) only.
But it is clear how to make the denition apply to arbitrary curved sur-
faces; the generalisation must be made in such a manner that the original
innities are restored when the surface and the steady streamings on it
are mapped by a conformal representation upon the plane. This limita-
tion in the nature of the innities implies that only a nite number of
them is possible in the streamings in question, but it must su ce to state
this as a fact here. Similarly, as I may point out in passing, it follows
from our premises that only a nite number of cross-points can present
themselves in the course of these streamings.[sect ix.] riemann's theory.36


covered with an innitely thin homogeneous lm of a conduct-

ing material, and we then employ those appliances whose use

we learnt in x 4. Thus we may place the two poles of a gal-

vanic battery at any two points of the surface; a streaming is

then produced having these two points as sources of equal and

opposite strength. Next we may join any two points on the

surface by one or more adjacent but non-intersecting curves

and make these seats of constant electromotive force, bearing

in mind throughout the remarks made in x 4 about the nec-

essary experimental processes for this case. A steady motion

is then obtained, in which the two points are vortex-points of

equal and opposite intensity. Further, we superpose various

forms of motion and nally, when necessary, allow separate

innities to coalesce in the limit in order to produce innities

of higher order. Everything proceeds exactly as on the sphere

and we have the following proposition in any case:

If the innities are limited to those discussed in x 2, and

if moreover the condition that the sum of all the logarithmic

residues must vanish is satised, then there exist on the surface

complex functions of position which become innite at arbi-

trarily assigned points and moreover in an arbitrarily specied

manner and are continuous elsewhere over the whole surface.

But for p > 0 the possibilities are by no means exhausted

by these functions. For there can now be found an experimen-

tal construction which was impossible on the sphere. There are

closed curves on these surfaces along which they may be cut

without being resolved into distinct pieces. There is nothing

to prevent the electricity owing on the surface from one side[sect ix.] riemann's theory.37


of such a curve to the other. We have then as much justica-

tion for considering one or more of these consecutive curves as

seats of constant electromotive force as we had in the case of

the curves of x 4 which were drawn from one end to the other.

The streamings so obtained have no discontinuities; they

may be denoted as streamings which are nite everywhere

and the associated complex functions of position as functions

nite everywhere. These functions are necessarily innitely

multiform, for they acquire a real modulus of periodicity, pro-

portional to the assumed electromotive force, as often as the
                               
given curve is crossed in the same direction.

We next enquire how many independent streamings there

may be, so dened as nite everywhere. Obviously any two

curves on the surface, seats of equal electromotive forces, are

equivalent for our purpose when by continuous deformation

on the surface one can be brought to coincidence with the

other. If after the process of deformation parts of the curve

are traversed twice in opposite directions, these may be simply

neglected. Consequently it is shown that every closed curve is

equivalent to an integral combination of the cross-cuts Ai, Bi

dened as in the previous section.

For let us trace the course of any closed curve on a normal

 
But this is not to imply that any disposition has herewith been made
of the periodicity of the imaginary part of the function. For if u is given,
v is completely determined, to an additive constant pr es, by the di er-
ential equations (1) of p. 1, and hence the moduli of periodicity which
v may possess at the cross-cuts Ai, Bicannot be arbitrarily assigned.[sect ix.] riemann's theory.38














 
surface;for p = 1 the correctness of the statement follows

immediately; we need but consider an example as given in

the above gures. The curve drawn on the anchor-ring in

Fig. 17 can be brought to coincidence with that in Fig. 18 by

deformation alone; it is thus equivalent to a triple description

of the meridian A (cf. Fig. 15) and a single description of the

curve of latitude B.

Further, let p > 1. Then whenever a curve passes through

one of the handles a portion can be cut o , consisting of de-

formations of an integral combination of the meridians and

corresponding curves of latitude belonging to the handle in

question. When all such portions have been removed there

remains a closed curve, which can either be reduced at once to

 
For another proof see C. Jordan, \Des contours trac es sur les sur-
faces," Liouville's Journal, ser. 2, t. xi. (1866).[sect ix.] riemann's theory.39


a single point on the surface|and then has certainly no e ect

on the electric streaming|or it may completely surround one

or more of the handles as in Fig. 19. Fig. 20 shows how such

a curve can be altered by deformation; by continuation of the

process here indicated, it is changed into a curve consisting












of the inner rim of the handle and one of its meridians, but

every portion is traversed twice in opposite directions. Thus

this curve also contributes nothing to the streaming. This con-

clusion might indeed have been reached before, from the fact

that this curve, herein resembling a curve which reduces to a

point, resolves the surface into distinct portions.

Nothing more is therefore to be gained by the consideration

of arbitrary closed curves than by suitable use of the 2p curves

Ai, Bi. The most general streaming we can produce which is

nite everywhere is obtained by making the 2p cross-cuts seats

of a constant electromotive force. Or, otherwise expressed:[sect x.] riemann's theory.40


The most general function we have to construct, which is -

nite everywhere, is the one whose real part has, at the 2p cross-

cuts, arbitrarily assigned moduli of periodicity.


x 10. The most general steady Streaming. Proof of the

Impossibility of other Streamings.

If we combine additively the di erent complex functions

of position constructed in the preceding section, we obtain a

function whose arbitrary character we can take in at a glance.

Without explicitly restating the conditions which we assumed

once and for all respecting the innities, we may say that this

function becomes innite in arbitrarily specied ways at arbi-

trarily assigned points, the real part having moreover arbitrar-

ily assigned moduli of periodicity at the 2p cross-cuts.

I now say, that this is the most general function to which a

one-valued streaming on the surface corresponds. For proof we

may reduce this statement to a simpler one. If any complex

function of this kind is given on the surface, we have, by what

precedes, the means of constructing another function, which

becomes innite in the same manner at the same points and

whose real part has at the cross-cuts Ai, Bithe same mod-

uli of periodicity as the real part of the given function. The

di erence of these two functions is a new function, nowhere

innite, whose real part has vanishing moduli of periodicity at

the cross-cuts|this function, of course, again denes a one-

valued streaming. It is obvious we must prove that such a

function does not exist, or rather, that it reduces to a constant[sect x.] riemann's theory.41


The proof is not di cult. As regards the strict demonstra-

tion, I conne myself to the remark that it depends on the
                               
most general statement of Green's Theorem;the following is

intended to make the impossibility of the existence of such a

function immediately obvious. Even if, on account of its in-

denite form, the argument may possibly not be regarded as
y
a rigorous proof,it would still seem protable to examine, by

this method as well, the principles on which that theorem is

based.

Firstly, then, in the particular case p = 0, let us enquire

why a one-valued streaming, nite everywhere, cannot exist on

the sphere. This is most easily shown by tracing the stream-

lines. Since no innities are to arise, a stream-line cannot have

an abrupt termination, as would be the case at a source or at

an algebraic discontinuity. Moreover it must be remembered

that the ow along adjacent stream-lines is necessarily in the

same direction. It is thus seen that only two kinds of non-

terminating stream-lines are possible; either the curve winds

closer and closer round an asymptotic point|but this gives

rise to an innity|or the curve is closed. But if one stream-

line is closed, so is the next. They thus surround a smaller and

smaller part of the surface of the sphere; consequently we are

unavoidably led to a vortex-point, i.e. once more to an innity,

and a streaming nite everywhere is an impossibility. It is

 
For this proposition see Beltrami, l.c., p. 354.
y
I may remind the reader that Green's theorem itself may be proved
intuitively; cf. Tait, \On Green's and other allied Theorems," Edin.
Trans. 1869{70, pp. 69 et seq.[sect x.] riemann's theory.42


true that we have here not taken into account the possibilities

involved when cross-points present themselves. But since these

points are always nite in number, as was pointed out above,

there can be but a nite number of stream-lines through them.

Let the sphere be divided by these curves into regions, and in

each individual region apply the foregoing argument, then the

same result will be obtained.

Next, if p > 0, let us again make use of the normal sur-

faces of x 8. By what we have just said, the existence on these

surfaces of one-valued streamings which are nite everywhere,

is due to the presence of the handles. A stream-line cannot be

represented on a normal surface, any more than on a sphere,

by a closed curve which can be reduced to a point. But further,

a curve of the form shown in Fig. 19 is not admissible. For

with this curve there would be associated others of the form

shown in Fig. 20, so that ultimately a curve would be obtained

with its parts described twice in opposite directions. A stream-

line must therefore necessarily wind round one or other of the

handles, that is, it may simply pass once through a handle or

it may wind round it several times along the meridians and

curves of latitude. In all cases then a portion of a stream-line

can be separated from the remainder, equivalent in the sense

of the last section to an integral combination of the appropri-

ate meridians and curves of latitude. Now the value of u, the

real part of the complex function dened by the streaming,

increases constantly along a stream-line. Further, the descrip-

tion of two curves, equivalent in the sense of the last section,

necessarily produces the same increment in u. There exists[sect xi.] riemann's theory.43


then a combination of at least one meridian and one curve of

latitude the description of which yields a non-vanishing incre-

ment of u. This is also necessarily true for the meridian or the

curve of latitude alone. But the increment which u receives by

the description of the meridian corresponds to the crossing of

the curve of latitude and vice versa. Hence at one meridian

or curve of latitude, at least, u has a non-vanishing modulus

of periodicity, and a one-valued streaming, nite everywhere,

having all its moduli of periodicity equal to zero, is impossible.

q.e.d.


x 11. Illustration of the Streamings by means of Examples.

It would appear advisable to gain, by means of examples,

a clear view of the general course of the streamings thus de-

ned, in order that our propositions may not be mere abstract
                                               
statements, but may be connected with concrete illustrations.

This is comparatively easy in the given cases so long as we

conne ourselves to qualitative relations; exact quantitative

determinations would of course require entirely di erent ap-

pliances. For simplicity I conne myself to surfaces with a

plane of symmetry coinciding with the plane of the drawing,

and on these I consider only those streamings for which the

apparent boundary of the surface (i.e. the curve of section of

the surface by the plane of the paper) is either a stream-line

or an equipotential curve. There is a considerable advantage

 
Such a means of orientation, it may be presumed, in also of consid-
erable value for the practical physicist.[sect xi.] riemann's theory.44


in this, for the stream-lines need only be drawn for the upper

side of the surface, since on the under side they are identically













 
repeated.

Let us begin with streamings, nite everywhere, on the

anchor-ring p = 1; let a curve of latitude (or several such

curves) be the seat of electromotive force. Then Fig. 21 is ob-

tained in which all the stream-lines are meridians and no cross-

points present themselves; the meridians are there shown as

portions of radii; the arrows give the direction of the streaming

on the upper side, on the lower side the direction is exactly

reversed.

 
Drawings similar to these were given in my memoir \Ueber den
Verlauf der Abel'schen Integrale bei den Curven vierten Grades," Math.
Ann. t. x., though indeed a somewhat di erent meaning is attached there
to the Riemann's surfaces, so that in connection with them the term uid-
motion can only be used in a transferred sense; cf. the remarks in x 18.[sect xi.] riemann's theory.45


In the conjugate streaming, the curves of latitude play the

part of the meridians in the rst example; this is shown in the

following drawing:














The direction of motion in this case is the same on the upper

and lower sides.

Let us now deform the anchor-ring, p = 1, by causing two

excrescences to the right of the gure, roughly speaking, to

grow from it, which gradually bend towards each other and

nally coalesce. We then have a surface p = 2 and on it a pair

of conjugate streamings as illustrated by Figures 23 and 24.

Here, as we may see, two cross-points have presented them-

selves on the right (of which of course only one is on the upper

side and therefore visible). An analogous result is obtained

when we study streamings which are nite everywhere on a

surface for which p > 1. In place of further explanations I give[sect xi.] riemann's theory.46













two more gures with four cross-points in each, relating to the

case p = 3.












These arise, if on all \handles" of the surface the curves

of latitude or the meridians respectively are seats of electro-

motive force. On the two lower handles the directions are the

same, and opposed to that on the upper handle. Of the cross-[sect xi.] riemann's theory.47


points, two are at a and b, the third at c, and the fourth at the

corresponding point on the under side. It is di cult to see the

cross-points at a and b (Fig. 25) merely because foreshortening

due to perspective takes place at the boundary of the gure,

and hence both stream-lines which meet at the cross-point ap-

pear to touch the edge. If the streamings on the under side of

the surface (along which the ow is in the opposite direction)

are taken into account, any obscurity of the gure at this point

will disappear.

Let us now return to the anchor-ring, p = 1, and let two

logarithmic discontinuities be given on it. The appropriate

gures are obtained if Figs. 23, 24 are subjected to a process

of deformation, which may also be applied, with interesting

as well as protable results, to more general cases. We draw

together the parts to the left of each gure and stretch out

the parts to the right, so that we obtain, in the rst place, the

following gures:[sect xi.] riemann's theory.48


and then we reduce the handle on the left, which has already

become very narrow, until it is merely a curve, when we reject

it altogether. Hence, from the streaming, nite everywhere,

on the surface p = 2, we have obtained on the surface p = 1

a streaming with two logarithmic discontinuities. The gures

are now of this form,













The two cross-points of Figs. 23, 24 remain, m and n are

the two logarithmic discontinuities; and these moreover, in

Fig. 29, are vortex-points of equal and opposite intensity, and,

in Fig. 30, sources of equal and opposite strength. Here, again,

it results from our method of projection that in the second case

all the stream-lines except one seem to touch the boundary at

m and n.

If we nally allow m and n to coalesce, giving rise to a

simple algebraic discontinuity, we obtain the following gures,

in which, as may be perceived, the cross-points retain their[sect xi.] riemann's theory.49


original positions.













There is no occasion to multiply these gures, as it is easy

to construct other examples on the same models. But one

more point must be mentioned. The number of cross-points

obviously increases with the p of the surface and with the

number of innities; algebraic innities of multiplicity r may

be counted as r+ 1 logarithmic innities; then, on the sphere,

with   logarithmic innities, the number of proper cross-points

is, in general,   2. Moreover unit increase in p is accompa-

nied, in accordance with our examples, by an increase of two

in the number of cross-points. Hence it may be surmised that

the number of cross-points is, in every case,   + 2p 2. A

strict proof of this theorem, based on the preceding methods,
                     
would present no especial di culty;but it would lead us too

 
It would seem above all necessary for such a proof to be perfectly[sect xii.] riemann's theory.50


far aeld. The only particular case of the theorem of which

use will be subsequently made, is known to hold by the usual

proofs of analysis situs; it deals (x 14) with streamings present-

ing m simple algebraic discontinuities, giving rise therefore to

2m + 2p 2 cross-points.


x 12. On the Composition of the most general Function of

Position from single Summands.

The results of x 10 enable us to obtain a more concrete

illustration of the most general complex function of position

existing on a surface by adding together single summands of

the simplest types.

Let us rst consider functions nite everywhere. Let

u1, u2, : : :, u be potentials, nite everywhere. These may be

called linearly dependent if they satisfy a relation

    a1u1+ a2u2+ : : : + a u = A

with constant coe cients. Such a relation leads to correspond-

ing equations for the 2p series of   moduli of periodicity pos-

sessed by u1, u2, : : :, u at the 2p cross-cuts of the surface.

Conversely, by the theorem of x 10, such equations for the

moduli of periodicity would of themselves give rise to a linear

relation in the u's. It then follows that 2p linearly independent

potentials nite everywhere, u1, u2, : : :, u2, can be found in
                            p

clear about the various possibilities connected with the deformation of a
given surface into the normal surface, cf. x 8.[sect xii.] riemann's theory.51


an indenite number of ways, but from these every other po-

tential, nite everywhere, can be linearly constructed:

  u = a1u1+ : : : : : : + a2u2+ A:
                      pp

For u1, u2, : : :, u2can e.g. be so chosen that each has
        p
a non-vanishing modulus of periodicity at one only of the

2p cross-cuts (where, of course, to each cross-cut, one, and only
                    P
one, potential is assigned). And inaiuithe constants aican

be so chosen that this expression has at each cross-cut the same
                           P
modulus of periodicity as u. Then uaiuiis a constant

and we have the formula just given.

Passing now from the potentials u to the functions u +

iv, nite everywhere, suppose, for simplicity, that coordinates

x, y, employed on the surface (x 6), are such that u and v are

connected by the equations

    @u@v@u @v
        =;=:
    @x@y@y@x

Now let u1be an arbitrary potential, nite everywhere. Con-

struct the corresponding v1; then u1and v1are linearly inde-

pendent. For if between u1and v1there were an equation

        a1u1+ b1v1= const:

with constant coe cients, this would entail the following equa-

tions:

@u1@v1@u1@v1
a1+ b1= 0; a1+ b1= 0;
@x@x@y@y[sect xii.] riemann's theory.52


whence, by means of the given relations, the following contra-

dictory result would be obtained:

      @u1@u1
          = 0;= 0:
      @x@y

Further, let u2be linearly independent of u1, v1. Then we

may take the corresponding v2and obtain the more general

theorem: The four functions u1, u2, v1, v2, are likewise linearly

independent. For from any linear relation

  a1u1+ a2u2+ b1v1+ b2v2= const:;

by means of the relations among the u's and the v's, we should

obtain the following equations:

@u1@v1@u2
                            22
(a1a2+ b1b2) (a1b2 a2b1)+ (a+ b)= 0;
                            22
  @x@x@x
@u1@v1@u2
                            22
(a1a2+ b1b2) (a1b2 a2b1)+ (a+ b)= 0;
                            22
@y@y@y

from which by integration a linear relation among u1, v1, u2

would follow.

Proceeding thus we obtain nally 2p linearly independent

potentials,

u1; v1; u2; v2; : : : : : : ; up; vp;

where each v is associated with the u having the same su x.

Writing u +iv = w and calling the functions w1, w2, : : :, w ,

which are nite everywhere, linearly independent if no relation

  c1w1+ c2w2+ : : : : : : + c w = C[sect xii.] riemann's theory.53


exists among them, where c1, : : :, c , C are arbitrary complex

constants, we have at once: The p functions w1, : : :, wp, nite

everywhere, are linearly independent. For if there were a linear

relation we could separate the real and imaginary parts and

thus obtain linear relations among the u's and v's.

But, further, it follows that every arbitrary function, nite

everywhere, can be made up from w1, w2, : : :, wpin the fol-

lowing form:

w = c1w1+ c2w2+ : : : + cpwp+ C:

For by proper choice of the complex constants c1, c2, : : :, cp,

since u1, : : :, up, v1, : : :, vpare linearly independent, we can as-

sign to the real part of the function w dened by this formula,

arbitrary moduli of periodicity at the 2p cross-cuts.

This is the theorem we were to prove in the present section,

in so far as it relates to the construction of functions nite

everywhere. The transition to functions with innities is now

easily e ected.

Let  1,  2, : : :,   be the points at which the function is to

become innite in any specied manner. Introduce an auxil-

iary point   and construct a series of single functions

        F1; F2; : : : ; F ;

each of which becomes innite, and that in the specied man-

ner, at one only of the points  , and in addition has, at  , a

logarithmic discontinuity whose residue is equal and opposite

to the logarithmic residue of the   in question. The sum

        F1+ F2+ : : : + F [sect xiii.] riemann's theory.54


is then continuous at  , for the sum of all the residues of the

discontinuities   is known to be zero. Moreover, this sum

only becomes innite at the  's, and there in the specied

manner. It therefore di ers from the required function only by

a function which is nite everywhere. The required function

may thus be written in the form

F1+ F2+ : : : + F + c1w1+ c2w2+ : : : + cpwp+ C;

whereby the theorem in question has been established for the

general case.

This result obviously corresponds to the dismemberment

of complex functions on a sphere considered in x 4, and there

deduced in the usual way from the reduction of rational func-

tions to partial fractions.


x 13. On the Multiformity of the Functions. Special Treat-

ment of uniform Functions.

The functions u + iv, under investigation on the surfaces

in question, are in general innitely multiform, for on the one

hand a modulus of periodicity is associated with every loga-

rithmic innity, and on the other hand we have the moduli of

periodicity at the 2p cross-cuts Ai, Bi, whose real parts may

be arbitrarily chosen. I assert that in no other manner can

u + iv become multiform. To prove this we must go back to

the conception of the equivalence of two curves on a given

surface which was brought forward in x 9, primarily for other

purposes. Since the di erential coe cients of u and v (or,[sect xiii.] riemann's theory.55


what is the same thing, the components of the velocity of the

corresponding streaming) are one-valued at every point of the

surface, two equivalent closed curves not separated by a loga-

rithmic discontinuity yield the same increment in u, and also

in v. But we found that every closed curve was equivalent to

an integral combination of the cross-cuts Ai, Bi. We further

remarked (x 10) that the description of Aiproduced the same

modulus of periodicity as the crossing of Biit and vice versa.

And from this the above theorem follows by known methods.

It will now be of special interest to consider uniform func-

tions of position; from the foregoing all such functions can be

obtained by admitting only purely algebraical innities and

by causing all the 2p moduli of periodicity at the cross-cuts

Ai, Bito vanish. To simplify the discussion, simple algebraic

discontinuities alone need be considered. For we know from

x 3 that the  -fold algebraic discontinuity can be derived from

the coalescence of   simple ones, in which case, it should be

borne in mind, cross-points are absorbed whose total multi-

plicity is   1. Let m points then be given as the simple

algebraic innities of the required function. We rst construct

any m functions of position Z1, : : :, Zmeach of which has a

simple algebraic innity at one only of the given points but

is otherwise arbitrarily multiform. From these Z's the most

general complex function of position with simple algebraic in-

nities at the given points can be compounded by the last

section in the form

a1Z1+ a2Z2+ : : : + amZm+ c1w1+ c2w2+ : : : + cpwp+ C;[sect xiii.] riemann's theory.56


where a1, : : :, amare arbitrary constant coe cients. To make

this function uniform the modulus of periodicity for each of

the 2p cross-cuts must be equated to zero; but these moduli

of periodicity are linearly compounded, by means of the a's

and c's, of the moduli of periodicity of the z's and w's; there

are thus 2p linear homogeneous equations for the m + p con-

stants a and c. Assume that these equations are linearly inde-
 
pendent,this important proposition follows:

Subject to this condition, uniform functions of position

with m arbitrarily assigned simple algebraic discontinuities

exist only if m = p+ 1; and these functions contain mp+ 1

arbitrary constants which enter linearly.

Now let the m innities be moveable, then m new degrees

of freedom are introduced. Moreover it is clear that m arbi-

trary points on the surface can be changed by continuous dis-

placement into m others equally arbitrary. It may therefore

be stated|bearing in mind, however, under what conditions|

that the totality of uniform functions with m simple algebraic

 
If they are not so, the consequence will be that the number of uni-
form functions which are innite at the m given points will be greater
than that given in the text. The investigations of this possibility, espe-
cially Roch's (Crelle, t. lxiv.), are well known; cf. also for the algebraical
formulation, Brill and Nother: \Ueber die algebraischen Functionen und
ihre Verwendung in der Geometrie," Math. Ann. t. vii. I cannot pursue
these investigations in the text, although they are easily connected with
Abel's Theorem as given by Riemann in No. 14 of the Abelian Functions,
and will merely point out with reference to later developments in the text
(cf. x 19) that the 2p equations are certainly not linearly independent if
m surpasses the limit 2p 2.[sect xiii.] riemann's theory.57


discontinuities existing on a given surface forms a continuum

of 2m p + 1 dimensions.

Having now proved the existence and ascertained the de-

grees of freedom of the uniform functions, we will, as simply

and directly as possible, enunciate and prove another impor-

tant property that they possess. The number of their inni-

ties m is of far greater import than has yet appeared, for I now

state that the function u+iv assumes any arbitrarily assigned

value u0+ iv0at precisely m points.

To prove this, follow the course of the curves u = u0, v = v0

on the surface. It is clear from x 2 that each of these curves

passes once through every one of the m innities. On the other

hand it follows by the reasoning of x 10 that every circuit of

each of these curves must have at least one innity on it. Hence

the statement is at once proved for very great values of u0, v0;

for it was shewn in x 2 that the corresponding curves u = u0,

v = v0assume in the vicinity of each innity the form of small

circles through these points, which necessarily intersect in one

point other than the discontinuity (which last is hereafter to

be left out of account).

But from this the theorem follows universally, since, by

continuous variation of u0, v0, an intersection of the curves

u = u0, v = v0can never be lost; for, from the foregoing,

this could only occur if several points of intersection were to

coalesce, separating afterwards in diminished numbers. Now

the systems of curves u, v are orthogonal; real points of inter-

section can then only coalesce at cross-points (at which points

coalescence does actually take place); but these cross-points[sect xiv.] riemann's theory.58












are nite in number and therefore cannot divide the surface

into di erent regions. Thus the possibility of a coalescence

need not be considered and the statement is proved.

It is valuable in what follows to have a clear conception

of the distribution of the values of u + iv near a cross-point.

A careful study of Fig. 1 will su ce for this purpose. For

instance, it will be observed that of the m moveable points of

intersection of the curves u = u0, v = v0,   + 1 coalesce at the

 -fold cross-point.

Considerations similar to those here applied to uniform

functions apply also to multiform functions; I do not enlarge

on them, simply because the limitations of the subject-matter

render them unnecessary; moreover it is only in the very sim-

plest case that a comprehensible result can be obtained. Su ce

it to refer in passing to the fact that a complex function with

more than two incommensurable moduli of periodicity can be

made to approach innitely near every arbitrary value at every

point.[sect xiv.] riemann's theory.59


x 14. The ordinary Riemann's Surfaces over the x + iy

Plane.

Instead of considering the distribution of the values of the

function u + iv over the original surface, the process may, so

to speak, be reversed. We may represent the values of the

function|which for this reason is now denoted by x + iy|
                                       
in the usual way on the plane (or on the sphere)and we

may study the conformal representation of the original sur-

face which (by x 5) is thus obtained. For simplicity, we again

conne our attention to uniform functions, although the con-

sideration of conformal representation by means of multiform
                  y
functions is of particular interest.

A moment's thought shows that we are thus led to the very

surface, many-sheeted, connected by branch-points, extending

over the xy plane, which is commonly known as a Riemann's

surface.

For let m be the number of simple innities of x+iy on the

original surface; then x+iy, as we have seen, takes every value

m times on the given surface. Hence the conformal represen-

tation of the original surface on the x + iy plane covers that

plane, in general, with m sheets. The only exceptional posi-

tions are taken by those values of x+iy for which some of the

 
I speak throughout the following discussion of the plane rather than
of the sphere in order to adhere as far as possible to the usual point of
view.
y
Cf. Riemann's remarks on representation by means of functions
which are nite everywhere, in No. 12 of his Abelian Functions.[sect xiv.] riemann's theory.60


m associated points on the original surface coalesce, positions

therefore which correspond to cross-points. To be perfectly

clear let us once more make use of Fig. 1. It follows from this

gure that the vicinity of a  -fold cross-point can be divided

into   + 1 sectors in such a way that x+iy assumes the same

system of values in each sector. Hence, above the correspond-

ing point of the x + iy plane,   + 1 sheets of the conformal

representation are connected in such a way that in describing

a circuit round the point the variable passes from one sheet to

the next, from this to a third and so on, a (  + 1)-fold circuit

being required to bring it back to the starting-point. But this
                                   
is exactly what is usually called a branch-point.The repre-

sentation at this point is of course not conformal; it is easily

shown that the angle between any two curves which meet at

the cross-point on the original surface is multiplied by precisely

  + 1 on the Riemann's surface over the x + iy plane.

But at the same time we recognize the importance of this

many-sheeted surface for the present purpose. All surfaces

which can be derived from one another by a conformal repre-

sentation with a uniform correspondence of points are equiv-

alent for our purposes (x 8). We may therefore adopt the m-

sheeted surface over the plane as the basis of our operations

 
In x 11 the number of cross-points of x+iy was stated without proof
to be 2m+ 2p2. We now see that this statement was a simple inversion
of the known relation among the number of branch-points (or rather their
total multiplicity), the number of sheets m, and the p of a many-sheeted
surface (where p is the maximum number of loop-cuts which can be drawn
on this many-sheeted surface without resolving it into distinct portions).[sect xiv.] riemann's theory.61


instead of the surface hitherto employed, which was supposed

without singularities, anywhere in space. And the di culty

which might be feared owing to the introduction of branch-

points is avoided from the rst; for we consider on the m-

sheeted surface only those streamings whose behaviour near a

branch-point is such that when they are traced on the origi-

nal surface by a reversal of the process, the only singularities

produced are those included in the foregoing discussion. To

this end it is not even necessary to know of a correspond-

ing surface in space; for we are only concerned with ratios in

the immediate vicinity of the branch-points, i.e. with di er-
                                   
ential relations to be satised by the streamings.And there

is no longer any reason, in speaking of arbitrarily curved sur-

faces, for postulating them as free from singularities; they may

even consist of several sheets connected by branch-points and

along branch-lines. But whichever of the unlimited number of

equivalent surfaces may be selected as basis, we must distin-

guish between essential properties common to all equivalent

surfaces, and non-essential associated with particular individ-

uals. To the former belongs the integer p; and the \moduli,"

which are discussed more fully in x 18, also belong to them;|

to the latter belong the kind and position of the branch-points

of many-sheeted surfaces. If we take an ideal surface possess-

ing only the essential properties, then the branch-points of a

 
For the explicit statement of these relations cf. the usual text-books,
also in particular C. Neumann: Das Dirichlet'sche Princip in seiner An-
wendung auf die Riemann'schen Flachen. Leipzig, 1865.[sect xv.] riemann's theory.62


many-sheeted surface correspond on this simply to ordinary

points which, generally speaking, are not distinguished from

the other points and which are only noticeable from the fact

that, in the conformal representation leading from the ideal to

the particular surface, they give rise to cross-points.

We have then as a nal result that a greater freedom of

choice has been obtained among the surfaces on which it is

possible to operate and the accidental properties involved by

the consideration of any particular surface can be at once rec-

ognized. Consequently, many-sheeted surfaces over the x +

iy plane are henceforward employed whenever convenient, but
                                               
this in no measure detracts from the generality of the results.


x 15. The Anchor-ring, p = 1, and the two-sheeted Surface

over the Plane with four Branch-points.

It was possible in the preceding section to make our ex-

planation comparatively brief as a knowledge of the ordinary

Riemann's surface over the plane with its branch-points could

be assumed. But it may nevertheless be useful to illustrate

 
The interesting question here arises whether it is always possible
to transform many-sheeted surfaces, with arbitrary branch-points, by a
conformal process into surfaces with no singular points. This question
transcends the limits of the subject under discussion in the text, but
nevertheless I wish to bring it forward. Even if this transformation is
impossible in individual cases, still the preceding discussion in the text is
of importance, in that it led to general ideas by means of the simplest ex-
amples and thus rendered the treatment of more complicated occurrences
possible.[sect xv.] riemann's theory.63


these results by means of an example. Consider an anchor-
                          4
ring, p = 1; on it there exist, by x 13, 1uniform functions

with two innities only; each of these, by the general formula

of x 11, has four cross-points. The anchor-ring can therefore be

mapped in an indenite number of ways upon a two-sheeted

plane surface with four branch-points. With a view to those

readers who are not very familiar with purely intuitive op-

erations, I give explicit formul  for the special case of this

representation which I am about to consider, even though, in

so doing, I partly anticipate the work of the next section.

Imagine the anchor-ring as an ordinary

tore generated by the rotation of a circle

about a non-intersecting axis in its plane.

Let   be the radius of this circle, R the dis-

tance of the centre from the axis,   the polar-

angle.

Take the axis of rotation for axis of Z, the

point O in the gure as origin for a system of

rectangular coordinates, and distinguish the

planes through OZ by means of the angle  

which they make with the positive direction

of the axis of X. Then, for any point on the

anchor-ring, we have,

  8
      >X = (R  cos ) cos ;
  <
(1)Y = (R  cos ) sin ;
  >
  :
      Z =  sin :[sect xv.] riemann's theory.64


Hence the element of arc is
    p
ds =dX2+ dY2+ dZ2(2)
    p
    =(R  cos )2d 2+  2d 2;

or,
                p
ds = (R  cos )d 2+ d 2;(3)
              Z
                 
                        d 
where  ,   are written for  ,.
                0R  cos 
By (3) we have a conformal representation of the surface of

the anchor-ring on the    plane. The whole surface is obviously
                   
covered once when   and  in (1)each range from   to + .

The conformal representation of the surface of the anchor-ring

therefore covers a rectangle of the plane, as in the following

gure,[sect xv.] riemann's theory.65


where p stands for
        Z
           
                  d 
                        :
          0R  cos 

To make the relation between the rectangle and the anchor-

ring intuitively clear, imagine the former made of some mate-

rial which is capable of being stretched and let the opposite

edges of the rectangle be brought together without twisting.

Or the anchor-ring may be made of a similar material, and af-

ter cutting along a curve of latitude and a meridian it can be

stretched out over the    plane. Instead of further explanation

I subjoin in a gure the projection of the anchor-ring from the

positive end of the axis of Z upon the xy plane, and in this

gure I have marked the relation to the    plane.[sect xv.] riemann's theory.66


The upper surface of the anchor-ring is, of course, alone

visible, the quadrants 3 and 4 on the under side are covered

by 2 and 1 respectively.

Again, let a two-sheeted surface with four branch-points
1
z =  1,  be given, where   is real and < 1, and imagine
 








the two positive half-sheets of the plane to be shaded as in the

gure. Let the branch-lines coincide with the straight lines
  1 1
between +1 and, and between 1 andrespectively.
      
This two-sheeted surface is known to represent the branching
p
222
of w =(1 z)   (1  z) and by proper choice of branch-

lines we can arrange that the real part of w shall be positive

throughout the upper sheet. Now consider the integral

              Z
                  z
                  dz
          W =:
                0w

This also, as is well-known, gives a representation of the

two-sheeted surface upon a rectangle, the relation between the

two being given in detail in the following gure, where the

shading and other divisions of Fig. 37 are reproduced. To the[sect xv.] riemann's theory.67













upper sheet of Fig. 37 corresponds the left side of this gure.

The representation near the branch-points of the two-sheeted

surface should be specially noticed.

It would perhaps be simplest to proceed rst from Fig. 37

by stereographic projection to a doubly-covered sphere with

four branch-points on a meridian|then to cut this surface

along the meridian into four hemispheres, which by proper

bending and stretching in the vicinity of the branch-points are

then to be changed into plane rectangles|and lastly to place

these four rectangles, in accordance with the relation among

the four hemispheres, side by side as in Fig. 38. Moreover

it is thus made evident that in Fig. 38 to one and the same

point on the original surface correspond exactly two (associ-

ated) points on the edge. And now to arrive at the required

relation between the anchor-ring and the two-sheeted surface

we have only to ensure by proper choice of   that the rectangle

of Fig. 38 shall be similar to that of Fig. 35. A proportional[sect xv.] riemann's theory.68


magnication of the one rectangle (which again is e ected by

a conformal deformation) will then make it exactly cover the

other and the result is a uniform conformal representation of

the two-sheeted surface upon the anchor-ring or vice versa.

Here again it is su cient to give a gure corresponding ex-

actly to Fig. 36. The shading in this gure is conned to the













upper part of the anchor-ring; on the remainder, the lower half

should be shaded while the upper half is blank.

The required conformal representation has thus been actu-

ally e ected. Now, conversely, we will determine on the surface

of the anchor-ring the streamings by means of which (accord-

ing to x 14) the representation is brought about. There are
      1
cross-points at  1,  , and algebraic innities of unit multi-
       
plicity at the two points at 1. The equipotential curves and

the stream-lines are most easily found by using the rectangle[sect xv.] riemann's theory.69


as an intermediate gure. The curves x = const., y = const.

of the z-plane, Fig. 37, obviously correspond on the rectangle

of Fig. 38 to those shown in Fig. 40 and Fig. 41. The arrows

are conned to the curves y = const. to distinguish them as

stream-lines.










We have now only to treat these gures in the manner

described for Fig. 35 and we obtain an anchor-ring and the

required system of curves on its surface. The result is the

following.[sect xvi.] riemann's theory.70


In Fig. 42, by reason of the method of projection, the four

cross-points of the streaming appear as points of contact of the

equipotential curves with the apparent rim of the anchor-ring.


x 16. Functions of x+iy which correspond to the Stream-

ings already investigated.

Let x + iy, as in x 14, be a uniform complex function of

position on the surface, with m simple algebraic innities; let

us transform the surface by the methods there given into an m-
                       
sheeted surface over the x+iy planeand let us then ask into

what functions of the argument x + iy the complex functions

of position we have hitherto investigated have been changed?

The results of x 6 should here be borne in mind.

First, let w be a complex function of position which, like x+

iy, is uniform on the surface. From the assumptions respecting

the innities of the functions, and particularly those of uniform

functions, it follows at once that w, as a function of x+iy, has

no essential singularity. Again, w, on the m-sheeted surface as

on the original surface, is uniform. Hence it follows by known

propositions that w is an algebraic function of z.

We have here not excluded the possibility of the m values

of w which correspond to the same z coinciding everywhere

  at a time (where   must of course be a divisor of m). But

it must be possible to choose functions w such that this may

not be the case. We have already (x 13) determined uniform

 
This geometrical transformation is of course not essential; it merely
preserves the connection with the usual presentations of the subject.[sect xvi.] riemann's theory.71


functions with arbitrarily assigned innities; thus, to avoid the

above contingency, we need only choose the innities of w in

such a way that no   of them lead to the same z. Then we

have:

The irreducible equation between w and z

          f(w; z) = 0

is of the mth degree in w.

Similarly, it will be of the nth degree in z, if n is the sum

of the orders of the innities of w.

But the connection between the equation f = 0 and the

surface is still closer than is shown by the mere agreement of

the degree with the number of the sheets. To every point of the

surface there belongs only one pair of values w, z, which satisfy

the equation; and conversely, to every such pair of values there
     
belongs, in general,only one point of the surface. Equation

and surface are, so to speak, connected by a uniform relation.

Now let w1be another uniform function on the surface; it

is therefore certainly an algebraic function of z. Then, when

once the equation f(w; z) = 0 has been formed, with the above

assumption, the character of this algebraic function can be ex-

pressed in half a dozen words. For it can be shown that w1is

a rational function of w and z, and, conversely, that every

rational function of w and z is a function with the character-

istics of w1. This last is self-evident. For a rational function

 
In special cases this may not be so. If we regard w, z, as coordinates
and interpret the equation between them by a curve, the double-points
of this curve, as we know, correspond to these exceptional cases.[sect xvi.] riemann's theory.72


of w and z is uniform on the surface; moreover, as an ana-

lytical function of z, it is a complex function of position on

the surface. The rst part is easily proved. Let the m values
                              (1)(2)(m)
of w belonging to a special value of z be w, w, : : :, w
( )
(in general, w) and the corresponding values of w1(which
                  (1)(2)(m)
are not all necessarily distinct) w, w, : : :, w. Then the
                  111
sum,
(1)(1) (2)(2) (m)(m) 
ww+ ww+ : : : + ww
111

(where   is an arbitrary integer, positive or negative), being
                              ( ) 
                                  ( )
a symmetric function of the various values ww, is a uni-
                              1
form function of z, and therefore, being an algebraic function,

is a rational function of z. From any m of such equations

        (1)(2)(m)
      w; w; : : : ; w;
      111

being linearly involved, can be found, and it can easily be
    ( )
shown that each wis, as it should be, a rational function of
  1
      ( )
the corresponding wand of z.

With the help of this proposition we can at once deter-

mine the character of those functions of z which arise from

the multiform functions of position of which we have been

treating. Let W be such a function. Then W must certainly

be an analytical function of z; we may therefore speak of a
        dW
di erential coe cient, and this again is a complex func-
        dz
tion of position on the surface. Qu a function of position it is

necessarily uniform; for the multiformity of W is conned to

constant moduli of periodicity, any multiples of which may be[sect xvi.] riemann's theory.73


                                    dW
additively associated with the initial value. Henceis, by
                                      dz
what has just been proved, a rational function of w and z, and

W is therefore the integral of such a function, viz.:
            R
        W =R(w; z)dz:

The converse proposition, that every such integral gives

rise to a complex function of position on the surface belonging

to the class of functions hitherto discussed, is self-evident on

the grounds of a known argument which considers, on the one

hand, the innities of the integrals, on the other, the changes

in the values of the integrals caused by alterations in the path

of integration. It is not necessary to discuss this here at greater

length.

We have now arrived at a well-dened result. Having once

determined the algebraical equation which denes the relation

between z and w, where w is highly arbitrary, all other func-

tions of position are given in kind; they are co-extensive in

their totality with the rational functions of w and z and the

integrals of such functions.

A convenient example is the repeatedly considered case of

the anchor-ring, p = 1, with, for z and w, the functions dis-

cussed in the last section, the function z being the one il-

lustrated by Figs. 42, 43. The equation between these being

simply
    2222
    w= (1 z)   (1  z);
R
the integralsR(w; z)dz are those generally known as elliptic

integrals. Among them, by x 12, there is one single integral,[sect xvii.] riemann's theory.74


\nite everywhere." From the representation given in Fig. 38
                    Z
                      dz
it follows that this is no other thanthere considered, the
                        w
so-called integral of the rst kind. The equipotential curves

and stream-lines are shown in Figs. 21, 22. But the functions

corresponding to Figs. 29, 30 and to Figs. 31, 32 are also famil-

iar in ordinary analysis. In one case we have a function with

two logarithmic discontinuities, in the other case one with one

algebraic discontinuity. Regarded as functions of z these are

the elliptic integrals usually called integrals of the third kind,

and integrals of the second kind respectively.


x 17. Scope and Signicance of the previous Investigations.

The last section has actually accomplished the solution of

the general problem indicated in x 7. The most general of the

complex functions of position here treated of have been de-

termined on an arbitrary surface, and the analytical relations

among these have been dened by observation of the fact that

all are dependent, in the sense of ordinary analysis, on a single,

uniform, but otherwise arbitrarily chosen function of position.

To complete the discussion, therefore, a synoptic review of the

subject alone is wanting, to ascertain the total result of the

investigation. We have obtained, though not the whole con-

tent, yet at least the principles of Riemann's theory, and for

further deductions Riemann's original work as well as other

presentations of the theory may be referred to.

First, to establish that these investigations do actually[sect xvii.] riemann's theory.75


comprehend the totality of algebraic functions and their inte-

grals. For if any algebraical equation f(w; z) = 0 is given, we

can construct, as usual, the proper many-sheeted surface over

the z-plane, and on this we can then study the one-valued

streamings and complex functions of position (cf. x 15).

We then enquire, is the knowledge of these functions really

furthered by these investigations? In this connection we must

remember that it was chiey the multiplicity of value of the in-

tegrals which for so long hindered any advance in their theory.

That integrals acquire a multiplicity of value when logarith-

mic discontinuities make their appearance had been already

observed by Cauchy. But it was only through Riemann's sur-

faces that the other kind of periodicity was clearly brought to

light,|that, namely, which has its origin in the connectivity of

the surface, and is measured along the cross-cuts of that sur-

face. Another point is this:|transformation by substitutions

had long been employed in the examination of integrals, but

without much more result than their mere empirical evalua-

tion. In Riemann's theory an extensive class of substitutions

presents itself automatically, and is to be critically examined

in operation. The variables w, z, are merely any two indepen-

dent, uniform functions of position; any other two, w1, z1, can

be equally well assumed as fundamental, whereby w1, z1prove

to be any rational, but otherwise arbitrary functions of w, z,

and these in their turn to be rational functions of w1, z1. The

Riemann's surface is not necessarily a ected by this change.

Hence among the numerous accidental properties of the func-

tions, we distinguish certain essential ones which are unaltered[sect xviii.] riemann's theory.76


by uniform transformations. And in the number p especially

such an invariantive element presents itself from the outset.

Thus Riemann's theory, avoiding these two di culties which

had hampered former investigations, proceeds at once to de-

termine in what way the functions in question are arbitrary.

This was accomplished in x 10 by the proposition: the inni-

ties of the functions (with the restrictions we have assumed

throughout) and the moduli of periodicity of its real part at the

cross-cuts, are arbitrary and su cient data for the determina-

tion of the function.

This fairly represents the advantage gained by this treat-

ment if, with most mathematicians, we place the interests of

the theory of functions foremost. But it must be borne in

mind that the opposite point of view is as fundamentally jus-

tiable. The knowledge of one-valued streamings on given

surfaces may with good reason be regarded as an end in it-

self, since in numerous physical problems it leads directly to a

solution. Among the innite possible varieties of these stream-

ings Riemann's theory is a valuable guide for it indicates the

connection between the streamings and the algebraic functions

of analysis.

Finally, we may bring forward the geometrical side of the

subject and consider Riemann's theory as a means of making

the theory of the conformal representation of one closed surface

upon another accessible to analytical treatment. The third

part of this pamphlet is devoted to this view of the subject; it

is unnecessary to dwell on it at present at greater length.[sect xviii.] riemann's theory.77


x 18. Extension of the Theory.

In Riemann's own train of thought, as I have here at-

tempted to show, the Riemann's surface not only provides an

intuitive illustration of the functions in question, but it ac-

tually denes them. It seems possible to separate these two

parts, to take the denition of the function from elsewhere and

to retain the surface only as a means of intuitive illustration.

This is, in fact, what has been done by most mathematicians,

the more readily that Riemann's denition of a function in-
               
volves considerable di cultieswhen subjected to more exact

scrutiny. They therefore usually begin with the algebraical

equation and the denition of the integral and then construct

the appropriate Riemann's surface.

But this method produces ipso facto a considerable gen-

eralisation of the original conception. Hitherto, two surfaces

were only held to be equivalent when one could be derived

from the other by a conformal representation with a uniform

correspondence of points. Now there is no longer any reason

for retaining the conformal character of the representation.

Every surface which by a continuous uniform transformation

can be changed into the given surface, in fact any geometrical

conguration whose elements can be projected upon the origi-

nal surface by a continuous uniform projection, serves equally

well to give a graphic representation of the functions in ques-

tion. I have, in former papers, followed out this idea in two

di erent ways, to which I should like to refer.

 
Cf. the remarks on this subject in the Preface.[sect xviii.] riemann's theory.78


On one occasion I used the conception of a normal surface

(cf. x 8) which, although representative, was open to various

modications, and on this I attempted to illustrate the course
                                           
of the functions in question by various graphical means.The
                              y
nets of polygons which I have repeatedly usedfall also under

this head; these I constructed by means of an appropriate dis-

section of the Riemann's surface afterwards spread out over

the plane. It need not here be discussed whether these gures,

which in the rst place are susceptible of continuous deforma-

tion, may not hereafter, for the sake of further investigations in

the theory of functions, be restricted by a law of form whereby

it may be possible to dene the functions graphically repre-

sented by each gure.
          z
On another occasionI undertook to bring out as intu-

itively as possible the connection between the conceptions of

the theory of functions and those of ordinary analytical geom-

etry, in which last an equation in two variables means a curve.

Starting from the proposition that every imaginary straight

line on the plane, and therefore also every imaginary tangent

to a curve, has one and only one real point, I obtained a Rie-

mann's surface depending essentially on the course of the curve

 
Cf. my papers on Elliptic Modular-functions in Math. Ann., t. xiv.,
xv., xvii.
y
Cf. especially the diagrams in Math. Ann., t. xiv. (\Zur Trans-
formation siebenter Ordnung der elliptischen Functionen"), and Dyck's
paper, to be cited presently, ib., t. xvii.
z
\Ueber eine neue Art Riemann'scher Flachen," Math. Ann.,
t. vii., x.[sect xviii.] riemann's theory.79


at every point. These surfaces I have hitherto employed, fol-

lowing my original purpose, only to illustrate intuitively the
                       
behaviour of certain simple integrals.But a remark similar

to that on the nets of polygons may here be made. In so far

as the surface is subjected to a law of form, it must be possi-

ble to use it as a denition of the functions which exist on it.

And it is actually possible to form a partial di erential equa-

tion for these functions somewhat analogous to the di erential

equation of the second order considered in xx 1 and 5; except

that the di erential expression on which this equation depends

cannot be directly interpreted by the element of arc.

These few remarks must su ce to indicate developments

which appear to me worthy of consideration.












 
See Harnack (\Ueber die Verwerthung der elliptischen Functionen
fur die Geometrie der Curven dritten Grades"), Math. Ann., t. ix.; and
my paper referred to above, \Ueber den Verlauf der Abel'schen Integrale
bei den Curven vierten Grades," Math. Ann., t. x.          PART III.

          Conclusions.

x 19. On the Moduli of Algebraical Equations.

In one important point, Riemann's theory of algebraic

functions surpasses in results as well as in methods the usual

presentations of this theory. It tells us that, given graphi-

cally a many-sheeted surface over the z plane, it is possible

to construct associated algebraic functions, where it must be

observed that these functions if they exist at all are of a

highly arbitrary character, R(w; z) having in general the same

branchings as w. This theorem is the more remarkable, in that

it implies a statement about an interesting equation of higher

order. For if the branch-points of an m-sheeted surface are

given, there is a nite number of essentially di erent possible

ways of arranging these among the sheets; this number can

be found by considerations belonging entirely to pure anal-
 
ysis situs.But, by the above proposition this number has

its algebraical meaning. Let us with Riemann speak of all

algebraic functions of z as belonging to the same class when

by means of z they can be rationally expressed in terms of
                            y
one another. Then the number in questionis the number of

 
This number has been determined by Herr Kasten, for instance, in
his Inaugural Dissertation: Zur Theorie der dreiblattrigen Riemann'schen
Flache. Bremen, 1876.
y
If I may be allowed to refer once more to my own writings, let me
do so with respect to a passage in Math. Ann., t. xii. (p. 173), which[sect xix.] conclusions.81


di erent classes of algebraic functions which, with respect to z,

have the given branch-values.

In the present and following sections various consequences

are drawn from this preliminary proposition and among these

we may consider in the rst place the question of the moduli

of the algebraic functions, i.e. of those constants which play

the part of the invariants in a uniform transformation of the

equation f(w; z) = 0.

For this purpose let   be a number initially unknown, ex-

pressing the number of degrees of freedom in any one-one

transformation of a surface into itself, i.e. in a conformal rep-

resentation of the surface upon itself. Then let us recall the

number of available constants in uniform functions on given
                                        2mp+1
surfaces (x 13). We found that there were in general 1

uniform functions with m innities and that this, as we stated

without proof, is the exact number when m > 2p2. Now each

of these functions maps the given surface by a uniform trans-

formation upon an m-sheeted surface over the plane. Hence

the totality of the m-sheeted surfaces upon which a given sur-

face can be conformally mapped by a uniform transformation,

and therefore also the number of m-sheeted surfaces with which
                                  2mp+1 
an equation f(w; z) = 0 can be associated, is 1; for
 
1representations give the same m-sheeted surface, by hy-

pothesis.

establishes the result that certain rational functions are fully determined
by the number of their branchings, and again to ib., t. xv., p. 533, where
a detailed discussion shows that there are ten rational functions of the
eleventh degree with certain branch-points.[sect xix.] conclusions.82


          w
But there are in all 1m-sheeted surfaces, where w is the

number of branch-points, i.e. 2m+ 2p2. For, as we observed

above, the surface is given by the branch-points to within a -

nite number of degrees of freedom, and branch-points of higher

multiplicity arise from coalescence of simple branch-points as

we have already explained in connection with the correspond-

ing cross-points in x 1 (cf. Figs. 2, 3). With each of these

surfaces there are, as we know, algebraic functions associated.

The number of moduli is therefore

w (2m + 1 p  ) = 3p 3 +  :

It should be noticed here that the totality of m-sheeted sur-
                                 
faces with w branch-points form a continuum,corresponding

to the same fact, pointed out in x 13 with respect to uniform

functions with m innities on a given surface. Hence we con-

clude that all algebraical equations with a given p form a single

continuous manifoldness, in which all equations derivable from

one another by a uniform transformation constitute an indi-

vidual element. Thus, for the rst time, a precise meaning

attaches itself to the number of the moduli; it determines the

dimensions of this continuous manifoldness.

The number   has still to be determined and this is done

by means of the following propositions.

1. Every equation for which p = 0 can by means of a one-
                          3
one relation be transformed into itself 1times. For on the

 
This follows e.g. from the theorems of Luroth and of Clebsch, Math.
Ann., t. iv., v.[sect xix.] conclusions.83


corresponding Riemann's surface uniform functions with one

innity only are triply innite in number (x 13), and in order

that the transformation of the surface into itself may be uni-

form, it is su cient to make any two of these correspond to

each other. Or the proof may be more fully given as follows.

If one function is called z, all the rest are (by x 16) algebraic

and uniform, i.e. rational functions of z, and since the relation

must be reciprocal, linear functions of z. Conversely every

linear function of z is a uniform function of position on the

surface having one innity only. Hence the most general uni-

form transformation of the equation into itself is obtained by

transforming every point of the Riemann's surface by means

of the formula
                 z + 
          z1=;
              z +  

  :  :  :   being arbitrary.

2. Every equation for which p = 1 can be transformed into

itself in a singly innite number of ways. For proof consider

the integral W nite over the whole surface, and in particular

the representation upon the W-plane of the Riemann's surface

when properly dissected. This has already been done in a

particular case (x 15, Fig. 38) and a minute investigation of the

general case is hardly necessary as the considerations involved

are usually fully worked out in the theory of elliptic functions.

The result is that to every value of W belongs one and only

one point of the Riemann's surface, while the innitely many

values of W corresponding to the same point of the Riemann's

surface can be constructed from one of these values in the form[sect xix.] conclusions.84


W + m1!1+ m2!2, where m1, m2are any integers and !1, !2

are the periods of the integral. For a uniform deformation a

point W1must be associated with each point W in such a way

that every increase of W by a period gives rise to a similar

increase of W1and vice versa. This is certainly possible, but

in general only by writing W1=  W + C; in special cases
                !1
(when the ratio of the periodspossesses certain properties
                !2
belonging to the theory of numbers) W1may also =  iW +C
                           
or   W+C (  being a third root of unity).However that may

be we have in each case in the formul  of transformation only

one arbitrary constant and hence corresponding to its di erent

values we have a singly innite number of transformations, as

stated above.

3. Equations for which p > 1 cannot be changed into them-
                      y
selves in an innite number of ways.For the analytical proof

of this statement I refer to Schwarz (Crelle, t. lxxxvii.) and

to Hettner (Gott. Nachr., 1880, p. 386). By intuitive methods

the correctness of the statement may be shown as follows. If

there were an innite number of uniform transformations of

the equation into itself, it would be possible to displace the

Riemann's surface continuously over itself in such a way that

 
This result, which is well known from the theory of elliptic functions,
is stated in the text without proof.
y
This theorem refers to a continuous group of transformations, those
with arbitrarily variable parameters. It is not discussed in the text
whether, under certain circumstances, a surface for which p > 1 may
not be transformed into itself by an innite number of discrete transfor-
mations; though when p is nite in value this also seems to be impossible.[sect xix.] conclusions.85


every smallest part should remain similar to itself. The curves

of displacement must plainly cover the surface completely and

at the same time simply; there can be no cross-point in this

system, for such a point would have to be regarded as a station-

ary point in order to avoid multiformity in the transformation

and the rate of displacement would there necessarily be zero.

But then an innitesimal element of surface approaching the

cross-point in the course of the displacement would necessarily

be compressed in the direction of motion and perpendicular to

that direction it would be stretched; it could therefore not re-

main similar to itself, contrary to the conception of conformal

representation. But on the other hand all systems of curves

covering a surface for which p > 1 completely and simply must

have cross-points; this is the proposition proved in somewhat

less general form in x 11. The continuous displacement of the

surface over itself is thus impossible, as was to be proved.

By these propositions,   = 3 for p = 0,   = 1 for p = 1,

and for all greater values of p,   = 0. The number of moduli is

therefore, for p = 0 zero, for p = 1 one, and for p > 1 3p 3.

It may be worth while to add the following remarks. To

determine a point in a space of 3p 3 dimensions we do not

generally conne ourselves to 3p3 coordinates; more are em-

ployed connected by algebraical, or transcendental relations.

But moreover it is occasionally convenient to introduce pa-

rameters, of which di erent series denote the same point of

the manifoldness. The relations which then hold among the

3p 3 moduli necessarily existing for p > 1 have been but

little investigated. On the other hand the theory of elliptic[sect xx.] conclusions.86


functions has given us an exact knowledge of the subject for

the case p = 1. I mention the results for this case in order

to be able to express myself precisely and yet briey in what

follows. Above all let me point out that for p = 1 the al-

gebraical element (to use the expression employed above) is

actually distinguished by one and only one quantity: the abso-
      2
    g
      2 
lute invariant J =.Whenever, in what follows, it is said
     
that in order to transform two equations for which p = 1 into

each other it is not only su cient but also necessary that the

moduli should be equal, the invariant J is always meant. In
                                      2
its place, as we know, it is usual to put Legendre's  , which,

given J, is six-valued, so that by its use a certain clumsiness

in the formulation of general propositions is inevitable. And
                              !1
it is even worse if the ratio of the periodsof the elliptic
                              !2
integral of the rst kind is taken for the modulus, though this

is convenient in other ways; for an innite number of values of

the modulus then denote the same algebraical element.


x 20. Conformed Representation of closed Surfaces upon

themselves.

In accordance with our original plan we now develop the

geometrical side of the subject, in order to obtain at least the

foundations of the theory of conformal representation of sur-

 
Cf. Math. Ann., t. xiv., pp. 112 et seq.[sect xx.] conclusions.87


       
faces upon each other,so following up the indications which,

as we have already remarked in the Preface, were given by

Riemann at the close of his Dissertation. For the cases p = 0,

p = 1, I shall for the most part, to avoid di useness, conne

myself to mere statements of results or indications of proofs.

And rst, in treating of the conformal representations of a

closed surface upon itself, a distinction which has been hith-

erto ignored must be introduced: the representation may be

accomplished without or with reversal of angles. We have an

example of the rst case when a sphere is made to coincide

with itself by rotation about its centre; of the second case

when it is reected across a diametral plane with the same re-

sult. The analytical treatment hitherto employed corresponds

to representations of the rst kind only. If u+iv and u1+iv1

are two complex functions of position on the same surface,

u = u1, v = v1gives the most general representation of the

rst kind (cf. x 6). But it is easy to see how to extend the

formula in order to include representations of the second kind

as well. We have simply to write u = u1, v = v1in order to

obtain a representation of the second kind.

 
The theorems to be established in the text are, for the most part,
not explicitly given in the literature of the subject. For the surfaces for
which p = 0, compare Schwarz's memoir (Berl. Monatsber., 1870), al-
ready cited. And, further, a paper by Schottky: Ueber die conforme Ab-
bildung mehrfach zusammenhangender Flachen, which appeared in 1875
as a Berlin Inaugural Dissertation and was reprinted in a modied form
in Crelle, t. lxxxiii. It treats of those plane surfaces of connectivity p
which have p + 1 boundaries.[sect xx.] conclusions.88


Let us rst take from the theorems of the last section those

parts which refer to representations of the rst kind; in the

most geometrical language possible we have then the following

theorems:

It is always possible to transform into themselves in an

innite number of ways by a representation of the rst kind

surfaces for which p = 0, p = 1, but never surfaces for which

p > 1.

For the surfaces for which p = 0 the only representation

of the rst kind is determined if three arbitrary points of the

surface are associated with three other arbitrary points of the

same.

If p = 1, to any arbitrary point of the surface a second

point may be arbitrarily assigned, and there is then in general

a two-fold possibility of determination of the representation of

the rst kind, though in special cases there may be a four-fold

or six-fold possibility.

These propositions of course do not exclude the possibility

that special surfaces for which p > 1 may be transformed into

themselves by discontinuous transformations of the rst kind.

If this occurs it constitutes an invariantive property for any

conformal deformation of the surface and by its existence and

modality specially interesting classes of surfaces may be dis-
                 
tinguished from the remainder.This point of view, however,

 
Algebraical equations with a group of uniform transformations into
themselves correspond to these surfaces. The observations in the text
thus refer to investigations such as those lately undertaken by Herr Dyck
(cf. Math. Ann., t. xvii., \Aufstellung und Untersuchung von Gruppe[sect xx.] conclusions.89


need not be discussed more fully here.

With respect to the transformations of the second kind we

may rst say that every such transformation, combined with

one of the rst kind, produces a new transformation of the

second kind. Now by the above theorems we have complete

knowledge of the transformations of the rst kind for surfaces

for which p = 0, p = 1; in these cases therefore it su ces to

enquire whether one transformation of the second kind exists.

For the surfaces for which p = 0 this is at once answered

in the a rmative. For it is su cient to take any one of the

uniform functions of position with only one innity, x + iy,

and then to write x1= x, y1= y. For the surfaces for

which p = 1 the case is di erent. We nd that in general no

transformation of the second kind exists. The easiest way to

prove this is to consider the values which the integral W, nite

over the whole surface, assumes on the anchor-ring, p = 1.

Let the points W = m1!1+m2!2be marked on the W plane,

m1, m2being as before arbitrary positive or negative integers.

It is then easily shown that a transformation of the second

kind can change the surface for which p = 1 into itself only

if this system of points has an axis of symmetry. This case

occurs when the invariant J, dened above, is real; according

as J is < 1 or > 1, these points in the W plane are corners of

a rhomboidal or rectangular system.

Now let p > 1. If one transformation of the second kind

exists for this surface, there will in general be no other of

und Irrationalitat regularer Riemann'scher Flachen").[sect xxi.] conclusions.90


 
the same kind.For otherwise the repetition or combination

of these transformations would produce a transformation of

the rst kind distinct from the identical transformation. The

transformation must then necessarily be symmetrical, i.e. it

must connect the points of the surface in pairs. The surface

itself will for this reason be called symmetrical. Moreover un-

der this name I shall in future include all those surfaces for

which there exists a transformation of the second kind lead-

ing, when repeated, to identity. To this class belong evidently

all surfaces for which p = 0, and such surfaces for which p = 1

as have real invariants.


x 21. Special Treatment of symmetrical Surfaces.

Among the symmetrical surfaces now to be considered, di-

visions at once present themselves according to the number

and kind of the \curves of transition" on the surfaces; i.e. of

those curves whose points remain unchanged during the sym-

metrical transformation in question.

The number of these curves can in no case exceed p + 1.

For if a surface is cut along all its curves of transition with the

exception of one, it will still remain an undivided whole, the

symmetrical halves hanging together along the one remaining

curve of transition. Thus if there were more than p + 1 of

 
There are, of course, surfaces capable of a certain number of trans-
formations of the rst kind, together with an equal number of transfor-
mations of the second kind; these correspond to the regular symmetrical
surfaces of Dyck's work.[sect xxi.] conclusions.91


these, more than p loop-cuts in the surface could be e ected

without resolving it into distinct portions, thus contradicting

the denition of p.

On the other hand there may be any number of curves of

transition below this limit. It will be su cient here to discuss

the cases p = 0, p = 1; for the higher p's examples will present

themselves naturally.

(1) When a sphere is made to coincide with itself by re-

ection in a diametral plane, the great circle by which the

diametral plane cuts it, is the one curve of transition. An ex-

ample of the other kind is obtained by making every point of

the sphere correspond to the point at the opposite end of its

diameter. Both examples can be easily generalised; the anal-

ysis is as follows. If one curve of transition exists, there are

uniform functions of position with only one innity, which as-

sume real values at all points of the curve of transition. If one

of these functions is x + iy the transformation, already given

as an example above, is x1= x, y1= y. For the second

case, a function x + iy can be so chosen that 1 and 0, and

+1 and 1, are corresponding points. Then

                      1
        x1 iy1=
                  x + iy

is the analytical formula for the corresponding transformation.

(2) In the case p = 1, the invariant J must in the rst

place, as we know, be assumed to be real. First, let it be > 1.

Then the integral W, which is nite over the whole surface,

can be reduced to a normal form by the introduction of an[sect xxi.] conclusions.92


appropriate constant factor in such a manner that one period

becomes real = a and the other purely imaginary = ib. If we

then write

U1= U; V1= V; in W = U + iV;

we obtain a symmetrical transformation of the surface for

which p = 1, with the two curves of transition,

                        b
      V = 0; V =;
                        2

but if we write

            a
    U1= U +; V1= V;
            2

which again is a symmetrical transformation of the original

surface, we have the case in which there is no curve of transi-

tion. The case with only one curve of transition occurs when

J < 1. W can then be so chosen that its two periods are

conjugately complex. We write, as before,

      U1= U; V1= V;

and obtain a symmetrical transformation with the one curve

of transition, V = 0.

Besides this rst division of symmetrical surfaces according

to the number of the curves of transition there is yet a second.

The cases of no curves of transition and of p + 1 curves of

transition are to be excluded for one moment. Then a two-fold[sect xxi.] conclusions.93


possibility presents itself: Dissection of the surface along all

the curves of transition may or may not resolve it into distinct

portions. Let   be the number of curves of transition. It is

easily shown that p  must be uneven if the surface is resolved

into distinct portions; that there is no further limitation may

be shown by examples. We shall therefore distinguish between

symmetrical surfaces of one kind or of the other and count the

surfaces with p+ 1 curves of transition among the rst kind|

those that are resolved into distinct portions|and the surfaces

with no curves of transition among the second kind.

These propositions have a certain analogy with the results

obtained in analytical geometry by investigating the forms of
       
curves with a given p.And in fact we see that this analogy

is justied. Analytical geometry is (primarily) concerned only

with equations, f(w; z) = 0, with real coe cients. Let us rst

observe that every such equation determines a symmetrical

Riemann's surface over the z-plane, inasmuch as the equation,

and therefore the surface, remains unchanged if w and z are

simultaneously replaced by their conjugate values, and that

the curves of transition on this surface correspond to the real

series of values of w, z, which satisfy f = 0, i.e. to the various

circuits of the curve f = 0, in the sense of analytical geometry.

But the converse is also easily obtained. Let a symmetrical

 
Cf. Harnack, \Ueber die Vieltheiligkeit der ebenen algebraischen
Curven," Math. Ann., t. x., pp. 189 et seq.; cf. also pp. 415, 416, ib.
where I have given the two divisions of those curves. It is perhaps as
well in these investigations to start from the symmetrical surfaces and
Riemann's Theory as presented in the text.[sect xxi.] conclusions.94


surface, and on it any arbitrary complex function of position,

u + iv, be given. The symmetrical deformation causes a re-

versal of angles on the surface. If then to every point of the

surface values u1, v1, are ascribed equal to those u, v, given by

the symmetrical point, u1iv1will be a new complex function

of position. Now construct

  U + iV = (u + u1) + i(v v1);

so obtaining an expression which in general does not vanish

identically; to ensure this, it is su cient to assume that the

innities of u + iv are unsymmetrically placed. We have then

a complex function of position with equal real parts, but equal

and opposite imaginary parts at symmetrically placed points.

Of such functions, U +iV , let any two, W, Z, be taken, these

being moreover uniform functions of position. The algebraical

equation existing between these two has then the characteristic

of remaining unaltered if W, Z are simultaneously replaced by

their conjugate values. It is therefore an equation with real

coe cients and the required proof has been obtained.

I supplement this discussion with a few remarks on the real

uniform transformations of real equations f(w; z) = 0 into

themselves, or, what amounts to the same thing, on confor-

mal representations, of the rst kind, of symmetrical surfaces

upon themselves, in which symmetrical points pass over into

other symmetrical points. Such transformations, by the gen-

eral proposition of x 19, can occur in innite number only for

p = 0, p = 1; we therefore conne ourselves to these cases. Let[sect xxii.] conclusions.95


us rst take p = 1. Then we see at once that among the trans-

formations already established, we need now only consider the

one

          W1=  W + C;

where C is a real constant. Similarly when p = 0, for the rst

case. The relations x1= x, y1= y remain unaltered if

  x + iy = z and x1+ iy1= z1

are simultaneously transformed by the substitution

          0 z + 
        z=;
              z +  

where the ratios   :  :  :   are real. When p = 0, for

the second case, the matter is rather more complicated. Sim-

ilar transformations with three real parameters are again pos-

sible; but these assume the following form, z being the same

as above,

    0(a + ib)z + (c + id)
  z=;
          (c id)z + (a ib)

where a : b : c : d are the three real parameters. This result

is implicitly contained in the investigations referring to the

analytical representation of the rotations of the x + iy sphere
 
about its centre.

 
Cf. Cayley, \On the correspondence between homographies and ro-
tations," Math. Ann., t. xv., pp. 238{240.[sect xxii.] conclusions.96


x 22. Conformal Representation of di erent closed Sur-

faces upon each other.

If we now wish to map di erent closed surfaces upon each

other, the foregoing investigation of the conformal representa-

tion of closed surfaces upon themselves will give us the means

of determining how often such a representation can occur, if

it is once possible. Surfaces which can be conformally repre-

sented upon each other certainly possess (as has been already

pointed out) transformations into themselves, consistent with

these. Thus all representations of the one surface upon the

other are obtained by combining one arbitrary representation

with all those which change one of the given surfaces into itself.

To this I need not return.

Let us rst consider general, i.e. non-symmetrical surfaces.

Then the enumerations of the moduli of algebraical equations

given in x 19 are at once applicable.

We have rst: Surfaces for which p = 0 can always be con-

formally represented upon each other, and we nd besides that

surfaces for which p = 1 have one modulus, surfaces for which

p > 1, 3p 3 moduli, unaltered by conformal representation.

Every such modulus is in general a complex constant. Since in

the case of symmetrical surfaces real parameters alone must be

considered, we shall suppose the modulus to be separated into

its real and imaginary parts. Then we have: If two surfaces

for which p > 0 can be represented upon each other there must

exist equations among the real constants of the surface, 2 for

p = 1, and 6p 6 for p > 1.[sect xxii.] conclusions.97


Turning now to the symmetrical surfaces, we must make

one preliminary remark. It is evident that two such surfaces

can be \symmetrically" projected upon one another only if

they have, as well as the same p, the same number   of curves

of transition, and moreover if they both belong either to the

rst or to the second kind. The enumeration in x 13 of the

number of constants in uniform functions is now to be made

over again, with the special condition required for symmetrical

surfaces that those functions only are to be considered whose

values at symmetrical places are conjugately imaginary. And

then, as in x 19, we must combine with this the number of

those many-sheeted surfaces which can be spread over the z-

plane and are symmetrical with respect to the axis of real

quantities. To avoid an innite number of transformations

into themselves, I will here assume p > 1. The work is then so

simple that I do not need to reproduce it for this special case.

The only di erence is that those constants which were before

perfectly free from conditions must now be either every one

real or else conjugately complex in pairs. Hence all the arbi-

trary quantities are reduced to half the number. This may be

stated as follows: In order that it may be possible to represent

two symmetrical surfaces for which p > 1 upon one another, it

is necessary that, over and above the agreement of attributes,

3p3 equations should subsist among the real constants of the

surface.

The cases p = 0, p = 1, which were here excluded, are

implicitly considered in the preceding section. Of course two

symmetrical surfaces for which p = 1 which are to be rep-[sect xxiii.] conclusions.98


resented upon one another must have the same invariant J,

giving one condition for the constants of the surface, inas-

much as J is certainly real. But besides this we nd at once

that the representation is always possible, so long as the sym-

metrical surfaces agree in the number of curves of transition,

a condition which is obviously always necessary.


x 23. Surfaces with Boundaries and unifacial Surfaces.

By means of the results just obtained an apparently im-

portant generalisation may be made in the investigation of the

representations of closed surfaces, and it was for the sake of

this generalisation that symmetrical surfaces were discussed in

so much detail. For surfaces with boundaries and unifacial sur-

faces (which may or may not be bounded) may now be taken

into account and the problems referring to them all solved at

once. With reference to the introduction of boundaries here,

a certain limitation hitherto implicitly accepted must be re-

moved. The surfaces employed have been all assumed to be

of continuous curvature or at least to have discontinuities at

isolated points only (the branch-points). But there is now no

reason against the admission of other discontinuities. For in-

stance, we may suppose that the surface is made up of a nite

number of di erent pieces (in general, of various curvatures)

which meet at nite angles after the manner of a polyhedron;

for there is nothing to prevent the conception of electric cur-

rents on these surfaces as well as on those of continuous curva-

ture. Now surfaces with boundaries are included among such[sect xxiii.] conclusions.99


 
surfaces.For let the two sides of the bounded surface be con-

ceived to be two faces of a polyhedron meeting along a boundary
                             
(and therefore everywhere at an angle of 360), and employ the

total surface composed of these two faces instead of the original
y
bounded surface.

This total surface is then in fact a closed surface; but it is

moreover symmetrical, for if the points which lie one above the

other are interchanged, the total surface undergoes a confor-

mal transformation into itself, the angles being reversed; the

boundaries are here the curves of transition. But at the same

time the division of symmetrical surfaces into two kinds ob-

tains an important signicance. The usual bounded surfaces,

in which the two sides are distinguishable, evidently corre-

spond to the rst kind; but unifacial surfaces, in which it is

possible to pass continuously from one side to the other on the

surface itself, belong to the second kind. The case, above men-

tioned, in which the unifacial surface has no boundary has also

to be considered. It is a symmetrical surface without a curve

of transition.

Let us now consider in order the various cases to be distin-

guished.

 
I owe this idea to an opportune conversation with Herr Schwarz
(Easter, 1881). Compare Schottky's paper, already cited, Crelle,
t. lxxxiii., and Schwarz's original investigations in the representations
of closed polyhedral surfaces upon the sphere. (Berl. Monatsber., 1865,
pp. 150 et seq. Crelle, t. lxx., pp. 121{136, t. lxxv., p. 330.)
y
I express myself in the text, for brevity, as if the original surface
were bifacial, but the case of unifacial surfaces is not to be excluded.[sect xxiii.] conclusions.100


(1) First, let a simply-connected surface with one boundary

be given. This surface now appears as a closed surface for

which p = 0, which, since there is a curve of transition, can

be symmetrically represented upon itself. We nd therefore

that two such surfaces can always be conformally represented

upon one another by transformations of either kind, and that

there are always three real disposable constants. These can

be employed to make an arbitrary interior point on the one

surface correspond to an arbitrary interior point on the other

surface and also an arbitrary point on the boundary of one to

an arbitrary point on the boundary of the other. This method

of determination corresponds to the well-known proposition

concerning the conformal representation of a simply-connected

plane surface with one boundary upon the surface of a circle,

given by Riemann, and explained at length in No. 21 of his

Dissertation as an example of the application of his theory to

problems of conformal representation.

(2) Further we consider unifacial surfaces for which p = 0,

with no boundaries. From xx 21, 22 it follows at once that two

such surfaces can always be conformally represented upon one

another and that there still remain (by the formul  at the end

of x 21) three real disposable constants.

(3) The di erent cases arising from a total surface for

which p = 1, may be considered together. These include, rst,

the doubly-connected surfaces with two boundaries, that is, sur-

faces which in the simplest form may be thought of as closed

ribbons; and, next, the well-known unifacial surfaces with only

one boundary, obtained by bringing together the two ends of[sect xxiii.] conclusions.101


a rectangular strip of paper after twisting it through an angle
 
of 180. Finally, certain unifacial surfaces with no boundaries

belong to this class. An idea of these may be formed by turn-

ing one end of a piece of india-rubber tubing inside out and

then making it pass through itself so that the outer surface of

one end meets the inner surface of the other. With reference

to all these surfaces it has been established by former propo-

sitions that the representation of one surface upon another of

the same kind is possible if one, but only one, equation exists

among the real constants of the surface; and that the repre-

sentation, if possible at all, is possible in an innite number

of ways, since a double sign and a real constant remain at our

disposal.

(4) We now take the general case of a bifacial surface. The
                                    0
surface has   boundaries and admits moreover of ploop-cuts

which do not resolve it into distinct portions, where either
0
pmust be > 0, or   > 2. Then the total surface composed of
                        0
the upper and under sides admits of 2p+ 1 loop-cuts which
                    0
leave it still connected; for rst the ppossible loop-cuts can be

e ected twice over (on the upper, as well as on the under side),

and then cuts may be made along  1 of the boundaries, and

the total surface is still simply-connected. We will therefore
0
write p = 2p+   1 in the theorems of the foregoing section

and we have the following theorem: Two surfaces of the kind

in question can be represented upon each other, if at all, only

in a nite number of ways. The transformation depends on
0
6p+ 3 6 equations among the real constants of the surface.

(5) We have, nally, the general case of unifacial surfaces[sect xxiv.] conclusions.102


with   boundaries and P other possible loop-cuts when the

surface is considered as a bifacial total surface. Leaving aside

the three cases given in (1), (2), and (3) (P = 0,   = 0 or 1,

and P = 1,   = 0) we have the same proposition as in (4) only
0
that for 2p+ 1 we must write P + , where p may be odd or

even. In particular, the number of real constants of a unifacial

surface which are unchanged by conformal transformation is

          3P + 3  3:

The general theorems and discussions given by Herr Schot-

tky in the paper we have repeatedly cited, are all included in

these results as special cases.


x 24. Conclusion.

The discussion in this last section now drawing to its con-

clusion is, as we have repeatedly mentioned, intended to cor-

respond to the indications given by Riemann at the close of

his Dissertation. It is true we have here conned ourselves

to uniform correspondence between two surfaces by means of

conformal representation, whereas Riemann, as he explicitly

states, was also thinking of multiform correspondence. For

this case it would be necessary to imagine each of the surfaces

covered by several sheets and to nd then a conformal rela-

tion establishing uniform correspondence between the many-

sheeted surfaces so obtained. For every branch-point which

these surfaces might possess a new complex constant would be

at our disposal.[sect xxiv.] conclusions.103


It may here be remarked that we have already considered

in detail at least one case of such a relation. When an arbi-

trary surface is spread over the plane in several sheets (x 15),

there is established between the surface and plane a correspon-

dence which is multiform on one side. Further we may point

out that by means of this special case two arbitrary surfaces

are in fact connected by a relation establishing a multiform

correspondence. For if the two surfaces are each represented

on the plane, then, by means of the plane, there is a relation

between them. The subject of multiform correspondence is of

course by no means exhausted by these remarks. But we have

laid a foundation for its treatment by showing its connection

with Riemann's other speculations in the Theory of Functions,

to an account of which these pages have been devoted.GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS.

      The numbers refer to the pages.

Bifacial, zweiseitig, 101
Boundary, Randcurve, 31
Branch-line, Verzweigungsschnitt, 61
Branch-point, Verzweigungspunct, 59
Circuit, Ast, Zug, 57
Circulation, Wirbel, 9
Conformal representation, conforme Abbildung, 21
Cross-cut, Querschnitt, 31
Cross-point, Kreuzungspunct, 4
Curve of transition, Uebergangscurve, 90
Equipotential curve, Niveaucurve, 2
Essential singularity, wesentlich singulare Stelle, 6
Loop-cut, Ruckkehrschnitt, 31
Modulus, absoluter Betrag, 10
Multiform, vieldeutig, 37
Normal surface, Normalache, 33
One-valued, einformig, 29
Source, Quelle, 8
Steady streaming, stationare Stromung, 2
Stream-line, Stromungscurve, 2
Strength, Ergiebigkeit, 8
Total surface, Gesammtache, 99
Unifacial surface, Doppelache, 98
Uniform, eindeutig, 3
Vortex-point, Wirbelpunct, 8


  CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A. AND SONS. AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of On Riemann's Theory of Algebraic
Functions and their Integrals, by Felix Klein

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON RIEMANN'S THEORY ***

***** This file should be named 36959-pdf.pdf or 36959-pdf.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/9/5/36959/

Produced by Andrew D. Hwang

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission. If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks. Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.


*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work            license.II


(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by            license.III


freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.            license.IV



1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method            license.V


you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic            license.VI


works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied            license.VII


warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation            license.VIII



The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations            license.IX


where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary            license.X


Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.