
ORISON SWETT MARDEN SELF INVESTMENT 
® ORISON SWETT MARDEN, 1911. Copyright to the TIMELESS WISDOM COLLECTION: ® 2013 Business and Leadership Publishing, All rights Reserved No part of this book could be condensed or reproduced without the permit of the author. Published by Business and Leadership Publishing. 
BANDLPUBLISHERS@GMAIL.COM 
Orison Swett Marden is considered a forward thinker and was way ahead of its time. However, please remember that this book is a product of its time and do not reflect the same views on race, gender, sexuality, ethnicity, and interpersonal relations as it would ifitwaswrittentoday. 
Most references to “Man” must be read understanding “Man” as human being, both male and female, as the author intended from the beginning (as a writer of the New Thought Movement, he foughtfortheequalityofwomen). 
Althoughthewisdomtheyimpartisageless,parentsmightwish todiscusswiththeirchildrenhowsomethingshavechangedsince thisbookwaswritten. 
The author uses examples with amounts in US$of the time. 
For the books written between 1895 and 1917, one US dollar is equivalent to around US$25 of 2013. 

World War I brought huge inflation, and by 1920, one US dollar was $11.63 oftoday (less than half than before). 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR ORISON SWETT MARDEN 
BorninNewEnglandin1850,Mardenhadadifficultinfancy,as both his parents died when he was a child. Shuttled from one guardiantoanother,heworkedasa “hiredboy” toearnhiskeep. 
Inspired by an early self-help book by the Scottish author Samuel Smiles, he set out to improve himself and his life circumstances. 
He attended Boston University, where he graduated in 1871, and AndoverTheologicalSeminary. 
He later earned an M.D. in 1881 and an LL.B. degree in 1882, bothinHarvard. 
Then,hestudiedattheBostonSchoolofOratory. 
During his college days he worked at catering and hotel management and was so successful that he had $20,000 (around $500.000 in today’s dollars) in capital when he finished his formal training. 
He bought a property in Rhode Island and developed a resort area. 
During the 1890’s Financial Depression, he lost his hotel. He moved to Chicago, where he worked as hotel manager during the World'sFairof1893. 
ThenhewentbacktoBostonandstartedoveragain. 
He never accepted defeat. On the contrary, the hard times 
inspired him to put together his ideas -particularly concerning optimism-, in a first book, Pushing to the Front, published in 1894, onlytwoyearsafterhehadlosteverything. 
Itbecameanimmediatesuccess,a true best seller ofit time,with phenomenalcirculation. 
He followed this with over 60 books and booklets mostly on the subjects of success, the cultivation of will-power, and positive thinking; but he also wrote on health, fitness and aging well, sexual education,andwomenequality. 
Besides Samuel Smiles, Marden cites as influences on his thinkingtheworksofOliverWendellHolmes,Jr. andRalphWaldo Emerson, forerunners of what, by the 1890s, was called the New Thought Movement. In 1897 he founded Success Magazine, and later became a regular contributor to Elizabeth Towne's New Thoughtmagazine Nautilus during the first two decades of the 20th century. 
Marden, as other contemporary writers of New Thought (like William Walker Atkinson, Wallace Wattles, and Elizabeth and William Towne) believed that our thoughts influence our lives and our life circumstances. They believed that “thoughts are things”, and because of the Law of Attraction (like attracts like), we must beverycarefulwithwhatandhowwethink. 
He said, “We make the world we live in and shape our own environmentwithourthoughts.” 

Yet although he is best known for his books on financial success, he always emphasized that this would come as a result of cultivating one's personal development: “The golden opportunity you are seeking is in yourself. It is not in your environment; it is notinluckorchance,orthehelpofothers;itisinyourselfalone.” 
His book titles express eloquently this outlook of cheerful optimismandconfidence. 
He averaged two books a year, from Pushing to the Front in 1894,tohislastin1924,whenhediedattheageof74. 
He had some two million words in as yet unpublished manuscripts. 

Over 50 of his books have been published as part of our Timeless Wisdom collection. You can find references on him and otherauthorsattheendofthebook. 



PREFACE TO THE TIMELESS WISDOM COLLECTION 
King Solomon says in Proverbs that there is nothing new under thesun. 
For thousands of years, life has been teaching us the same lessons over and over. Through war and peace; through rags and riches; through stories of hope and of despair; through tragedies andfailurethatendintriumphandsuccess… 
The lessons are simple, as simple are the values that originate them: Courage, Perseverance, Faith, Love, Truthfulness, Decision, GoodStewardship,Happiness… 
Also, be extremely careful with what you think and how you think it. “As a man thinks, so is his life”, says the Bible. Like attracts like. Fear, Worry and Hate attract more fear, more worry and more hate, in all its manifestations. Positive thinking attracts positivethings. 
Countless sages of the ages have tried to convey these messages andlessonsindifferentwaysandformulas. 
From Pythagoras to Plato; from Dante, to Da Vinci and Goethe; from Bacon to Shakespeare; from Emerson to Prentice Mulford; from Joan D’Arc to Helen Keller; from Ben Franklin to Abraham Lincoln… But we just keep ignoring them, and making the same mistakes… 
In this series, we present you the men and women of New Thought, whose lives were committed to enlighten the world with thewisdomoftheages. 
William Walker Atkinson, Orison Swett Marden, Napoleon Hill, Dale Carnegie, Charles A. Haanel, Dale Carnegie, Wallace 
Wattles, Bruce Maclelland, Christian D Larson, Ernest Holmes, Ralph Waldo Trine, Elizabeth Towne, Henry Wood, Neville Goddard, Charles Fillmore, Emile Coué and a few others that we feature in our collection, are considered the masters of self-development and positive thinking, and the promoters of New Thought, a movement that came very much to life again with the Millennium. 
We also round our collection with theosophists as Annie Besant, William Judge and Charles Leadbeater; economists as John Maynard Keynes; philosophers as Bertrand Russell or J.W.Dunne; Industrialists as Henry Ford, Andrew Carnegie and Charles Schwab, Psychologists as Isador Coriat and Carl Jung, and of course, classics of literature as Ernest Hemingway, William Faulkner, H. G. Wells, George Orwell, Aldous Huxley or C.S. Lewis. 

In over 300 books these writers brilliantly captured the essence of life, success, and the traditions of the East and the West, becoming one of the best collections in personal and mind-development in existence. These books are books for enlightenment... They will provide the seeker –the one who is readyandispayingattention-,someofthedeepestanswersoflife. 
Mauricio 
Chaves-Mesén 

BestSellingauthorof ‘‘12 
Laws 
of 
Great 
Entrepreneurs’ 
and 
the 
fiction 
series 
“The 
Knights 
of 
Nostradamus” 


ABOUT THIS BOOK 
In Self Investment, Marden explores the importance of our thoughts and actions for success, and gives nuggets of wisdom on how to achieve great personality traits that will be supremely important in life. Personality as a success asset, how to develop “tact”; how to beasocial success through good conversation skills, and even, how to dress for success, are some of the many subjectsin thisexceptional book. 
” 


CONTENTS 
IFYOUCANTALKWELL 
PUTBEAUTYINTOYOURLIFE 
ENJOYINGWHATOTHERSOWN 
PERSONALITYASA 
SUCCESSASSET 
HOWTOBEASOCIAL 
SUCCESS 
THE 
MIRACLEOFTACT 
"IHADAFRIEND" 
AMBITION 
EDUCATIONBYREADING 

DISCRIMINATIONINREADING 
READING, 
ASPURTOAMBITION 
THESELF-IMPROVEMENTHABIT, 
AGREAT 
ASSET 
THERAISINGOFVALUES 
SELF-IMPROVEMENTTHROUGHPUBLICSPEAKING 
WHATAGOOD 
APPEARANCEWILLDO 
SELF-RELIANCE 
MENTALFRIENDSANDFOES 

TIMELESS 
WISDOM 
COLLECTION: 
OTHER 
TITLES 
AND 
AUTHORS 

1 
IFYOUCAN TALKWELL 
A good conversationalist is one who has ideas, who reads, thinks, listens, and whohasthereforesomethingtosaysSirWALTERSCOTT. 
WHEN Charles W. Eliot was president of Harvard, he said, "I recognize but one mental acquisition as an essential part of the education of a lady or gentleman,namely,anaccurateandrefined useofthemother-tongue." 
There is no other one thing which enables us to make so good an impression, especially upon those who do not know us thoroughly, as the abilityto conversewell. 
To be a good conversationalist, able to interest people, to rivet their attention, to draw them to you naturally, by the very superiority of your conversational ability, is to be the possessor of a very great accomplishment, one which is superior to all others. It not only helps you to make a good impression upon strangers, it also helps you to make and keep friends. It opens doors and softens hearts. It makes you interesting in all sorts of company. It helps you to get on in the world. It sends you clients, patients, customers. It helps youintothebestsociety,eventhoughyouarepoor. 
A man who can talk well, who has the art of putting things in an attractive way, who can interest others immediately by his power of speech, has a very great advantage over one who may know more than he, but who cannot expresshimselfwithease or eloquence. 
No matter how expert you may be in any other art or accomplishment, you cannot use your expertness always and everywhere as you can the power to converse well. If you are a musician, no matter how talented you may be, or how many years you may have spent in perfecting yourself in your specialty, or how much it may have cost you, only comparatively few peoplecaneverhear orappreciate yourmusic. 
You may be a fine singer, and yet travel around the world without having an opportunity of showing your accomplishment, or without anyone guessing your specialty. But wherever you go and in whatever society you are, no matterwhatyourstationinlifemaybe, you talk. 
Youmay be a painter, you mayhave spentyears withgreat masters, and yet, unless you have very marked ability so that your pictures are hung in the salons or in the great art galleries, comparatively few people will ever see them. But if you are an artist in conversation, everyone who comes in contact with you will see your life-picture, which you have been painting ever since you began to talk. Everyone knows whether you are an artist or a bungler. 
In fact, you may have a great many accomplishments which people occasionally see or enjoy, and you may have a very beautiful home and a lot ofpropertywhichcomparativelyfew peopleever know about;butif you are a good converser, everyone with whom you talk will feel the influence of yourskillandcharm. 
A noted society leader, who has been very successful in the launching of debutantes in society, always gives this advice to her protégés, "Talk, talk. It does not matter much what you say, but chatter away lightly and gaily. Nothing embarrasses and bores the average man so much as a girl who has to be entertained." 
Thereis ahelpfulsuggestionin this advice. Theway to learnto talk is to talk. The temptation for people who are unaccustomed to society, and who feel diffident, is to say nothingthemselvesand listen to whatotherssay. 
Goodtalkersarealwayssoughtafterin society. Everybodywantstoinvite Mrs. Soami-Sotodinnersorreceptions becausesheis suchagoodtalker. She entertains. Shemayhave manydefects, butpeopleenjoyhersociety because she can talkwell. 
Conversation, if used as an educator, is a tremendous power developer; but talking without thinking, without an effort to express oneself with clearness, conciseness, or efficiency, mere chattering, or gossiping, the averagesociety small talk, will never gethold of the best thingin a man. It lies too deep for suchsuperficial effort. 
Thousands of young people who envy such oftheir mates as aregetting on faster than they are keep on wasting their precious evenings and their half­holidays,· saying nothing but the most frivolous, frothy, senseless things, things which do not rise to the level of humor, but the foolish, silly talk which demoralizes one's ambition, lowers one'sideals and all the standards of life, because it begets habits of superficial and senseless thinking. On the streets, on the cars, and in public places, loud, coarse voices are heard in light, flippant, slipshod speech, incoarse slang expression. 
"You're talking through your hat"; "Search me"; " You just bet"; " Well, that'sthelimit"; "Ihatethatman;hegetson my nerves," anda scoreof other such vulgaritieswe oftenhear. 
Nothing else will indicate your fineness or coarseness of culture, your breedingorlackofit, so quicklyas yourconversation. Itwilltellyour whole life's story. What you say, and how you say it, will betray all your secrets, willgivetheworld yourtruemeasure. 
There is no other accomplishment or acquirement which you can use so constantly and effectively, which will give so much pleasure to your friends, as fine conversation. There is no doubt that the gift of language was intended to be a much greater accomplishment than the majority of us have ever made ofit. 
Mostof us are bunglers in our conversation, because we do not make an art of it; we do not take the trouble or pains to learn to talk well. We do not read enough or think enough. Most of us express ourselves in sloppy, slipshod English, because it is so much easier to do so ·than it is to think before we speak, to make an effort to express ourselves with elegance, ease, and power. 
Poor conversers excuse themselves for not trying to improve by saying that "good talkers are born, not made." We might as well say that good lawyers, good physicians, or good merchants are born, not made. None of them would ever get very far without hard work. This is the price of all achievementthatis of value. 
Many a man owes his advancement very largely to his ability to converse well. The ability to interest people in your conversation, to hold them, is a great power. The man who bungles in his expression, who knows a thing,but never can put it in logical, interesting, or commanding language, is always placedatagreatdisadvantage. 
I know a business man who has cultivated the art of conversation to such an extent that it is a great treat to listen to him. His language flows with such liquid, limpid beauty, his words are chosen with such exquisite delicacy, taste, and accuracy, there is such a refinement in his diction that he charms everyone who hears him speak. All his life he has been a reader of the finest proseand poetry,andhascultivatedconversation asa fineart. 
You may think you are poor and have no chance in life. You may be situated so that others are dependent upon you, and you may not be able to go to school or college, or to study music or art, as you long to; you may be tied down to an iron environment; you may be tortured with an unsatisfied, disappointed ambition; and yet you can become an interesting talker, because in every sentence you utter you can practise the best form of expression. Every book you read, every person with whom you converse, who uses good English, can help you. 
Few people think very much' about how they are going to express themselves. Theyuse thefirstwordsthatcome tothem. Theydonotthinkof forming a sentence so that it will have beauty, brevity, transparency, power. The words flow from their lips helter-skelter, with little thought of arrangement or order. 
Now and then we meet a real artist in conversation, and it is such a treat and delight that we wonder why the most of us should be such bunglers in our conversation, that we should make such a botch of the medium of communicationbetweenhumanbeings,whenit is capableof beingmadethe artofarts. 
I have met a dozen persons in my lifetime who have given me such a glimpse of its superb possibilities that it has made all other arts seem comparativelyunimportanttome. 
Iwasonce avisitoratWendellPhillips'shome inBoston, andthemusicof his voice, the liquid charm of his words, the purity, the transparency of his diction, the profundity of his knowledge, the fascination of his personality, and his marvelous art of putting things, I shall never forget. He sat down on the sofa beside me and talked as he would to an old schoolmate, and it seemedtomethatIhadnever beforeheardsuch exquisiteEnglish. 
I have met several English people who possessed that marvelous power of "soul inconversationwhichcharmsallwhocomeunderitsspell." 
Mrs. Mary A. Livermore, Julia Ward Howe, and Elizabeth Stuart Phelps Ward had this wonderful conversational charm, as has ex-President Eliot of Harvard. 
The quality of the conversation is everything. We all know people who use the choicest language and express their thoughts in fluent, liquid diction, who impress us by the wonderful flow of their conversation; but that is all there is to it. They do not impress us with their thoughts; they do not stimulateus to action. Wedo notfeel anymoredeterminedto do something in the world, to be somebody, after we have heard them talk than we felt before. 
We know other people who talk very little, but whose words are so full of meat and stimulating brain force that we feel ourselves multiplied many timesbythepowertheyhaveinjectedinto us. 
In olden times the art of conversation reached a much higher standard than that of to-day. The deterioration is due to the complete revolution in the conditions of modern civilization. Formerly people had almost no other way ofcommunicatingtheirthoughtsthanbyspeech. Knowledgeofall kinds was disseminated almost wholly through the spoken word. There were no great daily newspapers,nomagazinesorperiodicalsofanykind. 
The great discoveries of vast wealth in the precious minerals, the new world opened up by inventions and discoveries, and the great impetus to ambition have changed all this. In this lightning-express age., in these strenuous times, when everybody has the mania to attain wealth and position, we no longer have time to reflect with deliberation, and to develop our powers of conversation. In these great news-paper and periodical days, when everybody can get for one or a few cents the news and information which it has cost thousands of dollars to collect, everybody sits behind the morning sheet or is buried in a book or magazine. There is no longer the same need of communicating thought by the spoken word, as there was formerly. 
Oratory is becoming a lost art for the same reason. Printing has become so cheap that even the poorest homes can get more reading for a few dollars thankingsandnoblemencouldafford intheMiddleAges. 
It is a rare thing to find a polished conversationalist to-day. So rare is it to hear one speaking exquisite English, and using a superb diction, that it is indeeda luxury. 
Good reading, however, will not only broaden the mind and give new ideas, but it will also increase one's vocabulary, and that is a great aid to conversation. Many people have good thoughts and ideas, but they cannot express them because of the poverty of their vocabulary. They have not words enough to clothe their ideas and make them attractive. They talk around in a circle, repeat and repeat, because, when they want a particular wordtoconveytheir exact meaning,they cannotfindit. 
Ifyouareambitiousto talkwell, you mustbe as muchas possible in the society of well-bred, cultured people. If you seclude yourself, though you are acollegegraduate,youwill be a poorconverser. 
We all sympathize with people, especially the timid and shy, who have that awful feeling of repression and stifling of thought, when they make an effort to say something and cannot. Timid young people often suffer keenly in this way in attempting to declaim at school or college. But many a great orator went through the same sort of experience when he first attempted to speak in public, and was often deeply humiliated by his blunders and failures. There is no other way, however, to become an orator or a good conversationalist than by constantly trying to express oneself efficiently and elegantly. 
If you find that your ideas fly from you when you attempt to express them, that you stammer and flounder about for words which you are unable to find, you may besure that everyhonest effortyou make, even if you fail in your attempt, will make it all the easier for you to speak well the next time. Itis remarkable, if one keeps on .trying, how quicklyhe will conquer his awkwardness and self-consciousness, and will gain ease of manner and facilityofexpression. 
Everywhere we see people placed at a tremendous disadvantage because they have never learned the art of putting their ideas into interesting, telling language. We see brainy men at public gatherings, when momentous questionsare beingdiscussed,sit silent, unabletotell whattheyknow, when they are infinitely better informed than those who are making a great deal of displayof oratory orsmoothtalk. 
Peoplewithalotofability,whoknowagreatdeal, oftenappearlike a set of dummies in company, while some superficial, shallow brained person holds the attention of those present simply because he can tell what he knows in an interesting way. They are constantly humiliated and embarrassed when away from those who happen to know their real worth, because they cannot carry on an intelligent conversation upon any topic. There are hundreds of these silent people at our national capital many of them wives of husbands whohave suddenlyandunexpectedlycomeintopoliticalprominence. 
Manypeople andthis is especially trueofscholars seem to thinkthatthe great desideratum in life is to get as much valuable information into the head as possible. But it is just as important to know how to give out knowledge in a palatable manner as to acquire it. You may be a profound scholar, you may be well read in history and in politics, you may be wonderfully well-posted in science, literature, and art, and yet, if your knowledge is locked up withinyou,youwillalwaysbeplacedata greatdisadvantage. 
Locked-up ability may give the individual some satisfaction, but it must be exhibited, expressed in some attractive way, before the world will appreciate it or give credit for it. It does not matter how valuable the rough diamond may be, no explaining, no describing its marvels of beauty within, and its great value, would avail; nobody would appreciate it until it was ground and polished and the light let into its depths to reveal its hidden brilliancy. Conversation is to the man what the cutting of the diamond is to the stone. The grinding does riot add anything to the diamond. It merely revealsits wealth. 
How little parents realize the harm they are doing their children by allowing them to grow up ignorant of or indifferent to the marvelous possibilities in the art of conversation. In the majority of homes, children are allowedtomangletheEnglishlanguageinamostpainful way. 
Nothing else will develop the brain andcharacter more than the constant effort to talk well, intelligently, interestingly, upon all sorts of topics. There is asplendid discipline in theconstant effort to expressone's thoughts inclear language and in an interesting manner. We know people who are such superb conversers that no one would ever dream that they have not had the advantagesof the higherschools. 
Many a college graduate has been silenced and put to shame by people who havenever even been to ahigh school, but who have cultivatedthe art 
ofself-expression. The school and the college employ the student comparatively a few hours adayfor afewyears; conversation is atrainingin a perpetual school. Many getthe best partof theireducationin thisschool. Conversation is a great ability discoverer, a great revealer of possibilities and resources. It stimulates thought wonderfully. We think more of ourselves if we can talk well, if we can interest and hold others. The power to do so increases our self-respect,our self-confidence. No man knows what he really possesses until he makes his best effort to express to others what is in him. Then the avenues of the mind fly open, the facultiesareonthealert. Everygoodconverserhasfelta powercome to him from the listener which he never felt before, and which often stimulates and inspires to fresh endeavor. The mingling of thought with thought, the contact of mind with mind, develops new powers, as the mixing of two chemicals 
producesanew thirdsubstance. 
Toconversewellonemustlistenwell also. 
Thismeansone mustholdoneselfin areceptiveattitude. 
Wearenotonlypoorconversationalists,butwe are poor listenersas well. We are too impatient to listen. Instead of being attentive and eager to drink in thestoryortheinformation, we havenotenoughrespectforthetalkertokeep quiet. We look about impatiently, perhaps snap our watch, play a tattoo with our fingers on a chair or a table, hitch about as if we were bored and were anxious to get away, and interrupt the speaker before he reaches his conclusion. Infact,we aresuchanimpatientpeoplethatwe havenotimefor anything excepttopush ahead, to elbow our way through the crowd to get the position or the money we desire. Our life is feverish and unnatural. We have no time to develop charm of manner, or elegance of diction. "We are too intenseforepigramorrepartee. We lacktime." 
Nervous impatience is a conspicuous characteristic of the American people. Everything bores us which does not bring us more business or more money, or which does not help us to attain the position for which we are striving. Instead of enjoying ourfriends,we are inclinedto look upon themas so many rungs in a ladder, and to value them in proportion as they furnish readers for our books, send us patients, clients, customers, or show their abilitytogiveus aboostforacovetedposition. 
Before these days of hurry and drive, before this age of excitement, it was considered one of the greatest luxuries possible to be a listener in a group surrounding an intelligent talker. It was better than most modern lectures, than anything one could find in a book; for there was a touch of personality, a charm of style, a magnetism which held, a superb personality which fascinated. For the hungry soul yearning for an education, to drink in knowledgefromthosewiselipswasto befedwitha royalfeastindeed. 
Butto-dayeverythingis "touch andgo." We haveno time to stop on the street and give a decent salutation. It is: "How do?" or "Morning," accompanied by a sharp nod of the head, instead of a graceful bow. We have no time for the graces and the charms. Everything must give way to the material. 
We have no time for the development of a fine manner; the charm of the days of chivalry and leisure has almost vanished from our civilization. A new type ofindividualhas sprung up. We worklike Trojans duringthe day, and then rush to a theater or other place of amusement in the evening. Vie have no time to make our own amusement or to develop the faculty of humor and fun-making as people used to do. We pay people for doing that while we sit and laugh. We are like some college boys, who depend upon tutors to carry them through their examinations they expect to buy their educationready-made. 
Life is becoming so artificial, so forced, so diverse from naturalness, we driveourhumanenginesatsucha fearfulspeed, that our finer life is crushed out. Spontaneity and humor, and the possibility of a fine culture and·· a superbcharmofpersonality inusarealmost impossibleandextremelyrare. 
Onecauseforourconversationaldeclineisalack ofsympathy. We aretoo selfish, too busily engaged in our own welfare, and wrapped up in our own little world, too intent upon our own self-promotion to be interested in others. No one can make a good converser who is not sympathetic. You must be able to enter into another's life, to live it with the other person, in order to be a goodtalkeroragoodlistener. 
Walter Besant used to tell of a clever woman who had a great reputation as a conversationalist, though she talked very little. She had such a cordial, sympathetic manner that she helped the timid and the shy to say their best things, and made them feel at home. She dissipated their fears, and they could say things to her which they could not say to anyone else. People thought her an interesting conversationalist because she had this ability to call outthe bestin others. 
If you would make yourself agreeable you must be able to enter into the life of the people with whom you converse, and you must touch them along the lines of their interest. No matter how much you may know about a subject,ifit does not happento interestthose to whom you are talkingyour effortswillbelargelylost. 
It is pitiable, sometimes, to see men standing around at the average reception or club gathering, dumb, almost helpless, and powerless to enter heartilyintothe conversation becausethey are ina subjective mood. They are thinking, thinking; thinking business, business, business; thinking how they can get on a little faster get more business, more clients, more patients, or more readersfor their books, or abetter house to live in;how they can make more show. They do not enter heartily into the lives of others, or abandon themselves to the occasion enough to make good talkers. They are cold and reserved, distant, because their minds are somewhere else, their affections on themselves and their own affairs. There are only two things that interest them, business and their own little world. If you talk about these things, they are interested at once; but they do not care a snap about your affairs, how you get on, or what your ambition is, or how they can help you. Our conversation will never reach a high standard while we live in such a feverish,selfish, andunsympatheticstate. 
Great conversationalists have always been very tactful interesting without offending. It does not do to stab people if you would interest them, nor to drag out their family skeletons. Some people have the peculiar quality of touching the best that is in us; others stir up the bad. Every time they come into our presence they irritate us. Others allay all that is disagreeable." They never touch our sensitive spots, sore spots, and they call out all that is spontaneousandsweet andbeautiful. 
Lincoln was master of the art of making himself interesting to everybody he met. He put people at ease with his stories and jokes, and made them feel so completely at home in his presence that they opened up their mental treasures to him without reserve. Strangers were always glad to talk with him, because he was so cordial and quaint, and always gave more than he got. 
A sense of humor such as Lincoln had is, of course, a great addition to one's conversational powers. But not everyone can be funny; and, if you lack thesenseofhumor,youwillmakeyourselfludicrousby attemptingto beso. 
A good conversationalist, however, is not too serious. He does not deal too much with facts, no matter how important. Facts, statistics, weary. Vivacity is absolutely necessary. Heavy conversation bores; too light, disgusts. 
Therefore, to be a good conversationalist you must be spontaneous, buoyant, natural, sympathetic, and must show a spirit of good will .. You must feel a spirit of helpfulness, and must enter heart and soul into things which interest others. You must get the attention of people and hold it by interesting them, and you can only interest them by a warm sympathy a real friendly sympathy. If you are cold, distant, and unsympathetic you cannot holdtheir attention. 
You must be broad, tolerant. A narrow, stingy soul never talks well. A man who is always violating your sense of taste, of justice, and of fairness, never interests you. You lock tight all the approaches to your inner self, every avenue is closed to him. Your magnetism and your helpfulness are thus cut off, and the conversation is perfunctory, mechanical, and without life orfeeling. 
Youmustbringyourlistenerclose toyou,mustopenyourheartwide,and exhibit a broad, free nature, and an open mind. You must be responsive, so that he will throw wide open every avenue of his nature and give you free access to his heartof hearts. . 
If a man is a success anywhere, it ought to be in his personality, in his power toexpress himself in strong, effective, interesting language. He should not be obliged to give a stranger an inventory of his possessions in order to show thathe has achievedsomething. Agreaterwealthshouldflowfromhis lips,and express itself in hismanner. 
No amount of natural ability or education or good clothes, no amount of money, will make you appear well if you cannot express yourself in good language. 

2 PUTBEAUTYINTO YOURLIFE 
"Beauty isGod'shandwriting." 
There is no beautifier of complexion, or form, or behavior, like the wish toscatterjoy,andnotpain, aroundus. Emerson. 
WHEN the barbarians overran Greece, desecrated her temples, and destroyed her beautiful works of art, even their savageness was somewhat tamed by the sense of beauty which prevailed everywhere. They broke her beautiful statues, it is true; but the spirit of beauty refused to die, and it transformed the savage heart and awakened even in the barbarian a new power. From the apparent death of Grecian art Roman art was born. "Cyclops forging iron for Vulcan could not stand against Pericles forging thought for Greece." The barbarian's club which destroyed the Grecian statues was no match forthechiselofPhidiasandPraxiteles. 
There was no art in Italy until the Romans conquered Greece and carried her art treasures back to Rome. It was the famous “Horse's Head," the "FarneseBull," the “Marble Faun," the "Dying Gladiator," the "Boy Taking a Thorn From His Foot" that were practically the basis of the whole wonderful Italian art. These, aided by the marvelous Italian marbles, were the first to arousetheslumberingartisticfacultiesin theItalianpeople. 
"What is the best education?" someone asked Plato, many centuries ago. "Itis," hereplied, "thatwhichgivestothebody andto thesoul all the beauty and all the perfectionofwhichtheyare capable." 
The life that would be complete; that would be sweet and sane, as well as strong,mustbesoftenedandenrichedbyaloveofthe beautiful. 
A man is a very broad, omnivorous animal, and his harmonious development demands a great variety of food, both mental and physical. No matterwhatelementweomitin hisbill offare,there is acorrespondingloss, omission, or weakness in his life. You cannot get a full, complete man on halfabilloffare. Youcannotnourishhisbodyandstarve his soul,andexpect him to be symmetrical, well . balanced, poised; nor can you starve his body and nourish his soul, and expect him to be a giant on the physical as well as on the spiritualplane. 
When children do not get a sufficient or proper variety of food, when they are deprived of any element necessary for the nourishment of brain, nerve, or muscle, there is a corresponding lack in their development. For want of a properly balanced diet they grow up lopsided, unbalanced, and unsymmetrical. 
If, for instance, a child does not get enough phosphate of lime in his food, Nature cannot build strong, firm bone; the framework of the body is weak, the bones are soft,andthe childis liable to have" rickets." Ifhis diet is lacking in nitrogenous or muscle-making material, his muscles will be weak and flabby, he will never have "the wrestling thews that throw the world." If the phosphatic elements, the builders of brain and nerves, be deficient, his whole organism will suffer, brain and nerves will be incomplete, lacking in energy, undeveloped, just as the body of a growing child requires a wide variety of physical food to make him strong, beautiful, and healthy, so man requires many kinds of mental food to nourish his mind and make itgrowstrong,active,and healthy. 
The marvelous material resources of our country have so stimulated the national ambition for wealth that we are in danger of overdeveloping the materialfacultiesat the expenseofthehigherand finer ones. 
It is not enough for us to cultivate mere physical and intellectual strength. If the esthetic side of one's being an appreciation of all that is beautiful in natureandart isnot fostered,the life will be like a countrywithout flowers or birds, sweet scents or sounds, color or music. It may be strong, but it will lackthegraces thatwouldadorn itsstrength andmakeitattractive. 
The Creator has not covered the world with loveliness, filled it with music, and spread the beauties of earth and sea on every hand for nothing. 
Manistheexplanationofthislavishnessof beauty. 
If you would be a man in the larger sense of the word, you must not be contentto makeonesmall clearingin theforestof your nature andlet allthe rest remain unreclaimed. The pursuit of merchandise, of material gain in any form, develops only a very small part of one'sbeing,and that often the selfish and coarser side. 
There is a lack in the make-up of a person who has no appreciation of beauty; who does not thrill before a great picture or an entrancing sunset, or aglimpseofbeautyin nature. 
Savages have no appreciation of beauty. They have a passion for adornment, but there is nothing to show that their esthetic faculties are developed. Theymerelyobey theiranimalinstinctsand passions. 
But as civilization advances ambition grows, wants multiply, and higher and higher faculties show themselves, until in the highest expression of civilization, we find aspiration and love of the beautiful most highly developed. We find it manifested on the person, in the home, in the environment. 
The lateProfessorCharles EliotNorton ofHarvardUniversity,one of the finest thinkersofhisday, saidthatbeautyhasplayedanimmensepart in the development of the highest qualities in human beings; and that civilization couldbemeasuredbyits architecture, sculpture,andpainting. 
A love for the beautiful has a refining, softening, enriching influence upon character which nothing else can supply. It is most unfortunate for a child to be brought up in an atmosphere in which it is missing, and where only a money-loving spirit is manifested, where he is trained to think that the most important thing in life is to get more money, more houses and lands, instead ofmoremanhood,morenobility,moresweetness,morebeauty. 
It is cruel to twist a young life out of its God-intended orbit by such false training, to wrench it from its spiritual center and set it toward a material goal, while the mind is plastic and capable of being molded to any impression,goodorevil. 
Childrenshouldlive in themidstof beauty,in art and nature, as much as possible. Noopportunityto calltheirattentiontoa beautiful object shouldbe lost. In this way their whole lives may be enriched by treasures which no amountofmoney in afteryearscanpurchaseforthem. 
What an infinite satisfaction comes from beginning early in life to cultivate our finer qualities, to develop higher sentiments, purer tastes, and more delicate feelings, the love of the beautiful in all its varied forms of expression! 
One can make no better investment than the cultivation of a taste for the beautiful, foritwill bring rainbowhuesand enduringjoys tothewhole life. It will not only greatly increase one's capacity for happiness, but also one's efficiency. 
A remarkable instance of the elevating, refining influence of beauty has been demonstrated by a Chicago school-teacher, who fitted up in her school a "beautycorner" forherpupils. 
It was furnished with a stained glass window, a divan covered with an Oriental rug, and a few fine photographs and paintings, among which was a picture of the Sistine Madonna. Several other esthetic trifles, artistically arranged, completed the furnishings of the" beauty corner." The children took great delight in their little retreat, especially in the exquisite coloring of the stained glass window. Insensibly their conduct and demeanor were affected by the beautiful objects with which they daily associated. They became more gentle,more refined, more thoughtfulandconsiderate. 
A young Italian boy, in particular, who had been incorrigible before the establishment of the "beauty corner," became, in a short time, so changed and softened that the teacher was astonished. One day she asked what it was that had recently made him so good. Pointing to the picture of the Sistine Madonnatheboy said, "Howcanafellerdobadthingswhenshe'slookingat him?" 
Character is fed largely through the eye and ear. The thousand voices in nature of bird and insect and brook, the soughing of the wind through the trees, the scent of flower and meadow, the myriad tints in earth and sky, in ocean andforest,mountain and hill, are just as important for the development of a real man as the education he receives in the schools. If you take no beauty into your life through the eye or the ear to stimulate and develop your estheticfaculties,yournaturewillbehard, juiceless,andunattractive. 
Nothingelse can ever quite take the place in life ofthe development of the faculty for appreciating the beautiful. It is a connecting link between man and the Great Author of the beautiful. At no other time do our spirits come into such close touch with the divine as when we are lost in the contemplation of the sublimity, the grandeur and perfection of the universe. Thenweactuallyseemtoseethecreativeprocessesof theInfiniteMind. 
Just try the effect of putting beauty into your life, a little every day. You will find it magical. It will broaden and light up your outlook upon the world as the acquisition of money or fame never can. Put variety into your mental bill of fare as well as into your physical. It will pay you rich returns. No matter if you are strong and rugged and able to work every day in the year, your mind needs a change even if your body does not. Vacation is as much a necessity from a character as from a health point of view. If you feed upon the same mental food, if you have practically the same experiences every day ofthethreehundredandsixty-five,yearinandyearout,therewillbe disaster somewherein yourlife. 
Unfoldment of the esthetic faculties is one of the most important factors in our success and happiness, in the ennobling and uplifting of our lives. Ruskin's love of the beautiful gave his whole life an indescribable charm and loftiness. It kept him looking upward as well as outward. It purified and exalted, while it held him spellbound. It was the constant reaching out after the beautiful in nature and art, in his divine interpretation of all that man and nature mean which gave zest and enthusiasm, earnestness and divine significancetohis greatlife-work. 
Beauty is a quality of Divinity, and to live much with the beautiful is to live close to the Divine. "The more we see of beauty everywhere; in nature, in life, in man and child, in work and rest, in the outward and the inward world,the morewe see of God(good)." 
There are many evidences in the New Testament that Christ was a great lover of the beautiful, especially in nature. Was it not He who said: "Consider the lilies of the field; they toil not, neither do they spin; yet Solomonin all his glorywasnotarrayedlike oneofthese"? 
Back of the lily and the rose, back of the landscape, back of all beautiful things that enchant us, there is the great Lover of the beautiful and great beauty Principle. Every star that twinkles in the sky, every flower, bids us lookbehinditforits source,pointsustothe great Authorofthebeautiful. 
The love of beauty plays a very important part in the poised, symmetrical life. We little realize how much we are influenced by beautiful people and things. We may see them so often that they become common in our experience and fail to attract much of our conscious attention, but every beautiful picture, every beautiful sunset and bit of landscape, every beautiful face and form and flower beauty in any form, wherever we encounter it ennobles, refines. andelevatescharacter. 
Thereis everythingin keepingthesoul andmind responsive to beauty. It is agreat refreshener,recuperator,life-giver,healthpromoter. 
Our American life tends to kill the finer sentiments; to discourage the development of charm and grace as well as beauty; it overemphasizes the value of material things and under-estimates that of esthetic things, which are farmoredevelopedin countrieswherethedollaris nottheGod. 
As long as we persist in sending all the sap and energy of our being into the moneymaking gland or faculty and letting the social faculty, the esthetic faculty, and all the finer, nobler faculties lie dormant, and even die, we certainly cannot expect a well-rounded and symmetrical life, for only faculties that are used, brain cells that are exercised, grow; all others atrophy. If the finer instincts in man and the nobler qualities that live in the higher brain are under-developed, and the coarser instincts which dwell in the lower brainclose to thebrute faculties are overdeveloped, man mustpay the penalty ofanimalityandwill lackappreciationof all thatis finest and mostbeautiful inlife. 
Isn't it pitiable, shameful, almost criminal that we give practically all our efforts to the useful, and allow the beautiful to play such an unimportant part in our life; that we should take so little pains to read God's handwriting in everycreatedthing? 
"The vision that you hold in your mind, the ideal that is enthroned in your heart, this you will build your life by, this you will become." It is the quality ofmind, ofideals,and not mere things, thatmakea man. 
It is as essential to cultivate the esthetic faculties and the heart qualities as to cultivate what we call the intellect. The time will come when our children will be taught, both at home and in school, to consider beauty as a most precious gift, which must be preserved in purity, sweetness, and cleanliness,andregardedas a divineinstrumentofeducation. 
There is no investment which will give such returns as the culture of the finer self, the development of the sense of the beautiful, the sublime, and the true; the development of qualities that are crushed out or strangled in the meredollar-chaser. 
There are a thousand evidences in us that we were intendedfor temples of beauty, of sweetness, of loveliness, of beautiful ideas, and not mere storehousesforvulgarthings. 
There is nothing else which will pay so well as to train the finest and truest, the most beautiful qualities in us in order that we may see beauty everywhereandbeabletoextractsweetnessfromeverything. 
Everywherewegothere areathousandthings to educatethe best there is in us. Every sunset, landscape, mountain, hill, and tree has secrets of charm and beauty waiting for us. In every patch of meadow or wheat, in every leaf andflower,the trainedeye willsee beautywhichwouldcharmanangel. The cultured ear will find harmony in forest and field, melody in the babbling brook,and untoldpleasurein all Nature'ssongs. 
Whatever our vocation, we should resolve that we will not strangle all that is finest and noblest in us for the sake of the dollar, but that we will put beauty into our life at every opportunity. 
Just in proportion to your love for the beautiful will you acquire its charms and develop its graces. The beauty thought, the beauty ideal, will outpicture themselves in the face and manner. If you are in love with beauty you will be an artist of some kind. Your profession may be to make the home beautiful and sweet, or you may work at a trade; but whatever your vocation, if you areInlove withthebeautiful,itwillpurifyyour taste, elevate and enrich your life,and makeyouatrueartistinstead ofa mere artisan. 
There is no doubt that in the future beauty will play an infinitely greater part in civilized life than it has thus far. It is becoming commercialized everywhere. The trouble with us is that the tremendous material prizes in this land of opportunityare sotempting that we have lost sight of the higher man. We have developed ourselves along the animal side of our nature; the greedy, grasping side, The great majority of us are still living in the basement of our beings. Now and then one ascends to the upper stories and gets a glimpse ofthelifebeautiful,thelifeworthwhile. 
There is nothing on earth that will so slake the thirst of the soul as the beautywhichexpressesitselfinsweetness andlight. 
An old travelingmanrelates that once whenon atripto the Westhe sat next to an elderly lady who every now and then would lean out of the open window and pour some thick salt it seemed to him from a bottle. When she had emptiedthebottleshewould refillitfroma hand-bag. 
A friend to whom this man related the incident told him he was acquainted with the lady, who was a great lover of flowers and an earnest follower of the precept: " Scatter your flowers as you go, for you may never travel the same road again." He said she added greatly to the beauty of the landscape along the railroads on which she traveled, by her custom of scattering flower seeds along the track as she rode. Many roads have thus been beautified and refreshed by this old lady's love of the beautiful and her effort to scatter beautywherevershe went. 
Ifwe wouldall cultivate a love of the beautiful and scatter beauty seeds as we go throughlife, whata paradisethisearthwouldbecome! 
Whatasplendidopportunityavacationinthe countryoffersto putbeauty into the life; to cultivate the esthetic faculties, which in most people are wholly undeveloped and inactive! To some it is like going into God's great gallery of charm and beauty. They find in the landscape, the valley, the mountains, the fields, the meadows, the flowers, the streams, the brooks and the rivers, riches that no money can buy; beauties that would enchant the angels. But this beauty and glory cannot be bought; they are only for those whocan see them, appreciatethem whocan readtheir message and respond totheir affinity. 
Have you ever felt the marvelous power of beauty in nature? If not, you have missed one of the most exquisite joys in life. I was once going through the Yosemite Valley, and after riding one hundred miles in a stagecoach over rough mountain roads, I was so completely exhausted that it did not seem as though I could keep my seat until we traveled over the ten more miles which would bring us to our destination. But on looking down from the top of the mountain I caught a glimpse of the celebrated Yosemite Falls and the surrounding scenery, just as the sun broke through the clouds; and there was revealed a picture of such rare beauty and marvelous picturesqueness that every particle of fatigue, brain-fag, and muscle weariness departed in an instant. My whole soul thrilled with a winged sense of sublimity, grandeur, and beauty, which I had never before experienced, and which I never can forget. I felta spiritualupliftwhichbroughttearsofjoytomyeyes. 
No one can contemplate the wonderful beauties of Nature and doubt that the Creator must have intended that man, made in His own image and likeness,should beequallybeautiful. 
Beauty of character, charm of manner, attractiveness and graciousness of expression, a godlike bearing, are our birthrights. Yet how ugly, stiff, coarse, and harsh in appearance and bearing many of us are! No one can afford to disregardhisgoodlooks orpersonalappearance. 
But if we wish to beautify the outer, we must first beautify the inner, for every thought and every motion shapes the delicate tracings of our face for ugliness or beauty. Inharmonious and destructive attitudes of mind will warp and marthemostbeautiful features. 
Shakespearesays: "Godhas givenyou oneface andyou make yourselves another." The mindcanmakebeauty oruglinessatwill. 
A sweet, noble disposition is absolutely essential to the highest form of beauty. It has transformed many a plain face. A bad temper, ill nature, jealousy, will ruin the most beautiful face ever created. After all, there is no beauty like that produced by a lovely character. Neither cosmetics, massage, nor drugs can remove the lines of prejudice, selfishness, envy, anxiety, mentalvacillation thataretheresultsof wrongthoughthabits. 
Beauty is from within. If every human being would cultivate a gracious mentality, not only would what he expressed be artistically beautiful, but also his body. There would indeed be grace and charm, a superiority about him, which wouldbeeven greater thanmerephysicalbeauty. 
We have all seen even very plain women who because of the charm of theirpersonalityimpressedus as transcendentlybeautiful. The exquisite soul qualities expressed through the body transformed it into their likeness. A finespiritspeakingthroughtheplainestbodywill makeit beautiful. 
Someone, speakingof FannyKemble,said: "Althoughshe wasverystout and short, and had a very red face, yet she impressed me as the supreme embodiment of majestic attributes. I never saw so commanding a personality in feminine form. Any type of mere physical beauty would have paled to insignificance by her side." 
Antoine Berryer says truly: "There are no ugly women. There are only womenwhodonotknowhowto lookpretty." 
Thehighestbeauty;beautythatis farsuperiortomereregularityoffeature or form is within reach of everybody. It is perfectly possible for one, even withthe homeliestface, to make herselfbeautifulbythe habit ofperpetually holding in mind the beauty thought not the thought of mere superficial beauty, but that of heart beauty, soul beauty, and by the cultivation of a spirit ofkindness, hopefulness,and unselfishness. 
The basis of all real personal beauty is a kindly, helpful bearing and a desire to scatter sunshine and good cheer everywhere, and this, shining through the face, makes it beautiful. The longing and the effort to be beautiful in character cannot fail to make the life beautiful, and since the outwardis butan expressionof the inward,a mere outpicturingon the body of the habitual thought and dominating motives, the face, the manners, and the bearing must follow the thought and become sweet and attractive. If you hold the beauty thought, the love thought, persistently in the mind, you will make such an impression of harmony and sweetness wherever you go that no one willnoticeanyplainnessordeformityof person. 
There are girls who have dwelt upon what they consider their unfortunate plainness so long that they have seriously exaggerated it. They are not half so plain as they think they, are; and, were it not for the fact that they have made themselves very sensitive and self-conscious on the subject, others would not notice it at all. In fact, if they could get rid of their sensitiveness and be natural, they could, with persistent effort, make up in sprightliness of thought,in cheerfulnessofmanner,inintelligence,andincheeryhelpfulness, whatthey lackin graceandbeautyof face. 
We admire the beautiful face, the beautiful form, but we love the face illumined by a beautiful soul. We love it because it suggests the ideal of the possibleperfectmanor woman,theidealwhichwastheCreator'smodel. 
It is not the outward form of our dearest friend, but our ideal of friendship which he arouses or suggests in us that stirs up and brings into exercise our love and admiration. The highest beauty does not exist in the actual. It is the ideal, possible beauty, which the person or object symbolizes or suggests, that givesusdelight. 
Everyone should endeavor to be as beautiful, attractive, as complete a human being as possible. There is not a taint of vanity in the desire for the highestbeauty. 
The love of beauty that confines itself to mere external form, however, misses its deepest significance. Beauty of form, of coloring, of light and shade, of sound, make our world beautiful; yet the mind that is warped and twisted cannot see all this infinite beauty. It is the indwelling spirit, the ideal in the soul, that makes all things beautiful; that inspires and lifts us above ourselves. 
We love the outwardly beautiful, because we crave perfection, and we cannot help admiring those persons and things that most nearly embody or measure up to our human ideal. But a beautiful character will make beauty and poetry out of the prosiest environment, bring sunshine into the darkest home,anddevelop beautyandgraceamidtheugliestsurroundings. 
Whatwould become of us if it were notfor the great souls who realize the divinityof life, who insist upon bringing out and emphasizingits poetry, itsmusic,itsharmonyand beauty? 
How sordid and common our lives would become but for these beauty-makers, these inspirers, these people who bring out all that is best and most attractiveinevery place, every situationandcondition. 
There is no accomplishment, no trait of character, no quality of mind, which will give greater satisfaction and pleasure or contribute more to one's welfare than an appreciation of the beautiful. How many people might be saved from wrong-doing, even from lives of crime, by the cultivation of the esthetic faculties in their childhood! A love of the truly beautiful would save children from things which encoarsen and brutalize their natures. It would shieldthem from amultitude oftemptations. 
Parents do not take sufficient pains to develop a love and appreciation of beauty in their children. They do not realize that in impressionable youth, everything about the home, even the pictures, the paper on the wall, affect the growing character. They should never lose an opportunity of letting their boys and girls see beautiful works of art, hear beautiful music; they should make a practise of reading to them or having them read very often some lofty poem, or inspirational passages from some great writer, that will fill their minds with thoughts of beauty, open their souls to the inflow of the Divine Mind, the Divine Love which encompasses us round about. 'The influences that moveouryouthdeterminethecharacter,thesuccessand happinessofour whole lives. 
Every soul is born responsive to the beautiful, but this instinctive love of beauty must be fostered through the eye and the mind must be cultivated, or it willdie. The cravingfor beautyis as strongin achild ofthe slums as in a favorite of fortune. "The physical hunger of the poor, the yearning of their stomachs," says Jacob A. Riis, "is not half so bitter, or so little likely to be satisfiedas theiresthetichunger,theirstarvingforthebeautiful." 
Mr. Riis has often tried to take flowers from his Long Island home to the "poors" in Mulberry Street, New York. "But they never got there," he says. "Before I had gone half a block from the ferry I was held up by a shrieky mob of children who cried for the posies and would not let me go another step till I had given them one. And when they got it they ran, shielding the flower with the most jealous care, to some place where they could hide and gloat over their treasure. They came dragging big, fat babies and little weazened ones that they might get a share, and the babies' eyes grew round and big at the sight of the golden glory from the fields, the like of which had never come their way. The smaller the baby, and the poorer, the more wistful itslook,and somyflowerswent. Whocouldhave saidthemno? 
"I learned then what I had but vaguely understood before, that there is a hunger that is worse than that which starves the body and gets into the newspapers. All children love beauty and beautiful things. It is the spark of the divine nature that is in them and justifies itself! To that ideal their souls grow. When they cry out for it they are trying to tell us in the only way they can that if we let the slum starve the ideal, with its dirt and its ugliness and its hard-trodden mud where flowers were meant to grow, we are starving that which we little know. A man, a human, may grow a big body without a soul; but as a citizen, as a mother, he or she is worth nothing to the commonwealth. Themarktheyare going toleaveuponit istheblacksmudgeoftheslum. 
"So when in these latter days we invade that slum to make homes there and teach the mothers to make them beautiful; when we gather the children into kindergartens, hang pictures in the schools; when we build beautiful new schools and public buildings and let in the light, with grass and flower and bird,wheredarknessandfoulnesswerebefore;whenwe teachthechildrento dance and play and enjoy themselves alas! that it should ever be needed we are trying to wipe off the smudge, and to lift the heavy mortgage which it put on the morrow, a much heavier one in the loss of citizenship than any community, even the republic, can long endure. We arepayingarrears of debt which we incurred by our sad neglect, and we could be about no better business." 
There are many poor children in the slums of New York, Mr. Millionaire, whocouldgointo yourdrawing-roomandcarryawayfromits rich canvases, its costly furnishings, a vision of beauty which you never perceived in them because your esthetic faculties, your finer sensibilities, were early stifled by your selfishpursuitofthedollar. 
Theworldisfullofbeautifulthings,butthemajorityhave not been trained to discern them. We cannot see all the beauty that lies around us, because our eyes have not been trained to see it; our esthetic faculties have not been developed. We are like the lady who, standing with the great artist, Turrier, before one of his wonderful landscapes, cried out in amazement: "Why, Mr. Turner,Icannot seethosethingsin naturethat youhave putinyourpicture." 
"Don't youwish youcould, madam?" hereplied. 
Just think what rare treats we shut out of our lives in our mad, selfish, insane pursuit of the dollar! Do you not wish that you could see the marvels that Turner saw in a landscape,that Ruskin saw in a sunset? Do you not wish that you had put a little more beauty into your life instead of allowing your natureto become encoarsened, your esthetic faculties blinded, and your finer instincts blighted by the pursuit of the coarser things of life; instead of developing your brute instincts of pushing and elbowing your way through theworldforafewmoredollars,in yourselfisheffortto get something away fromsomebodyelse? 
Fortunate is the person who has been educated to the perception of beauty;he possesses a heritage of which no reverses can robhim. Yetitis a heritage possible to all who will take the trouble to begin early in life to cultivatethefinerqualitiesofthesoul,theeye,andthe heart. 
3 

ENJOYINGWHAT OTHERS OWN 
If you are not wealthy yourself, be glad that somebody else is, and you will be astonished at the happiness that will result to yourself. REV. DR. CHARLESF. AKED. 
"I would rather be able to appreciate things I cannot have than to have thingsIamnotable toappreciate." 
IN his "Citizen of the World," Goldsmith describes a mandarin who appeared in a blaze of diamonds, and who was very ostentatiously thanked byapersoninthecrowd. 
"What does the man mean?" the mandarin exclaimed. "Friend, I never gave thee any of my jewels." "No," replied the stranger, "but you have let me lookatthem;andthatis all theuse you can make ofthem yourself; so there is no difference between us, except that you have the trouble of watching them,andthat is anemploymentI do notdesire." 
A French marquis with whom Washington Irving made us acquainted consoled himself for the loss of his chateau by remarking that he had Versailles and St. Cloud for his country resorts, and the shady alleys of the Tuileries and theLuxembourg for his townrecreation. 
"When I walk through these fine gardens," he said, "I have only to fancy myself the owner of them, and they are mine. All these gay crowds are my visitors, and I have not the trouble of entertaining them. My estate is a perfect Sans Souci, where everyone does as he pleases, and no one troubles the owner. All Paris is my theater, and presents me with a continual spectacle. I have a table spread for me in every street, and thousands of waitersreadytofly atmybidding. Whenmyservantshavewaiteduponme,I pay them, discharge them, and there's an end. I have no fears of their wronging or pilfering me when my back is turned. Upon the whole," said the old gentleman with a smile of infinite good humor, "when I recollect all that I have suffered, and consider all I at present enjoy, I can but look upon myselfas apersonofsingulargoodfortune." 
Robert L. Stevenson once packed up his pictures and his furniture and sent themto anenemywhowasabouttobemarried,andhewroteto a friendthat he had at last rid him-self of his master, to whom he had been a bond slave. "Don't," he said, "give hostages to fortune, I implore you. Not once in a month will you be in a mood to enjoy a picture. When that mood comes, go to the gallery and see it. Meanwhile let some hired flunkey dust the picture and keep itin goodconditionforyourcoming." 
How is it that some rare characters manage to have such precious treasures, so much that enriches the life, out of a poverty-stricken, forbidding environment, while others get little out of the most luxurious and beautifulconditionsthatwealthcan furnish? 
It is wholly a question of the quality of the absorbent material. Some people are blind to beauty. They cantravelwith the utmostindifference in the midst of the most gorgeous and inspiring scenery. Their souls are not touched. They donotfeeltheinspiration whichputsothers intoecstasy. 
The power to absorb beauty depends on the quality of the mind to assimilateandincorporate itin the life. 
Iknowa lady who has lived allher life in apoverty-stricken district, in the midst of squalor and all sorts of discord, and yet, in this miserable environment, she has developed a sweet and beautiful character. She possesses that marvelous soul-alchemy which transforms the common into theuncommon, the uglyinto thebeautiful,drudgeryintodelight. 
Such rare characters are like the lily, which absorbs purity and beauty fromthemudandslimeoftheswamp. 
How few people extract from their environ ment and experience, even a titheof their possibilities,either ofhappinessorof achievement! 
Did youever watchabee flittingaboutgatheringdelicious honey from the most forbidding and unattractive sources? I know men and women who have this marvelous instinct for gathering honey from all sorts of sources, superbly developed. They extract it from the most repellent surroundings. They cannot talk with the poorest, meanest, most unfortunate specimen of humanity withoutgettingthatwhichwillsweeten thelifeandenrichtheexperience. 
The habit of feeling rich because you have developed the faculty of extracting wealth from everything you touch is riches indeed. Why should we not feel rich in all that our eyes can carry away, no matter if others happen to have the title-deed. Why should I not enjoy the beautiful gardens of the wealthy and their grounds, just as if I owned them? As I pass by I can make my own the wealth of color. The beauty of plants and lawn and flowers and trees are all mine. The title-deed of another does not cut off my esthetic ownership. The best part of the farm, the landscape, the beauty of the brook and the meadow, the slope of the valley, the song of the birds, the sunset cannot be shut up within the title-deed; they belong to the eye that can carry themaway,themindthatcanappreciatethem. 
Some people are so constituted that they do not need to Own things to enjoy them. There is no envy in their nature. They feel glad that others have money and a splendid home, even if they themselves live in poverty. Henry Ward Beecher had this broad, liberal, magnanimous, whole-hearted nature, whichcouldenjoywithoutowning. Heusedtosaythatit wasa greattreatto him to go out and enjoy the good things in the shop windows, especially during the Christmas holidays, and he could make the architecture and sculpture of palatial homes his own and enjoy the grounds, no matter who had the title-deed tothem. 
This ability to gather enjoyment from all sorts of sources is a divine gift. It broadens the life, deepens the experience, and enriches the whole nature. It is a greatforce inself culture. 
Some people are so mean and stingy, so uncharitable and narrow, so bigoted and suspicious, that they never open their natures wide enough to take in the riches all about them, the beauty with which they come in contact. They are so jealous and envious and small, that they are afraid to throw open thedoorsoftheirhearts. The resultis,theirlives arepinchedandstarved. 
A personmustbemagnanimousandlargehearted,tobeabletoabsorbthe wealthandbeautythatare worthwhile. 
I know a woman in New York who is a dwarf and a cripple, but who has such a sweet, open, beautiful nature that everybody loves her. She is welcome everywhere, because she loves everybody and feels interested in everyone. She is poor but she enters into other lives with a heartiness and unselfish abandonment and an enthusiasm that ought to shame those of us whoarephysicallynormalandina bettercondition. 
I knew a poor man who really enjoyed more than any rich man I know of, simply because early in life he learned to enjoy things without owning them to such an extent that he never seemed to have the slightest envy or jealousy in connection with them, but rather gratitude to those who owned them. He was such a sweet soul that all doors were open to him, because he radiated sunshine andgood cheer. 
It does not matter how poor or how unfortunate you are, you can enjoy, without the trouble of owning or caring for them, millions and millions of dollars' worth of works of art, and things of rarest beauty, almost as well as though they were your own. Think what it costs to maintain our great city parks, with all their wonders of beauty and comfort, the palatial public buildings, the fine residences, beautiful private grounds and gardens and objectsofbeauty everywhere, whichyou can enjoy without money, andyet you,perhaps,say you ownnothing. 
He has missed the finest lesson of culture and experience who has not learnedhowtoenjoy withoutowning. 
The secret of happiness is in a cheerful, contented mind. "He is poor who is dissatisfied; heis rich who is contented with what he has," and can enjoy whatothers own. 
Children should betaughttofeelrich in thewealth,goodness, beauty, and experiences of others, no matter how humble their own condition. It is a greatthingtoopen upthenaturewhileyoung,tokeep allthe avenuesofone's heart wide open and responsive; to learn to be receptive, and to drink in everything thatis goodand trueandbeautifulwhichcan enrichthenatureand broadenthe life. 
4 

PERSONALITYASA SUCCESS ASSET 
There is something about one's personality which eludes the photographer,whichthe painter cannot reproduce, whichthe sculptor cannot chisel. This subtle something which everyone feels, but which no one can describe,whichnobiographereverputdowninabook,hasa greatdealtodo withone'ssuccess in life. 
IT is this indescribable quality, which some persons have in a remarkable degree, whichsets an audience wild at the mention of the name of a Blaine, a Lincoln, or a Roosevelt -which makes people applaud beyond the bounds of enthusiasm. It was this personal atmosphere which made Clay the idol of his constituents. Although, perhaps, Calhoun was a greater man, he never aroused any such enthusiasm as "the mill boy of the. slashes." Webster and Sumner were great men, but they did not arouse a tithe of the spontaneous enthusiasmevoked by men likeBlaineandClay. 
A historian says that, in measuring Kossuth's influence over the masses, "we must first reckon with the orator's physical bulk, and then carry the measuring line above his atmosphere." If we had discernment fine enough and testsdelicate enough,wecouldnotonlymeasurethepersonalatmosphere of individuals, but could also make more accurate estimates concerning the future possibilities of schoolmates and young friends. We are often misled as tothepositiontheyaregoingto occupyfromthe fact thatwe are apt to take accountmerelyof their ability, and do not reckon this personal atmosphere or magnetic power as a part of their. success-capital. Yet this individual atmosphere has quite as much to do with one's advancement as brain-power oreducation. Indeed,weconstantlysee menofmediocreabilitybutwith 'fine personal presence, superb manner, and magnetic qualities, being rapidly advanced over the heads of those who are infinitely their superiors in mental endowments. 
A good illustration of the influence of personal atmosphere is found in the orator who carries his audience with him like a whirlwind, while he is delivering his speech, and yet so little of his personal element adheres to his cold words in print that those who read them are scarcely moved at all. The influence of such speakers depends almost wholly upon their presence, the atmospherethatemanatesfromthem. 
Charm of personality is a divine gift that sways the strongest characters, andsometimeseven controlsthedestiniesofnations. 
We are unconsciously influenced by people who possess this magnetic power. The moment we come into their presence we have a sense of enlargement. Theyunlockwithinuspossibilities of which wepreviously had no conception. Our horizon broadens; we feel a new power stirring through all our being; we experience a sense of relief, as if a great weight which long had presseduponushadbeenremoved. 
We can converse with such people in a way that astonishes us, although meeting them, perhaps, for the first time. We express ourselves more clearly and eloquently than we ever thought possible. They draw out the best that is in us; they introduce us, as it were, to our larger, better selves. In their presence, impulses and longings come thronging to our minds which never stirred us before. All at Once me takes on a higher and nobler meaning, and we are fired with a desire to do more than we have ever before done, and to be morethanwe havebeen in the past. 
A few minutes before, perhaps, we were sad and discouraged, when, suddenly, the flashlight of a potent personality of this kind has opened a rift in our lives and revealed to us hidden capabilities. Sadness gives place to joy, despair to hope, and disheartenment to encouragement. We have been touched to finer issues; we have caught a glimpse of higher ideals; and, for the moment, at least, have been transformed. The old commonplace life, with its absence of purpose and endeavor, has dropped out of sight, and we resolve, with better heart and stronger hope, to struggle anew to make permanently ours the forces and potentialities that have been thus revealed to us. 
Even a momentary contact with a character of this kind seems to double our mental and soul powers, as two great dynamos double the current which passes over the wire, and we are loath to leave the magical presence lest we lose ournew-bornpower. 
On the other hand, we frequently meet people who make us shrivel and shrink into ourselves. The moment they come near us we experience a cold chill, as if a blast of winter had struck us in midsummer. A blighting, narrowing sensation, which seems to make us suddenly smaller, passes over us. We feel a decided loss of power, of possibility. We could no more smile in their presence than we could laugh while at a funeral. Their gloomy, miasmatic atmosphere chills all our natural impulses. In their presence there is no possibility of expansion for us. As a dark cloud suddenly obscures the brightness of a smiling summer sky, their shadows are cast upon us and fill us with vague, indefinableuneasiness. 
We instinctively feel that such people have no sympathy with our aspirations, and our natural prompting is to guard closely any expression of our hopes and ambitions. When they are near us our purposes and desires shrink, the charm of sentiment vanishes, and life seems to lose color and zest. The effect of their presence is paralyzing, and we hasten from it as soon as possible. 
If we study these two types of personality, we shall find that the chief difference between them is that the first loves his kind, and the latter does not. Of course, that rare charm of manner which captivates all those who come within the sphere of its influence, and that strong personal magnetism which inclines all hearts toward its fortunate possessor, are largely natural gifts. But we shall find that the man who practises unselfishness, who is genuinely interested in the welfare of others, who feels it a privilege to have the power to do a fellow-creature a kindness, even though polished manners and a gracious presence may be absent, will be an elevating influence wherever he goes. He will bring encouragement and uplift to every life that touches his. He will be trusted and loved by all who come in contact with him. Thistypeofsuperiorpersonalitywemayallcultivateif wewill. 
This intangible, mysterious something, which we sometimes call individuality or personality, is often more powerful than the ability which can be measured,or the qualitiesthatcanbe rated. 
Many women are endowed with this magnetic quality, which is entirely independent of personal beauty. It is often possessed in a high degree by very plain women. This was notably the case with some of the women who ruled intheFrench salons moreabsolutelythanthekingon his throne. 
At a social gathering, when conversation drags, and interest is at a low ebb, the entrance of some bright woman with a magnetic personality instantly changes the whole situation. She may not be handsome, but everybodyisattracted toher;itis aprivilege toconversewithher. 
People who possess this' rare quality are frequently ignorant of the source of their power. They simply know they have it, but cannot locate or describe it. While it is, like poetry, music, or art, a gift of nature, born in one, it can be cultivated. 
Much of the charm of magnetic personality comes from a fine, cultivated manner. Tact, also, is a very important element, next to a fine manner, perhaps the most important. One must know exactly what to do, and be able to do just the right thing at the proper time. Good judgment and common sense are indispensable to those who are trying to acquire this magic power. Good taste is also one of the elements of personal charm. You cannot offend thetastes ofothers without hurtingtheirsensibilities. 
One of the greatest investments one can make is that of attaining a gracious manner, cordiality of bearing, generosity of feeling, the delightful art of pleasing. It isinfinitely better than money capital, for all doors fly open to sunny, pleasing personalities. They are more than welcome; they are sought for everywhere. 
Many a youth owes his promotion or his first start in life to the disposition to be accommodating, to help along wherever he could. This was one of Lincoln's chief characteristics; he had a passion for helping people, for making himself agreeable under all circumstances. Mr. Herndon, his law partner, says: "When the Rutledge Tavern, where Lincoln boarded, was crowded, he would often give up his bed, and sleep on the counter in his store with a roll of calico for his pillow. Somehow everybody in trouble turned to him for help." This generous desire to assist others and to return kindnesses endearedLincolntothepeople. 
The power to please is a tremendous asset. What can be more valuable thana personality which always attracts, never repels? It is not only valuable inbusiness,but also in every field of life. It makes statesmen and politicians; it brings clients to the lawyer, and patients to the physician. It is worth everything to the clergyman. No matter what career you enter, you cannot overestimate the importance of cultivating that charm of manner, those 
personalqualities,whichattractpeople to you. They will take the place of capital, or influence. They are often a substituteforalargeamountof hardwork. Some men attract business, customers, clients, patients, as naturally as magnets attract particles of steel. Everything seems to point their way, for the samereasonthatthesteelparticlespointtowardthemagnet, becausetheyare attracted. Such men are business magnets. Business moves toward them, even when they do not apparently make half so much effort to get it as the less successful. Their friends call them "lucky dogs." But if we analyze these men closely, we find that they have attractive qualities. There is usually some charmofpersonalityaboutthemthatwinsallhearts. Many successful business and professional men would be surprised, if they should analyze their success, to find what a large percentage of it is due to their habitual courtesy and other popular qualities. Had it not been for these, their sagacity, long-headedness, and business training would not, perhaps, have amounted to half so much; for, no matter how able a man may be, if his coarse, rude manners drive away clients, patients, or customers, if hispersonalityrepels,he will alwaysbe placedatadisadvantage. It pays to cultivate popularity. It doubles success possibilities, develops manhood, and builds up character. To be popular, one must strangle selfishness, he must keep back his bad tendencies, he must be polite, gentlemanly, agreeable, and companionable. In trying to be popular, he is on the road to success and happiness as well. The ability to cultivate friends is a powerful aid to success, It is capital which will stand by one when panics come, when banks fail, when business concerns go to the wall. How many men have been able to start again after having everything swept away by fire or flood, or some other disaster, just because they had cultivated popular qualities, because they had learned the art of being agreeable, of making friends and holding them with hooks of steel! People are influenced powerfully by their friendships, by their likes and dislikes, and a popular business or professional man has every advantage in the world over a cold, indifferentman,forcustomers,clients,orpatientswillflocktohim. Cultivate the art of being agreeable. Itwillhelpyou to self-expression as nothing else will; it will call out your success qualities; it will broaden your 
sympathies. It is difficult to conceive of any more delightful birthright than to be born with this personal charm, and yet it is comparatively easy to cultivate,because itis made up of so many other qualities, all o-fwhich are cultivatable. 
I never knew a thoroughly unselfish person who was not an attractive person. No personwhois alwaysthinkingofhimselfandtryingto figureout how he can get some advantage from everybody else will ever be attractive. We are naturally disgusted with people who are always trying to get everything for themselves andneverthinkofanybodyelse. 
The secret of pleasing is in being pleasant yourself, in being interesting. If you wouldbe agreeable,you mustbe magnanimous. The narrow, stingy soul is not lovable. People shrink from such a character. There must be heartiness in the expression, in the smile, in the hand-shake, in the cordiality, which is unmistakable. The hardest natures cannot resist these qualities any more than the eyes can resist the sun. If you radiate sweetness and light, people will love to get near you, for we are all looking for the sunlight, trying to get awayfromtheshadows. 
It is unfortunate that these things are not taught more in the home and in the school; for our success and happiness depend largely upon them. Many of us are no better than uneducated heathens. We may know enough, but we give ourselves out stingily and we live narrow and reserved lives, when we should bebroad,generous, sympathetic, andmagnanimous. 
Popular people, those with great personal charm, take infinite pains to cultivate all the little graces and qualities which go to make up popularity. If peoplewhoare naturallyunsocial wouldonly spendasmuch timeand take as much pains aspeople who are socialfavoritesinmakingthemselvespopular, theywouldaccomplishwonders. 
Everybody is attracted by lovable qualitiesand is repelled by the unlovely, wherever found. The whole principle of an attractive personality lies in this sentence: A fine manner pleases; a coarse, brutal manner repels. We cannot help being attracted to one who is always trying to help us, who gives us his sympathy, who is always trying to make us comfortable and to give us every advantage he can. On the other hand, we are repelled by people who are always trying to get something out of us, who elbow their way in front of usto getthe bestseat in a car or a hall, who are always lookingfor the easiest chair,orforthechoicest bits at the table, who are alwayswantingto bewaitedon firstat therestaurantor hotel,regardless ofothers. 
The ability to bring the best that is in you to the man you are trying to reach, to make a good impression at the very first meeting, to approach a prospective customer as though you had known him for years without offending his taste, without raising the least prejudice, but getting his sympathy and good will, is a great accomplishment, and' this is what commands a great salary. 
It is one of the most difficult things in the world to change our first impression of a person, whether good or bad. We do not realize how rapidly the mind works when we meet anyone for the first time. We are all eyes and ears; our mind is busy weighing the person upon the scales of our judgment. We are all alert, watching for earmarks of strength or weakness. Every word, every act, the manner, the voice, the mind takes in everything very rapidly, and our judgment is not only formed quickly, but also firmly, so that it is very difficult and almost impossible for us to get this first picture of the personentirelyoutof ourmind. 
Careless, tactless people are often obliged to spend a great deal of time in trying to overcome the bad first impressions they make. They apologize and explain in letters. But apology and explanation usually have very little effect, because they are so much weaker than the strong picture of the first impression which frequently persists in spite of all efforts to change it. Hence it is of the utmost importance for a youth who is trying to establish himself to be very careful of the impression he makes. A bad first impression maybe themeansof barringhimfromcredit. 
There is a charm in a gracious personality from which it is very hard to getaway. Itis difficult to snub the man who possesses it. There is something about him which arrests your prejudice, and no matter how busy or how worried you may be, or how much you may dislike to be interrupted, somehow you haven't the heart to turn away the man with a pleasing personality. 
. Who has not felt his power multiplied many times, his intellect sharpened, and a keener edge put on all of his faculties, when coming in contact with a strong personality which knowledge is valuable, but the knowledge whichcomes frommindintercourseisinvaluable. 
Two substances totally unlike, but having a chemical affinity for each other, may produce a third infinitely stronger than either, or even both, of those which unite. Two people with a strong affinity often call into activity in each other a power which neither dreamed he possessed before. Many an author owes his greatest book, his cleverest saying to a friend who has aroused in him latent powers whichotherwise might have remained dormant. Artists have been touched by the power of inspiration through a masterpiece, or by someone they happened to meet who saw in them what no one else hadever seen,-thepowertodo an Immortalthing. 
The man who mixes with his fellows is ever on a voyage of discovery, finding new islands of power in himself which would have remained forever hidden but for association with others. Everybody he meets has some secret for him, if he can only extract it, something which he never knew before, something which will help him on his way, something which will enrich his life. Nomanfindshimselfalone. Othersare his discoverers. 
It is astonishing how much you can learn from people in social intercourse when you know how to look at them rightly. But it is a fact that you can only get a great deal out of them by giving them a great deal of yourself. The more you radiate yourself, the more magnanimous you are, the more generous of yourself, the more you fling yourself out to them without reserve, themoreyou willgetback. 
You must give much in order to get much. The current will not set toward youuntilitgoesoutfromyou. Aboutallyougetfromothersis areflexofthe currents from yourself. The more generously you give, the more you get in return. You will not receive generously if you give out stingily, narrowly, meanly. You must give ofyourselfin awholehearted,generousway, or you will receive only stingy rivulets, when you might have had great rivers and torrentsof blessings. 
A man who might have been symmetrical, well-rounded, had he availed himself of every opportunity to touch life along all sides, remains a pygmy in everything except his own little specialty, because he did not cultivate his social side. 
It is always a mistake to miss an opportunity to meet with our kind, and especially to mix with those who are above us, because we can always carry away something of value. It is through social intercourse that our rough cornersarerubbedoff,thatwebecome polishedandattractive. 
If you go into social life with a determination to give it something, to make it a school for self-improvement, for calling out your best social qualities, for developing the latent brain cells, which have remained dormant from the lack of exercise, you will not find society either a bore or unprofitable. Butyoumustgiveitsomething,oryou willnotgetanything. 
When you learn to look upon everyone you meet as holding a treasure, something which will enrich your life, which will enlarge and broaden your experience, and make you more of a man, you will not think the time in the drawing-roomwasted. 
The man who is determined to get on will look upon every experience as an educator, as a culture chisel, which will make his life a little more shapely and attractive. 
Frankness of manner is one of the most delightful of traits in young or old. Every body admires the open-hearted, the people who have nothing to conceal, and who do not try to cover up their faults and weaknesses. They are, as a rule, large-hearted and magnanimous. They inspire love and confidence, and, by their very frankness and simplicity, invite the same qualitiesin others. 
Secretiveness repels as much as frankness attracts. There is something about the very inclination to conceal or cover up which arouses suspicion and distrust. Wecannothave thesameconfidenceinpeople whopossessthistrait, no matter how good they may seem to be, as in frank, sunny natures. Dealing with these secretive people is like traveling on a stage coach on a dark night. There is always a feeling of uncertainty. We may come out all right, but there is a lurking fear of some pitfall or unknown danger ahead of us. 'We are uncomfortable because of the uncertainties. They may be all right, and may deal squarely with us, but we are not sure and cannot trust them. No matter how polite or gracious a secretive person may be, we can never rid ourselves of the feeling that there is a motive behind his graciousness, and that he has an ulterior purpose in view. He is always more or less of an enigma, because he goes through life wearing a mask. He endeavors to hide every trait that is not favorable to himself. Never,if he can help it, do we get aglimpseof therealman. 
How different the man who comes out in the open, who has no secrets, who reveals his heart to us, and who is frank, broad, and liberal! How quickly he wins 'our confidence! How we all like and trust him. We forgive him for manya slipor weakness, because he is always ready to confess his faults, and to make amends for them. If he has bad qualities, they are always in sight, and we are ready to make allowances for them. His heart is sound and true, his sympathies are broad and active. The very qualities he possesses frankness and simplicity are conducive to the growth of the highest manhood. 
In the Black Hills of South Dakota there lived a humble, ignorant miner, who won the love and good will of everyone. "You can't 'elp likin' 'im," said an English miner; andwhen asked why the miners and the people in the town couldn't help liking him, he answered: "Because he has a 'eart in 'im; he's a man. He always helps the boys when in trouble. You never go to 'im for nothin'." 
Bright, handsome young men, graduates of Eastern colleges, were there seeking their fortune; a great many able, strong men drawn there from different parts of the· country by the gold fever; but none of them held the public confidence like this poor man. He could scarcely write his name, and knew nothing of the usages of polite society, yet he so intrenched himself in the hearts in his community that no other man, however educated or cultured, had the slightest chance of being elected to any office of prominence while "Ike" wasaround. 
He was elected mayor of his town, and sent. to the legislature, although he could not speak a grammatical sentence. It was all because he had" a 'eartin 'im";he wasa man. 
5 

HOW TOBE ASOCIALSUCCESS 
The power to please is a great success asset. It will do for you what money will not do. It will often give you capital which your financial assets alone would not warrant. People are governed by their likes and dislikes. We are powerfully influenced by a pleasing, charming personality. A persuasive mannerisoftenirresistible. Evenjudgeson thebenchfeelitsfascination. 
LORD CHESTERFIELD has called the art of pleasing one of the choicest gifts. It is a great social power. If you want to be popular, you must assume a popular attitude, and, above all, you must be interesting. If people are not interested in you, they will avoid you. But if you can be so sunny and cheerful, helpful and kind, if you can fling sunshine about you in every direction, so that people will cross the street to meet you, instead of trying to avoidyou,you willhaveno difficulty inbecomingpopular. 
The best way to draw people to you is to make them feel that you are interested in them. You must not do this for effect. You must be really interestedinthem, ortheywilldetectthedeception. 
Nothing else will win the heart of a young person to you so quickly as making him feel that you take a genuine interest in him, in what he is doing, andespeciallyin whathe isgoingto do in the future. 
Ifyouavoid people, you must expect them to avoid you;and if you always talk about yourself and your wonderful achievements, you will find that peoplewill move awayfromyou. Youdonotpleasethem. Theywantyouto talk aboutthem, tobeinterestedin thatwhichconcernsthem. 
If you wear a bulldog expression, if you go about looking sour and disagreeable, you must not wonder that you are not popular with your employees or other people. Everybody likes a pleasant face. We are always looking for the sunshine, and we want to get away from the clouds and gloom. 
There are many people who think that much of what is real culture and refinementis merely affectation. They believe that a diamond in the rough is the only genuine diamond. If a man is sincere, they argue, if he possesses manly qualities and is loyal to truth, no matter how uncouth and coarse he maybeoutwardly,hewillberespected andwillbesuccessful. 
This argument is good only to a limited extent. What is true of an uncut gem is also true of a human diamond in the rough. No matter how intrinsically valuable they may be, no one would think of wearing uncut diamonds. A man might have a million dollars' worth of such gems; yet, if he refused to have them cut and polished, no one would appreciate them. The unpractised eye would not be able to distinguish' them from common pebbles. They are valuable only in proportion to the degree of brilliancy and beauty which thediamond-cutter cancalloutofthem. 
So, a man may be possessed of many admirable qualities, but, if they are covered by a rough, uncouth exterior, they will be robbed of much of their intrinsic value. They will be discovered only by keen observers, or expert character readers. What cutting and polishing do for crystalized carbon, education and refined social intercourse do for the human diamond in the rough. The grace of fine culture, a charming personality, and an exquisite mannerenhanceits value athousandfold. 
**** 
I know a man a type of thousands of others, who cannot understand why people avoid him. If he is at a social gathering everybody seems repelled from his side of the room. When others are enjoying themselves, chatting and laughing, he is silent, in a corner by himself. If, by any accident, he gets into the center of attraction, there seems to be a centrifugal force acting upon him, which quickly draws him out again to his solitary corner. He is rarely invited anywhere. He appears to be a social icicle, there is no warmth abouthim, nomagnetism. 
The reason for this man's unpopularity is a mystery to him. He has great ability, is a hard worker, and, when his day's work is done, likes to relax and mingle with his kind; but he gets none of the pleasure for which he longs. He is mortified to find himself persistently shunned while others, with not a tithe of his ability, are welcomed wherever they go. He has no idea that selfishness is the principal bar to his popularity. He is always thinking of self. He cannot get himself or his business out of his mind long enough to take an interest in other people or their affairs. No matter how often you talk with him, he always wants to pull the conversation around to himself or his business. 
Another hindrance to his social success is that he does not know the secretof attraction. Hedoes not know that everyperson is a magnet, which attractsin exact intensityand power to the habitualthought and motive. The man who is always thinking of himself becomes a self-magnet, attracting himself, nobody else. Many men become money magnets. Their thoughts have been held on money so long that they attract money, nothing else. Somemenbecomeviciousbecausetheyhavemadethemselvesvice magnets. 
On the other hand,there are men and women so beautifulin mind andin character that everybody who comes in contact with them feels a sense of ownership or close kinship with them. Everyone about them loves and admires them. These large-hearted creatures are loved because they love. They are magnets which attract all sorts of people because they are large enoughto take them in. They are interestedin them all;theyhave charityfor everyone. 
We instinctively measure the predominating qualities of a person, and estimate everything about him, under favorable conditions. We perceive his dominating qualities and know at once whether he is a Chinese wall of exclusiveness, or don't-touch-me-ness, or a generous, open, magnanimous nature, without bars, or secrets, or evasiveness, one who attracts and loves everybodyelse. 
As long as a man remains cold, self-centered, and self-contemplative, he will have no magnetism for others. He will be shunned and disliked. No one will voluntarily seek him. It is just a question of the kind of magnet he makesof himself. The moment he shows regard for and interest in others, he will take on magnetic qualities, and attract, where before he repelled. He will draw others to him just in proportion to his interest in them. As soon as he puts himself in another's place, takes a genuine interest in his welfare, and does not try to shift the conversation to himself and his own affairs, just so soon and no sooner will others take an interest in him. There is only way to win love, and that is to love. Love will break the bonds of selfishness and self-consciousness. Stop thinking of self, and take an interest in others; develop an admiration and love for them, a real desire to help them, and you willnotfailtobe loved andto bepopular. 
Many persons are avoided because they are always shut up within themselves, absorbed in their own affairs. They have lived with themselves so long that they have lost connection and sympathy with the outside world. They have lived a subjective life so long that an objective one seems impossible. They did not realize that living alone and not interesting themselves in others for years would shut off their powers of attraction and dry up their sympathies, until they would cease to generate any warmth or power, and would become human icicles, so cold that their mere presence would chillthewholeatmosphere aboutthem. 
Manis so constitutedthathedoes notlivenormally alone. Alarge part of the best of his life comes from others. He is a related being, and, when cut offfrom his fellows, loses halfhis power. As arule,a man is great only as he comes so in contact with other lives that there is a vital pulsating connectionbetweenhimselfand other men,and their lives and thoughts surge throughhim,and his through them. 
The moment a cluster of green grapes is severed from the parent stem it begins to shrivel. The moment the sap which feeds it is cut off, it grows stale and insipid. Itbecomesworthless. Thevirtueoftheclustercomesfromitssap connection, its nourishment connection with the soil through the main vine. It candonothingalone. Whenits source ofpoweris cut off, it ceases to grow. It dies. 
Amanis buta clusteron the greathuman grapevine. He begins to dry up the moment he is cut off from his fellows. There is something in the Solidarityof the human race which cannotbe accountedfor in the sum total of all the individuals. As Kipling says: "The strength of the wolf is in the pack." Separation from the mass involves a mighty loss of power in the individual, just as there is a loss of cohesion and adhesion involved in the separation of the molecules and atoms of the diamond. The value of the gem is in the close contact, the compactness, and the concentration of the particles which compose it. The moment they are separated its value is gone. So a strong, effective man gets a large part of his strength from the vital connectionwithhisfellows. 
Man is omnivorous mentally as well as physically. He requires a variety of mental food, which he can obtain only by mixing with a great variety of people. The moment a human being is separated from his kind, he begins to deteriorate. Childrenwho have beenimprisonedandkeptmanyyearsfromall communicationwithotherhumanbeingshavedeterioratedto idiocy. 
A man is strong in proportion to the quantity, the quality, and the variety of forces which he absorbs from others. He is a power in proportion to the extent of his contact, socially, mentally, and morally, with his kind, and a weaklingjustinproportionas hecutshimselfofffromothers. 
Some religious organizations have tried to evolve moral giants by separating the individuals in monasteries or cloisters, by cutting off all communicationwiththe outsideworld andpracticallyalsowith oneanother. 
But their method has proven a failure, as have all plans which have interferedwiththeCreator'sgreatplanof humansolidarity. 
There is a mighty telepathic force, playing between brain and brain, between soul and soul, which we do not yet know how to measure, but it is powerful to stimulate, mighty to build up or to tear down. There are scoresof avenueswhichcarrynutrimentto the humanmind, andto close up any of them must result in dwarfing the faculties, in shutting off power. The five senses are only a small number of the vehicles which carry impressions and information to the inner man. There are other, intangible, unknown soul senses, which illuminate the mind. We grow largely upon the nutriment which the soul absorbs from everywhere, but which the crude senses cannot weigh or measure. We drink in power through the eye and ear which does not Come through the optic or auditory nerves. The greatest thing which comes from a master painting is not in the tints or the shades or forms on the canvas, but is back of all that, in the artist, a mighty force which inheres in hispersonality,is madeup ofthe sum of all he has inherited and all he has experienced. Who can ever measure the suggestive force which reaches the innerconsciousnessthroughtheimagination? 
An opportunity to associate with people who see the best instead of the worstin us is worthfar, far more to us than an opportunityto make money. Itincreasesahundredfoldourpowerto develop noble characters. 
Beware of people who are constantly belittling others, finding flaws and defects in their characters, or slyly insinuating that they are not quite what they ought to be. Such persons are dangerous, and not to be trusted. A disparaging mind is a limited, rutty; unhealthy mind. It can neither see nor acknowledge good in others. It is a jealous mind: it is really painful to it to hear others spoken well of, praised, or commended for any virtue or good point. If it cannot deny the existence of the alleged good, it will seek to minimizeit by amalicious "if," or "but," or tryin some other wayto throw a doubtonthecharacteroftheperson praised. 
A large, healthy, normal mind will see the good in another much more quickly than the evil, buta narrow, belittling mind has an eye only for faults, for the unlovely and the crooked. The clean, the beautiful, the true, and the magnanimous are too large for its vision. It delights in tearing down or destroying,butit is incapableof upbuilding. 
Whenever you hear a person trying to belittle another, discard him from yourlistof friends,unless youcanhelp himto remedyhis fault. Donotflatter yourself that those who tell you of the failings of other people, and criticize and hold them up to ridicule, will not treat you in the same way when an opportunity presents itself. Such people are incapable of true friendship, for true friendship helps, instead of hinders; it never exposes the weak point in a friend'scharacter,orsuffersanyonetospeakill of him. 
One of the finest fruits of culture is the power to see the man or woman whom God made in his own image, and not the one who is scarred by faults anddeficiencies. Itisonly the generous,lovingsoul who ever attains to this degree of culture. It is only the broad, charitable, magnanimous, great­hearted man or woman who is blind to the defects of others, and always ready toenlarge upontheir goodqualities. 
We are all of us constantly, but unconsciously, molding others by our thoughts about them. The qualities you see in your friend and those with whom you come in contact, you tend to enlarge. If you see only the little, mean, contemptible side of people.. you cannot help them out of their faults, for you only intensify and fix them; but if you see the good, the noble, the aspiring traits in them, you will help to develop these qualities until they crowdoutthe base,unworthyones. 
Everywhere, the world over, this unconscious interchange of influence is at work,hinderingor helping according toitsnature. 
Many people become morbid in dwelling upon the thought that they are peculiar in some respect. Some of these people think they have inherited certain tendencies or peculiarities from their parents and are always looking fortheirreappearance inthemselves. Nowthis is justthe way to make them appear, for what we encourage in the mind or hold there persistently we draw to us. So these people continually increase the evil by worrying about it and dwellingupon itssadeffectsonthemselves. Theybecome sensitiveaboutreal or imaginary idiosyncrasies. They never like to speak of or hear of them, and yet the belief that they possess them takes away their self-confidence and marstheirachievement. 
Most of these peculiarities are usually imaginary or are exaggerated by imagination. But they have been nursed and brooded over so long that they havebecomerealtothesufferers. 
The remedy lies in doing precisely the opposite, dwelling on the perfect qualities and ignoring any possible shortcomings. If you think you are peculiar, form a habit of holding the normal thought. Say to yourself, "I am not peculiar. The idiosyncrasies that ·disturb me are not real. I was made in the image of my Maker, and a Perfect Being could not make imperfections, hence the imperfections I think I have cannot be real, as the truth of my being is real. There can be no abnormalities about me unless I produce them in thought, for the Creator never gave them to me. He never gave me a discordantnote,becauseHeis Harmony." 
If you hold this thought persistently in mind, you will forget what seems abnormal to you; it will soon disappear and you will regain your confidence justby becomingconvincedthatyouarenotmuchunlike other people. 
Shyness sometimes becomes a disease; but it is a disease of the imaginationonly, andcanbeeasilyovercomebydrivingthethoughtofitout of the mind and holding the opposite thought, by one's just making up his mind that he is not being watched by everybody and that people are too busy about their own selfish aims and ambitions to be observing him all the time. 
I know a girl who had become so morbid and despondent, through constantly dwelling on her plain features and ungainly manner, that she was on the verge of insanity. She was extremelysensitive, very proud, and would brood for days over the fancied slight when she was not invited to a party or otherentertainmentwithhermoreattractiveacquaintances. 
Finally a real friend came to her assistance, and told her that it was possible for her to cultivate qualities which would be far more attractive and would make her much more popular than the mere physical beauty and grace whoseabsenceshe so deplored. 
With this kind friend's assistance she completely reversed her estimate of herself; she turned about face, and, instead of over-emphasizing mere physical grace and beauty, instead of thinking of herself as ugly and repulsive, she constantly held the thought that she was the expression of God's idea, that there was something divine in her, and she resolved to bringit out. 
She denied every suggestion that she could possibly be unpopular, or that she could really be ugly, and held persistently in mind the image of her popularity and attractiveness, and the thought that she could make herself interesting and even fascinating. She would not allow herself to harbor the suggestionthatshecouldbe anythingbutattractive. 
She began to improve herself intellectually in every possible way. She read the best authors; she took up different courses of study; and determined that at every opportunity she would make herself just as interesting as possible. 
Hitherto she had been careless in her dress and manners because of the conviction that it did not matter how she dressed or what she did, for she would still be unpopular. She began to dress as becomingly as possible and in better taste. 
The result was, that, instead of being a wallflower, as formerly, she began to attract little groups about her wherever she went. She became a fascinating talker, and made herself so interesting in every way that she was invited out just as often as the more attractive girls whom she used to envy. Ina shorttimeshehadnotonlyovercomeherhandicap,buthadalsobecome themostinteresting girlinher community. 
Her task had not been an easy one, but she had worked with superb resolution and grit to overcome the things which had held her down; and, in her determined effort to overcome what she regarded as a fatal handicap, as a curse,she was enabled to develop qualities which more than compensated for the personal beautythat wasdeniedher. 
It is wonderful what a transformation we can bring about by holding persistently in the mind the image of the thing we desire or would become, and struggling hard to attain it. This has a marvelous power to attract what wedesire, to makerealthepicturethatwe see. 
The speaking voice has much to do with one's popularity and social success. There is no one thing which marks the degree of good breeding, culture,and refinementsomuchas asweet,modulated,cultivatedvoice. 
"Shut me up in a dark room with a mixed multitude," says Thomas WentworthHigginson, "andIcanpickoutthegentlefolksby theirvoices." 
It is said that during the early history of Egypt only written pleadings were allowedin the law courts, lest the judges on the bench mightbe influenced or swayed by the eloquence of the human voice. In announcing the verdict, the presiding judge, with an image of the goddess of Truth, merely touched insilencethe personon trial. 
Considering the marvelous power of the human voice is it not a shame, almosta crime, that ourchildren athome and in thepublic schools should not have their voices well trained? Is it not pitiable to see a bright, promising child getting a good education and yet developing a harsh, coarse, strident, nasal, disagreeable voice, which will handicap his whole career? Think of whata handicapthisis to a girl! 
But in America one finds boys and girls graduated from schools and colleges, institutions supposed to have taught them how to make the most and best of life, instructed in the dead languages, in mathematics, in the sciences, art,andliterature,yetwithvoices 'rasping,nasal,repellent. 
Many brilliant young women, who have been graduatedwithdegreesfrom universities, possess voices so discordant and harsh that a person with sensitivenervescan scarcelycarryona conversationwith them. 
What is so fascinating, so charming, as the human voice when properly modulatedandwhenproperlytrained?Itisarealtreattolistentoa voicethat enunciates clearly,flings outthe wordsclean-cut, liquid, andmusical,as from a divineinstrument. 
I know a lady whose voice has such a charm that wherever she goes everyone listens whenever she speaks, because they cannot help it. Her voice simply captivates one. Her features are plain, almost to the point of ugliness, but her voice is divine; the charm is irresistible, and indicative of her highly cultivatedmindand charmingcharacter. 
I have heard female voices in society which were so high-keyed, which rasped so terribly upon the nerves, and so offended the sensibilities, that I havebeenobliged,timeandagain,to retreatfromtheirreach. 
A pure, low-keyed, trained voice, which breathes of culture and refinement, and gives out clean-cut words and sentences and syllables with perfectenunciation,a voice which expresses the very soul, rising and falling in sweet undulations that captivate, is a divine possession possible to most persons,especiallywomen. 
6 

THE MIRACLE OF TACT 
"Talent is something, but tact is everything." "Talent is no match for tact; weseeitsfailureeverywhere. Intherace oflife, common sense has the right ofway." 
TACT is an extremely delicate quality, difficult to define, hard to cultivate, but absolutely indispensable to one who wishes to get on in the world rapidly andsmoothly. 
Some people possess this exquisite sense in such a degree that they never offend, andyetthey sayeverything that they wish to. They apparently do not restrain themselves, and say things with impunity which, if said by many others,would givemortaloffense. 
On the other hand, certain people, no matter what they say, cannot seem to avoid irritating the sensitiveness of others, although they mean well. Such people go through life misunderstood, for they cannot quite adjust themselves to circumstances. The way is never quite clear. They are continually running against something. They are always causing offense without meaning to, uncovering blemishes or sore spots. They invariably appear at the wrong time and do the wrong thing. They never get hold of the rightend of thethread, so thatthe skein does not unravel, butthe more they pull,theworsetheytanglethe threads. 
Who can estimate the loss to the world which results from the lack of tact, the blundering, the stumbling, the slips, the falls, the fatal mistakes which come to people because they do not know how to do the right thing at the right time! How often we see splendid ability wasted, or not used effectively, becausepeoplelackthisindefinable, exquisitequalitywhichwe call "tact." 
You may have a college education; you may have a rare training in your specialty; you may be a genius in certain lines, and yet not get on in the world; but if you have tact and one talent combined with stick-to-it-iveness, you willbepromoted,you willsurely climb. 
Nomatterhowmuchabilityamanmayhave, ifhe lacks the tactto direct it effectively, to say the right thing and to do the right thing at just the right time, he cannotmakeiteffective. 
Thousands of people accomplish more with small ability and great tact thanthosewithgreatabilityandlittle tact. 
Everywhere we see people tripping themselves up, making breaks which cost friendships, customers, money, simply because they have never developed this faculty. Merchants are losing customers; lawyers, influential clients; physicians, patients; editors sacrificing subscribers; clergyman losing their power in the pulpit and their hold upon the public; teachers losing their situations;politicianslosing theirholdupon the people, because of the lack of tact. 
Tact is a great asset in business, especially for a merchant. In a large city where hundreds of concerns are trying to attract the customer's attention, tact playsa veryimportantpart. 
One prominent business man puts tact at the head of the list in his success recipe, the other three things being: enthusiasm, knowledge of business,dress. 
The following paragraph, in a letter which a merchant sent out to his customers,is an exampleof shrewdbusiness tact: 
"We should be thankful for any information of any dissatisfaction with any former transactions with us, and we will take immediate steps to remedy it." 
Think of the wealthy customers that have been driven away from banks by thelackoftacton the partof acashieror teller! 
A man must possess the happy faculty of winning the confidence of his fellow-beings and making steadfast friends, if he would be successful in his business or profession. Good friends praise our books at every opportunity, "talk up" our wares, expatiate at length on our last case in court, or on our efficiency in treating some patient; they protect our name when slandered, and rebuke our maligners. Without tact, the gaining of friends who will rendersuch servicesisimpossible. 
A young man with very ordinary ability gained a seat in the United States Senatelargelybecauseof hiswonderfultact. 
A great many men are held down, kept back, because they cannot get along well with others. They are so constituted that they nettle others, run against their prejudices. They cannot seem to cooperate with other people. Theresultistheyhavetoworkalone,andtheylose thestrengthwhichcomes fromsolidarity. 
I know a man whose effectiveness during a very strenuous life has been almost ruined by the lack of tact. He can never get along with people. He seems to have every other quality necessary to make a large man, a leader of men, but his faculty for antagonizing others has crippled his life. He is always doing the wrong thing, saying the wrong thing, hurting people's feelings without meaning to, counteracting the 'effectiveness of his own work, because he has not the slightest appreciation of what the word tact means. He is constantlygivingoffense. 
We all know men who pride themselves on saying what they think, on beingblunt. Theythinkitis honest,a signofstrengthofcharacter;andthatit is weak to "beat about the bush" and to resort to diplomacy in dealing with people. They believe in "striking right out from the shoulder," "calling things bytheirright names." 
These men have never been much of a success. People believe them to be honest, but their lack of tact, good judgment, and good sense is all the time queering their propositions. They do not know how to manage people,cannot get along with them, and are always" in hotwater." 
The truth is, we all like to be treated with consideration, with tact, and to deal with people who use diplomacy. Diplomacy IS common-sense reduced to a fine art. 
Bluntness is a quality which people do not like or appreciate. People who pride themselves on saying just what they think, do not usually have a great many friends, nor a very large business or successful profession. Often truths whichwillhurtare betterunsaid. 
Mark Twain says: "Truth is so very precious that we should use it sparingly." 
"A man may have not much learning nor wit," says Addison, "but if he has commonsense and something friendly in his behavior,it will conciliate men's minds more than thebrightest thoughtswithoutthisdisposition." 
"A little management may often have resistance which a vast force may vainly strivetoovercome," saysanotherwriter. 
Toquoteagain: 
"A tactful man will not only make the most of everything he does know, but also of many things he does not know, and will gain more credit by his adroit mode of hiding his ignorance than a pedant by his attempt to exhibithiserudition." 
When the French Revolution was at its height and the exciting mob was surging through the Paris streets, a detachment of soldiers filled one of the streetsanda commandingofficer wasaboutto orderhis mento fire, when a young lieutenant asked permission to appeal to the people. Riding out in front of the soldiers, he doffed his hat and said: "Gentlemen will have the kindness to retire, for I am ordered to shoot down the rabble." The mob at oncedispersedas ifby magic,andthestreetwasclearedwithoutbloodshed. 
Tact enabled Lincoln to extricate himself from a thousand unfortunate and painful situationswith politicians during the Civil War. In fact, without it, the resultof the warmighthavebeenentirelychanged. 
"The kindly element of humor almost always enters into the use of tact, and sweetens its mild coercion. We cannot help smiling, oftentimes, at the deft way in which we have been induced to do what we afterwards recognize as altogetherrightandbest. Thereneedbe nodeceptioninthisuse of tact, only such a presentation of rightful inducements as shall most effectively appeal to a hesitating mind. It is the fine art of getting the right thingdone in the nick of time." 
Someonehas said, "Everyfish hasitsfly." 
As every fish has its fly, so every person can be reached, no matter how odd or peculiar,bythe person who has tact enoughto touchhim in the right place. 
A teacherin oneof the public schoolsre proved a little eight-year-old Irish boy for some mischief. The boy was about to deny the fault when the teacher said, "I saw you, Jerry." "Yes," replied the boy as quick as a flash, " I tells them thereain'tmuchyoudon'tsee withthempurtyblackeyes ofyours." 
Tactful people make friends rapidly because they have a way of drawing people out and inducing them to express the best within them. We always admire people who interest themselves in our affairs and who are not forever trying to talk aboutthemselvesand theirowninterests. 
When William Penn went to pay his respects to Charles II, true to his Quaker principles, he kept on his hat. But the Merry Monarch, instead of showing anger, respectfully doffed his. "Prithee, Friend Charles, put on thy hat," said the great Friend; "N 0, Friend Penn," replied the king, "it is usual foronly onemantostandcoveredhere." 
King Edward, when a prince, was the most popular man in the United Kingdom, becauseof his never-failingtactandurbanity. 
Some people seem to be incapable of learning tactfulness, because they donotappreciate delicate situations. They areoften thick skinned themselves and cannotunderstand sensitivepeople. 
A lady who had been a guest in a country home wrote to her hostess saying what a nice visit she had had, and that she was all right except that her hand was sore from mosquito bites, and that it did seem good to get back oncemoretoa comfortablebathroom. 
Someone has said, "The secret of all success lies in being alive to what is going on around one; in adjusting oneself to one's surroundings; in being sympathetic and helpful; in knowing the wants of the time; in saying to one's fellowswhattheywantto hear,whattheyneedtohearattherightmoment . 
It is not enough to do the right thing; it must be done at the right time and place." 
Tactis a combinationof goodtemper,ready wit, quickness of perception, and ability to take in the exigency of the occasion instantly. It is never offensive,butis a balmallayingsuspicion,andsoothing. Itis appreciative. It is plausible without being dishonest, apparently consults the welfare of the second party and does not manifest any selfishness. It is never antagonistic, neveropposes,neverstrokesthehairthewrongway, andneverirritates. 
Tact, like a fine manner eases the way, takes the jar out of the jolts; oils the bearings, opens doors barred to others; sits in the drawing-room when othersmustwaitin the receptionhall;getsintotheprivateofficewhenothers are turned down. It admits you into exclusive circles, where wealth abounds, eventhoughpoor. Itsecuresthepositionwhenmeritis turnedaway. 
Tact is a great manager; it easily controls people, even when combined withsmall ability,wheregeniuscannotget along. 
With tact, one woman, even with mediocre ability, is able to be a leader in society and wield great influence over statesmen and brilliant men in all vocations, while another woman very muchhersuperior in other intellectual endowments remains in obscurity and apparently without influence, because she lacksthis exquisitequality. 
Iwasoncein a home wherethewifeusedto perform whatto me seemed almost a daily miracle. The husband would come to breakfast always in a great rush, with his paper in his hand, cross and crabbed from his perplexing businessand latehoursattheclub. 
He was a very nervous man, and everything seemed to irritate him in the morning. He was always late at breakfast, and if everything was not ready on the instant, piping hot, he would fly into a rage, which, but for the wife's marvelous tact, would have destroyed the peace and comfort of the family for the entire day. The servants stood in fear of their master, because they dreadedhistonguelashings,hishottemper. 
The calm, serene, gentle wife, however, was usually equal to the emergency. No matter where the trouble was, with marvelous tact and gentleness she would slip in and calm the storm. If the husband's coffee did not please him, she would immediately remove his cup, go to the kitchen, and in a few minutes return with a fresh, deliciously creamed, boiling hot cup, which would temporarilyquiether bearhusband. 
This man would sometimes throw food that did not suit him across the dining-room in his fits of anger. But the patient wife would make excuses that her husband's business was very trying, and that he had not been well of late. 
Sometimes he was so domineering that the servants threatened to leave immediately; but the wife in her tactful manner would smooth everything over. 
She alwaysseemed to be equalto any emergency, and usually managed to calm the storm, to pour the oil of gentleness and sweetness upon the troubled waters. She went about the home like a ray of sunshine, shedding light, warmth, andbeauty everywhere. 
Many a patient has lost his life for the lack of tact in physician or relatives. A patient ought to be benefited by a visit from a physician even without medicine. A physician ought to be so cheerful, buoyant, exuberant with life, that his very presence would cheer the patient, give hope and encouragement. A gloomy, sad-faced, moody, tactless physician is a poor health restorer. Only those who are happy and cheerful should administer to the unfortunate sick. The personality of a physician has a great deal to do withhissuccess, andwiththechancesofhis patients. 
Everything which tends to depress and discourage and take away hope should be kept away from the ill. The coming of the physician ought to be a signal of encouragement. Hope and confidence should come with him. He should radiate cheerfulness, encouragement. A brutal, coarse physician is a calamityto anycommunity. Infact,a physician'spersonality andhis tact are oftenmuchmoreimportantthanhisremedies. 
Some physicians are so conscientious and so tactless, that they think they must tell patients the whole truth when they believe they cannot recover, instead of giving them the benefit of the doubt, for every physician knows that, nearly always, there is a doubt which way the case will turn. Cheerful encouragementhas savedmanya life byhelpingittopassacrisisfavorably, when the actual truth might have killed the patient or reduced his rallying powers to the danger-point. In all the affairs of life, cruel bluntness in statingbrutalfactshascauseduntoldmiseryandbrokenmanyfriendships. 
Napoleon actually terrified ladies by his coarse brutality and his selfishness in conversation. 
He once said to one of the most beautiful, courtly women of his time, Madame Reynault, in a large company and in hearing of court ladies who were envious of her, "Do you know, Madame, you are aging terribly?" She was only twenty-eight and replied with exquisite self-command, "What your majestydoes me the honorto say to me wouldbe verypainfulto hear were I of an age to be afflictedbyit." 
Once when Napoleon was introduced to alady whom he was very anxious tomeet, hesaid, "Why,they toldmeyou wereverybeautiful." 
There are many people who do not try to be agreeable to others who do notinterestthem,andshowadeplorablelackoftact. Ifapersonhas any little habit or peculiarity which offends them, they do not care to associate with him, and do not hesitate to show their dislike. Ifforced into the company of a person who does not attract them, they either freeze him with their cold indifference, so as to shut off the intercourse altogether, or they make him feelveryuncomfortable insomeway. 
There is no better discipline in the world than to force ourselves to be sociable and interesting to those for whom we do not care. It is really surprising how much one can find of interest, even in those who at first repel us. It is not difficult for an intelligent, cultivated person to find somethingof realinterestin everyone. 
Thefactis, our prejudicesareoftenverysuperficial,basedfrequently upon an unfortunate first impression, so that we often find that people who repelled us at first, who seemed very unattractive, and not likely to have anything in common with us, finally become our best friends. Knowing this, we ought at least to give another the advantage of a fair trial before we jump to the conclusionthatwearenotgoingto like himor her. 
We are creatures of prejudice, and we know from experience that even people towards whom we feel kindly often misjudge and do not like us simply because they do not know us. They are prejudiced by some false impression or hasty opinion of us; but when they are better acquainted the prejudicewearsoffandtheycan appreciateour goodpoints. 
Some writerhasthusdescribedthe qualitieswhich enterinto tact: "A sympathetic knowledge of human nature, its fears, weaknesses, expectations,and inclinations. "The ability to put yourself in the other person's place, and to consider the matterasit appearsto him. "The magnanimity to deny expression to such of your thoughts as might unnecessarilyoffend another. " The ability to perceive quickly what is the expedient thing, and the willingnesstomake the necessary concessions. "The recognition that there are millions of different human opinions, of which yourownis but one. "A spirit of unfeigned kindness such as makes even an enemy a debtor to yourinnategood-will. " A recognition of what is customary under the circumstances and a 
gracious acceptanceofthesituation. "Gentleness, cheerfulness, andsincerity." Some people are color-blind and have not the slightest appreciation of delicate tints.. Manyaretact-blind. "Don't, on any account, allude to the execution that is to take place to­day," said the wife of a tactless man as she and her liege lord were on their way to a luncheon party. " The people of the house are distantly related to MissHthoughthey don'ttalkaboutthecousinship." All went well as long as the man bore this in mind, but before the visit 
was overhebrokea ratheroppressivesilence 'by remarking: 
"Well,IsupposeMissHhas beenhangedbynow." 
When tactful people first meet us they try to find out what we are interested in and talk about that. They do not talk about themselves or what they are doing, for they know that there is nothing which will interest you quite so much as your own affairs, or conversation along the line of your own ambition. On the other hand, tactless people are always talking about whatintereststhemselvesandoftenbecomebreatborestostrangersaswell as totheir friends. 
It is a great art to interest oneself in others, to be able to strike a responsive chord so that you will make a stranger feel at the introduction thatthere is somethingin common between you. Itis said that the test of a beautifulwoman'spopularityisthatsheseemstobelongto everybody. 
How easy it is to meet tactful people for the first time! No matter how embarrassingorstrainedtheoccasion,theyputusatease atonce. They make usfeel perfectly athome. This is the testoftact;thatyou can putshypeople, timid people, people who have had little experience in the world, at ease at once. Nevermindwhatyouknow. 
Do not try to dazzle others with your great knowledge upon a certain subject. Just try to find out what will interest them, and make them feel comfortableand unrestrained. 
7 

"I HADA FRIEND" 
Oh, friendship! of all things the most rare, and therefore most scarce because most excellent, whose comforts in misery are always sweet, and whose counselsin prosperity areever fortunate.-LILLY. 
“I HAD a friend!" Is there anything more beautiful in all this world than theconsciousness ofpossessingsweet,loyal, helpfulfriends,whosedevotion is not affected in the least by a for tune or the lack of it; friends who love us evenmorein adversitythanin prosperity? 
At the breaking out of the Civil War, when the qualifications of the different candidates for the Presidency were being discussed, and Lincoln was mentioned, someone said: "Lincoln has nothing, only plenty of friends." It is true that Lincoln was poor, that when he was elected to the legislature of his State he borrowed money to buy a suit of clothes, in order that he might make a respectable appearance, and that he walked a hundred miles to take his seat. It is a matter of history that he also borrowed money to move his family to Washington after he was elected President, but how rich was this marvelousmanin hisfriendships! 
Friends are silent partners every one of them interested in everything that interests the other, everyone trying to help the other to succeed in life, to makea good impression, to stand for the best thing in him and not the worst, trying to help the other do what he is endeavoring to do, rejoicing in every good thing that comes to him. Can anything be more sublime, more beautiful thantheloyalty, the devotionof friends! 
Even with all his remarkable ability, Theodore Roosevelt could never have accomplished anything equal to what he has but for the powerful, persistent, enthusiastic assistance of his friends. It is doubtful whether he would ever have been President but for the loyalty of friends, especially of those he made while a student at Harvard University. Hundreds of his classmatesand college mateswereworkinghardfor him,bothwhile he was candidate for Governor of New York and for President of the United States. The wonderfully enthusiastic friendship of his regiment of "Rough Riders" came back to him in tens of thousands of votes in the South and West in the Presidentialelection. 
Just think of what it means to have enthusiastic friends always looking outforourinterests,workingforusallthetime,sayinga goodwordforus at every opportunity, supporting us, speaking for us in our absence when we need a friend, shielding our sensitive, weak spots, stopping slanders, killing lies which would injure us, correcting false impressions, trying to set us right, overcoming the prejudices created by some mistake or slip, or a bad first impression we may have made in some silly moment; always doing somethingto give us alift orto help usalong. 
Whatsorryfiguresmanyofuswouldcutbutfor our friends!Whatmarred and scarred reputations most of us would have but for the cruel blows that have been warded off by our friends, the healing balm that they have applied to the hurts of the world. Many of us would have been very much poorer financially, too, but for the hosts of friends who sent us customers and clients and business, and who have always turned our way everything they could. 
Oh, what a boon our friends are to our weaknesses, our idiosyncrasies andshortcomings,ourfailuresgenerally. Howthey throwa mantleofcharity overourfaults,andcover upourdefects! 
What is more beautiful than to see a man trying to draw the curtain before the weaknesses or the scars of his friend, to shield him from the harsh criticism of the thoughtless or heartless, to bury his weaknesses in silence, and to proclaim his virtues upon the housetop! We cannot help admiring such aman, becausewe knowthathe is atruefriend. 
Is there anything more sacred in this world than the office of a true friend? How few of us appreciate what it means to have the reputation of anotherin our keeping!Thereport we sendout, ourestimateof another, may have a great deal to do with the success or failure of the individual. The scandalwhich we allow topass unchallengedmay mar areputation for life. 
Oneofthe mosttouchingthingsIknowofis the office ofa realfriendto one who is not a friend to himself one who has lost his self-respect, his self-control, and fallen to the level of the brute. Ah! this is friendship, indeed, which will stand by us when we will not stand by ourselves! I know a man who thus stood by a friend who had become such a slave to drink and all sorts of vice that even his family had turned him out-of-doors. Even when father and mother and wife and children had forsaken him, this friend remained loyal. He followed him at night in his debauches, and many a time savedhimfrom freezingtodeathwhenhewassoinebriatedthat. hecould not stand. Scores of times this man left his home and searched in the slums for hisfriend,to keephimfromthehandsofapolicemanandtoshieldhimfrom thecold;and thisgreatloveanddevotionfinallyredeemed the fallen man and sent him back to decency and to his home. Can' any money measure the value of such devotion! 
Oh! what a difference a friend has made in the lives of most of us! How many people a strong loyal friendship has kept from utter despair, from giving up the struggle for success! How many men and women have been kept from suicide by the thought that someone loved them, believed in them; how many have preferred to suffer tortures to dishonoring or disappointing their friends! The thrill of encouragement which has come from the pressure of a friendly hand, or a sympathetic, friendly word, has proved the turning­pointin manya life. 
Many a man endures hardships and suffers privations and criticism in the hope of winning at last for the sake of his friends, of those who love and believein him,andwhoseeinhimwhatothersdo not,when,if he had only himselftoconsider,hewouldgiveup withlittleeffort. 
Thefaithof friendsis aperpetualstimulus. 
How it nerves and encourages us to do our best, when we feel that scores offriendsreallybelieve in us whenothersmisunderstandanddenounceus! 
"Life is to be fortified by many friendships," said Sydney Smith. "To love and to be lovedis thegreatesthappinessof existence." 
Was there ever such capital for starting in business for oneself as plenty of friends? How manypeople,whoare now successful,would havegiven upthe struggle in some great crisis of their lives, but for the encouragement of a friend which tided them over the critical place! How barren and lean our lives wouldbeif strippedof allthat our friendshavedoneforus. 
If you are starting out in a profession or in business, the reputation of having a lot of stanch friends will give you backing, will bring you patients, clients, customers. Ithasbeensaid that "destinyisdeterminedbyfriendship." 
It would be interesting and helpful if we could analyze the lives of successful people, and those who have been highly honored by their fellow men, andfindoutthe secretof theirsuccess. 
I have tried to make this analysis in the case of one man, whose career I have for a long time carefully studied, and I believe that at least twenty per cent. of his success is due to his remarkable ability to make friends. He has cultivated the friendship faculty most assiduously from boyhood, and he fastens people to him so solidly and enthusiastically, that they would do almostanythingtopleasehim. 
When this man began his career the friend ships formed in school and college were of immense value in helping him to positions which not only opened up unusual opportunities, but added very largely to his reputation as well. 
In other words, his natural ability has been multiplied many times by the help of his hosts of friends. He seems to have a peculiar faculty of enlisting their interest, their hearty, enthusiastic support in everything he does, so that theyarealwaystryingto advancehisinterests. 
Veryfew givethe creditthey oughtto their friends. Most successful men think that they have won out because of their great ability, because they have fought and conquered; and they are always boasting of the wonderful things they have done. They attribute their success wholly to their own smartness, their own sagacity and shrewdness, to their push, their progressiveness. They do not realize that scores of friends, like so many unpaidtravelingsalesmen,havebeen helpingthemateveryopportunity. 
"True friendship," says C. C. Colton, "is like sound health, the value of it isseldomknownuntilit belost." 
The character and standing of your friends will have a very marked influence upon your life. Make it a rule to choose upwards just as far as possible. Try to associate with people who are your superiors, not so much with people who have more money, but with those who have had greater advantages for culture and self-improvement, who are better educated and better informed, in order that you may absorb as much as possible that will help you. This will tend to raise your own ideals, to inspire you to higher things,to makeagreaterefforttobesomebodyyourself. 
I know young people who have plenty offriends, but they are not the kind that helporelevatethem. They havechosendownward,insteadof upward. 
If you habitually associate with people be low you, they will tend to drag youdown,loweryourideals, yourambition. 
We little realize what a great molding, fashioning influence our friends and acquaintances have upon us. Every person 'we come in contact with stamps an indelible influence upon us, and the influence will be like his character. If we form a habit of always trying to better our friendships and acquaintances, we unconsciously acquire the habit of perpetual self-betterment, self-improvement, The great thing is to keep the life standards high. An aspiring habit will tend to do this. However, we should not be intolerantand expecttoomuchofourfriends. 
"Take your friends more as you find them, without the desire to make them live up to some ideal standard of your own," says a writer. "You may find thattheirownstandard,whiledifferent,maynotbe 50bad,afterall." 
It is possible to measure up a man we have never seen, by studying his friends. It is possible to tell pretty nearly how much of a man he is, whether hewillstandby hiswordor whetherhe is unreliable,ortreacherous. 
Look out for the man who has practically no friends. You will find something wrong in him somewhere. If he was worthy of friends he would havehadthem. 
"Toberichinfriends" is notasentimentalexpression;it is of real market worth. To the man or woman "rich in friends" doors are opened and opportunities presented that often are not within reach of those merely rich in money,andareneverheardof by thewoe-begonewholive in thedepths. 
Heis poorindeedwho has nofriends 
What wealth would be a substitute for friendships! How many millionaires would give a large part of their wealth to regain the friends they have lostby neglectwhile they were makingtheirmoney! 
Not half a dozen people outside of his immediate family attended the funeralofaveryrich man who died not longsince in New York. But afew 
weeks later a large church was filled to the doors and the streets were rendered impassable by the crowds assembled to pay the last respects to a man who died withoutleavingeven athousanddollarsbehind him. 
The latter loved his friends as a miser loves his gold. Everybody who knew him seemed to be his friend. He took infinitely more pride in thinking that he was rich in friendships than he could possibly have taken in a fortune. He would divide his last dollar with anyone who needed it. He did not try to sell his services as dearly as possible. He gave himself to his friends gave himself without reserve, royally, generously, magnanimously. There was no stinting of effort or service in this man's life, nothing that ever suggested selfishness or greed. Is it any wonder that thousands of people should regardhisdeathasagreatpersonalloss? 
"In friendship," says Seneca, "there must be no reserve; as much deliberation as you please before the league is struck, but no doubtings nor jealousies after. It requires time to consider a friendship, but the resolution oncetakenentitleshimtomyveryheart. Thepurposeoffriendshipis to have one dearer to me than myself, and for the saving of whose life I would gladly lay down my own, taking with me the consciousness that only the wise canbefriends;othersaremerecompanions." 
It is only he who loses his life, who gives it royally, in kindly, helpful service to others, that finds it. This is the sowing that gives the bountiful harvest. The man who gets all he can and gives nothing, cannot get real riches. Heis like the farmerwho thinkstoo much ofhis seed-corn to sow it and hoardsit, thinkinghewill bericherfor the hoarding. He does notgive it to the soil because he cannot see the harvest in the seed. It is not so much a question of how far we have gotten along in the world ourselves, as of how manyotherswe havehelped to geton. 
Perhaps really the richest man who ever lived upon this continent was Abraham Lincoln, because he gave himself to his people. He did not try to sell his ability to the highest bidder. Great fees had no attraction for him. Lincoln lives in history because he thought more of his friends and all his countrymen were his friends than he did of his pocketbook. He gave himself to his country as a farmer gives his seed to the earth, and what a harvest fromthatsowing. Theendofitnomanshallsee. 
.One of the saddest phases of our strenuous American life is the terrible slaughterof friendshipsbyourdollarchasers. 
Our strenuous,rushing, electric life in this countryis not conducive to the formationofrealfriendships,suchas existin some foreign countries. We do not have time for them. The vast resources and marvelous opportunities tend to develop an abnormal ambition. The great prizes appeal to our selfish natures, to the brute in us, and we rush and drive at such a killing pace that we cannot take time to cultivate friendships, except those which will help us toourgoal. 
The result is that we Americans have a great many very pleasant acquaintances, helpful acquaintances, acquaintances which pay us well, but wehavecomparativelyfewfriendsin the highestsense of theword. 
The fact is that the tremendous material prizes abnormally develop some very undesirable qualities, and stunt and starve many of our most desirable qualities, makingusone-sided. 
We have developed colossal money glands in our brain for secreting dollars; and, in the process, we have lost that which is invaluable. We have commercialized our friendships, commercialized our ability, our energy, our time. Everything possible has been turned into dollars; and the result is that wehavemoney,butmanyof us havenotmuchelse. 
Thousands of rich men are nobodies outside of their own little business ruts. They have not developed enough of their higher brain cells, not enough of the better part of themselves to rank as high-class men. They are first-class moneymakers,secondor thirdclassin everythingelse. Theyhave cashed in everything their friendships, their influence, their life-work everything into dollars. 
Is there anything more chilling in this world than to have a lot of money but practically no friends? What does that thing which we call success amount to if we have sacrificed our friendships, if we have sacrificed the most sacred things in life in getting it?We may have plenty of acquaintances, but acquaintances are not friends. There are plenty of rich people in this countryto-daywho scarcelyknowtheluxury ofreal friendship. 
There is something that is called friendship which follows us as long as we are prosperous and have anything to give of money or influence, but which forsakes us when we are down. "True friendship," said Washington, 
"is a plant of slow growth, and must undergo and withstand the shocks of adversity before it isentitledto theappellation." 
I knew a man who once thought he was unusually rich in real friendships, but, when he lost his money and with it much of his influence, those who were apparently devoted to him before forsook him, and the poor man was so distressed and disappointed over their disaffection that he nearly lost his mental balance. 
But a few real friends clung to him in his adversity. When his home and his large business were gone, two of his old servants drew every penny they had out of the savings-bank and insisted upon his taking it to help him to start again. An engineer who used to work for him also remained loyal in adversity and loaned him every cent he had. Through the devotion of those true friends, this man soon recovered his standing and in a comparatively shorttimebecamerich again. 
Never trust people who trade on friendship, who use it as their greatest asset;peoplewhosee capitalin your friendshipbecause they can use you to their own advantage. There never was a time when so many used their friends forpersonal gainasnow. 
He who prizes his friends should be very careful about his business transactions with them, and especially careful about borrowing money from them. It is a remarkable trait of human nature that some people will do almost anything for us, and we can ask almost any favor of them without losingtheirconfidenceor friendship,exceptthat ofloaningus money. 
How many of us regret the day that we asked a friend for a loan, for, even when it was freely granted, there was not always quite the same feeling afterwards. Some people can never loan others money without having a sort ofcontemptforthemeverafterwards. Thisoughtnotto beso, butitis. There are people who will forgive almost anything except a request for money or material assistance. Somehow this is not compatible with the average friendship. You say that real friendship would not be so easily forfeited, but unfortunately most of us have had a sad experience along this line. We may have gotten the money or the help, but a little estrangement, a strained relationbetweenus andourfriend,has resulted. 
There is a new kind of friendship which is coming more and more into vogue; and that is, business friendship, the friendship that means pecuniary gain. It is a dangerous friendship because of the selfish motive. It is dangerous because it simulates the genuine so nearly that it is difficult to distinguish betweenone'sreal friends andthosewhoarefalse. 
I know a man who is thoroughly wanting in the capacity for real friendship; and yet he has so assiduously cultivated the friendship of people forbusinesspurposes, cultivateditassomuchpowertobeusedtofurtherhis own ends, that he appears to be friendly to everybody, and a stranger who meets him for the first time often thinks that he has gained a real friend, when he would really sacrifice him at the first opportunity, without the slightest hesitation,if he sawitwould betohisadvantage. 
It is impossible for the man who looks at everything through selfish glassesto be arealfriendtoanybody. 
There are plenty of people in New York and the large cities who make a profession of trading in their friendships. They have that peculiar magnetic power which attracts people quickly and strongly; but all the time they are weaving theirlittlespider's web,andbeforethe victim is awareof it, he finds himself hopelesslyimmeshed. 
One of the most despicable things a man can dois to use others as a ladder to climb to some coveted position, and then, after he has attained it, kick the ladderdown. 
The habit of cultivating friendships because it pays, because it will increase one's business, one's pull, one's influence, one's credit; because it brings more clients, more patients,morecustomers,isdangerous,forittends tokillthereal friendshipfaculties. 
What a delightful, delicious thing it is to have friends who love us for our own sake,who haveno "axesto grind," who are always readyto make any sacrificeofcomfort,oftime, or moneywhenwe arein need! 
Cicero said that man had received nothing better from the immortal gods, nothing more delightful than friendship. But friendship must be cultivated. It cannotbe bought;it is priceless. If you abandon your friends for a quarter of a century or more while you are buried in your pursuit of wealth, you cannot expect to go back and find them where you left them. Did you ever get or keepanything worthwhilewithoutaneffortequaltoitsvalue? 
Only he has friends worthwhile who iswillingto pay the price for making and keeping them. He may not have quite as large a fortune as if he gave all of his time to money making. But wouldn't you rather have more good, stanch friends who believe in you, and who would stand by you in the severest adversity, than have a little more money? What will enrich the life so muchas hostsofgoodloyalfriends? 
Many people seem to think that friendship is a one-sided affair. They enjoy their friends, enjoy having them come to see them, but they rarely think ofputtingthemselves out to reciprocate, or take the trouble to keep up their friendships, while the fact is, reciprocation is the very essence of friendship. 
It does not matter how much knowledge you have or what your accomplishments are, you will live a cold, friendless, isolated life and will be unattractive, unless you have come in close constant contact with other lives, unless you have cultivated your sympathies and have taken a real interest in others,havesuffered withthem,rejoicedwiththem, helpedthem. 
Iamacquainted withayoung manwho isalways complainingthat he has no friends, and who says that in his loneliness he sometimes contemplates suicide; but no one who knows him wonders at his isolation, for he possesses qualities which everybody detests. He is closefisted, mean, stingy in money matters, is always criticizing others, is pessimistic, lacks charity and magnanimity, is full of prejudice, is utterly selfish and greedy, is always questioning people's motives when they do a generous act, and yet he wonders why he does nothave friends. 
If you would have friends, you must cultivate the qualities which you admire in others. Strong friendships rest upon a social, generous, hearty nature. There is nothing like magnanimity and real charity, kindness, and a spirit of helpfulness, for attracting others. Your interest in people must be a realone,oryouwill notdrawthemto you. 
No great friendship can rest. upon pretense or deception, Opposite qualities cannot attract each other. After all, friendship rests largely upon admiration. There must be something worthy in you, something lovable, beforeanybodywill loveyou. 
Many people are not capable of forminggreat friendships because they do not have the qualities themselves which attract noble qualities in others. If you are chock-full of despicable qualities, you cannot expect anyone to care foryou. 
Ifyou areuncharitable,intolerant, ifyoulackgenerosity,cordiality,ifyou are narrow and bigoted, unsympathetic, small, and mean, you cannot expect that generous, large-hearted, noble characters will flock around you. If you expectto makefriendswithlarge-souled,noblecharactersyoumustcultivate large-heartedness, generosity, and tolerance. One reason why so many people have so few friends is that they have so little to give, and they expect so much. A happy temperament, a desire to scatter joy and gladness, to be helpful to everybody with whom one comes in contact, are wonderful aids to friendship. 
You will be amazed to see how quickly friends will flock about you just as soon as youbegintocultivateattractableandlovablequalities. 
Justice and truth are absolutely essential to the highest friendship, and we respect a friend all the more because he is just and true, even when it hurts and mortifies us most. We cannot help respecting justice and truth because we are built on these lines; they are a part of our very nature. The friendship which shrinks from telling the truth, which cannot bear to pain one when justice demands it, does not command as high a quality of admiration as the friendshipwhichis absolutelyjustandtruthful. 
There is something inherent in human nature which makes us despise the hypocrite. 
'We may overlook a weakness in a friend, which makes it hard for him to be absolutely truthful, but if we ever detect him trying to deceive us, we never have quite the same confidence in him again, and confidence is the verybasis of realfriendship. 
"Friendship carries with it love. The true friend is not one made in a hurry. There is no friend like the old one with whom you went bird nesting in your youth, the friend that has plodded along life's road with you shoulder to shoulder. 
"When you have a friend who has proven himself such, never let up So long as you live in your evidences of gratitude for the kindness he has shown you. Repay him with interest for his good offices, and let your actions towardshimever beasourceofhappinessandpleasuretohim. 
"Nothingissomuchappreciatedbetweenfriendsas gratitude,and nothing willkillfriendshiplike ingratitude. 
"Genuine friendship is such a rare jewel that when you have a positive demonstration of it, let it be your great concern that you will do nothing to mar this friendship, for broken friendship is a source of grief to both friends so longas they live." 
The friendships that last rest more upon a solid respect, admiration, and great congeniality than upon a passionate love. Where the love is so great that it defeats justice and truth, friends are more likely to fall out. The strongest, the most lasting, devoted friendships are those which are based uponprinciple,uponrespect,admiration,andesteem. 
"I would go to hell, if there were such a place, with any friend of mine, and I would want no heaven of which I have ever read if any friend of mine were in the outer dark," was the startling assertion of the Rev. Minot J. Savage,inthe courseofasermonon "TheCompanionship ofFriends." 
"Falsefriendsarelikeourshadows,keepingclose to us whilewe walkin thesunshine,butleavingustheinstantwecrossintotheshade," says Bovee. 
Realfriendshipwill followus intothe shadows, into the dark as well as into the sunshine. 
The capacity for friendship is a great test of character. We instinctively believe in people who are known to stick to their friends through thick and thin. It is an indication of the possession of splendid qualities. You can generally trust a man who never goes back on a friend. People who lack loyaltyhaveno capacityforgreatfriendship. 
After all, isn't a man's success best measured by the number and quality of his friendships? For, no matter how much money he may have accumulated, if he doesn't have a lot of friends there is certainly some tremendous lack in him somewhere, a great lack of sterling qualities. Childrenoughtto, betaughtthatthemostsacredthingin this worldis a true friend, and they ought to be trained to cultivate a capacity for friendships. This would broaden their characters, develop fine qualities, and sweeten their lives as nothingelse could. 
One ofthemostbeautifulthings thatcanever be said of a human beingis that he has a host of loyal, true friends. "No man is useless," said Robert LouisStevenson, "whilehe hasa friend." 
8 

AMBITION 
"The youthwho does not look up willlookdown,andthespiritthatdoes notsoarisdestined togrovel." 
"Whoever is satisfied with what he does has reached his culminating point. Hewill progressno more." 
IT is astonishing how many people there are who have no definite aim or ambition, but just exist from one day to another with no well-defined life plan. All about us on the ocean of life we see young men and women aimlesslydriftingwithoutrudderorport, throwingawaytime,withoutserious purpose or method in anything they do. They simply drift with the tide. Ifyou ask one of them what he is going to do,· what his ambition is, he will tell youhe does notexactlyknowyet whathe will do. He is simply waitingfor a chancetotakeupsomething. 
How can a man who lives without a pro gram ever expect to arrive anywhere but in chaos, confusion? A clear-cut purpose has a powerful influence upon the life. It unifies our efforts and gives direction to our work, so thatevery blowcounts. 
I have never known anyone who followed an indolent inclination ever to amount to much. It is the man who struggles against the things that are fightingwithhisambition whogets tothefront. 
No one ever amounts to much who does not take himself in hand and force himself to do the thing that is best for him in the end, not the pleasantestor the easiest. 
Every man should be a stern schoolmaster to himself. He cannot sit and take it easy every time he has the opportunity; he cannot lie abed until he feels like getting up in the morning, and work only when he is in the mood, and ever amount to anything. He must learn to master his moods and to forcehimselfto work no matterhow he feels. 
Most of the ambitionless people who fail are too lazy to succeed. They are not willing to put themselves out, to pay the price, to make the necessary effort. They want to have a good time. Why should they struggle and strive and strain?Whynotenjoylife,takeiteasy? 
Physical laziness, mental indifference, an inclination to let things slide, to go along the line of the least resistance, these are the causes which have madeup the great failurearmy. 
One of the first symptoms of deterioration in one's work is the gradual, unconscious oozing out, shrinkage, of one's ambition. There is no one quality in our lives that requires more careful watching and constant bracing up, jacking up, so to speak, than our ambition, especially when we do not keep inanatmospherewhichtendsto arouseone to life'spossibilities. 
The habit of watching the ambition constantly and keeping it awake, is absolutely imperative to those who would keep from deteriorating. Everything depends on the ambition. The moment it becomes weak all the life standards drop with it. One must keep the ambition lamp ever-trimmed 
and burning brightly. 
Itisdangeroustodallywithambition-killing influences. 
When a person has taken an overdose of morphine, a doctor knows that sleep would be fatal, and every effort is made to keep the patient awake. He is sometimes obliged to resort to what seems to be most cruel treatment, pinchingandpoundingthepatient,tokeepoffthat slumber from which there wouldbe noawakening. So it is withambition;if it oncegoesto sleep, it is almostimpossibleto arouseit. 
Everywhere we see human watches with splendid equipment, apparently all ready to run, and we wonder why they are silent, why they do not keep goodtime. Thereason is,theyhavenomainspring,noambition. ' 
A watch may have perfect wheels, it may have a very costly jeweled setting, but if it lacks a mainspring, it is useless. So a youth may have a college education, excellent health, but if he lacks ambition, all his other equipments,no matterhowsuperb,will notamountto much. 
I know capable men more than thirty years of age who have not yet chosen theirlift-work. Theysay theydo notknowforwhattheyarefitted. 
Ambition often begins very early to knock for recognition. If we do not heed its voice, if it gets no encouragement after appealing to us for years, it gradually ceases to trouble us, because, like any other unused quality or function,itdeterioratesordisappearswhenunused. 
Nature allows us to keep only that which is in constant use. The moment we stop exercising muscle, brain, or faculty, deterioration sets in, and the power 'is takenawayfromus. 
If you do not heed the early call of "Upward!" if you do not encourage and nourish your ambition, and constantly strengthen it by vigorous exercise, it will soon die. 
An unfed ambition is like a postponed resolution. Its demand for recognition becomes less and less imperious, just as the constant denying of any desire or passion tends to itsextinction. 
All about us we see people in whom ambition has died. They have the appearance of human beings, but the fire that was once in them has gone out. They walk the earth, but they barely exist. Their usefulness is gone. They are ofno accounttothemselvesor the world. 
Ifthere is apitiable sightin the world, itis a person in whom ambition is dead, the man who has denied and denied that inward voice which bids him up and on, the man in whom ambition's fires have cooled from the lack of fuel. 
There is always hope for a person, no matter how bad he is, as long as his ambition is alive; but when that is dead beyond resuscitation, the great life-spur, the impelling motiveisgone. 
One of the most difficult things a human being can do is to keep his ambition from fading out, his aspirations sharp and fresh, his ideals clear and clean-cut. 
Many deceive themselves into thinking that if they keep aspiring, if they keep longing to carry out their ideals, to reach their ambition, they are actually realizing their dreams. But there is such a thing as aspiring too much,asformingthedreaminghabitto one'sinjury. 
Ambition requires a great deal and a great variety of food to keep it vigorous. Anamby-pambyambitiondoes not amountto anything. It must be backed by a robust will power, stern resolve, physical energy, powers of endurance,tobe effective. 
The fact that you have an almost uncontrollable impulse, a great absorbing ambition to do a thing which meets with the approval of your judgmentandyourbetterself, is anotice served upon you that you can do the thing,andshould doit atonce. 
Some people seem to think that the ambition to do a certain thing in life is a permanent quality which will remain with them. It is not. It is like the daily manna which fell for the daily needs of the Israelites in the desert. They had to use it at once. When their faith was weak they tried to store it up, but theyfoundit would never keep until the next day. 
The time to do a thing is when the spirit is upon us, when it makes a sharp, clean-cut impression upon us. Resolution fades and becomes dimmer at every postponement. When the desire, the ambition, comes fresh and strong with zeal and enthusiasm, it is easy; but after we have postponed it a few times, we find ourselves less 'and less inclined to make the necessary effort or sacrifice to attain it, because it does not appeal to us with the same emphasisas at first. 
Donotallow the ambitiontocool. Makeupyourmind thatyoucannotand will not spend your life being half satisfied. Rouse your spirit, and go toward thegoalwhichisworthwhile. 
It is one ofthe most discouraging problems in the world to try to help the ambitionless, the half satisfied, those whohave not discontent enough in their natures to push them on, initiative enough to begin things, and persistency enoughto keep going. 
You cannot do much with a young man who is apparently contented to drift along in a humdrum way, half content with his accomplishments, undisturbed by the fact that he has used but a very small part of himself, a verysmallpercentage ofhisrealability,that his energies are running to waste in all sorts of ways. You cannot do much with a young man who lacks ambition,life,energy,andvigor, whois willingto slide alongthelineof the least resistance, and who exerts himself as little as possible. There is nothing upon which to build. Even those foundations which he had at the start are slowly crumbling touselessness. 
It is the young man who is not satisfied with what he does, and who is determined to better it every day, who struggles to express the ideal, to makethepossible inhim areality. 
The trouble with many men is that their ideals are too low, too common, too dull. They do not keep their hope bright or aspire enough. They live in their animal senses. We must aspire if we would rise. We cannot climb while looking down. The ambition must always precede the achievement. The higher civilization climbs, the higher the ambition; the higher the ambition, the finer the people. 
What would become of the human race if everyone had reached his goal; had attained his ambition? Would anyone want to work anymore than he felt like working?Whowould doallthedrudgery? 
Suppose everyone was in the condition of the sons and daughters of many rich parents whose sole object is to have a good time, to enjoy all the pleasant things, and to avoid all of the work and disagreeable experience possible. Howlong wouldittakeaworld sopeopledtoretrogradetobarbarism? 
The struggle of man to rise a little higher, to get into a little more comfortable position, to secure a little better education, a little better home, to gain a little more culture and refinement, to possess that power which comes from being in a position of broader and wider influence through the acquirement of property, is what has developed the character and the stamina of our highest types of manhood today. This upward life-trend gives others confidenceinus. 
Ambition is the Moses that has led the human race through the wilderness and into sight of the promised land, the millennium. It is true that vast multitudes of human beings are still following far in the rear, so far that it would seem almost impossible for them ever to get a glimpse of the land of promise,butstill thereis an improvementeven in thesemi-civilized. 
The quality of the ambitions of a people at any time locates them in the scale of civilization. The ideals of an individual or a nation measure the actual condition andthe futurepossibilitiesandprobabilities. 
Oneofthemosthopefulsignsin ourcivilizationto-dayis the evolutionin ideals. 
In every department of life our ideals or ambition are becoming higher, purer, cleaner. Our march of progress and improvement is so rapid that it 
requires a greater ambition, loftier ideals, a higher order of intellect, and stronger effortforachievementineverylineofendeavorthan formerly. 
The ideals are gradually leavening the whole human mass, and will ultimately bring every human being into his own, into that state of blessednesswhichis undoubtedly his birthright. 
It is only the man who has stopped growing that feels satisfied with his achievements. The growing man feels a great lack of wholeness, of completeness, Everything in him seems to be unfinished because it is growing. The expanding man is always dissatisfied with hisaccomplishment, is alwaysreachingoutforsomethinglarger, fuller, completer. 
Nothing else contributes to one's advancement in life as the formation of the climbing habit in everything, the perpetual ambition and effort to do a little better to-day than yesterday, to do everything we attempt a little better thanwe havedone itin the past. 
It is a wonderful aid to growth to associate constantly with people who are above us, who are better educated, more cultivated, more refined, who have had rich experience in lines of which we know little. We all know how quickly one deteriorates when all his tendencies are downward, when he seeks the company of those below him, and common, demoralizing pleasures. When this process is reversed, the upward tendency, the upward progress,is equallyas pronounced. 
The lofty aspiration habit becomes a great uplifting force in any life. It broadens all the mental faculties and arouses new powers, new possibilities in the sub-consciousness which would never respond to the ordinary ambition or sordid motive. It awakens the Great Within, arouses the resourcefulness in the subconscious nature which would remain dormant underordinaryconditions. 
No one can do anything very great unless he is spurred on by an ambition which takes the drudgery out of his task, an enthusiasm which lightens his burdens and cheers the way. The man who goes to his work as a galley-slave tohisoar,as atiredhorsetohisloadtooheavytopull,canneveraccomplish much; there must be a zeal and great ambition and love for the work, or either mediocrityorfailure mustresult. 
It is a very difficult thing to succeed in life under the most favorable conditions, but to love your work is a tremendous help; a great tonic. Enthusiasm seems to make us unconscious of danger and obstacles. If you find your ambition dying out, if you do not feel the old zeal for your work, if you are not so interested that you long to go to it in the morning and hate to leave it at night, there is something wrong somewhere. Perhaps you have not found your right place; discouragement may have killed your enthusiasm and diminished your zest; but, whatever the cause of your lowering standard, if youfindyourambitionon thedecline,ifyou find itharassing to go to your task, if you feel the drudgery of your work increasing, do everything to remedyit. 
It is not difficult to increase enthusiasm, to spur on a lagging ambition, if yousetaboutit as you do aboutthe task you are determinedto accomplish. You cannot keep up your friendships without constant cultivation, and the samethingis trueofyourambition. 
Everywhere we see people side-tracked with their fires banked, the water in their boilers cooled down, and yet they are wondering why express trains fly past them, while they creep along like snails. They fail to remember that bankedfires andlukewarmwaterwill not pulltheirtrainsat expressspeed. 
These people never renew their rails, do not keep the water in their engines at the boiling point, yet they complain if they fail to reach their destination. They cannot understand why they are so much slower than their neighbor, who flies rapidly past them on perfectly ballasted roads, and with up-to-date engines and cars. If they run off their wretched tracks, they attributeit to hardluck. 
The great majority of people who do not amount to anything in the world, those who are sidetracked the idle, the indolent, the mediocre have failed fromthelackof ambition. 
The youth who hungers for an education, who longs for improvement, no matter how poor, generally finds a way. But there is little hope for the ambitionless; there is no way' of firing, of stirring up, of stimulating those wholacktheinclinationor ambitiontogeton intheworld. 
It is not an easy matter to keep back a boy with an ambition to do something and to be somebody in the world. No matter what his surroundings,no matter how badly he is handicapped, he will find a way out, he will forge ahead. You could not keep back a Lincoln, a Wilson, or a 
Greeley; if too poor to buy books, they would borrow them and pick up an education. 
We need never despairof ayouth,no matterhowdull or stupid, who has a tasteforsomethingbetter. 
You may think your life very commonplace, your opportunity of amounting to much very small, but it does not matter how humble your position or what you are doing, if you have a taste for something better, if there is an out-reach and an up-reach in your life, if you aspire to something higherand are willingto pay the price for advancementin downrighthard work, you will succeed. You will rise out of your commonness just as surely as the germ, struggling up through the sod, will reach the surface, by persistentpushing. 
We should not judge a person by what he is doing, for it may be just a stepping-stone to something higher up, further on. Judge him by what he is ambitious and determined to do. An honest man will do any respectable workas a stepping-stoneto his goal. 
There is something in the atmosphere of every person which predicts his future; for the way he does things, the energy, the degree of enterprise which he puts into his work, his manner, everything is a telltale of what is awaitinghim. 
"Ifyou are only swabbing a deck, swabit as if oldDavyJones were after you," saysDickens. 
A man may be very dissatisfied with what he is doing without having the aspiration for something higher and the stamina to reach his aim. Mere dissatisfaction with one's position does not always indicate ambition. It may indicate laziness, indifference. 
But when we see a man filling a position just as well as it can be filled, trying to do everything to a complete finish, taking great pride in it, and yet having a great longing for something higher and better, we feel certain he will attain it. We cannot tell much about a man until we know what his ambition is. This, if he has grit, persistency, and application, will readily locatehimonthehuman scale. 
When young Franklin was struggling to get a foothold in Philadelphia, shrewd business men there predicted, even when he was eating, sleeping, and printing in one room, that he had a great future before him, because he was working with all his might to get up higher, and he carried himself in a way that gave confidence. Everything he did was done so well, with such ability, that it was a prediction of very much larger things. When he was only a journeyman printer he did his work so much better than others, and his system wasso muchsuperioreventohisemployer'sthatpeoplepredictedhe would someday have thebusinesswhichwenttothatfirm,which hedid. 
Many people who live in remote country districts do not come in contact with standards by which they can measure and compare their own powers. They live a quiet, uneventful life, and there is little in their environment to arousethefaculties whicharenotactive intheirvocation. 
The ambition of the boy who has lived on a farm in the back country is often aroused the first time he goes to the city. To him the city is a colossal world's fair, where everybody's achievement is on exhibition. The progressivespiritwhichpervadesthecityis likean electricshockto him and arouses all of his latent energies, calls out his reserves. Everything he sees seemsto be acall tohimtogoforward,to pushon. 
This is one advantage of city life, and of travel, coming in contact with others constantly gives us an opportunity to compare ourselves with others, to measure our ability with theirs. There is the contagion of example which tendsto arouseand prod. The contact with others helps to arouse the love of conquest,thepassionto tryourstrengthwithothers. 
Then, in the city or in traveling, we are constantly reminded of what others have done. We see the tremendous engineering feats, great factories and offices, vast businesses, all huge advertisers of man's achievement. All these things fill an ambitious youth with interrogation points, and he is always wondering why he does not do something himself. And when he wants todo it, when he longs to doa thing andbelieves he can, his power is multiplied. 
Men often fail because of an impatient ambition. They cannot wait to prepare for their life-work, but think they must leap into a position which others have been years in reaching. They are over-ambitious,' impatient of results,and have no time to do anythingproperly. Everythingis hurried and forced. Such people do not develop symmetrically, but are one-sided, lacking judgmentandgoodsense. 
"The heights by great men reached and kept 
Were not attained by sudden flight, 
But they, while their companions slept, 
Were toiling upward in the night." 
We frequently see sad examples of unbridled ambition men who have been spurred on by an overvaulting ambition, men whose sensibilities have been so benumbed by the ambition to become rich or powerful, that they have stooped to do very questionable things. Ambition often blinds one to justice. 
There is nothing more pitiable than to see a man the victim of an inordinate, selfish ambition to advance himself at all costs, to gain fame, or notoriety, nomatterwho issacrificedintheprocess. 
It is very difficult to see the right, to get a clear perspective of justice, when we become victims of an overvaulting ambition. Men so intoxicated have stopped at no crime. Napoleon and Alexander the Great are good examples ofthewrecks which anunbridledambitionmakesofits victims. 
""'Just an ambition to excel may become avery dangerous force, and may leadtoallsorts of sacrifices of character. 
"Everyone should have an ambition to do something distinctive, something individual, something which will take him out of mediocrity, which will lift him above the ambitionless, the energyless. It is perfectly propertobe ambitiousto getup as highin theworldaspossible,andthiswe maydowithallcharityandkindlinessof hearttowardourneighbors. 
The fellow who must be aroused is yourself, and every man is entitled to drawhis inspirationfromwhateversourceis athand. 
Sometimes the conversation or encouragement of an inspiring man or woman in whom we have great confidence, the faith of someone who believes in us when others do not, who sees something in us which others do not see, arouses the ambition and gives us a glimpse of our possibilities. We may not think much about this at the time, but it may be a turning point in ourcareer. 
Multitudes of men and women have caught the first glimpse of themselves by the reading of some inspiring book or some vigorous article. Without it, they might have remained ignorant of their real power forever. Anythingthatwill giveus aglimpseofourselves,that willawaken usto our possibilities,isinvaluable. 
Choose for your friends those who stimulate you, who arouse your ambition, who stir you up with a desire to do something and to be somebody in the world. One suchfriendisworthadozenpassiveorindifferentfriends. 
Get close to people who arouse your ambition, who get hold of you, who make you think and feel. Keep close to people who are a perpetual inspiration to you. The great trouble with most of us is that we never get aroused, never discover ourselves until late in life, often too late to make much out of the remnant that is left. It is very important that we become aroused to our possibilities when young, that we may get the greatest possibleefficiency outofourlives. 
Most people die with the largest percentage of their possibilities still undeveloped. They have improved little patches of their ability here and there, while the great estate of their possible selves is untilled, with great mines ofwealthuntouched. 
We cannot use what we do not first discover or see. There are tens of thousands of day laborers in this country -common workmen putting their lives in drudgery, who, if they had only been arouse, would have been employers themselves, wo uld have been men of force, of standing in their community, but they have been held down by their ignorance of their own power. Theyhave never discovered themselves, and so they must be "hewers of wood and drawers of water." We see them everywhere, splendid men and women, who impress us as giants in possibility, but who are totally ignorant of the greatforcesthataresleepingwithinthem. 
There are thousands of girls who are spending their lives as clerks or operatives, or in ordinary situations, who, if they could but discover themselves and once see their possibilities, might improve their condition immeasurablyandbecome great livingforcesintheworld. 
Sit down and take an inventory of yourself. Ifyou are dissatisfied with what you are doing and think you ought to do better, try to discover, no matter how long it takes you, just where your trouble lies. Find out the things that keep you back. Make long searching tours of discovery in your own consciousness. Say to yourself over and over again, "Why can others do such remarkable things while I do ordinary, common things? Constantly ask yourself, "If otherscandothem,whycannotI?" 
You may find some great nuggets of gold in these tours of self-discovery, which you never dreamed you possessed, great possibilities of power which you never uncovered before, and which may, if developed, revolutionize your life. 
One of the fatal dangers of remaining a long time in one position, as a clerk, for example, is that habit tends to make slaves of us. What we did yesterdaywe are more likelyto do to-day;andif we do it to-day, it is still more certain that we will do it to-morrow; and, after a while, using the same faculties in a dry routine, the other, unused faculties begin to wane, grow weaker, atrophy, until we begin to think that what we are doing is the only thingwe cando. 
What we use becomes stronger; what we do not use weaker; and we are likelytodeceiveourselvesin underratingthepowerswe reallypossess. 
Low aim is' crime because it pulls down every other quality to its level. Low aim destroys the executive ability. The faculties and the entire man followtheaim. Wemustclimb, or we mustgo down. Thereis no suchthing asclingingforeverupononerungofLife'sgreatladder. 
9 

EDUCATION BY READING 
Books are the windows through which the soul looks out.-H. W. BEECHER. 
“TUMBLING around in a library" was the phrase Oliver Wendell Holmes used in describing in part his felicities in boyhood. One of the most important things that wise students get out of their schooldays is a familiarity with booksin variousdepartmentsoflearning. The abilityto pick outfrom a library what will be most helpful in life is of the greatest value. It is like a man selecting his tools for intellectual expansion and social service. "Men in every department of practical life," says President Hadley of Yale, "men in commerce, in transportation, or in manufactures, have told me that what they really wanted from our colleges was men who have this selective power of using books efficiently. The beginnings of this kind of knowledge are best learnedinanyhomefairlywellfurnishedwith books." 
Libraries are no longer a luxury, but a necessity. A home without books and periodicals and newspapers is like a house without windows. Children learn to read by being in the midst of books; they unconsciously absorb knowledge by handling them. No family can now afford to be without good reading. 
It is related that Henry Clay's mother furnished him with books by her ownearningsatthewashtub. 
Children who are well supplied with dictionaries, encyclopedias, histories, works of reference, and other useful books, will educate themselves unconsciously and almost without expense, and will learn many things oftheirown accordinmoments whichwouldotherwisebewasted;and which, if learned in schools, academies, or colleges, would cost ten times as much as the expense of the books would be. Besides, homes are brightened and made attractive by good books, and children stay in such pleasant homes; whilethosewhoseeducationhasbeenneglectedareanxiousto getawayfrom home,driftoff, andfallinto all manner ofsnares anddangers. 
It is splendid for children to be brought up in the atmosphere of books, and it is astonishing how much a bright child will absorb from good books, if allowed to use them constantly, to handle them, to be familiar with their bindings andtitles. 
Many people never make a mark on a book, never bend down a leaf, or underscore a choice passage. Their libraries are just as clean as the day they bought them, and often their minds are just about as clean of information. Don'tbeafraidtomarkyourbooks. Makenotes in them. Theywillbe all the more valuable. One who learnsto use his books in earlylife grows up with anincreasingpowerforeffective usefulness. 
Wearthreadbareclothesandpatchedshoes,if necessary,butdo not pinch or economize on books. If you cannot give your children an academic education,you can place within their reach afew goodbooks which willlift themabovetheirsurroundings,into respectabilityand honor. 
Is not one's early home the place where he should get his principal training for life? It is here we form habits which shape our careers, and which cling to us as long as we live. It is here that regular, persistent mental training should fix the lifeeverafter. 
I know of pitiable cases where ambitious boys and girls have longed to improve themselves, and yet were prevented from doing so by the pernicious habits prevailing in the home, where everybody else spent the evenings talking and joking, with no effort at self-improvement, no thought of higher ideals, no impulse to read anything better than a cheap, exciting story. The aspiring members of the family were teased and laughed at until they got discouragedand gave up thestruggle. 
Ifthe younger ones do not wantto read or studythemselves, they will not let anybody else so inclined do so. Children are naturally mischievous, and like to tease. They are selfish, too, and cannot understand why anyone else should want to go off by himself to read or study when they want him to play. 
Were the self-improvement habit once well established in a home, it would become a delight. The young people would look forward to the study hourwithas muchanticipationasto playing. 
I knowa NewEnglandfamilyin whichallthechildren andthe father and mother, by mutual consent, set aside a portion of each evening for study or some form of self-culture. After dinner, they give themselves completely to recreation. They have a regular romp and play, and all the fun possible for an hour. Thenwhen the time comes forstudy, the entire house becomes so still that you could hear a pin drop. Everyone is in his place reading, writing, studying, or engaged in some form of mental work. No one is allowed to speak or disturb anyone else. If any member of the family is indisposed, or for any reason does not feel like working, he must at least keep quiet and not disturb the others. There is perfect harmony and unity of purpose an ideal condition for study. Everything that would scatter the efforts or cause the mind to wander, all interruptions that would break the continuity of thought, are carefully guarded against. More is gained in one hour of close, uninterrupted study than in two or three broken by many interruptions, or weakenedbymindwandering. 
Were it possible for every family that squanders precious time to spend an evening in such a home, it would be an inspiration. A bright, alert, intelligent, harmonious atmosphere so pervades a self-improving home that one feelsinsensiblyuplifted andstimulatedtobetterthings. 
Sometimes the habits of a home are revolutionized by the influence of one resolute youth who declares himself, taking a stand and announcing that, as for himself, he does not propose to be a failure; that he is going to take no chances as to his future. The moment he does this, he stands out in strong contrast with the great mass of young people who are throwing away their opportunities and have not grit and stamina enough to do anything worthwhile. 
The very reputation of always trying to improve yourself in every possible way, of being dead in earnest, will attract the attention of everybody who knows you, and you will get many a recommendation for promotion which nevercomestothosewhomakenospecialeffortto climbupward. 
There is a great deal of time wasted even in the busiest lives, which, if properlyorganized, mightbe usedto advantage. 
Many housewives who are so busy from morning to night that they really believe they have no time for reading books, magazines, or newspapers' would be amazed to find how much they would have if they would more thoroughly systematize their work. Order is a great time saver, and we certainly ought to be able so to adjust our living plan that we can have a fair amount of time for self-improvement, for enlarging life. Yet many people thinkthat theironlyopportunity for self-improvementdepends upon the time leftaftereverythingelse hasbeenattendedto. 
What would a business man accomplish if he did not attend to important matters until he had time that was not needed for anything else? The good business man goes to his office in the morning and plunges right into the important work of the day. He knows perfectly well that if he attends to all the outside matters all the details and little things that come up sees everybodythatwantsto seehim,andanswers allthe questionspeoplewantto ask,itwillbe timetoclose hisofficebeforehe getsto hismainbusiness. 
Most of us manage somehow to find time for the things we love. If one is hungry for knowledge, if one yearns for self-improvement, if one has a taste forreading,hewillmakethe opportunity. 
Where the heart is, there is the treasure. Where the ambition is, there is time. 
It takes not only resolution but also de termination to set aside unessentials for essentials, things pleasant and agreeable to-day for the things that will prove best for us in the end. There is always temptation to sacrifice future good for present pleasure; to put off reading to a more convenient season, while we enjoy idle amusements or waste the time in gossip or frivolousconversation. 
The greatest things of the world have been done by those who systematized their work, organized their time. Men who have left their mark on the world have appreciated the preciousness of time, regarding it as their greatquarry. 
Ifyou wantto develop a delightfulformofenjoyment,tocultivate a new pleasure, a new sensation which you have never before experienced, begin to read good books, good periodicals, regularly every day. Do not tire yourself by trying to read a great deal at first. Read a little at a time, but read someeveryday,no matterhowlittle. Ifyouarefaithfulyouwillsoonacquire a taste for reading the reading habit; and it will, in time, give you infinite satisfaction,unalloyedpleasure. 
In a gymnasium, one often sees lax, listless people, who, instead of pursuing a systematic course of training to develop all the muscles of the body, flit aimlessly from one thing to another, exercising with pulley-weights fora minuteortwo, taking up dumb-bells and throwing themdown, swinging once or twice on parallel bars, and so frittering away time and strength. Far betterit wouldbe forsuchpeopletostayawayfromagymnasiumaltogether, for their lack of purpose and continuity makes them lose rather than gain muscular energy. A man or woman who would gather strength from gymnastic exercise must set about it systematically and with a will. He must put mind and energy into the work, or else continue to have flabby muscles and anundevelopedbody. 
The physical gymnasium differs only in kind from the mental one. Thoroughness and system are as necessaryinone as in theother. Itis notthe tastersof books notthosewhosiphereandthere,whotakeuponebookafter another, turn the leaves listlessly and hurry to the end, who strengthen and developthemindbyreading. 
To get the most from your reading you must read with a purpose. To sit down and pick up a book listlessly, with no aim except to pass away time, is demoralizing. Itismuchasif anemployerweretohireaboy,andtellhim he could start when he pleased in the morning, work when he felt like it, rest whenhewantedto,and quitwhenhegottired! 
Never go to a book you wish to read for a purpose, if you can possibly avoid it, with a tired, jaded mentality. If you do, you will derive nothing from it. Go to it fresh, vigorous, and with active, never passive, faculties. This practise is a splendid and effective cure for mind-wandering, which afflicts so many people, and which is encouraged by the multiplicity of and facility forobtainingreadingmatteratthe presentday. 
What can give greater satisfaction than reading with a purpose, and that consciousness of a broadening mind that follows it; the consciousness that we are pushing ignorance, bigotry, and whatever clouds the mind and hampers progressalittlefurtherawayfromus? 
The kind of reading that counts, that makes mental fiber and stamina, is that upon which the mind is concentrated. One should approach a book with all one'ssoulintentuponits contents. 
Passivereadingis even moreharmfulin itseffects thandesultoryreading. It will not strengthen the brain any more than sitting in a gymnasium will develop the body. The mind remains inactive, in a sort of indolent revery, wandering here and there, without focusing anywhere. Such reading takes the spring and snap out of the mental faculties, weakens the intellect and makes the brain torpid and incapable of grappling with great principles and difficult problems. 
What you get out of a book is not necessarily what the author puts into it, but whatyou bringto it. Ifthe heartdoes notlead the head, ifthe thirst for knowledge, the hunger for a broader and deeper culture, are not the motives forreading,you will notgetthe mostoutof abook. But,if your thirsty soul drinks in the writer's thought as the parched soil absorbs rain, then your latent possibilities and the potency of your being, like delayed germs and seeds in thesoil,willspringforthinto new life. 
When youread,readas Macaulay did, asCarlyledid,as Lincolndid asdid every great man who has profited by his reading with your whole soul absorbed in what you read, with such intense concentration that you will be obliviousofeverythingelse outside ofyourbook. 
"Reading furnishes us only with the materials of knowledge," said John Locke;Hitis thinkingthatmakeswhatwereadours." 
In order to get the most out of books, the reader must be a thinker. The mereacquisitionoffactsisnottheacquisition ofpower. 
To fill the mind with knowledge that cannot be made available is like filling our houses with furniture and brio-a-brae until we have no room to moveabout. 
Food does not become physical force, brain, or muscle until it has been thoroughly digested and assimilated, and has become an integral part of the blood, brain, and other tissues. Knowledge does not become power until digested and assimilated by the brain, until it has become a part of the mind itself. 
If you wish to become intellectually strong, after reading with the closest attention, form this habit: frequently close your book and sit and think, or stand and walk and think but think,contemplate, reflect. Turn what you have readoverandoverin yourmind. 
Itis notyours untilyou have assimilateditby your thought, taken it into your life. When you first read it, it belongs to the author. It is yours only whenit becomes an integralpartof you. 
Many people have an idea that if they keep reading everlastingly, if they have a book in their hands during every leisure moment, they will, of necessity, become full-rounded and well-educated. This is a mistake. They might just as well expect to become athletes by eating at every opportunity. It is even more necessary to think than to read. Thinking, contemplating what we have read,is whatdigestionandassimilationaretothefood. 
Some of the biggest numskulls I know are always cramming themselves with knowledge, everlastingly reading. But they never think. When they get a few minutes' leisure they snatch a book and go to reading. In other words, they are always eating intellectually, but never digesting their knowledge or assimilatingit. 
I know a young. man who has formed such a habit of reading that he is almost never without a book, a magazine, or a paper. He is always reading, at home, on the cars, at the railway stations, and he has acquired a vast amount of knowledge. He has a perfect passion for knowledge, and yet his mindseems tohavebeenweakenedbythisperpetual braincramming. 
By everyreaderlet Milton'swordsbe bornein mind: 
Who reads Incessantly, and to his reading brings not 
A spirit and judgment equal or superior, 
Uncertain and unsettled still remains, 
Deep versed in books and shallow in himself, 
Crude or intoxicate, collecting toys 
And trifles for choice matters, worth a sponge, 
As children gathering pebbles on the shore. 
When Webster was a boy, books were scarce, and so precious that he never dreamed that they were to be read onlyonce, but thought they ought to be committedtomemory,or read andre-read untiltheybecame apartof his verylife. 
Elizabeth Barrett Browning says, "We err by reading too much, and out of proportion to what we think. I should be wiser, I am persuaded, if I had not read half as much; should have had stronger and better exercised faculties, and should stand higherin my ownappreciation." 
Peoplewho live morequietlydo not have so many distractinginfluences as others,andconsequentlytheythinkmoredeeplyandreflectmore. Theydo notreadso muchbuttheyare betterreaders. 
You should bring your mind to the reading of a book, or to the study of any subject, as you take anax to the grindstone; not forwhat you getfrom the stone,butforthesharpening oftheax. 
The greatest advantage of books does not always come under what we remember of them, but from their suggestiveness, their character-building power. 
"It is not in the library, but in yourself," says Fr. Gregory, "in your self-respect and your consciousness of duty nobly done-that you are to find the 'Fountain of Youth,' the , Elixir of Life,' and all the other things that tend to preservelife'sfreshness andbloom. " Itis a grand thing to read a good book-it is a grander thing to live a good life and in the living of such life is generatedthe powerthatdefies ageanditsdecadence." 
It is not the ability, the education, the knowledge that one has that makes the difference between men. The mere possession of knowledge is not always the possession of power; knowledge, which has not become a part of yourself, knowledge which cannot swing into line in an emergency is of little use,andwillnotsave youatthe criticalmoment. 
To be effective, a man's education must become a part of himself as he goes along. All of it must be worked up into power. A little practical education that has become a part of one's being and is always available, will accomplishmorein the worldthanknowledge far more extensivethat cannot be utilized. 
No one better illustrates what books will do for a man, and what a thinker will do with his books, than Gladstone, who was always far greater than his career. He rose above Parliament, reached out beyond politics, and was always growing. He had a passion for intellectual expansion. His peculiar gifts undoubtedly fitted him for the church, or he would have made a good professor at Oxford or Cambridge, but circumstances led him into the political arena, and he adapted himself readily to his environment. He was an all-round well-read man, who thought his way through libraries and through life. 
One great benefit of a taste for reading and access to the book world, is theserviceit rendersas a diversionanda solace. 
What a great thing to be able to get away from ourselves, to fly away from the harassing, humiliating, discouraging, depressing things about us, to goat willto aworldofbeauty,joy,andgladness! 
If a person is discouraged or depressed by any great bereavement or suffering, the quickest and the most effective way of restoring the mind to its perfect balance, to its normal condition, is to immerse it in a sane atmosphere, an uplifting, encouraging, inspiring atmosphere, and this may always be readily found in the best books.' I have known people who were suffering under the most painful mental anguish, from losses and shocks which almost unbalanced their minds, to be completely revolutionized in their mental state by the suggestive power which came from becoming absorbedin a greatbook. 
Everywhere we see rich old men sitting around the clubs, smoking, looking out of the windows, lounging around hotels, traveling about, uneasy, dissatisfied, not knowing what to do with themselves, because they had neverpreparedforthis partof theirlives. They put all their energy, ambition, everything into their vocation. 
I know an old gentleman who has been an exceedingly active business man. He has kept his finger upon the pulse of events. He has known what has been going on in the world during his whole active career. And he is now as happy and as contented as a child in his retirement, because he has alwaysbeenagreatreader,a greatloverof his kind. 
People who keep their minds bent in one direction too long at a time soon lose their elasticity, theirmental vigor, freshness, spontaneity. 
IfI wereto quoteMr. Dooley,it wouldbe: 
“ Reading is not thinking; reading is the next thing this side of going to bed forrestingthemind." 
To my own mind, however, I would rather cite that versatile Englishman, Lord Rosebery. In a speech at the opening of a Carnegie library at West Calder, Midlothian, he made a characteristic utterance upon the value of books;sayingin substance: 
" There is, however, one case in which books are certainly an end in themselves, andthatis to refreshand to recruit after fatigue. When the object is to refresh and to exalt, to lose the cares of this world in the world of imagination, then the book is more than a means. It is an end in itself. It refreshes, exalts, and inspires the man. From any work, manual or intellectual,the manwitha happytaste for books comes in tired and soured andfallsintothe armsof some greatauthor,who raises himfrom the ground and takes him into a new heaven and a new earth, where he forgets his bruises and rests his limbs, and he returns to the world a fresh and happy man." 
"Who," asks Professor Atkinson, "can overestimate the value of good books, those strips of thought, as Bacon so finely calls them, voyaging through seas of time, and carrying their precious freight so safely from generation to generation? Here are finest minds giving us the best wisdom of present and past ages; here are the intellects gifted far beyond ours, ready to give us the results of lifetimes of patient thought, imaginations open to the beautyof the universe." 
The lover of good books can never be very lonely; and, no matter where he is, he can always fine pleasant and profitable occupation and the best of societywhenhe quitswork. 
Who can ever be grateful enoughfor the art of printing; gratefulenough to the famous authors who have put their best thoughts where we can enjoy them at will? There are some advantages of intercourse with great minds through their books over meeting them in person. The best of them lives in their books, while their disagreeable peculiarities, their idiosyncrasies, their objectionable traits are eliminated. In their books we find the authors at their best. Their thoughts are selected, winnowed in their books. Book friends are always at our service, never annoy us, rasp or nettle us. No matter how nervous, tired, or discouraged we may be, they are always soothing, stimulating, uplifting. 
We may call up the greatest writer in the middle of the night when we cannot sleep, and he is just as glad to be with us, as at any other time. We are not excluded from any nook or corner in the great literary world; we can visit the most celebrated people that ever lived without an appointment, without influence, without the necessity of dressing or of observing any rules of etiquette. We can drop in upon a Milton, a Shakespeare, an Emerson, a Longfellow, a Whittier without a moment's notice and receive the warmest welcome. 
"You get into society, in the widest sense," says Geikie, " in a great library, withthe huge advantage of needing no introduction, and not dreading repulses. From that great crowd you can choose what companions you please, for in the silent levees of the immortals there is no pride, but the highest is at the service of the lowest, with a grand humility. You may speak freely with any, without a thought of your inferiority; for books are perfectly well bred, and hurt no one's feelings by any discriminations." 
"Itis notthe number of books," says Professor William Mathews, "which a young man reads that makes him intelligent and well informed, but the number of well-chosen ones that he has mastered, so that every valuable thoughtinthemis afamiliarfriend." 
It is only when books have been read and reread with ever deepening delight that they are clasped to the heart, and become what Macaulay found them to be, the old friends who are never found with new faces, who are the same to us in our wealth and in our poverty, in our glory and in our obscurity. No one gets into the inmost heart of a beautiful poem, a great history, a book of delicate humor, or a volume of exquisite essays, by reading it once or twice. He must have its precious thoughts and illustrations stored in thetreasure-houseofmemory,andbroodoverthemin thehoursofleisure. 
"A book may be a perpetual companion. Friends come and go, but the book may beguileall experiences andenchantall hours." 
"The first time," says Goldsmith, "that I read an excellent book, it is to me just as if I had gained a new friend; when I read over a book I have perused before, itresemblesthemeeting withanoldone." 
" No matter how poor I am," says William Ellery Channing, " no matter thoughthe prosperous of my own time will not enter my obscure dwelling; if the sacred writers will enter and take up their abode under my roof if Milton will cross my threshold to sing to me of Paradise; and Shakespeare to open to me the worlds of imagination and the workings of the human heart, I shall not pine for want of intellectual companionship, though excluded from whatis calledthebest society intheplacewhereIlive." . 
"Books," says Milton, "do preserve as in a violl, the purest efficacy and extraction of that living intellect that bred them. A good Book is the pretious life-blood of a master spirit, imbalm'd and treasur'd up on purpose to a Life beyondLife." 
"A book is good company," said Henry Ward Beecher. "It comes to your longing with full instruction, but pursues you never. It is not offended at your absent-mindedness, nor jealous if you turn to other pleasures, of leaf, or dress, or mineral, or even of books. It silently serves the soul without recompense, not even for the hire of love. And yet more noble, it seems to pass from itself, and to enter the memory, and to hover in a silvery transformation there, until the outward book is but a body and its soul and spiritare flown to you,andpossessyourmemorylike a spirit." 

10 DISCRIMINATIONIN READING 
Cultivate the habit of reading something good for ten minutes a day. Ten minutes a day will in twenty years make all the difference between a cultivated and an uncultivated mind, provided you read what is good. I mean by the good the proved treasures of the world, the intellectual treasures of the world in story, verse, history, and biography. CHARLES 
W. ELIOT,Ex-PresidentofHarvard University. 
FEWbookswellread, andan intelligentchoice of thosefew,-theseare the fundamentalsforself-educationby reading. 
Ifonly a few well chosen, itis better to availyourself of choices others havealreadymadeoldbooks, the standardworks tested by manygenerations of readers. If only a few, let them be books of highest character and establishedfame. Suchbooksareeasily found, evenInsmallpublic libraries. 
It is a cardinal rule that if you do not like a book, do not read it. What another likes, you may not. Any book list is suggestive; it can be binding onlyon those whoprizeit. Likeattractslike. 
Did you ever think that the thing you are looking for is looking for you; thatitis theverylawofaffinities togettogether? 
If you are coarse in your tastes, vicious in your tendencies, you do not have to workveryhardto findcoarse,viciousbooks;theyareseekingyouby theverylawofattraction. 
One'staste for readingis much like his tastefor food. Dull books are to be avoided, as one refuses food disagreeable to him; to someone else the book may not be dull, nor the food disagreeable. Whole nations may eat cabbage,orstale fish, whileIlikeneither. Ultimately,therefore,everyreader must make his own selection, and find the book that finds him. Anyone not a random reader will soon select a short shelf of books that he may like better than a longer shelf that exactly suits someone else. Either will be a shelf of good books and neither a shelf of the best books, since if best for you or me, they may not be best for everybody. 
A most learned man in India, in turning the leaves of a book, as he read, felt a little prick in his finger; a tiny snake dropped out and wriggled out of sight. The pundit's finger began to swell, then his arm; and in an hour, he was dead. 
Whohas notnoticedin the home a snake ina book thathas changedthe character of a boy through its moral poison so that he was never quite the same again? 
Howwell didCarlyledividebooksintosheepandgoats. 
It is probable that the careers of the majority of criminals in our prisons to-day might have been vastly different if the character of their reading when they were young had been different; had it been uplifting, wholesome, insteadof degrading. 
"Christian Endeavor" Clark saw a notice conspicuously posted in a large city :~" All boys should read the wonderful story of the desperado brothers of the Western plains, whose strange and thrilling adventures of successful robbery and murder have never before been equaled. Price five cents." The nextmorning,Dr. Clarkreadinanewspaperofthatcity thatseven boys had been arrested for burglary, and four stores broken into by the "gang." One of the ringleaders was only ten years old. At their trial, it appeared that each had invested five cents in the story of border crime. "Red-eyed Dick, the Terror of the Rockies," or some such story has poisoned many a lad's life. A seductive, demoralizing book destroys the ambition unless for vicious living. All that was sweet, beautiful, and wholesome in the character before seems to vanish, and everything changes after the reading of a single badbook. Ithas aroused the appetite for more forbidden pleasures, until it crowds out the desire for everything better, purer, healthier. Mental dissipation from this exciting literature, often dripping with suggestiveness of impurity, giving a passporttotheprohibited, isfatalto allsoundnessofmind. 
A lad once showed to another a book full of words and pictures of impurity. He only had it in his hands a few moments. Later in life he held high office in the church, and years afterward told a friend that he would havegivenhalf hepossessedhad henever seenthat book. 
Light, flashy stories, with no moral to them, seriously injured the mind of a brilliant young lady I once knew. Like the drug fiend whose brain has been stupefied, her brainbecame completely demoralized by constant mental dissipation. Familiarity with the bad ruins the taste for the good. Her ambition and ideas of life became completely changed. Her only enjoyment wastheexcitementof herimaginationthroughvicious,unhealthfulliterature. 
Nothing else will more quickly injure a good mind than familiarity with the frivolous, the superficial. Even though they may not be actually vicious, the reading of books which are not true to life, which carry home no great lesson, teach 110 sane or healthful philosophy, but are merely written to excite the passions, to stimulate a morbid curiosity, will ruin the best of minds in a very short time. It tends to destroy the ideals and to ruin the taste forallgoodreading. 
In our reading we can take, in secret, the poison which kills, or we can drink inencouragement andinspiration whichbids us look up. The poison in some books is extremely dangerous, because so subtle; the evil is often painted to look like good. Beware of books which, though they may not containasingle bad word, yet reek with immoral suggestions. 
The spirit which pervades a book, the subtle motive in the author's mind whenhe wrote it, has everythingto do withits influence. Readbooks which make you look up, which inspire you to be a little bigger man or woman, to amountto a littlemorein the world. 
Read books that make you think more of yourself and believe more in yourself and in others. Beware of books that shake your confidence in your fellow-man. Read constructive books, books that are builders; avoid those that tear down. Beware of authors who sap your faith in men and your respect for womanhood, who shake your faith in the sanctity of the home and scoff at religion,whounderminesense of dutyandmoralobligation. 
The books which we handle most often and value the highest are great tell-tales of our tastes and our ambition. A stranger could write a pretty good biography of a man he had never seen by careful examination and analysis ofhisreadingmatter. 
Read, read, read all you can. But never read a bad book or a poor book. Life is too short, time too precious, to spend it in reading anything but the best. 
Anybook isbadforyou,thereadingofwhich takes away your desire for a better one. 
Many people still hold that it is a bad thing for the young to read works of fiction. They believe that young minds get a moral twist from reading that which they know is not true, the descriptions of mere imaginary heroes and heroines, and of things which never happened. Now, this is a very narrow, limited view of a big question. These people do not understand the office of the imagination; they do not realize that many of the fictitious heroes and heroines that live in our minds, even from childhood's days, are much more realin theirinfluence on ourlives thansome ofthose that existin flesh and blood. 
Dickens'marvelouscharacters seem more realtousthananywe haveever met.' They have followed millions of people from childhood to old age, and influenced their whole lives for good. Many of us would look upon it as a great calamity to have these characters of fiction blotted out of our memory and theirinfluencetakenoutofourlives. 
Readers are sometimes so wrought up by a good work of fiction, their minds raised to such a pitch of courage and daring, their faculties so sharpened and braced, their whole nature so stimulated, that they can for the time being attempt and accomplish things which were impossible to them without thestimulus. 
This, it seems to me, is one ofthe greatvalues offiction. Ifitis good and elevating, it is a splendid exercise of all the mental and moral faculties; it increases courage; it rouses enthusiasm; it sweeps the brain-ash off the mind, and actually strengthens its ability to grasp new principles and to grapple with thedifficulties of life. 
Many a discouraged soul has been refreshened, reinvigorated, has taken on new life by the reading of a good romance. I recall a bit of fiction, called "The Magic Story," which has helped thousands of discouraged souls, given themnew hope,newlife,whenthey were readytogiveup thestruggle. 
The reading of good fiction is a splendid imagination exerciser and builder. It stimulates it by suggestions, powerfully increases its picturing capacity, andkeeps itfresh and vigorous and wholesome, and awholesome imagination plays a very great part in every . sane and worthy life. It makes it possibleforustoshutoutthemostdisagreeablepast,toshut out at will all hideous memories of our mistakes, failures, and misfortunes; it helps us to forget our trouble and sorrows, and to slip at will into a new, fresh world of our own making, a world which we can make as beautiful, as sublime, as we wish. Theimaginationis a wonderful substitute for wealth, luxuries, and for material things. No matter how poor we may be, or how unfortunate-we may be bedridden even-we can by its aid travel round the world, visit its greatestcities,and createthemostbeautifulthingsforourselves. 
Sir John Herschel tells an amusing anecdote illustrating the pleasure derived from a book, not assuredly of the first order. In a certain village a blacksmith got hold of Richardson's novel "Pamela, or Virtue Rewarded," and used to sit on his anvil in the long summer evenings and read it aloud to alargeandattentiveaudience. Itisbynomeansa shortbook, butthey fairly listened to it all. "At length, when the happy turn of fortune arrived, which brings the hero and heroine together and sets them living long and happily according to the most approved rules, the congregation were so delighted as to raise a great shout, and, procuring the church keys, actually set the parish bellsringing." 
"It all comes back to us now," said the editor of the Interior not long ago, "that winter evening in the old home. The curtains are down, the fire is sending out a cheerful warmth and the shaded lamp diffusing a well-tempered radiance. The lad of fifteen is bent over a borrowed volume of sea tales. For hours he reads on, oblivious of all surroundings, until parental attention is drawn toward him by the unusual silence. The boy is seen to be trembling from head to foot with suppressed excitement. A fatherly hand is laid upon the volume, closing it firmly, and the edict is spoken, 'No more novels for five years.' And the lad goes off to bed, half glad, half grieved, wonderingwhetherhe hasfoundfettersor achievedfreedom. 
"In truth he had received both; for that undiscriminating command forbadetohim,during aformativeperiodofhislife,workswhichwouldhave kindled his imagination, enriched his fancy, and heightened his power of expression; but it saved him from a possible descent to the Inferno; it made heroes of history, not demigods of mythology, his companions, and reserved to maturer years those excursions in the literature of the imagination which may lead a young man up to heaven or as easily drag him down to hell. 
"There was never such a demand for fiction as now, and never larger opportunities for its usefulness. Nothing has such an attraction for life as life. Butwhattheheartcravesis not,life as it is.'Itis life as it oughtto be. We want not the feeble but the forceful; not the commonplace but the transcendent. Nobody objects to the 'purpose novel' except those who object to the purpose. Dealing as it does, in the hands of a great master, with the grandest passions, the mosttender emotions, the divinest hopes, it can portray all these spiritual forces in their majestic sweep and uplift. And as a matter of history, we have seen the novel achieve in a single generation the task at which the homily had labored ineffectively for a hundred years. Realizing this, it is safe to say that there is not a theory of the philosopher, a hope of thereformer, or aprayerof the saint whichdoes not eventuallytake form in a story. The novel has wings, while logic plods with a staff. In the hour it takes the metaphysician to define his premises, the story-teller has reached thegoalandafterhim :tumblesthecrowdtumultuous." 
Arranged in the order of their popularity, as decided by the readers of the Literary News some yearsago,thefollowingaretheworld'sten bestnovels: 
David Copperfield, Dickens. Ivanhoe, Eliot; The Letter Scarlet, Hawthorne; Uncle Tom’s Cabin, Stow; The Newcomes, Thackeray; Les Miserables, VictorHugo;JohnHalifax,Gentleman;Mulock, Craik. 
The ten next best novels, as decided by the same constituency, and constituting, with the foregoing list of ten, the world's most popular twenty, are: 
Kenilworth, Scott Henry Esmond; Thackeray, Romola; George Eliot, The Last Days of Pompeii; Lytton, Middlemarch; Eliot, The Marble; Faun, Hawthorne; Pendennis, Thackeray;Hypatia, Charles Kingsley; The House of SevenGables,Hawthorne; TheMill on the Floss,George Eliot. 
To those who enjoy novels with strong underlying themes, this list, prepared by Hamilton Wright Mabie for the Ladies' Home Journal, will offer a delightfulrangeforselection: 
" PROBLEM" NOVELS 
Red Pottage by Cholmondeley; The Awakening of Helena Richie by Deland; Philip and His Wife by Deland; The Patriot; The Saint; The Sinner, all by Fogazzaro; The Undercurrent; and Unleavened Bread, both by Grant. Tess of the D'Urbervilles by Hardy; The Common Lot, and Her Son, by HerrickVachell;The Houseof MirthandThe FruitoftheTreebyWharton. 
NOVELSON SOCIOLOGICALSUBJECTS 
PutYourselfin His Place, &It IsNeverTooLate toMend,bothby Reade; FelixHolt,theRadicalbyEliot;All SortsandConditionsofMenby Besant; The Pit by Norris; Fathers and Sons by Turgenief; Truth by Zola; Looking BackwardbyBellamy;BeggarsAllbyDougall 
NOVELSOFPLOT 
The Moonstone by Collins; Treasure Island by Stevenson; Jane Eyre, Bronte; The Heart of Midlothian by Scott; Notre Dame de Paris, Victor Hugo; It Is Never Too Late to Mend & Reade The Mill on the Floss; Eliot Under the Greenwood Tree, all by Hardy; Our Mutual Friend by Dickens; TheThreeMusketeersby Dumas; MonteCristo byDumas 
NOVELSOFCHARACTER STUDY 
Prideand Prejudice,Austen;SentimentalTommy,byBarrie;Middlemarch by Eliot; Anna Karenina, Tolstoi; Joseph Vance, De Morgan; The Mayor of Chesterbridge, Hardy; The Scarlet Letter, Hawthorne; The Rise of Silas & Lapham, by Howells;The Portrait of a Lady, James; The Egoist, Meredith; TheSanctuary,Wharton; Divine Fire, Sinclair; Vanity Fair by Thackeray;Dr. JekyllandMr. Hyde,Stevenson. 
NOVELSOFREALISM 
Anna Karenina by Tolstoi; Daisy Miller, and The Bostoriians, by James; Adam Bede by Eliot; The Mill on the Floss Eliot Oliver Twist Dickens A 
PairofBlue Eyes, ".HardyHazardofNew FortunesHowells TheHouseof MirthWhartonTheCommonLotHerrick 
ROMANTIC NOVELS 
Notre Dame de Paris, Victor Hugo;David Balfour; StIves, & Prince Otto, all by Stevenson; To Have and to Hold by Johnston; Charles O'Malley by Lever; Guy Mannering by Scott; Quentin Durward Scott; Marble Faun by Hawthorne;Mr. Isaacsby Crawford 
NOVELSOFHUMOR 
The Vicar of Wakefield, Goldsmith; Deephaven by Hardy; Rudder GrangebyJewett;OldtownFolksbyStockt;DonQuixote byCervantes; 
Sir John Lubbock, included in his list of "The Hundred Best Books the followingrepresentatives ofModernFiction: 
Either Emma or Pride and Prejudice by Austen; Vanity Fair and Pendennis by Thackeray; Pickwick and David Copperfield by Dickens; Adam Bede by George Eliot; Last Days of Pompeii by Bulwer; Lytton Scott'sNovels 
The graded list of books for young people which follows was compiled by Hamilton Wright Mabie. It will be appreciated especially by teachers and parents. 
Books for Children Under Five Years of Age 
GIRLS 
Mother Goose, Classic Nursery Tales-Cinderella; The Three Bears; Little Red Riding Hood; Hop; My Thumb, etc. Fables and Folk Stories, H. E. Scudder, The Storyland, Elizabeth Harrison. In the Child's World, Emilie Poulsson. Small Songs for Small Singers, The Story Hour, Kate D. Wiggin and Nora A. Smith; The Good Fairy and the Bunnies, Allen A. Green; Cat Stories,HelenHuntJackson. BibleStories ' 
BOYS 
Mother Goose (Illustrated edition by Nister) The Book of the Zoo; The Book of the Farm; The Moo Cow Book; Our Dog Friends, Animal Books by ErnestNister; Fablesand FolkStoriesH. E. Scudder FairyTalesGrimm'sand Andersen's The Stories Mother Nature Told Her Children, by Jane Andrews; Child'sGardenofVersesbyR. L. Stevenson. Aesop'sFables. BibleStories 
For Children from Five to Ten Years of Age 
GIRLS 
Alice in Wonderland and Through the Looking Glass, by Lewis Carroll; Lullaby-Land (Eugene Field); The Seven Little Sisters by Jane Andrews; Primerof Workand PlaybyEdithG. Alger; Little Goody Two Shoes (Edited by Charles Welsh); Miss Muffet's Christmas Party by Samuel M. Crothers; Goops and How to be Them; More Goops and How Not to be Them by Gelett Burgess; Hiawatha by Longfellow; Five Minute Stories by Laura E. Richards. Also The Little Lame Prince; The Adventures of a Brownie (Dinah MariaMulock);CraikThe Peterkin Papers (Lucretia Hale);Legends of King Arthur by Frances N. Greene; The Rose and the Ring by Thackeray; Child Stories from the Masters by Maud Menefee; At the Back of the North Wind byGeorgeMacdonald;BalladsforLittleFolkby Aliceand Phoebe Cary 
BOYS 
The King of the Golden River, Ruskin; Water Babies, Kingsley; Just So Stories,Kipling;NightswithUncleRemusbyHarris;Glimpses of Nature for Little Folks, K. A. Griel; Crib and Fly: A Tale of Two Terriers, (Edited by Charles Welsh); The Boy's King Arthur by Sidney Lanier; Wonder Book of Horses; Story of Roland; Story of Siegfried; Story of the Golden Age, all by James Baldwin; Visit to London by E. V. Lucas; Toby Tyler by James Otis; Gods and Heroes R. E. Francillon; Buz by Maurice Noel. The Jungle Book; The Second Jungle Book by Kipling; Rab and His Friends by Dr. John Brown; Black Beauty byAnna Sewell; Ten Boys Who Lived on the Road from Long Ago to Now by Jane Andrews; Stories of Great Americans by 
EdwardEggleston;WonderBookandTanglewoodTales,byHawthorne 
For Children from Ten to Fifteen Years of Age 
GIRLS Little Women; Little Men; An Old-Fashioned Girl; Under the Lilacs; Jo's Boys,allby LouisaM. Alcott Two Little Waifs; Us Mrs. Molesworth Tales from Shakespeare Lamb FranconiaStoriesJacobAbbottSaraCrewe;LittleSt. Elizabeth Mrs. Burnett Pilgrim's Progress Bunyan Silas Marner; The Mill on the Floss,allby George Eliot Undine,Foque;LornaDoone by Blackmore; Hildegard Series (5) Laura E. Richards The Little Minister J. M. Barrie Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm, Kate D. Wiggin Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm; New Chronicles of Rebecca by Kate D. Wiggin; Adventures of Dorothy by Jocelyn Lewis; Gypsy Books byElizabethStuartPhelpsWard; Little Pussy by Willow; Harriet Beecher by Stowe; SixtoSixteenbyJulianaHoratiaEwing;Memoriesofa LondonDoll, Mrs. Fairstar; Toinette's Philip by C. V. Jamison; Abbe Constantin by Ludovic Halevy; The Daisy Chain and Pillars of the House by Charlotte M. Yonge 
BOYS 
Arabian Nights,Largeedition 
J. FenimoreCooper'sNovels JollyFellowship,Stockton TheNurnberg Stove, Ouida TheHoosierSchool-Boy, EdwardEggleston TheLandofthe MidnightSun,. Du Chaillu 
TomBrown'sSchoolDaysby Hughes TwoYearsBeforetheMast,R H. Dana TwoLittleSavages byE. ThompsonSeton Boy'sLifeof Lincoln .byHelenNicolay 
TheHillH. A. Vachell 
Storiesof Adventure;Boys'Heroes,E. E. Hale 
SquirrelsandOtherFur-Bearers;BirdsandBeesbyBurroughs. 
TreasureIslandbyStevenson 
TheStoryofa Bad BoybyAldrich. 
MastermanReadyF. Marryat 
TheSwiss FamilyRobinsonbyJ. RWyss 
Rip VanWinkle;TheLegendof SleepyHollowbyIrving 
AroundtheWorldin theSloop Spray" J. Slocum. 
Boys ofOtherCountries,BayardTaylor. 
TwoLittleConfederates, ThomasNelson Page 
Aztec TreasureHouse, ThomasA. Janvier 
WestwardHo,byKingsley 
BirdsThrough anOperaGlass,F. A. MerriamBailey 
Translationof theOdyssey ..... G. H. Palmer 
Three GreekChildren;Storyof theIliad,Young 
Knocking 'RoundtheRockies,byErnestIngersoll. 
HansBrinker,by MaryMapesDodge 
TheHalf Back;Behind theLine byRalph HenryBarbour 
Life of Garfield W. O. Stoddard The Man Without a Country E. E. Hale BlueJacketsof 1898; Battle Fieldsof '61, W. J. Abbot 
Plutarchfor Boys andGirls .. "JohnS. White 
Heart,aSchool-boy'sJournal(trans. by IsabelHapgood)byEdmondo De 
Amicis 
DaysofAncientRomebyMacaulay 
Harold,by Lytton 
For Young People from Fifteen to Twenty Years of Age 
'" GIRLS 
John Halifax, Gentleman .. Mrs. Mulock-Craik, New England Nun and Other Stories,byMaryE. Wilkins 
T. B. Aldrich'sShortStories JaneAusten's Novels CharlesReade'sNovels EssaysofElia,by Lamb Sesameand Lilies;Crownof Wild Olive Ruskin Little Rivers;TheRuling Passion,byHenryvanDyke Uarda;HomoSum; .EbersGoldbyElsieE. Marlitt ToHaveand to Holdby Mary Johnston ThomasNelsonPage'sShortStories Santilario : Saracinesca; Corleone; MariettaF. Marion Crawford Penelope 
inEngland;Penelope'sProgress; Penelope in Ireland .• Kate Douglas Wiggin The Rise of Silas Lapham; An Indian Summer . Howells Little Masterpieces of English Poetry by British and American Authors Henry van Dyke and HardinCraig 
AmericanAnthology;VictorianAnthologybyStedman 
BOYS 
Ben Hur by Lew Wallace; Rob Roy; Ivanhoe; The Heart of Midlothian; The Abbot; Kenilworth; The Pirate; Boys' and Girls' Plutarch, all by Sir Walter Scott; The Sketch-Book by Washington Irving; The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table, Holmes. Representative Men, by Emerson. Fenimore Cooper's Novels. Kim; Captain Courageous, Kipling. Jack Hazard, J. T. Trowbridge. Kidnaped; David Balfour; The Master of Ballantrae by Stevenson. Henry Esmond; The Virginians; The Newcomes; Pendennis, all byThackeray 
David Copperfield; Nicholas Nickleby; Martin Chuzzlewit; Tale of Two Cities, by Dickens. Francis Parkman's Histories. Biographies in the Great Writers Series Biographies in the American Statesmen Series Biographies in theAmerican MenofLetters 
Series ThreeGuardsmen;The BlackTulip .... Dumas 
TheCall oftheWildJackLondon 
TheCloisterandtheHearth;PutYourselfinHisPlace CharlesReadeThe Man with the Broken Ear; The King of the Mountains Edmond About The 
VirginianOwen Wister 
ShortStoriesof theEnglishPeople,J.RGreen 
JohnFiske'sHistories 
TheRise of the DutchRepublic byJ. L. Motley;Brave Little Hollandby 
W. E. Griffin; Ferdinand and Isabella by Prescott Charles the Fifth; William Robertson The American Revolution by G. O. Trevelyan; Charles the Bold 
J. F. Kirk; Makers of Florence; Makers of Venice; Royal Edinburgh, all by Mrs. Oliphant; Ave Roma Immortalis F. Marion Crawford The Story of GermanyS. B. Gould The Story of Norway by H. H. Boyesen The Conquest of Mexico by Prescott; Heroes of the Middle West, Mrs. Catherwood; The Conquest by Dye; Beginnings of a Nation by Edward Eggleston; Americans of 1776 by Schouler; The Winning of the West by Roosevelt; Life of Cesar, Froude; Life of Johnson, Boswell; Early Life of Charles James, Fox; Life of Macaulay by Trevelyan; Life of Scott by Lockhart; Life of Nelson by Southey; The Four Georges by Thackeray; Life of Lincoln by Nicolay and Hay; Life of Robert E. Lee by John Esten Cook or W. P. Trent; George Washington by Horace E. Scudder; Holmes, Oliver Cromwell, by John Morley;RalphWaldoEmerson. 

11 READING,A SPUR TOAMBITION 
I know of nothing else which will enlarge one's ideals and lift one's life standards more thanthe study of the lives of great and noble characters; the reading of biographies of great men and women. Abroad, it is impossible for me to avoid the society of fools. In my study, I can call up the ablest spirits, the learnedest philosophers, the wisest counselors, the greatest generals,andmakethemserviceableto me.-SIR WILLIAMWALLER. 
THE great purpose in reading is for self-discovery. Inspirational, character-making,life-shapingbooksarehelpfultothisend. 
There are books that have raised the ideals and materially influenced entire nations. Who can estimate the value of books that spur ambition, that awakenslumberingpossibilities? 
Cotton Mather's it Essay to Do Good" influenced the whole career of BenjaminFranklin,weare told. 
Are we ambitious to associate with peoplewhoinspire us to nobler deeds? Let usthenread upliftingbooks,whichstirusto makethemost ofourselves. 
We all know how completely changed we sometimes are after reading a bookwhichhas taken astrong,vigorousholdupon us. 
Thousands of people have found themselves through the reading of some book which has opened the door within them and given them the first glimpse of their possibilities. I know men and women whose whole lives have been molded, the entire trend of their careers completely changed, uplifted beyond their fondest dreams, by the good books they have taken timeto read. 
It has been said by President White of Cornell that, "The great thing needed to be taught in this country is truth, simple ethics, the distinction between right and wrong. Stress should be laid upon what is best in biography, upon noble deeds and sacrifices, especially those which show that the greatest man is not the greatest orator, or the tricky politician. They area curse;what we need is noble men. National loss comes as the penalty for frivolous boyhood and girlhood, that gains no moral stamina from wholesomebooks." 
If youths learn to feed on the thoughts of the great men and women of all times, they will never again be satisfied with the common or low; they will never again be content with mediocrity; they will aspire to some thing higher and nobler. 
A day which is passed without treasuring up some good thought is not wellspent. Everydayis aleaf in the book of life. 
The Bible, such manuals as " Daily Strength for Daily Needs," such books as Professor C. C. Everett's "Ethics for Young People"; Lucy Elliot Keeler's" IfI Werea Girl Again"; 
"Beauty through Hygiene," by Dr. Emma F. Walker; such essays as RobertL. Stevenson's 
"Gentlemen" (in his "Familiar Studies of Men and Books "); Smiles' "Self Help"; John Ruskin's" Sesame and Lilies"; and, according to a statement made a few years ago by Hamilton Wright Mabie in the Ladies' Home Journal, the author's Inspirational Book, "Pushing to the Front "-this is literature that makes young men and women trustworthy, so that the Marshall Fields and John Wanamakers want their aid in the conduct of great business concerns. Blessed are they who go much farther in later years, and whobecomefamiliarwiththose 
"Olympianbardswhosang 
Divineideasbelow, 
Whichalwaysfind usyoung 
Andalways keepusso." 
The readers who do not know the Concord philosopher Emerson, and the great writers of antiquity, Marcus Aurelius, Epictetus, and Plato, have pleasuresto come. 
Aside from reading fiction, books of travel are of the best for mental diversion; then there are nature studies, and science and poetry, all affording wholesome recreation, all of an uplifting character, and some of them opening up study specialties of the highest order, as in the great range of booksclassifiedasNaturalScience. 
The reading and study of poetry is much like the interest one takes in the beauties of natural scenery. Much of the best poetry is indeed a poetic interpretation of nature. Whittier and Longfellow and Bryant lead their readers to look on nature with new eyes, as Ruskin opened the eyes of Henry WardBeecher. 
A great deal of the best prose is in style and sentiment of a true poetic character, lacking only the metrical form. To become familiar with Tennyson and Shakespeare and the brilliant catalogue of British poets is in itself a liberal education. Rolfe's Shakespeare is in handy volumes, and so edited as to be of most service. Palgrave's" Golden Treasury,” of the best songs and lyrical poems in the English language, was edited with the advice and collaboration of Tennyson. His" Children's Treasury" of lyrical poetry is most attractive. Emerson's" Parnassus," and Whittier's" Three Centuries of Song" are excellent collectionsofthemostfamous poemsoftheages. 
Never before was a practical substitute for a college education at home made so cheap, so easy, and so desirable. Knowledge of all kinds is placed before us in an attractive and interesting manner. The best of the literature of the world is found to-day in thousands of American homes where fifty years agoitcouldonlyhavebeenobtainedby therich. 
Whatashameitisthatundersuchconditionsas theseanAmericanshould grow up ignorant, should be uneducated in the midst of such marvelous opportunities for self-improvement! Indeed, most of the best literature in every line to-day appears in the current periodicals, in the form of short articles. Many of our greatest writers spend a vast amount of time in the drudgery of travel and investigation, in gathering material for these articles, and the magazine publishers pay thou-sands of dollars for what a reader can get for ten or fifteen cents. Thus the reader secures for a trifle in periodicals or bookstheresultsofmonthsandoftenyearsofhardworkand investigation of our greatest writers. 
A New York millionaire, a prince among merchants, took me over his palatial residence on FifthAvenue, every room of which was a triumph of the architect's, of the decorator's, and of the upholsterer's art. I was told that the decorations of a single sleeping room had cost ten thousand dollars. On the walls were paintings which cost fabulous prices, and about the rooms were pieces of massive and costly furniture and draperies representing a small fortune, and covering the floors were carpets on which it seemed almost sacrilege to tread. He had expended a fortune for physical pleasure, comfort, luxury, and display, but there was scarcely a book in the house. It was pitiful to think of the physical surfeit and mental starvation of the children of such a home as that. He told me that he came to the city a poor boy, with all his worldly possessions done up in a little red bandanna. "I am a millionaire," hesaid, "but 
IwanttotellyouthatIwouldgivehalf I haveto-dayfora decenteducation." Many a rich man has confessed to confidential friends and his own heart that he would give much of his wealth, all, if necessary, to see his son a manly man, free from the habits which abundance has formed and fostered till they have culminated in sin and degradation and perhaps crime; and has realized that, in all his ample provision, he has failed to provide that which might have saved his son and himself from loss and torture, good books in thehome. There is a wealth within the reach of the poorest mechanic and day-laborer in this country that kings in olden times could not possess, and that is the wealthof a well-read,culturedmind. Inthisnewspaperage,thisageofcheap books and periodicals, there is no excuse for ignorance, for a coarse, untrained mind. To-day no one is so handicapped, if he have health and the use of his faculties, that he cannot possess himself of wealth that will enrich his whole life, and enable him to converse and mingle with the most cultured people. No one is so poor but that it is possible for him to lay hold of that which will broaden his mind, which will inform and improve him, and lift him out ofthebrutestage ofexistenceinto the godlike realmof knowledge. "Noentertainmentisso cheapas reading," saysMaryWortleyMontague; "nor any pleasure so lasting." Good books elevate the character, purify the taste, take the attractiveness out of low pleasures, and lift us upon a higher planeofthinkingand living. "A greatpartof whatthe Britishspend on books," says Sir John Lubbock, 
"they save inprisonsandpolice." 
It seems like a miracle that the poorest boy can converse freely with the greatest philosophers and scientists, statesmen, warriors, authors of all time, with little expense, that the inmates of the humblest cabin may follow the storiesof the nations,the epochs ofhistory,thestoryof liberty,theromance ofthe world,andthecourseof humanprogress. 
Carlyle said that a collection of books is a university. What a pity that the thousands of ambitious, energetic men and women who missed their opportunities for an education at the school age, and feel crippled by their loss, fail to catch the-significance of this, fail to realize the tremendous cumulative possibilities of that great life-improver, that admirable substitute fora college oruniversityeducation -reading. 
Have you just been to a well-educated, sharp-sighted employer to find work? You did not need to be at any trouble to tell him the names of the books you have read, because they have left their indelible mark upon your face andyourspeech. Yourpinched,starvedvocabulary, your lackofpolish, your slang expressions, tell him of the trash to which you have given your precious time. He knows that you have not rightly systemized your hours. He knows that thousands of young men and women whose lives are crowded to overflowing with routine work and duties, manage to find time to keep postedonwhatis goingonin theworld,andforsystematic,usefulreading. 
"Of the things which man can do or make here below," it was said by the Sage of Chelsea, "by far the most momentous, wonderful, and worthy are the things we call books! Those poor bits of rag-paper with black ink on them; from the daily newspaper to the sacred Hebrew Book, what have they not done,what aretheynotdoing?" 
President Schurmann of Cornell points with pride to a few books in his library which he says he bought when a poor boy by going many a day withouthisdinner. 
The great German Professor Oken was not ashamed to ask Professor Agassiz to dine with him on potatoes and salt, that he might save money for books. 
KingGeorgeIII. usedtosay thatlawyersdo not knowso much more law thanpeople ofothercallings,butthatthey know betterwhereto find it. 
A practical working knowledge of how to find what is in the book world, relating to any given point, is worth a vast deal from a financial point of view. And by such knowledge, one forms first an acquaintance with books, thenfriendship. 
"When I consider," says James Freeman Clarke, "what some books have done for the world, and what they are doing, how they keep up our hope, awaken new courage and faith, soothe pain, give an ideal of life to those whosehomes are hardandcold, bindtogetherdistantagesandforeignlands, create new worlds of beauty, bring down truths from heaven, I give eternal blessingsfor thisgift." 
Not long ago President Eliot of Harvard College aroused widespread controversy over his selection of a library of books which might be contained on a five-foot shelf, in the belief that "the faithful and considerate reading of these books will give any man a liberal education even if he can devote to them but fifteen minutes a day." The titles of the books so far selected are: 
TheAutobiographyofBenjamin Franklin 
TheJournal ofJohnWoolman 
SomeFruits ofSolitude WilliamPenn 
The Apology, Phredo, and Crito (translated by Benjamin Jowett) Plato TheGolden Sayings ofEpictetus(translated byH. Crossley) 
TheMeditationsofMarcusAurelius(translatedbyJ. S. Long) 
TheEssaysofFrancisBacon 
TheNew Atlantis(SpeddingText),FrancisBacon 
Areopagitica;Tractateon Education(JohnMilton) 
TheCompletePoemsofJohn Milton 
Religio Medici,Sir Thomas Browne Essays and English Traits, Ralph 
WaldoEmerson 
ThePoemsofRobert Burns 
The Confessions ofSt. Augustine(PuseyText)TheImitationofChrist .... 
Thomasa Kernpis 
Nine Greek Dramas; Agamemnon, The Libation-Bearers, The Furies (translatedby E. D. A. Morshead); 
AeschylusPrometheus,Aeschylus 
Oedipus the King,Antigoneby Sophocles 
Hippolytus,TheBacchze (translatedbyGilbertMurray) 
Euripides,TheFrogs,Aristophanes 
TheLetters ofCicero(translated byE. S. Shuckburgh) 
Cicero'sTreatiseonFriendshipand OldAge (translatedbyW. Melmoth) 
TheLetters ofPliny(revised byF. C. T. Bosanquet) 
The Wealth of Nations (edited by Professor J.C. Bullock, Harvard University)AdamSmith 
TheOriginofSpeciesbyCharlesDarwin 
Lives of Themistocles, Pericles, Aristides, Alcibiades, Coriolanus, Demosthenes, Cicero, Caesar, Antony (from the translation known as Dryden's corrected and revised by Arthur Hugh Clough); Plutarch The Aeneid(translated by JohnDryden), Virgil 
DonQuixote, Cervantes 
Pilgrim'sProgress JohnBunyan 
TheLivesof DonneandHerbert 
IzaakWalton 
StoriesfromtheArabianNights(Stanley 
Lane-Pooletranslation)Folk-LoreandFables:Aesop'sFables,82 titles. 
Grimm'sHouseholdTales,41titles 
Tales fromHansChristianAndersen, 20titles 
ModernEnglishDrama: 
AllforLove,JohnDryden 
TheSchoolforScandal 
RichardBrinsley, Sheridan 
She Stoops to ConquerOliverGoldsmith 
TheCenci,PercyByssheShelley 
A Blot in the Scutcheon,RobertBrowning 
Manfred Lord Byron 
Faust,HermannandDorothea, EgrnontGoethe DoctorFaustusChristopherMarlowe 
TheDivineComedy, Dante 
IPromessiSposi,AlessandroManzoni 
The Odysseyof Homer(Butcher andLangtranslation) 
TwoYearsBeforetheMast,RichardHenry Dana,Jr. 
Essays on Taste; on the Sublime and Beautiful; Reflections on the FrenchRevolution;LettertoaNoble Lord EdmundBurke 
Essayson Liberty;Autobiography,JohnStuartMiII 
Inaugural Address as Lord Rector of Edinburgh University; 
Characteristics;EssayonScott .by ThomasCarlyle 
ContinentalDrama: 
Calderon 
Corneille 
Lessing 
Moliere 
Racine 
EnglishEssays: 
Abraham Cowley John Locke Jonathan Swift Samuel Johnson Sydney 
Smith WilliamHazlittColeridge 
Leigh Hunt 
CharlesLamb Thomasde QuinceyJoseph Addison 
SirRichard Steele 
DanielDefoe 
David Hume 
Percy ByssheShelley 
ThomasB. Macaulay 
Englishand AmericanEssays: 
CardinalNewman Dean Swift 
John Ruskin Matthew Arnold James A. Froude Walter Bagehot Edward 
A. FreemanThomasH. Huxley Edgar AllanPoeRobertLouisStevenson James RussellLowellHenryD. Thoreau 
William MakepeaceThackeray 
TheVoyage ofthe Beagle .... CharlesDarwin 
ScientificPapers-Chemistry, Physics,Astronomy: 
Faraday 
LordKelvin 
Helmholtz 
Newcomb 
Essays-French,German,Italian: 
Montaigne RenanSchillerGrimmKant 
Mazzini Sainte-BeuveLessingGoethe 
AncientandElizabethanVoyagesand Travels: 
Herodotus 
SirFrancisDrake 
SirHumphrey Gilbert 
Coronado 
Descartes,Voltaire,etc. 
Tacitus 
SirWalterRaleigh 
Magellan 
CaptainJohnSmith 
Scientific Papers-Biology, Medicine, etc., including articles by Sir John Lister andAmbroisePare 
FamousPrefaces 
Caxton 
Raleigh 
JohnKnox 
HemingeandCondell 
Fielding 
Schiller WhitmanBerners 
SpenserCalvinBacon DrydenJohnsonTaineWordsworthNewton 
American Historical Documents, containing 40 important documents, such as: 
Cabots'Voyage 
Columbus'sLetter 
FirstCharterofVirginia 
MayflowerCompact 
Cornwallis's ProposalofSurrender 
Washington'sFirst Inaugural 
MonroeDoctrine 
Lincoln'sFirstInaugural 
Lincoln'sSecondInaugural 
Chronicles 
NationalEpics 
Machiavelli, More, and others Comparative Religions and Hymns; ElizabethanDramas. 
Ex-President Theodore Roosevelt selected for his famous African trip the followingbooks: 
Bible 
Apocrypha 
Bible in Spain; Zingali; Lavengro; Wild Wales; The Romany Rye, all by Borrow 
Shakespeare 
FaerieQueenebySpenser 
Marlowe 
Sea Power,Mahan 
History;Essays;Poems,Macaulay 
Iliad;Odyssey,Homer 
LaChanson de Roland 
NibelungenLied 
FredericktheGreat,Carlyle 
Poems, Shelley Essaysby Bacon 
LiteraryEssays; Biglow Papers 
LowellPoems 
Emerson 
Longfellow 
Tennyson 
Tales;PoemsbyPoe 
Keats 
ParadiseLost(BooksI.& II) Milton; Inferno (Carlyle's translation) Dante; Autocrat; Over the Teacups; Holmes Poems; Tales of the Argonauts; Luck of Roaring Camp Bret Harte Selections by Browning; Gentle Reader by Crothers; Huckleberry Finn and Tom Sawyer by Mark Twain; Pilgrim's Progress by Bunyan; Hippolytus; Bacchre (Murray's translation); Euripides; The Federalist; Rome by GregoroviusM Legend of Montrose; Guy Mannering; Waverley; Rob Roy, .AntiquarybyScott Pilot; Two Admirals by Cooper; Froissart; Percy's Reliques; Vanity Fair; Pendennis byThackeray; MutualFriend;Pickwick, byDickens 
Colonel Roosevelt says: "The list represents in part Kermit's taste, in part mine; and, I need hardly say, it also represents in no way all the books we most care for, but merely those which, for one reason or another, we thought we shouldlike to takeon thisparticulartrip." 
It is the author's hope and desire that the lists given, limited as they are, may prove of value to those seeking self-education, and that the books may encourage the disheartened, stimulate ambition, and serve as steppingstones to higheridealsandnoblerpurposesinlife. 
12 

THE SELF-IMPROVEMENT HABIT,A GREAT ASSET 
Aboy is betterunbornthanuntaught. GASCOIGNE. 
It is ignorance that wastes; it is knowledge that saves, an untaught faculty is atonce quiescent anddead.-N. D. HILLIS. 
The plea that this or that man has no time for culture will vanish as soon as we desire culture so much that we begin to examine seriously into our present useoftime.-MATTHEWARNOLD. 
EDUCATION, as commonly understood, is the process of developing the mind by means of books and teachers. When education has been neglected, either by reason of lack of opportunity, or because advantage was not taken of the opportunities afforded, the one remaining hope is self-improvement. Opportunities for self-improvement surround us, the helps to self-improvement are abundant, and in this day of cheap books, free libraries, and evening schools, there can be no good excuse for neglect to use the faculties for mental growth and development which are so abundantly supplied. 
When we look at the difficulties which hindered the acquisition of knowledge fifty years to a century ago; the scarcity and the costliness of books, the value of the dimmest candlelight, the unremitting toil which left so little time for study, the physical weariness which had to be overcome to enable mental exertion in study, we may well marvel at the giants of scholarship those days of hardship produced. And when we add to these limitations physical disabilities, blindness, deformity, ill-health, which many contended against, we may feel shame as we contemplate the fullness of modern opportunity and the helps and incentives to study and self-development which are so lavishly provided for our use and inspiration, and of whichwe avail ourselvesso little. 
Self-improvement implies one essential feeling: the desire for improvement. Ifthedesire exists,then improvementis usually accomplished only by the conquest of self the material self, which seeks pleasure and amusement. The novel, the game of cards,the billiard cue, idle whittling and story-telling, will have to be eschewed, and every available moment of leisure turned to account. For all who seek self-improvement "there is a lion in the way," the lion of self-indulgence, and it is only by the conquest of this enemythatprogress is assured. 
Show me how a youth spends his evenings, his odd bits of time, and I will forecast his future. Does he look upon this leisure as precious, rich in possibilities, as containing golden material for his future life structure? Or doeshe lookuponitasanopportunity for self-indulgence,foralight, flippant "goodtime"? 
The way he spends his leisure will give the keynote of his life, will tell whetherhe is deadin earnest,orwhetherhelooksuponlife as ajoke. 
He may not be conscious of the terrible effect, the gradual deterioration of character which comes from a frivolous wasting of his evenings and half­holidays,butthe characteris beingunderminedjustthesame. 
Youngmen are often surprisedto find them selves droppingbehindtheir competitors, but if they will examine themselves, they will find that they have stopped growing because they have ceased their effort to keep abreast of thetimes,to bewidelyread, toenrich theirlifewith self-culture. 
The right use of spare moments in reading and study is an indication of superior qualities. And in many historic cases the "spare" moments utilized forstudywere not spare in the sense of being the spare time of leisure. They were rather spared moments, moments spared from sleep, from meal times, fromrecreation. 
Where is the boy to-day who has less chance to rise in the world than Elihu Burritt, apprenticed at sixteen to a blacksmith, in whose shop he had to work at the forge all the daylight, and often by candle-light? Yet he managed,by studyingwitha book beforehimathismeals,carryingitin his pocketthathemightutilizeeverysparemoment,and studying at night and on holidays, to pick up an excellent education in the odds and ends of time which most boys throwaway. While the rich boy and the idler were yawning and stretching and getting their eyes open, young Burritt had seized the opportunityand improved it. 
He had a thirst for knowledge and a desire for self-improvement, which overcame everyobstaclein his pathway. A wealthygentlemanofferedtopay his expenses at Harvard, but Elihu said he could get his education him-self, even though he had to work twelve or fourteen hours a day at the forge. Here was a determined boy. He snatched every spare moment at the anvil and forgeasifitweregold. Hebelieved, withGladstone,thatthriftoftimewould repay him in after years with usury, and that waste of it would make him dwindle. Think of a boy working nearlyall the daylight in a blacksmith shop, and yet findingtimetostudysevenlanguagesin asingleyear! 
It is not lack of ability that holds men down but lack of industry. In manycases theemployeehasabetterbrain,abettermentalcapacity than his employer. But hedoesnotimprovehisfaculties. Hedullshismindby vicious habits. Hespends his time and moneyatthepooltableandinthesaloonand as he grows old, and the harness of perpetual service galls him, he grumbles athis lack ofluck,hislimitedopportunity. 
Thenumberof perpetualclerksis constantly being recruited by those who did not think it worthwhile as boys to learn to write a good hand or to master the fundamental branches of knowledge requisite in a business career. The ignorance common among young men and young women in factories, stores, and offices, everywhere, in fact, in this land of opportunity where youth should be well educated, is a pitiable thing. On every hand we see men and women of natural ability occupying inferior positions because they did not think it of enough importance in their youth to concentrate their attention on the acquisitionofknowledge thatwouldmakethem proficientworkers. 
Thousands of men and women find them selves held back, handicapped forlife, becauseof the seemingtrifleswhichtheydidnotthinkitworthwhile topayattentiontointheiryouth. 
Many a girl of good natural ability spends her most productive years as a cheap clerk or in a mediocre position because she never thought it worthwhile to develop her mental faculties or to take advantage of opportunities within reach to fit herself for a superior position. Thousands of girls unexpectedly thrown on their own resources have been held down all their lives because of neglected tasks in youth, which at the time were dismissedwith acareless" I don'tthinkit worthwhile." Theydid notthinkit would pay to go to the bottom of any study at school, to learn to keep accounts accurately, or fit themselves to do anything in such a way as to be abletomakea living by it. They expectedto marry, and never preparedfor being dependent on themselves, a contingency against which marriage, in manyinstances,is no safeguard. 
The trouble with most youths is that they are not willing to fling the whole weight of their being into their vocation. They want short hours, little work and a lot of play. They think more of leisure and pleasure than of discipline and training intheirgreatlifespecialty. 
Many a clerk envies his employer and wishes that he could go into business for himself and be an employer also, but he thinks it is too much workto make the effortto rise above a clerkship. He likes to take life easy; and he wonders idly whether, after all, it is worthwhile to strain and strive and struggle and study to prepare oneself for the sake of getting up a little higherandmakingalittlemoremoney. 
The trouble with a great many people is that they are not willing to make present sacrifices for future gain. They prefer to have a good time as they go along, rather than spend time in self-improvement. They have a vague wish to do something great, but few have that intensity of longing which impels them to make the sacrifice of the present for the future. Few are willing to work underground for years laying a foundation for their life structure. They yearnforgreatness,buttheiryearningis not the kind which is willingto payanypriceormakeanysacrificeforitsobject. 
So the majority slide along in mediocrity all their lives. They have ability for something higher up, but they have not the energy and determination to prepare for it. They do not care to make the necessary ·effort. They prefer to take life easier and lower down rather than to struggle for something higher. Theydonotplay thegameforallthey areworth. 
If a man or woman has but the disposition for self-improvement and advancement he will find opportunity to rise, or "what he cannot find, create." Here is an example from the everyday life going on around us and in which we arealltakingpart. 
A young Irishman who had reached the age of nineteen or twenty without learning to read or write, and who left home because of the intemperance that prevailed there, learned to read a little by studying billboards, and eventually got a position as steward aboard a man of-war. He chosethatoccupationand got leaveto serve atthecaptain'stablebecauseofa great desire to learn. He kept a little tablet in his coat-pocket, and whenever hehearda new wordwroteit down. One day anofficersawhimwritingand immediately suspected him of being a spy. When he and the other officers learned what the tablet was used for, the young man was given more opportunities to learn, and these led in time to promotion, until, finally, he won a prominent position in the navy. Success as a naval officer prepared thewayforsuccessinotherfields. 
Self-help has accomplished about all the great things of the world. How many young men falter, faint, and dally with their purpose, because they have no capital to start with, and wait and wait for some good luck to give thema lift! But success is thechild of hard work and perseverance. It cannot becoaxedor bribed;pay thepriceanditisyours. 
One of the sad things about the neglected opportunities for self­improvementis thatthey put people of great natural ability at a disadvantage among those who aretheir mental inferiors. 
I know a member of one of our state legislatures, a splendid fellow, immensely popular, who has a great, generous heart and broad sympathies, but who cannot open his mouth without so murdering the English language thatit is reallypainfulto listento him. 
There are a great many similar examples in Washington of men who have been elected to important positions because of their great natural ability and fine characters, but who are constantly mortified and embarrassed by their ignoranceand lackofearlytraining. 
One of the most humiliating experiences that can ever come to a human beingis to be conscious ofpossessing more than ordinary ability, andyetbe tied to an inferior position because of lack of early and intelligent training commensuratewiththisability. Toknowthatone hasabilitytorealizeeighty or ninety per cent of his possibilities, but because of the lack of proper education and training, to be unable to bring out more than twenty-five per cent of it, is humiliating. In other words, to go through life conscious that you are making a botch of your capabilities just because of lack of training, is amost depressing,mortifyingthing. 
Nothing else outside of sin causes more sorrow than that which comes fromnothavingpreparedforthehighestcareerpossibletoone. Thereare no more bitter regrets than those which result from being obliged to let pass opportunities for which onenever prepared himself. 
I know a pitiable case of a born naturalist whose ambition was so suppressed and whose education so neglected in youth that later, when he came to know more about natural history than almost any man of his day, he could not write a grammatical sentence, and could never make his ideas live in words, perpetuate them in books, because of his ignorance of even the rudimentsof an education. His early vocabulary was so narrow andpinched, and his knowledge of his language so limited, that he always seemed to be painfullystrugglingforwordstoexpresshis thought. 
Think of the suffering of this splendid man, who was conscious of possessing colossal scientific knowledge, and yet was absolutely unable to expresshimselfgrammatically! 
Howoftenstenographersaremortifiedby the useof some unfamiliarword or term, or quotation, because of the shallowness of their preparation! It is not enough to be able to take dictation when ordinary letters are given, not enough to do the ordinary routine of office work. The ambitious stenographer must be prepared for the unusual word or expression, must have good reservesofknowledgeto draw from in case of emergency. If she is constantly slipping up on her grammar, or is all at sea the moment she steps out of her ordinary routine, her employer knows that her preparation is shallow,thathereducationislimited,andherprospectswillbe limitedalso. 
A young lady writes me that she is so handicapped by the lack of an early education that she fairly dreads to write a letter to anyone of education or culture for fear of making ignorant mistakes in grammar and spelling. Her letter indicates that she has considerable natural ability. Yet she is always placed at a disadvantage because of this lack of an early education. It is difficult to conceive of a greater misfortune than always to be embarrassed and handicapped justbecauseoftheneglectof early years. 
I am often pained by letters from people, especially young people, which indicate that the writers have a great deal of natural ability, that they have splendid minds, but that a large part of their ability is covered up, rendered ineffectualby theirlackofeducation. 
Many of these letters show that the writers are like diamonds in the rough, with only here and there a little facet ground off, just enough to let in thelightandrevealthegreathiddenwealthwithin. 
I always feel sorry for such people who have passed the school age and who will probably go through life with their splendid minds handicapped by ignorancewhich,evenlate inlife,theymightlargelyorentirelyovercome. 
Itis sucha pitythatayoungman,forinstance,whohasthenaturalability which would make him a leader among men, must, for the lack of a little training and preparation, work for somebody else, perhaps with scarcely half of his ability but with abetter preparation,moreeducation. 
Everywhereweseeclerks, mechanics, employeesinallwalksoflife,who cannot rise to anything like positions which correspond with their natural ability, because they have not had the education. They are ignorant. They cannot write an intelligent letter. They murder the English language, and hence theirsuperbability cannotbedemonstrated,and remainsin mediocrity. 
The parable of the talents illustrates and enforces one of nature's sternest laws: "To him that hath shall be given; from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath." Scientists call this law the survival of the fittest. The fittest are those who use what they have, who gain strength by struggle, and who survive by self-development through control of their hostile or helpful environment. 
Thesoil,thesunshine,theatmosphereareveryliberalwiththematerialfor the growth of the plant or the tree, but the plant must use all it gets, must work it up into flowers, into fruit, into leaf or fiber or something, or the supply will cease. In other words, the soil will not send any more building material up the sap than is used for growth, and the faster this material is used the more rapid the growth, the more abundantly the material will come. 
The same law holds good everywhere. Nature is liberal with us if we utilize what she gives us, but if we stop using it, if we do not do some buildingsomewhere,if we do nottransform the material which she gives us into force and utilize that force, we not only find the supply cut off, but also thatwearegrowingweaker,less efficient. 
Everything in nature is on the move, either one way or the other. It is either going up or down. It is either advancing or retrograding; we cannot holdwithoutusing. 
Nature withdraws muscle or brain if we do not use them. She withdraws skill the moment we stop using it efficiently. The force is withdrawn when we ceaseexercisingit. 
A college graduate is often surprised .years after he leaves his college to find that about all he has to show for his education is his diploma. The power andefficiency whichhegainedtherehavebeen lost becausehe has notbeen using them. He thought at the time when everything was still fresh in his mind, after his examination, that this knowledge would remain with him, but it has been slipping away from him every minute since he stopped using it, and only that has remained and increased which he has used; the rest has evaporated. 
A great many college men ten years after graduation find that they have but very little to show for their four years' course, because they have not utilized their knowledge. They have become weaklings without knowing it. They constantly say to themselves, " I have a college education, I must have some ability, I must amount to something in the world." But the college diploma has no more power to hold the knowledge you have gained in college than a piece of tissue paper over a gas jet can hold the gas in the pipe. 
Everything which you do not use is constantly slipping away from you. Use it or lose it. The secret of power is use. Ability will not remain with us; forcewillevaporatethemomentwecease todosomethingwithit. 
Thetools for self-improvementareatyour hand. Use them. Iftheaxis dull the more strength must be put forth. If your opportunities are limited you must use more energy, put forth more effort. Progress may seem slow at first, but perseverance assures success. "Line upon line, and precept upon precept" is therule of mentalupbuilding,and" Induetimeyeshallreapifye 
faintnot." 
13 

THERAISINGOFVALUES 
"Destiny is not about thee, but within, Thyself must make thyself." 
THEworldis no longerclay,butratherironin the handsofits workers," says Emerson, "and men have got to hammer out a place for themselves by steadyandrugged blows." 
To make the most of your "stuff," be it cloth, iron, or character -this is success. 
Raising common" stuff" to priceless value is great success. 
The man who first takes the rough bar of wrought iron may be a blacksmith, who has only partly learned his trade, and has no ambition to rise above his anvil. He thinks that the best possible thing he can do with his bar is to make it into horseshoes, and congratulates himself upon his success. He reasons that the rough lump of iron is worth only two or three centsa pound, andthatitis not worthwhile to spend muchtime or labor on it. His enormous muscles and small skill have raised the value of the iron fromonedollar, perhaps,totendollars. 
Along comes a cutler, with a little better education, a little more ambition, a littlefinerperception,andsaystotheblacksmith: "Isthisall youcansee in thatiron?Giveme abar,andI will show you whatbrainsandskillandhard work can make of it." He sees a little further into the rough bar. He has studied many processes of hardening and tempering; he has tools, grinding and polishing wheels, and annealing furnaces. The iron is fused, carbonized into steel, drawn out, forged, tempered, heated white-hot, plunged into cold water or oil to improve its temper, and ground and polished with great care and patience. When this work is done, he shows the astonished blacksmith two thousand dollars' worth of knife-blades where the latter only saw ten dollars' worth of crude horseshoes. The value has been greatly raised by the refining process. 
" Knife-blades are all very well, if you can make nothing better," says another artisan, to whom the cutler has shown the triumph of his art, "but you haven't half brought out what is in that bar of iron. I see a higher and better use; I have made a study of iron, and know what there is in it and what can bemadeofit." 
This artisan has a more delicate touch, a finer perception, a better training,ahigherideal,andsuperiordetermination,whichenablehimto look still further into the molecules of the rough bar, past the horseshoes, past the knife-blades, and he turns the crude iron into the finest cambric needles, with eyes cut with microscopic exactness. The production of the invisible points requires a more delicate process, a finer grade of skill than the cutler possesses. 
This feat the last workman considers marvelous. He has multiplied many times the value of the cutler's product, and he thinks he has exhausted the possibilitiesoftheiron. 
But, behold! another very skillful mechanic, with a still more finely organized mind, a more delicate touch, more patience, more industry, a higher orderof skill,anda better training,passeswith ease by the horseshoes, the knife blades, and the needles, and returns the product of his bar in fine mainsprings for watches. Where the others saw horseshoes, knife-blades, or needles, worth only a few thousand dollars, his penetrating eye saw a product worthonehundredthousanddollars. 
Yet a higher artist-artisan appears, who tells us that the rough bar has not even yet found its highest expression; that he possesses the magic that can perform a still greater miracle in iron. To him even mainsprings seem coarse and clumsy. He knows that the crude iron can be manipulated and coaxed into an elasticity that cannot even be imagined by one less trained in metallurgy. He knows that, if care enough be used in tempering the steel, it will not be stiff, trenchant, and merely a passive metal, but so full of its new qualitiesthatitalmostseemsinstinctwithlife. 
With penetrating, almost clairvoyant vision, this artist-artisan sees how everyprocessofmainspringmakingcanbecarriedfurther;and how,atevery stage of manufacture, more perfection can be reached; how the texture of themetalcanbeso muchrefinedthatevenafiber, a slenderthreadof it, can do marvelous work. He puts his bar through many processes of refinement and fine tempering, and in triumph turns his product into almost invisible coils of delicate hairsprings. After infinite toil and pain, he has made his dream true; he has raised the few dollars' worth of iron to a value of one milliondollars, perhaps forty times thevalueof the sameweightofgold. 
But still another workman, whose processes are so almost infinitely delicate, whose product is so little known by even the average educated man that his trade is unmentioned by the makers of dictionaries and encyclopedias, takes a fragment of one of the bars of steel, and develops its higher possibilities with such marvelous accuracy, such ethereal fineness of touch, that mainsprings and even hairsprings are looked back upon as coarse, crude, and cheap. When his work is done, he shows you a few of the minutely barbed instruments used by dentists to draw out the finest branches of the dental nerves. While a pound of gold, roughly speaking, is worth about two hundred and fifty dollars, a pound of these slender, barbed filaments of steel, if a pound could be collected, might be worth hundreds of times as much. 
Other experts may still further refine the product, but it will be many a day before the best will exhaust the possibilities of a metal that can be subdivided until its particles will float in the air. It sounds magical, but the magic is only that wrought by the application of the homeliest virtues; by the training of the eye, the hand, the perception; by painstaking care, by hard work,andbydeterminationandgrit. 
If a metal possessing only a few coarse material qualities is capable of such marvelous increase in value, by mixing brains with its molecules, who shall set bounds to the possibilities of the development of a human being, that wonderful compound of physical, mental, moral, and spiritual forces? Whereas, in the development of iron, a dozen processes are possible, a thousandinfluences maybe broughtto bearuponmindandcharacter. While the iron is an inert mass acted upon by external influences only, the human being is a bundle of forces, acting and counteracting, yet all capable of controlanddirectionby the higherself,thereal,dominatingpersonality. 
The difference in human attainment is due only slightly to the original material. It is the ideal followed and unfolded, the effort made, the processes of education and experience undergone, that fuse, hammer, and mold our life-barintoits ultimatesplendiddevelopment. 
Life, everyday life, has counterparts of all the tortures the iron undergoes, andthroughthemitcomestoits highestexpression. Theblowsofopposition, the struggles amid want and woe, the fiery trials of disaster and bereavement, the crushings of iron circumstances, the raspings of care and anxiety, the grinding of constant difficulties, the rebuffs that chill enthusiasm, the weariness of years of dry, dreary drudgery in education and discipline, all thesearenecessarytothemanwhowould reachthehighestsuccess. 
The iron, by this manipulation, is strengthened, refined, made more elastic or more resistant, and adapted to the use of which each artisan dreams. Ifevery blow shouldfracture it, if everyfurnace shouldburn the life out of it, if every roller should pulverize it, of what use would it be? It has that virtue,those qualities that withstand all; that draw profit from every test, and come out triumphant in the end. In the iron the qualities are, in the main, inherent; but in ourselves they are largely matters of growth, culture, and development,and all are subjectto the dominatingindividualwill. 
Just as each artisan sees in the crude iron some finished, refined product, so must we see in our lives glorious possibilities, if we would but realize them. If we see only horseshoes or knife-blades, all our efforts and struggles will never produce hairsprings. We must realize our own adaptability to great ends; we must resolve to struggle, to endure trials and tests, to pay the necessary price, confident that the result will pay us for our suffering, our trials,andourefforts. 
Those who shrink from the forging, the rolling, and the drawing out, are the ones whofail,the" nobodies," thefaulty characters,thecriminals. Justas a bar of iron, if exposed to the elements, will oxidize, and become worthless, so will characterdeteriorateif thereisnoconstantefforttoimproveitsform, to increase its ductility, to temper it, or to better it in some way-It is easy toremaina commonbarof iron;or comparativelyso,bybecomingmerely a horseshoe;but itishardto, raise yourlife product tohighervalues. 
Many of us consider our natural gift-bars poor, mean, and inadequate, compared with those of others;but, if we are willing, by patience, toil, study, and struggle, to hammer, draw out, and refine, to work on and up from clumsy horseshoes to delicate hairsprings, we can, by infinite patience and persistence, raise the value of the raw material to almost fabulous heights. It was thus that Columbus, the weaver, Franklin, the journeyman printer, .Aesop the slave, Homer, the beggar, Demosthenes, the cutler's son, Ben Jonson,the bricklayer, Cervantes, the common soldier, andHaydn, the poor wheelwright's son, developed their powers, until they towered head and shouldersaboveothermen. 
There is very little difference between the material given to a hundred average boys and girls at birth, yet one with no better means of improvementthanthe others, perhaps with infinitely poorer means, will raise his material in value a hundredfold, five-hundredfold, aye, a thousandfold, while the ninety-nine will wonder why their material remains so coarse and crude,andwillattribute theirfailureto hardluck. 
While one boy is regretting his want of opportunities, his lack of means to get a college education, and remains in ignorance, another with half his chances picks up a good education in the odds and ends of time which other boys throwaway. From the same material, one man builds a palace and another a hovel. From the same rough piece of marble, one man calls out an angel of beauty which delights every beholder, another a hideous monster which demoralizeseveryonewhosees it. 
Theextenttowhichyoucanraisethevalueofyour life-bar depends upon yourself. Whether you go upward to the mainspring or hairspring stage depends very largely upon your ideal, your determination to be the higher thing, upon your having the grit to be hammered, to be drawn out, to be thrustfromthefireintocold wateroroil inordertogetthepropertemper. 
Of course, it is hard and painful, and it takes lots of stamina to undergo theprocessesthat producethe finest product,butwouldyouprefertoremain a rough barofironor ahorseshoeall yourlife? 
14 

SELF-IMPROVEMENTTHROUGH PUBLIC SPEAKING 
IT DOES not matter whether he wants to be a public speaker or not, a person should have such complete control of himself, should be so self-reliant and self-poised, that he can get up in any audience, no matter how largeorformidable,and express histhoughtsclearly anddistinctly. 
Self-expression in some manner is the only means of developing mental power. Itmaybe inmusic;it maybe oncanvas;it mayhethroughoratory;it may come through selling goods or writing a book; but it must come through self-expression. 
Self-expression in any legitimate form tends to call out what is in a man, his resourcefulness, inventiveness; but no other form of self-expression develops a man so thoroughly and so effectively, and so quickly unfolds all ofhispowers,asspeakingbeforean audience. 
It is doubtful whether anyone can reach the highest standard of culture withoutstudying the art of expression, especially public vocal expression. In all ages oratory has been regarded as the highest expression of human achievement. Young people, no matter what they intend to be, whether blacksmithorfarmer,merchantor physician,should make itastudy. 
Nothingelse will call out whatis in a man so quickly and so effectively as the constant effort to do his best in speaking before an audience. When one undertakes to think on his feet and speak extemporaneously before the public, thepowerandtheskilloftheentiremanareputto a severetest. 
The practise of public speaking, the effort to marshal all one's forces in a logical and forceful manner,· to bring to a focus all the power one possesses, is a great awakener of all the faculties. The sense of power that comes from holding the attention, stirring the emotions, or convincing the reason of an audience, gives self-confidence, assurance, self-reliance, arouses ambition andtendsto makeone moreeffectivein every way. 
One's judgment, education, manhood, character, all the things that go to make a man what he is, are being unrolled like a panorama in his effort to express himself. Every mental faculty is quickened, every power of thought and expression stirred and spurred. The speaker summons all his reserves of experience, of knowledge, of natural or acquired ability, and masses all his forces in the endeavor to express himself with power and to capture the approvalandapplause ofhisaudience. 
A writer has the advantage of being able to wait for his moods. He can write when he feels like it; and he knows that he can burn his manuscript again and again if it does not suit him. There are not a thousand eyes upon him. He does not have a great audience criticizing every sentence, weighing every thought. He does not have to step upon the scales of every listener's judgment to be weighed, as does the orator. He may write as listlessly as he pleases, use much or little of his brain or energy, just as he chooses or feels like doing. No one is watching him. His pride and vanity are not touched, and what he writes may never be seen by anyone. Then, there is always a chance for revision. In music, whethervocal or instrumental,what one gives out is only partially one's own; the rest is the composer's. In conversation, we do not feel that so much de-pends upon our words; only a few persons hear them, and perhaps no one will ever think of them again. But when a person attempts to speak before an audience, all props are knocked out from underhim;he hasnothingto leanupon,he can getno assistance,no advice; he mustfind all his resources in himself; he stands absolutely alone. He may have millions of money, broad acres of land, and may live in a palace, but none of these avail him now; his memory, his experience, his education, his ability, are all he has; he must be measured by what he says, what he revealsofhimselfinhisspeech;hemuststandorfallin the estimation ofhis audience. 
Anyone who lays any claim to culture should train himself to think on his feet, so that he can at a moment's notice rise and express himself intelligently. The occasions for after-dinner speaking are increasing enormously. A great manyquestionswhichonceweresettledin the officeare now discussed and disposed of at dinners. All sorts of business deals are now carried through at dinners. There was never before any such demand for dinner oratory as to­day. 
We know men who have, by dint of hard work and persistent grit, lifted themselves into positions of prominence, and yet they are not able to stand on their feet in public, even to make a few remarks or to put a motion, without trembling like an aspen leaf. They had plenty of opportunities when they wereyoung,atschool,in debatingclubs,togetridoftheirself-consciousness and to acquire ease and facility in public speaking, but they always shrank from every opportunity, because they were timid, or felt that somebody else couldhandlethedebateorquestionsbetter. 
There are plenty of business men to-day who would give a great deal of money if they could only go back and improve the early opportunities for learning to think and speak on their feet which they threw away. Now they have money, they have position, but they are nobodies when called upon to speak in public. All they can do is to look foolish, blush, stammer out an apology,andsitdown. 
Some time ago I was at a public meeting when a man who stands very high in the community, who is king in his specialty, was called upon to give his opinion upon the matter under consideration, and he got up and trembled and stammered and could scarcely say his soul was his own. He could not even make a decent appearance. Hehadpower and a greatdealof experience, but there he stood, as helpless as a child, and he felt cheap, mortified, embarrassed. Probably he would have given anything if he had early in life trained himself to speak extemporaneously, so that he could think on his feetandsaywithpowerandeffectivenessthatwhichhe knew. 
At the very meeting where this strong man, who had the respect and confidence of everybody who knew him, had made such a miserable failure of his attempt to give his opinion upon the important public matter on which he was well posted, a shallow-brained business man of the same city who hadn't a hundredth part of the other man's practical power in affairs, got up and made a brilliant speech, and strangers no doubt thought that he was much the stronger man. He had simply cultivated the ability to say his best thingon his feet, andthe othermanhadnot. 
A brilliant young man in New York who has climbed to a responsible position in a very short time, tells me that he has been surprised on several occasions when he has been called upon to speak at banquets, or at other public functions, at the new discoveries he has made of himself of power which he never before dreamed he possessed, and he now regrets more than anything else that he has in the past allowed so many opportunities for callinghimselfoutto go by. 
The effort to express one's ideas in lucid, clean-cut, concise, telling English tends to make one's everyday language choicer and more direct, and to improve one's diction generally. In this and other ways speech-making develops mental power and character. This explains the rapidity with which a young man develops in school or college when he begins to take part in public debates orindebatingsocieties. 
Every man, saysLord Chesterfield, may choosegood words insteadof bad ones and speak properly instead of improperly; he may have grace in his motions and gestures, and may be a very agreeable instead of disagreeable speakerifhe willtakecareandpains. 
It is a matter of painstaking and preparation. There is everything in learning what you wish to know. Your vocal culture, manner, and mental furnishing,aretobe madeamatterforthoughtandcarefultraining. 
In thinking on one's feet before an audience, one must think quickly, vigorously, effectively. At the same time he must speak through a properly modulated voice, with proper facial and bodily expression and gesture. This requires practisein earlylife. 
Nothing will tire an audience more quickly than monotony, everything expressed on the same dead level. There must be variety; the human mind tiresvery quickly when thisisnotsupplied. 
This is especially true of a monotonous tone. It is a great art to be able to raise and lower the voice with sweet flowing cadences which please the ear. Gladstone said, "Ninety-nine men in every hundred never rise above mediocrity because the training of the voice is entirely neglected and considered of no importance." 
It was said of a certain Duke of Devonshire that he was the only English statesman who ever took a nap during the progress of his own speech. He was a perfect genius for dry, uninteresting oratory, moving forward with a monotonous droning, and pausing now and then as if refreshing himself by slumber. 
In youth the would-be orator must cultivate robust health, since force, enthusiasm, conviction, will-poweraregreatlyaffectedby physical condition; and, too, he must cultivate bodily posture, and have good habits at easy command. 'WhatwouldhavebeentheresultofWebster'sreplytoHayne, the greatest oratorical effort ever made on this continent, if he had sat down in the Senate and put his feet on his desk? Think of a great singer like Nordica attempting to electrify an audience while lounging on a sofa or sitting in a slouchyposition! 
There is no class of people put to such a severe test of showing what is in them as public speakers; no other men who run such a risk of exposing their weakspots, or makingfools of themselvesin the estimationof others,asdo orators. Publicspeaking-thinkingon one'sfeetis a powerful educator except to the thick-skinned man, the man who has no sensitiveness, or who does not care for what others think of him. Nothing else so thoroughly discloses a man's weaknesses or shows up his limitations of thought, his poverty of speech, his narrowvocabulary;nothingelse is sucha touchstone of character and the extent of one's reading, the carefulness or carelessness of his observationas his publicutterances. 
Anearly trainingfor effectivespeakingwillmakeone carefulto secure a goodvocabularybygoodreadinganda dictionary. Onemustknowwords. 
Close, compact statement is imperative, Learn to stop when you get through. Do not keep stringing out conversation or argument after you have made your point. You only neutralize the good impression you have made, weaken your case, and prejudice people against you for your lack of tact, good judgment, or sense of proportion. 
The attempt to become a good public speaker is a great awakener of all the mental faculties. The sense of power that comes from holding the attention, stirring the emotions or convincing the reason of an audience, gives self-confidence, assurance, self-reliance, arouses ambition, and tends to make one more effective in every particular. One's manhood, character, learning, judgment of his opinions all things that go to make him what he is-are being unrolled like a panorama. Every mental faculty is quickened, every power of thought and expression spurred. Thoughts rush for utterance, words press for choice. The speaker summons all his reserves of education, of experience, of natural or acquired ability, and masses all his forces in the endeavorto capturethe approvalandapplauseofthe audience. 
Such an effort takes hold of the entire nature, beads the brow, fires the eye, flushes the cheek, and sends the blood surging through the veins. Dormant impulses are stirred, half-forgotten memories revived, the imagination quickened to see figures and similes that would never come to calm thought. 
This forced awakening of the whole personality has effects reaching much further than the oratorical occasion. The effort to marshal all one's reserves in a logical and orderly manner, to bring to the front all the power one possesses, leaves these reserves permanently better in hand, more readily in reach. 
The Debating Club is the nursery of orators. No matter how far you have to go to attend it, or how much trouble it is, or how difficult it is to get the time, the drill you will get by it is often the turning point. Lincoln, Wilson, Webster, Choate, Clay, and Patrick Henry got their training in the old­fashionedDebatingSociety. 
Do not think that because you do not know anything about parliamentary law you should not accept the presidency of your club or debating society, or take an active part. This is just the place to learn, and when you have accepted the position you can post yourself on the rules, and the chances are that you will never know the rules until you are thrust into the chair where you will be obliged to give rulings. Join just as many young people's organizations-especially self-improvement organizations-as you can, and force yourself to speak every time you get a chance. If the chance does not come to you, make it. Jump to your feet and say something upon every questionthatisupfordiscussion. Donot be afraidto rise to puta motion or tosecond it or to give your opinion upon it. Do not wait untilyou are better prepared. Youneverwill be. 
Every time you rise to your feet will increase your confidence, and after a while you will form the habit of speaking until it will be as easy as anything else. There is no one thing which will develop young people so rapidly and effectively as debating clubs and discussions of all sorts. A vast number of our public men have owed their advance more to the old-fashioned debating societies than anything else. Here they learned confidence, self-reliance; they discovered themselves. It was here they learned not to be afraid of themselves, to express their opinions with force and independence. Nothing will call a young man out more than the struggle to hold his own in a debate. It is strong, vigorous exercise for the mind just as wrestling is for the body. 
Donotremainwaybackontherearseat. Go upfront. Do notbe afraidto show yourself. This shrinking into a corner and getting out of sight and avoiding publicityisfatal toself-confidence. 
It is so easy and tempting, especially for boys and girls in school or college,to shrinkfromthepublicdebatesorspeaking,onthegroundthatthey are not quite well enough educated at present. They want to wait until they can use a little better grammar, until they have read more history and more literature,untiltheyhavegainedalittlemorecultureandease of manner. 
But the way to acquire grace, ease, facility, the way to get poise and balance so that you will not feel disturbed in public gatherings, is to get the experience. Do the thing so many times that it will become second nature to you. Ifyou have an invitation to speak, no matter how muchyou may shrink from it, or how timid or shy you may be, resolve that you will not let this opportunityfor selfenlargementslip by you. 
I know of a young man who has a great deal of natural ability for public speaking, and yet he is so timid that he always shrinks from accepting invitations to speak at banquets or in public because he is so afraid that he has not had experience enough. He lacks confidence in himself, He is so proud, and so afraid that he will make some slip which will mortify him, that he has waited and waited and waited until now he is discouraged and thinks that he will never be able to do anything in public speaking at all. He would give anything in the world if he had only accepted all of the invitations he has had, because then he would have profited by experience. It would have beenathousandtimesbetterforhimtohavemadea mistake,oreven tohave broken down entirely a few times, than to have missed the scores of opportunities whichwouldundoubtedlyhavemadea strong publicspeakerof him. 
What is technically called "stage fright" is very common. A college boy recitedanaddress" Totheconscript fathers." His professorasked,-" Isthatthe way Caesar would have spoken it?" " Yes," he replied, "if Caesar had been scaredhalftodeath,andasnervousasa cat." 
An almost fatal timidity seizes on an inexperienced person when he knows that all eyes are watching him, that everybody in his audience is trying to measure and weigh him, studying him, scrutinizing him to see how muchthereis in him, for what he stands, and making up their minds whether hemeasuresmoreorlessthantheyexpected. 
Some men are constitutionally sensitive and so afraid of being gazed at that they don't dare open their mouths, even when a question in which they are deeply interested and on which they have strong views is being discussed. At debating clubs, meetings of literary societies, or gatherings of any kind, they sit dumb, longing, yet fearing to speak. The sound of their ownvoices,iftheyshouldgeton theirfeet to make amotionor to speak in a public gathering, would paralyze them. The mere thought of asserting themselves, of putting forward their views or opinions on any subject as being worthy of attention, or as valuable as those of their companions, makes themblushandshrinkmoreintothemselves. 
Thistimidityis often, however, not so much the fear of one's audience, as thefearlestone canmakenosuitableexpressionofhisthought. 
Thehardest thing for the publicspeakertoovercomeisself-consciousness. Those terrible eyes which pierce him through and through, which are measuring him, criticizing him, are very difficult to get out of his consciousness. 
But no orator can make a great impression until he gets rid of himself, until he can absolutely annihilate his self-consciousness, forget himself in his speech. While he is wondering what kind of an impression he is making, whatpeoplethinkofhim,hispoweriscrippled, andhis speechto that extent will bemechanical,wooden. 
Even a partial failure on the platform has good results, for it often arouses a determination to conquer the next time, which never leaves one. Demosthenes' heroic efforts, and Disraeli's "The time will come when you willhearme," are historic examples. 
Itis notthe speech, butthe man behindthe speech, that wins a way to the front. 
One man carries weight because he is himself the embodiment of power, he is himself convinced of what he says. There is nothing of the negative, 
the doubtful, the uncertain in his nature. He not only knows a thing, but he knows that he knows it. His opinion carries with it the entire weight of his being. The whole man gives consent to his judgment. He himself is in his conviction,inhisact. 
One of the most entrancing speakers I have ever listened to--a man to hear whom people would go long distances and stand for hours to get admission to the hall where he spoke never was able to get the confidence of his audience because he lacked character. People liked to be swayed by his eloquence. There was a great charm in the cadences of his perfect sentences. Butsomehowthey could notbelievewhat hesaid. 
The orator must be sincere. The public is very quick to see through shams. Ifthe audience sees mud at the bottom of your eye, thatyou are not honestyourself,thatyouareacting,theywill not takeanystockin you. 
It is not enough to say a pleasing thing, an interesting thing, the orator must be able to convince; and to convince others he must himself have strong convictions. 
Very fewpeople ever rise to their greatestpossibilities or ever know their entire power unless confronted by some great occasion. We are as much amazed as others are when, in some great emergency, we out-do ourselves. Somehow the power that stands behind us in the silence, in the depths of our natures, comes to our relief, intensifies our faculties a thousandfold and enablesustodothings whichbeforewe thoughtimpossible. 
It would be difficult to estimate the great part which practical drill in oratorymayplayin one'slife. 
Great occasions, when nations have been in peril, have developed and brought out some of the greatest orators of the world. Cicero, Mirabeau, Patrick Henry, Webster, and John Bright might all be called to witness to this fact. 
The occasion had much to do with the greatest speech delivered in the United States Senate: Webster's reply to Hayne. Webster had no time for immediate preparation, but the occasion brought out all the reserves in this giant, and he towered so far above his opponent that Hayne looked like a pygmyin comparison. 
Thepen has discovered many a genius, butthe process is slower andless effectivethan thegreatoccasionthatdiscovers the orator. 
Every crisis calls out ability previously undeveloped and perhaps unsuspected. 
No orator living was ever great enough to give out the same power and force and magnetism to an empty hall, to empty seats, that he could give to an audience capable of being fired by his theme. In the presence of the audience lies a fascination, an indefinable magnetism that stimulates all the mental faculties, and acts as a tonic and vitalizer. An orator can say before an audience what he could not possibly have said before he went on the platform,justaswe canoftensayto afriendinanimatedconversationthings which we could not possibly say when alone. As when two chemicals are united, a new substance is formed from the combination which did not exist in either alone, he feels surging through his brain the combined force of his audience, which he calls inspiration, a mighty power which did not exist in his own personality. 
Actors tell us that there is an indescribable inspiration which comes from the orchestra, the footlights, the audience, which it is impossible to feel at a cold mechanical rehearsal. There is something in a great sea of expectant faces which awakens the ambition and arouses the reserve of power which can never be felt except before an audience. The power was there just the samebefore, but itwas not aroused. 
In the presence of a great orator, the audience is absolutely in his power. They laugh or cry as he pleases, or rise and fall at his bidding, until he releases them fromthemagicspell. 
What is oratory but to stir the blood of all hearers, to so arouse their emotionsthattheycannot controlthemselvesamomentlongerwithout taking the action to which theyareimpelled? 
"His words are laws" may: be well said of the statesman whose orations swaytheworld. Whatartisgreaterthanthatof changingtheminds ofmen? 
WendellPhillipssoplayedupontheemotions,so changedthe convictions of Southerners who hated him, but who were curious to listen to his oratory, that for the time being he almost persuaded them that they were in the wrong. I have seen him when it seemed to me that he was almost godlike in his power. With the ease of a master he swayed his audience. Some who hated him intheslavery dayswere there, and they could not resist cheeringhim. 
When James Russell Lowell was a student, said Wetmore Story, he and Story went to Faneuil Hall to hear Webster. They meant to hoot him for his remainingin Tyler'scabinet. Itwouldbeeasy,theyreasoned,to getthethree thousandpeople to jointhem. Whenhe began,Lowellturnedpale, andStory livid. His great eyes, they thought, were fixed on them. His opening words changed theirscorntoadmiration,and theircontempttorespect. 
"He gave us a glimpse into the Holy of Holies," said another student, in relatinghisexperiencein -listening toa greatpreacher. 
15 

WHAT A GOOD APPEARANCE WILL DO 
Theappareloftproclaims theman. SHAKESPEARE. 
As a general thing an individual who is neat in his person is neat in his morals.-H. W. SHAW. 
THERE are two chief factors in good appearance; cleanliness of body and comeliness of attire. Usually these go together, neatness of attire indicating a sanitary care of the person, while outward slovenliness suggests a carelessness of appearance that probably goes deeper than the clothes coveringthebody. 
We express ourselves first of all in our bodies. The outer condition of the body is accepted as the symbol of the inner. If it is unlovely, or repulsive, throughsheerneglector indifference,weconclude that the mind corresponds with it. As a rule, the conclusion is a just one. High ideals and strong, clean, wholesome lives and work are incompatible with low standards of personal cleanliness. A young man who neglects his bath will neglect his mind;hewillquicklydeterioratein every way. A young woman who ceases to care for her appearance in minutest detail will soon cease to please. She willfalllittlebylittle untilshe degenerates intoanambitionlessslattern. 
Itis not to be wondered at that the Talmud places cleanliness next to godliness. I should place it nearer still, for I believe that absolute cleanliness is godliness. Cleanliness or purity of soul and body raises man to the highest estate. Without this he is nothing but a brute. There is a very close connection between a fine, strong, clean physique and a fine, strong, clean character. A man who allows himself to become careless in regard to the one will,inspiteofhimself,fall awayin theother. 
But self-interest clamors as loudly as esthetic or moral considerations for the fulfillment of the laws of cleanliness. Every day we see people receiving "demerits" for failure to live up to them. I can recall instances of capable stenographers who forfeited their positions because they did not keep their finger nails clean. An honest, intelligent man whom I know lost his place in a large publishing firm because he was careless about shaving and caring for his teeth. Not very long since a lady remarked that she went into a store to buy some ribbons, but when she saw the salesgirl's hands she changed her mind and made her purchase elsewhere. "Dainty ribbons," she said, "could not be handled by such soiled fingers without losing some of their freshness." Of course, it will not be long until that girl's employer will discover that she is not advancing his business, and then, well, the law will workinexorably. 
The first point to be emphasized in the making of a good appearance is the necessity of frequent bathing. A daily bath insures a clean, wholesome conditionof theskin,withoutwhichhealthisimpossible. 
Next in importance to the bath is the proper care of the hair, the hands, and the teeth. This requires little more than a small amount of time and the use of soap and water. 
Manicure sets are so cheap that they are within the reach of almost everyone. If you cannot afford to buy a whole set, you can buy a file and keepyour nails smoothand clean. 
Keeping the teeth in good condition is a very simple matter, yet perhaps more people sin in this particular point of cleanliness than in any other. I know young men, and young women, too, who dress very well and seem to take considerable pride in their personal appearance, yet neglect their teeth. They do not realize that there could hardly be a worse blot on one's appearance than dirty or decaying teeth, or the absence of one or two in front. Nothingcan be more offensivein man or woman than a foulbreath, and no one can have neglected teeth without reaping this consequence. No employer wants a clerk, or stenographer, whose appearance is marred by a lackof oneortwofront teeth. Manyanapplicant hasbeen deniedtheposition hesoughtbecause ofbad teeth. 
Forthosewhohavetomaketheirwayinthe world, the bestcounselonthe subject of clothes may be summed up in this short sentence, "Let thy attire be comely, but not costly." Simplicity in dress is its greatest charm, and in these days, when there is such an infinite variety of tasteful but inexpensive fabrics to choose from, the majority can afford to be well dressed. But no one need blushforashabbysuit,ifcircumstancespreventhishavingabetterone. You will be more respected by yourself and everyone else with an old coat on your back that has been paid for than a new one that has not. It is not the shabbiness thatis unavoidable, but the slovenliness thatis avoidable, that the world frowns upon. If you are dressed according to your means, no matter how poorly, you are appropriately dressed. The consciousness of making the best appearance you possibly can, of always being scrupulously neat and clean, and of maintaining your self-respect and integrity at all costs, will sustain you under the most adverse circumstances, and give you a dignity, strength, and magnetic forcefulness that will command the respect and admirationof others. 
Herbert H. Vreeland, who rose in a short time from a section hand on the Long Island Railroad to the presidency of all the surface railways in New York City, in the course of an address on how to attain success, said: "Clothes don'tmake the man,butgoodclothes have got many a man a good job. If you have twenty-five dollars, and want a job, it is better to spend twenty dollars for a suit of clothes, four dollars for shoes, and the rest for a shave, a hair-cut, and a clean collar, and walk to the place, than go with the moneyinthepocketsofa dingysuit." 
Mostlargebusinesshousesmakeita rulenottoemployanyone wholooks seedy, or slovenly, or who does not make a good appearance when he applies for a position. The man who hires all the salespeople for one of the largest retail stores in Chicago says: "While the routine of application is in every case strictly adhered to, the fact remains that the most important element inanapplicant's chance for atrialishispersonality." 
It does not matter how much merit or ability an applicant for a position may possess, he cannot afford to be careless of his personal appearance. Diamonds in the rough of infinitely greater value than the polished glass of some of those who get positions may, occasionally, be rejected. Applicants whose good appearance helped them to secure a place may often be very superficial in comparison with some who were rejected in their favor; but having secured it, they may keep it, though not possessing half the ability of themanor woman whowasturnedaway. 
Thatthesamerule thatgovernsemployersin Americaholdsin England, is evidenced by the" London Draper's Record." It says:-"Wherever a marked personal care is exhibited for the cleanliness of the person and for neatness in dress, there is also almost always found extra carefulness as regards the finish of work done. Work people whose personal habits are slovenly produce slovenly work; those who are careful of their own appearance are equally careful of the looks of the work they turn out. And probably what is trueoftheworkroom is equally true of the region behindthe counter. Is it not a fact that the smart saleswoman is usually rather particular about her dress, is averse to wearing dingy collars, frayed cuffs, and faded ties? The truth of the matterseems to be thatextracareasregards personalhabits andgeneral appearance is, as a rule, indicative of a certain alertness of mind, which showsitselfantagonistic to slovenlinessof allkind." 
No young man or woman who wishes to retain that most potent factor of the successful life, self-respect, can afford to be negligent in the matter of dress, for" the character is subdued to what it is clothed in." As the consciousness of being well dressed tends to grace and ease of manner, so shabby, ill-fitting, or soiled attire makes one feel awkward and constrained, lacking in dignity and importance. Our clothes unmistakably affect our feelings andself-respect,as anyoneknows whohasexperiencedthe sensation and who has not? that comes from being attired in new and becoming raiment. Poor, ill-fitting, or soiled garments are detrimental to morals and manners. "Theconsciousnessof cleanlinen," saysElizabethStuart Phelps, "is in and of itself a source of moral strength, second only to that of a clean conscience. A well ironed collar or a fresh glove has carried many a man throughanemergencyinwhicha wrinkleora rip wouldhavedefeatedhim." The importance of attending to little details the perfection of which really constitutes the well-dressed man or woman is well illustrated by this story of a young woman's failure to secure a desirable position. One of those large-souled women of wealth, in which our generation is rich, had established an industrial school for girls in which they received a good English education and were trained to be self-supporting. She needed the services of a superintendent and teacher, and considered herself fortunate when the trustees of the institution recommended to her a young woman whose tact, knowledge,perfectmanners,and general fitness for the position they extolled in the highest terms. The young woman was invited by the founder of the school to call on her at once. Apparently she possessed all the required qualifications; and yet, without assigning any reason, Mrs. V. absolutely refusedto givehera trial. Longafterward, whenquestionedbya friend asto the cause of her seemingly inexplicable conduct in refusing to engage so competent a teacher, she replied: "It was a trifle, but a trifle in which, as in an Egyptian hieroglyphic, lay a volume of meaning. The young woman came to me fashionably and expensively dressed, but with torn and soiled gloves, and half of the buttons off her shoes. A slovenly woman is not a fit guidefor any young girl." Probablythe applicantnever knew why she did not obtain the position, for she was undoubtedly well qualified to fill it in every respect, except in this seemingly unimportant matter of attention to the little details of dress. 
From every point of view it pays well to dress well. The knowledge that wearebecominglyclothedactslikeamentaltonic. Veryfew men or women are so strong and so perfectly poised as to be unaffected by their surroundings. Ifyou lie aroundhalf-dressed, without makingyour toilet, and with your room all in disorder, taking it easy because you do not expect or wish to see anybody, you will find yourself very quickly taking on the mood of your attire and environment. Your mind will slip down; it will refuse to exert itself; it will become as slovenly, slipshod, and inactive as your body. On the otherhand,if,whenyouhavean attack ofthe "blues," when you feel half sick and not able to work, instead of lying around the house in your old wrapper or dressing gown, you take a good bath, a Turkish bath, if you can afford it, put on your best clothes, and make your toilet as carefully as if you were going to a fashionable reception, you will feel like a new person. Nine times out of ten before you have finished dressing your " blues" and your half-sickfeelingwillhavevanished likeabad dream,andyourwholeoutlook on lifewill havechanged. 
By emphasizing the importance of dress I do not mean that you should be like Beau Brummel, the English fop, who spent four thousand dollars a year at his tailor’s alone, and who used to take hours to tie his cravat. An undue love of dress is worse than a total disregard of it, and they love dress too much who, like Beau Brummel, devote most of their chief object in life to the neglect of their most sacred duty to themselves and others, or who, like Beau Brummel, devote most of their waking hours to its study. But I do claim, in view of its effect on ourselves and on those with whom we come in contact, that it is a duty, as well as the truest economy, to dress as well and becominglyasourpositionrequiresandourmeanswillallow. 
Many young men and women make the mistake of thinking that "well dressed" necessarily means being expensively dressed, and, with this erroneous idea in mind, they fall into as great a pitfall as those who think clothes are of no importance. They devote the time that should be given to the culture of head and heart to studying their toilets, and planning how they can buy, out of their limited salaries, this or that expensive hat, or tie, or coat, which they see exhibited in some fashionable store. If they cannot by any possibility afford the coveted article, they buy some cheap, tawdry imitation, the effect of which is only to make them look ridiculous. Young men ofthis stamp wear cheap rings,vermiliontintedties,andbroadchecks, and almost invariably they occupy cheap positions. Like the dandy, whom Carlyle describes as "a clothes-wearing man, a man whose trade, office, and existence consists in the wearing of clothes, every faculty of whose soul, spirit, person, and purse is heroically consecrated to this One object," they live to dress, and have no time to devote to self-culture or to fitting themselvesforhigherpositions. 
The overdressed young woman is merely the feminine of the overdressed young man. The manners of both seem to have a subtle connection with their clothes. They are loud, flashy, vulgar. Their style of dress bespeaks a type of character even more objectionable than that of the slovenly, untidily dressed person. The world accepts the truth announced by Shakespeare that "the apparel oft proclaims the man"; and the man and the woman, too, are frequently condemned by the very garb which they think makes them so irresistible. At first sight, it may seem hasty or superficial to judge men or women by their clothes, but experience has proved, again and again, that they do, as a rule, measure the sense and self-respect of the wearer; and aspirants to success should be as careful in choosing their dress as their companions. 
The old adage: "Tell me thy company and I will tell thee what thou art," is offset by this wise saying of some philosopher of the commonplace: "Show me all' the dresses a woman has worn in the course of her life, and I will writeyou herbiography." 
"How exquisitely absurd it is," says Sydney Smith, "to teach a girl that beauty is of no value, dress of no use. Beauty is of value. Her whole prospect and happiness in life may often depend upon a new gown or a becoming bonnet. If she has five grains of common sense, she will find this out. Thegreatthingis to teach hertheir propervalue." 
It is true that clothes do not make the man, but they have a much larger influence on man's life than we are wont to attribute to them. Prentice Mulford declares dress to be one of the avenues for the spiritualization of the race. This is not an extravagant statement, when we remember what an effect clothes have in inciting to personal cleanliness. Let a woman, for instance, don an old soiled or worn wrapper, and it will have the effect of making her indifferent as to whether her hair is frowsy or in curl papers. It does not matter whetherher face andhands are clean or not, or what sort of slipshod shoes she wears, for "anything," she argues, "is good enough to go with this old wrapper." Her walk, her manner, the general trend of her feelings, will in some subtle way be dominated by the old wrapper. Suppose she changes, puts on a dainty muslin garment instead; how different her looks and acts! Her hair must be becomingly arranged, so as not to be at odds with her dress. Her face and hands and finger nails must be spotless as the muslin which surrounds them. The down-at-heel old shoes are exchanged for suitable slippers. Her mind runs along new channels. She has much more respect for the wearer of the new, clean wrapper than for the wearer of the old, soiled one. "Would you change the current of your thoughts? Change your raiment, and youwillat once feelthe effect." Evenso greatan authority as Buffon, the naturalist and philosopher, testifies to the influence of dress on thought. He declared himself utterly incapable of thinking to good purpose except in full court dress. This he always put on before entering his study, not even omitting his sword. 
There issomethingabout ill-fitting, unbecoming,orshabby apparel which not only robs one of self-respect, but also of comfort and power. Good clothes give ease of manner, and make one talk well. The' consciousness of being well dressed gives a grace and ease of manner that even religion will notbestow,whileinferiorityof garbofteninducesrestraint. 
One cannot but feel that God is a lover of appropriate dress. He has put robes of beauty and glory upon all His works. Every flower is dressed in richness;everyfield blushesbeneatha mantleof beauty; every star is veiled in brightness; every bird is clothed in the habiliments of the most exquisite taste. And surely He is pleased when we provide a beautiful setting for the greatestofHishandiworks. 
16 

SELF-RELIANCE 
A normal person is capable of independence and self-reliance, yet comparatively few people ever develop their ability to stand alone. It is so much easier to lean, to trail, to follow somebody else, to let others do the thinkingandtheplanningand the work. 
One of the worst faults of the typical American is that, if he does not possess commanding talents in some particular direction, he usually does not thinkitworthwhiletomakethemostof whathe has. 
Do not think that, just because you are not a born leader, you are a born leaner. Because you have no great commanding qualities of leadership is no reasonwhyyoushouldnotcultivatethelittleyouhave. Wenever know what resources or possibilities of strength are ours until we put our powers to the test. Many a man has proved himself a great leader who did not seem to be sonaturally whoshowedat firstverylittleevidenceofself-reliance. 
Leaders do not copy. They do not reflect the opinion of the majority. They think. Theycreate. Theymaketheirownprogramandcarryit out. 
How few people stand for anything in particular! The majority of mankind are merely so many individuals in the census; they help make a little larger crowd; but how few men stand above or beyond their fellows and areself-sufficient! 
Almost everybody you see is leaning on something or somebody. Some lean on their money, some on their friends; some depend upon their clothes, their pedigree, their social standing; but how seldom we see a man who stands fair and square on his own feet; who goes through life on his own merits, andisself-reliantandresourceful. 
In later life we never quite forgive those who have allowed us to lean upon them,for weknowthatit hasdeprivedus of ourbirthright. 
A child is not satisfied when his father shows him how to do a certain thing. But watch the exultant expression on his face when by actually doing it he has conquered the thing himself. This new sense of conquest is an added power whichincreasesself-confidence andself-respect. 
A college education does not develop the practical faculties. It merely furnishes the workman with his tools. He must learn by practise how to wield them skillfully. It is the school of "hard knocks" that develops character and brings out thesuccess materialina man. 
Henry WardBeecherusedto tellthefollowingstoryofhowhe wastaught, whenaboy, todependon himself: 
"Iwas sent to the blackboard,and went,uncertain,fullofwhimpering. 
"'That lesson must be learned,' said my teacher, in a quiet tone, but with terrible intensity. All explanations and excuses he trod under foot with utter scornfulness. 'I want that problem; I don't want any reason why you haven't it,'he wouldsay. 
"'Ididstudytwohours.' 
"'That's nothing to me; I want the lesson. You need not study it at all, or you may studyit, tenhours,justtosuityourself. Iwantthelesson.' 
"It was tough for a green boy, but it seasoned me. In less than a month, I had the mostintensesenseofintellectualindependence andcourageto defend myrecitations. 
"One day his cold, calm voice fell upon me in the midst of a demonstration, 'No "I hesitated, and then went back to the beginning; and, when I reached the same point again, 'No!' uttered in a tone of conviction, barredmyprogress. 
"Thenext!'I sat downin red confusion. "He, too, was stopped with'No!' but went right on, and finished; and, 'as he sat down, was rewarded with ' Verywell.'",Why,'whimperedI, 'Ireciteditjust as he did, and you said" No! " , " 'Why didn't you say "Yes," and stick to it? "It is not enough to know your lesson; you must know that you know it. You have learned nothinguntilyouaresure. If alltheworldsays "No," yourbusinessis to say "Yes," and proveit.'" 
The greatest service a teacher can render a pupil is to train him to depend uponhimself,to trustto his own powers. Ifthe youthdoes not practise self­reliance,the man will beaweakling,a failure. 
One of the greatest delusions that a human being could ever have is that he is permanentlybenefitedby continued assistance fromothers. 
Power is the goal of every worthy ambition, and only weakness comes from imitation or dependence on others. Power is self-developed, self-generated. We cannot increase the strength of our muscles by sitting in a gymnasium and letting another exercise for us. Nothing else so destroys the power to stand alone as the habit of leaning upon others. If you lean, you will never be strong or original. Stand alone or bury your ambition to be somebody in the world. The man who tries to give his children a start in the world so that they will not have to struggle as hard as he had to, is unknowingly bringing disaster upon them. What he calls giving them a start will probably give them a setback in the world. Young people need all the motive power they can get. They are naturally leaners, imitators, copiers, and it is easy for them to develop into echoes, imitations. They will not walk alone while you furnish crutches; they will lean upon you just as long as you will let them. 
It is self-help, not pulls or influence, self-reliance, not leaning upon others, that develops staminaandstrength. 
"Hewhositson thecushionofadvantagegoestosleep," saidEmerson. 
Whatisthere so paralyzing to strenuous endeavor, so fatal to self-exertion, to self-help, as to be helped, as to feel that there is no necessity for exertion becausesomebodyelse hasdone everythingforus! 
"Oneofthe mostdisgustingsights intheworldisthatofayoung manwith healthy blood, broad shoulders, a presentable pair of calves, and one hundredand fiftypounds more or less ofbone and muscle,standing withhis handsin his pockets longing for help." 
Did you ever think how many of the people you know are just waiting for something? Many of them do not know just what; but they are waiting for something. They have an indefinite idea that somehow something is coming to them, that there will be some fortunate conjunction of circumstances, or something willhappen which will make an openingfor them, or someone will help them, so that without very great education or preparation or capital, they can get astart forthemselves,or get aheadsome way. 
Some are waiting for money which may come from a father's fortune, from a rich uncle, or some other distant relative. Others are waiting for that mysterioussomethingcalled "luck," a"pull” or a"boost" to helpthem. 
I have never known a person who had thishabit of waiting for help, or for somebody to give him a boost, of waiting for somebody's money, or for assistance of any kind, or for luck to come to him, that never really amountedto much. 
It is the man who strips himself of every prop, who throws away his crutches, burns his bridges behind him, and depends upon himself, that wins. Self-reliance is the key that opens the door to achievement. Self-reliance is theunfolderof power. 
There is nothing that will so undermine self-confidence, which is the very foundation stone of all achievement, as the habit of expecting help from others. 
A man at the head of a large company recently said that he was trying to place his son in another business house, where he would get hard knocks. He did not want him to start with him because he was afraid he might lean on him or expect favors. 
Boyswho arepamperedby theirfathers,allowedtocome to business at all sortsof hours,to leavewhen they please, and to remain away when they feel like it,rarelyamount to much. Itisthe development of self-reliance that gives strengthandconfidence. Dependingon oneselfiswhatdevelopsthepowerof achievement,theabilityto dothings. 
It is a dangerous thing to put a boy where he can lean on his father or expect favors. It is a difficult thing to learn to swim in shallow water, where one knowshe cantouchbottom. Aboy willlearna greatdeal quicker where thewateris over his head, where he is compelledto swim or sink. When he has cut off all chances for retreat he will reach the shore safely. It is human nature to lean when possible, not to do a thing until we feel the spur of necessity. Itisthe "must" inourlivesthatbringsoutthebestthingin us. 
This is why boys who never amount to much at home, when they are always helped by their fathers, often develop marvelous ability in a very short time when they are thrown upon their own resources, when they are obligedtodo, or bearthe disgraceof failure. 
The moment you give up trying to get help from others, and become independent and self-reliant, you will start on the road to success. The moment you throw overboard all help outside of yourself, you will develop strengthyou neverbefore realizedyoupossessed. 
There is nothing so valuable in this world as your own self-respect; and you cannot keep this if you go from one person to another trying to get help. You will be an infinitely stronger man or woman if you will just make up your mind that you are going to rely upon yourself, that you will put yourself inapositionofindependence. 
Outsidehelpmayseem to youa blessingattimes;butitisusuallyacurse because of its crippling power. People who give you money are not your best friends. Your friends are those who urge you, who force you to depend uponyourself,to helpyourself. 
There are plenty of people older than you are, with only one leg or one arm, who manage to earn a living, while you who are healthy and physically able to work are looking to others for assistance. No able-bodied person can feel that he is quite a man while he is dependent. When one has a trade, a profession, or some kind of occupation which makes him absolutely independent, he feels a sense of added power, resourcefulness, completeness, which nothing else can give. Responsibility discovers ability. Manyayouthdiscovershimselfforthefirst time whenhe goesinto business for himself. He might have worked for years for somebody else without ever findinghimself. 
It is not possible to develop one's utmost possibilities while working for somebodyelse. 
There is not the motive, the same reach of ambition or enthusiasm. No matter how conscientious to duty, there is not the same stimulus or incentive to bring out the possible man that God intended. The best in a man is his independence, his self-reliance, his originality, and these will never reach their highest expression under service to somebody else while human nature remains whatitisnow. 
It does not take a great amount of skill, a long experience in seamanship, to steer a ship in a calm. It is when the ocean is lashed into fury by the tempest; it is when the ship is plowing through the trough of the sea which threatens to engulf it; when everybody else is terrified; when there is a panic on board among the passengers and when the crew is in mutiny, that the captain'sseamanshipistested. 
It is only when the brain is tested to its utmost, when every bit of ingenuity and sagacity a young man possesses must come to the rescue of a possible failure, that he will develop his greatest strength. It takes months and years of effort to stretch small capital over a larger business without disaster. Itistheperpetualstruggleto keepupappearances,togetandtohold customers,that will call outthe reservein a young man. It is when money is scarce and business dull, and living high, that the real man is making his greatest progress. Where there is no struggle, there is no growth, no character. 
What are the chances of a youth developing his own innate resources who knows he has money enough to buy his" education" and need not work for it, and who pays a tutor to help him cram for examinations? What are the chances of his buckling down to hard study, working nights and parts of holidays,ofseizingeveryspareminuteforself-betterment,self-improvement, in the same way as the boy who knows he will not have a dollar which he does not earn, who knows there is no rich father or uncle or generous friend backinghim? 
How can a boy develop any self-reliance or independent manliness by having somebody else do practically everything for him? It is the exercise of a faculty that makes It strong. It is the struggle to attain that brings out the stamina. 
I do not believe it is possible for a man to put forth the same amount of exertion,to strugglewiththe same exasperationofpurpose as when he feels that all outside help has been cut off; that he must stand or fall by his own exertion; that hemust makehis own wayinthe world or beartheignominy of failure. 
There is something about the situation of being thrown absolutely upon one's own resources, with no possibility of outside help, that calls out the greatest, grandest thing in a man, that brings out the last reserve of effort, just as a mighty emergency,a great fire or other catastrophe calls out powers which the victim never before dreamed he possessed. Power from somewhere has come to his relief. He feels himself a giant, doing things which were impossible for him just before the emergency. But now his life is in peril. The wrecked car in which he is imprisoned may take fire, orhe maydrown if he clings to the wrecked ship. Something must be done instantly; and, like the invalid mother who sees her child in peril, the power, the force, which comesonlyinsheerdesperation,rushestohim andhe feels astrength which he never beforefelt aidinghimtoescape. 
Man has always remained close to the brute where he has not had to struggle to supply his necessities. Want has ever been the great developer of the race. Necessity has been the spur which has whipped man up from the Hottentot to the highest civilization. Inventors, with pinched, hungry faces of childrenstaringthem in the face, havereachedintothedepthsof their being and laid hold of powers which wrought miracles. Oh, what has not been achieved under the pressure of want, of stern necessity! We never know what is in us until we are put to the test, until some great crisis uncovers the hidden power which lies so deep in our beings that no ordinary occasion can call it out. It responds only in emergencies, in desperation, because we do not know how to reach deep enough in the great within of ourselves to lay holdofit. 
A boy once told his father he had seen a woodchuck up a tree. His father said that that was impossible, for woodchucks did not climb trees. The boy insisted that a dog got between the woodchuck and his hole and he just had to climb the tree. Therewasno other wayoutofit. 
Wedo "impossible" thingsinlifesimplybecausewe have to. 
Self-reliance has been the best substitute for friends, influence, capital, a pedigree, or assistance. It has mastered more obstacles, overcome more difficulties, carried through more enterprises, perfected more inventions, than any other humanquality. 
The man who can stand alone, who is not afraid of difficulties, who does nothesitate before obstacles, the man whobelieves in his own inherent power todo things heis theman who will win. 
One reason why so many people carry such little weight in the world is because they are afraid to do things or to have convictions. They do not dare to do their own thinking, or to be positive. They must trim a little here and a little there so as not to antagonize. They put out feelers to see how you stand andwhetheryou agreewiththembeforetheydareassertwhattheythink,and thentheiropinionis merelya modificationof yourown. 
There is something in human nature which loves the genuine, the true, the man who has an opinion of his own and dares to assert it, who has a creed and dares tolive it,whohasconvictionsanddares tostandbythem. 
We only feel contempt for the man who does not dare to show himself, to express his opinion until he knows ours, for fear he may run counter to them or offend us. The man we respect and would imitate is he who fixes his aim beyond the range of the narrow vision of those about him, who has the courageandgritto standforthanddo hisdutyregardless ofcriticism. Sucha man is not disheartened because he is not understood, for he knows that it is only the long-sighted who can see his target, that if he takes a long range his object mustinvariably beinvisibleto mostofthoseabouthim. 
There is a powerful tonic in holding the conviction that you are in the world for a purpose, that you are there to help, that you have a part to perform which no one else can take for you, because everyone else has his own part to fill in the great life drama. If you do not act your role, there will be something lacking, a want in the production. No one ever amounts to much until he feels this pressure that he was made to accomplish a certain thing in the world, to fit a definite part. Then life seems to take on a new meaning. 
17 

MENTAL FRIENDSAND FOES 
We can make our minds art galleries of beauty or chambers of horror; we can furnishthemwithanythingwe please. 
WETHINKin mentalimages. 
They alwaysprecede the physical realities. The mental pictures are copied into the life, etched upon the character. The whole physical economy is constantly translating these images, these mental pictures, into life, into the character. 
A thousand times better allow thieves to enter your home and steal your most valuable treasures, to rob you of money or property, than to allow the enemiesofyoursuccessandhappiness discordantthoughts,diseasethoughts, sick thoughts, morbid thoughts, jealous thoughts to enter your mind and steal your comfort, rob you of that peace and serenity without which life is a livingtomb. 
Whatever you do or do not do for a living, resolve that no morbid, discordant, sick thoughts shall get access to your mind. Everything depends upon keeping your mental faculties clear and clean. Keep the holy shrine of yourmind, God'stemple, pureand freefromallyour thoughtenemies. 
A discordant thought, a morbid mood, when once harbored, breeds more discordant thoughts and more morbid moods. The moment you harbor the one or the other it will begin to multiply a thousandfold, and grow more formidable. Do not have anything to do with discord or error, or the brood of morbid moods. They spoil everything they touch. They leave their wretched impression on everything. They rob one of hope, happiness, and efficiency. Tear down all these sable pictures from your mind, all the black images. Dispel them. They only mean mischief, failure, paralysis of ambition,andthedeathof hope. 
We must stand 'on guard at the door of our thoughts; keep out all the enemies of our happiness and achievement. We have no real enemies except those which live in our own minds, which are generated by our own passion, prejudice,andselfishness. 
Wearesoconstitutedthatwemustdoright,we mustgo straight,wemust be clean and pure and true and unselfish, magnanimous and charitable and loving, or we cannot be really healthy, successful, or happy. Perfect harmony ofmindandbodymeansa cleanmentality. 
What a tremendous amount of wear and tear, wrenching, rasping, aging friction we could prevent, if we had only been taught as children always to shut the doors of our minds to all tearing down, destructive enemy thoughts, and to hold in the mind ideas that uplift and encourage, that cheer, gladden, and refreshen, encourage and give hope! I have known instances where a fit of the "blues," depressing, gloomy, melancholy thoughts, sapped the life of morevitalityandenergyin afew hoursthanweeks ofhardworkwouldhave takenoutoftheman. 
We sometimes see the power of thought strikingly illustrated when a great sorrow or a disappointment or a heavy financial loss in a short time so changes the personal appearance of a man that his friends scarcely recognize him. The cruel thought bleaches the hair and seems to laugh demoniacallyfromthewrinklesit hasmadein theface. 
What fearful havoc jealousy will make in a life within a few days or weeks. How it ruins the digestion, dries up the very source of life, whittles down the vitality, and warps the judgment. It poisons the very centers of life. 
It ispitifulto see the wreckageof hopes and happiness and ambition in a life after hurricanesof passionhavesweptthroughthementalkingdom. 
If thechildwereproperlytrainedintheartofthinking,whataneasything it wouldbe forthe grown personto avoid all this tobring beauty, poise, and serenity to the mind, instead of the desolation wrought by the enemy thoughts,the thieves of joy, the burglarsofhappinessand contentment. 
Why do we learn so quickly that on the physical plane hot things burn. us, that sharp tools cut us, that bruises make us suffer, and endeavor to avoid the things which give pain and to use and enjoy the things that give pleasure and comfort, while in the mental realm we are constantly burning ourselves, gashing ourselves, poisoning our brain, our blood, our secretions with deadly, destructive thoughts? How we suffer from these thought lacerations, these mental bruises, these burnings of passion; and yet we do not learn to excludethe causesof all this suffering. 
It was not intended that man should suffer, but that he should rejoice, and foreverbehappy,buoyant,andglad. Itis the pervertedthoughthabitthathas deterioratedthe race. 
Everybody ought to be happier than the happiest of us. This was the Divine plan. We might as well say that the maker of the most perfect watch that was ever constructed planned for and intended' a certain amount of friction and imperfection, as that the Creator who ,I doeth all things well" intended thatmanshouldhavemoreor lesssuffering. 
To get rid of our thought enemies requires constant, systematic, persistent effort. We cannot accomplish anything else worthwhile without energy and determination, and how can we expect to keep the enemies of our peace and prosperity out of the mind without energetically resisting them, driving themout ofconsciousness,lockingthedoorof the mind againstthem? 
We do not seem to have any trouble in keeping personal enemies out of the home, people we dislike very much, people who injure us and lie about us;why can'twe keep out of the reception rooms of the mind the enemies of ourthought? 
Ifwe walkbarefootin the country we learn to avoidthe sharp stones and briers which would lacerate our feet. It is not difficult to learn to avoid the thoughts which hurt us, which lacerate us and leave ugly scars, the hate thoughts, jealous, selfish thoughts, which leave us bleeding and suffering. It is not a deep problem; it is only a question of keeping out of the mind its enemies, and entertainingitsfriends. 
Somethoughts sendhopeandjoy,gladnessand encouragement,bounding through the whole system; others restrict, repress all hope, joy, and contentment. 
Think of the possibilitiesfor happiness,prosperity,and long life could we allkeepin the mind strong, vigorous, resourceful, productivethoughts! 
It is impossible to entertain the thought of discord while the mind is dwelling upon harmony; of ugliness while beauty is reflected in the mental 
mirror; or of sorrow while joy and gladness predominate. Sadness and melancholy cannot outpicture themselves upon the body when good cheer, hope,andjoylive inthemind. 
If you persistently keep these enemy thoughts fear thoughts, anxious thoughts, disease thoughts, sick thoughts out of your mind a while, they will leave you forever; but if you entertain them, nourish them, they will keep returning for more nourishment, more encouragement. The way to do is to discourage them by dosing the door of your mind against them. Have nothing to do with them, drop them, forget them. When things have gone against you, do not say, "That is just my luck. I am always getting into trouble. Iknewitwouldbe just so. Italwaysis." Do notpityyourself. Itis a dangerous habit. It is not a very difficult art to learn to keep the mind slate clean; to erase unfortunate experiences, sad memories, recollections, memories which humiliate, pain us; to wipe them all out and keep a clean mentalslateso faras the pastisconcerned. 
You have no conception of the peace, comfort, and happiness that will come to you after vigorously making up your mind and persistently carrying out your resolution never again to have anything to do with the things which have kept you back, have crippled, cramped, strangled your efforts; the thingswhichhavepainedyou andmade you sufferbitterpangs. 
Have nothing more to do with your mistakes, short-comings. No matter how bitter they have been, blot them out, forget them, and resolve never againto harborthem. 
Of course, this cannot be done by a single act of the will; but by persistency and determination and watchfulness one can gradually clear his mind o{ most of his enemies; and the best way to get unfortunate, bitter, cruel experiences out of the mind is to fill it with good things, bright, cheerful,hopefulthoughts. 
Ideas, thoughts, like everything else, attract what is akin to them. The thoughts which dominate in the mind will tend to drive out their opposites. Optimism will drive out pessimism. Cheerfulness will tend to drive out despondency; hope, discouragement. Fill the mind with the sunshine of love, and all hatred and jealousy will flee. These black shadows cannot live in love'ssunshine. 
Persistently keep the mind filled to overflowing with good thoughts, generous, magnanimous, charitable thoughts; love thoughts, truth thoughts, health thoughts, harmony thoughts,-and all the discordant thoughts will have to go. Two opposite thoughts cannot exist in the mind at the same moment. Truth thoughts are the antidote for error; harmony for discord; and good for evil. 
Most of us fail to appreciate the difference between the influence of diverse thoughts or suggestions. We all know how a cheerful, optimistic, encouraging idea gives a thrill of wellbeing, how it rejuvenates, re-creates. We feel its tingle to the tips of our fingers .. It permeates and quickens as an electric shock of joy and gladness; it brings with it fresh courage, hope, and a new lease of life. 
The man who can keep his thought right can substitute hope for despair, courage for timidity, decision and firmness for hesitancy, doubt, or uncertainty. The man who can keep out the enemies of his success by filling his mind with his friend thoughts, optimistic, courageous, hopeful thoughts, has a tremendous advantage over the one who is the victim of his moods, the slave of the "blues," discouragement, doubt. He can accomplish more withfive talentsthanthemanwhocannotmasterhis moodscanwithten. 
The value of our life output will depend very largely upon the degree with which we can keep ourselves in harmony and keep from our minds the multitude of enemies which kill initiative and neutralize efficiency through destructivefriction. 
You cannot affirm too often or too vigorously the idea that you were made in the image of perfection, love, beauty, and truth, made to express thesequalitiesand not their opposites. Say to yourself: "Every timean idea of hatred, malice, revenge, discouragement, or selfishness comes into my mind, I have done myself an injury. I have struck myself a blow that is fatal to my peace of mind, my happiness, my efficiency; all these enemy thoughts cripple my advance in life. I must destroy them immediately by neutralizing themwiththeir opposites." 
It does not matterwhetheritis fear,anxiety,worry,dread, jealousy, envy, selfishness; whatever can in any way mar the symmetry and beauty of life should beexpelledas afatalenemy. 
Acute worry, anxiety, jealousy, bad temper, nasty disposition, all these things are symptoms ofa diseasedmind, acuteor chronic. Anysortofdiscord orunhappinessis anevidencethatthereis somethingwronginsideofyou. 
The time will come when we shall realize that every fit of anger which racks and wrenches the delicate nervous system, every touch of the hatred and revenge thoughts, every vibration of selfishness and fear, .anxiety and worry even the temporary passing through the mind of a jarring or discordant thoughtwillleaveitsindeliblemarkin thelife andwillmarthecareer. 
When discordant from worry, anxiety, anger, revenge, or jealousy, you may know that these things drain your energy and waste your vitality at a fearful rate. These losses not only do no good, but grind away the delicate mental machinery, inducing premature age and shortening the life. Worry thoughts, fear thoughts, selfish thoughts are so many malignant forces within us, poisoning the blood and brain, destroying harmony and ruining efficiency, while the oppositethoughtsproducejusttheoppositeresult. They soothe instead of irritate, increase efficiency, multiply mental power. Five minutes of hot temper may make such a havoc in the delicate cell life of different parts of the body that it will take weeks or months to repair the injury, or it may never be repaired. Terror, horror, a great fear shock, have many a time permanently' whitened the coloring matter in the hair, and producedpermanentagingmarkson the face. 
When we realize, therefore, that these emotions and all forms of animal passion are debilitating, demoralizing, that they mar, scar, and make fearful havoc in the mental realm, and that their hideousness is outpictured in the body in pain and suffering, in corresponding ugliness and deformities, we shall learntoavoidthemaswe wouldavoidphysicalpestilence. 
It was not intended that man should suffer, but rejoice and forever be happy,buoyant,jubilant,andprosperous. It is the perverted thought habit that hasdeteriorated the race. 
All that seems discordant to us is but the absence of the divine harmony, just as darkness is not an entity in itself, but an absence of light. The time willcomewhendiscordwillbelost,neutralizedin harmony. 
Love, charity, benevolence, kindliness, good will towards others, all arouse the noblest feelings and sentiments within us. They are life-giving, uplifting. They make for health, harmony, power. They all tend to the normal,toputus in tunewiththe Infinite. 
If we can preserve the integrity of the mind and protect it from its enemies evil and vicious thoughts and imaginings we have solved the problem of scientific living. A well-trained mind is always able to furnish theharmoniousnote inany condition. 
Every man builds his own world, makes his own atmosphere. He can fill it with difficulties, fears, doubts, and despair and gloom, so that the whole life willbe influencedto gloom anddisaster; or he can keepthe atmosphere clear, transparent and sweet by dispelling every gloomy, envious, malicious thought. 
Hold the enduring, the immortal thought in the mind, and all discord will disappear. When the mind is held in the creative attitude, all that is minus, all that is negative the shadows and the .discords will flee. Darkness cannot live in the presence of sunlight;discord cannot dwell with harmony. Ifyou hold harmony persistently in the mind, discord cannot enter; if you cling to thetruth,errorwillflee. 
THEEND. 



TITLES AND AUTHORS 
TIMELESS WISDOM COLLECTION 
THE GREATEST SELF HELP, NEW THOUGHT, ECONOMY, PHILOSOPHY AND CLASSIC LITERATURE COLLECTION EVER AVAILABLE IN AMAZON AND SOON IN APPLE IBOOKS. 
Isn’t technology amazing? Now, with one click from your phone, tablet or computer, you can purchase any of the following books for just $.99 cents, and start reading right now. They are all from best-selling and influential authors;and wehave carefullychoseninterestingbooks. 
Clickinthenameoftheauthortogothelistof worksin thisbook. 
Clickinanybookname,andyouwillbe takento Amazon.com. 
Most titles are available worldwide, although, some are not available in certaincountriesduetolocal restrictions. 
If your title is not available for your country at Amazon.com, try Amazon.ca (Canada). 
Just change .com for .ca in the hyperlinks. 


SELF HELP AND PERSONAL DEVELOPMENT 
OrisonSweetMarden,William 
Walker 
Atkinson. 
Wallace 
Wattles, 
Napoleon 
Hill, 

Charles 
F. 
Haanel, 
Robert 
Collier, Prentice 
Mulford, Elizabeth 
Towne, William 
E. 
Towne,RussellH. 
Conwell. 
Frank 
Channing 
Haddock, 
Edmund 
Shatesbury, 
Brown 
Landone, 
Max 
FreedomLong, 
DavidBush, 


PSYCHOLOGY 
C. HarryBrooks,EmileCoue, 
AlfredAdler,Isador 
Coriat,Carl 
Jung 


CHRISTIAN MOTIVATIONAL/SELF HELP 
Ralph 
Waldo 
Trine, Christian 
D. 
Larson, Ernest 
Holmes, Fenwicke 
Holmes, Henry 
Wood, 
CharlesFillmore, HoratioW. 
Dresser,Henry 
Thomas 
Hambling, 
Charles 
Brodie 
Patterson, 
Bruce 
Maclelland, 
Genevieve 
Behrend, 
Thomas 
ParkerBoyd 


THEOSOPHY 
William 
Q. 
Judge, 
Annie 
Besant, 
Charles 
Leadbeater, 
A.P.Sinnett, 
Ernest 
Wood 


CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY 
Henry 
Ford,CharlesSchwab,AndrewCarnegie 


ECONOMY, PHILOSOPHY AND OTHERS 
FrancisM. Cornford,GeorgesPolti,John MaynardKeynes,BertrandRussell, J.W.Dunne 

NOVELS 
C.S.Lewis, H.G.Wells, 
Ernest 
Hemingway, George 
Orwell, Aldous 
Huxley, 
HughLofting,Malcolm 
Lowry, 
MauricioChaves 


ORISON SWETT MARDEN ORISON’S BEST SELLERS: 
He can whothinkshecan, 1909 
Character:thegrandestthingintheworld,1899 
ProsperityHowtoAttractIt.1922 Prosperidad:ComoAtraerla. 
(Español,2014) 

Masterful Personality 1923 
Howto GetWhatYou Want. 1917. 
TheSecretofAchievement. 1898. 
PushingtotheFront,1896 
AnIronWill,1901 

OTHER GREAT MOTIVATIONAL BOOKS (IN ALPHABETICAL ORDER) 
AmbitionandSuccess. 1919. AfterFailure,What? 1905-1921 BeGoodtoYourself. 1910. DoIt toa Finish. 1909 Economy. The self-denying depositor and prudent paymaster at the bank of 
thrift. 1901 
Everybody Ahead, Or getting themostout oflife 1916 
Every Mana KingorMightoverMind. 1906 
GettingOn,1910 
Love'sWay 1918 
MakingLifeamasterpiece,1917. Peace,Power, andPlenty.1909 Rising in the World or Architects of Fate or, Steps to Success and Power. 
1895 Self-Investment 1911 Success. ideas, helps and examples for all desiring to make the most of life 
1897 Successnuggets, 1906 TheHour ofOpportunity TheMiracleof RightThought 1910 TheOptimisticLifeor in The CheeringUpBusiness 1907 Thevictoriousattitude, 1916 Thrift 1918 

HEALTH 
Keeping Fit 1914 WhyGrowOld? 1909 

BUSINESS AND EFFICIENCY 
YoungManEnteringBusiness,1907 HintsforYoungWriters,1914 SellingThings, 1916 

BIOGRAPHY AND INTERVIEWS 
Howthey succeeded, 1901 TalkswithgreatWorkers,1901 

WOMAN AND FAMILY 
ThecrimeofSilence, 1915 Womanand Home, 1915 

COMING SOON 
ProgressiveBusinessMan,1913 ExceptionalEmployee,1913 TrainingforEfficiency,1913 Little visits withgreatAmericans, 1904 

WILLIAM WALKER ATKINSON THOUGHTS AND LAW OF ATTRACTION 
TheSecretofSuccessandthe LawofAttraction TheLaw ofAttractionintheThoughtWorldor ThoughtVibration The Law of New Thought: Form the Law of Attraction to the Soul’s 
Awakening DynamicThoughtortheLawofVibrant Energy. ThoughtsareThings(asEdwardWalker) ThoughtForceinBusinessandEverydayLife The MasterMind. TheKey To MentalPowerDevelopmentAndEfficiency The Inner Secret, or That Something Within. A story of enlightenment and 

initiation. 

NEW THOUGHT AND MODERN THOUGHT 
Nuggets ofNewThought: Several Thingsthathave helpedPeople NewThought,HistoryandPrinciples:TheMessageofNewThought TheCrucibleofModernThought 

PERSONAL MAGNETISM 
TheArtandScience ofPersonal Magnetism AdvancedCoursein PersonalMagnetism Personal Magnetism, Psychic Influence, Thought Force, Concentration, Will 
PowerAndPractical MentalScience. ASeries Of Lessons MentalFascination Mind-Power: The Law of Dynamic Mentation (The Secret of Mental Magic) 

SELF HEALING 
Self-Healing By ThoughtForce Mind 
andBodyor 
MentalStatesandPhysicalConditions 
Howto HealOneself andOthers. MentalTherapeutics. TheScienceof PsychicHealing TheYogi Philosophyof PhysicalWellBeing(HathaYoga) 

THE ARCANE 
TheArcaneTeaching 
TheArcaneFormulas 
TheArcaneIII. 
Vril. 
VitalMagnetism. 

TheArcaneIV. TheMystery ofSex orSex Polarity 
TheSecretDoctrineof theRosicrucians TheKybalion 

HINDU AND ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 
FourteenLessons In YogiPhilosophyAndOrientalOccultism AdvancedCourse In Yogi PhilosophyAndOrientalOccultism TheInnerTeachings Of The Philosophies AndReligionsOfIndia TheSpirit Of TheUpanishads. TheAphorisms Of TheWise TheBhagavadGita The Life Beyond Death. The Journey of Transformation From “Death” To 
TheAstral PlanesToRebirthAndBeyond 

NEW PSYCHOLOGY 
TheNewPsychology:ItsMessage,PrinciplesandPractice 
TheArtofLogicalThinking 
TheArtofExpression 
orPrinciplesofDiscourse 
Memory Culture:TheScienceofObserving,Rememberingand Recalling Your MindandHowtoUseIt TheWill,ItsNature, PowerandDevelopment. The Mastery of Being. A Study of the Ultimate Principle of 
Reality,and 
The 
Practical 
Application 
Thereof. 
TheSubconscious 
And 
TheSuperconscious 
PlanesOfMind. 
Telepathy,ItsTheory, 
FactsandProof 

PERSONAL POWER SERIES (12 VOLUMES) 
VolumeI. PERSONALPOWERORYOURMASTERSELF VolumeII. CREATIVEPOWER OR YOURCONSTRUCTIVEFORCES VolumeIII. DESIREPOWER OR YOUR ENERGIZINGFORCES VolumeIV. FAITHPOWER OR YOURINSPIRATIONALFORCES VolumeV. WILLPOWER OR YOUR DYNAMICFORCES VolumeVI. SUBCONSCIOUS POWER OR YOURSECRETFORCES 
VolumeVII. SPIRITUALPOWEROR THE INFINITEFOUNT 
VolumeVIII. THOUGHT POWER OR RADIO-MENTALISM VolumeIX. PERCEPTIVEPOWER OR THEARTOFOBSERVATION VolumeX. REASONINGPOWER OR PRACTICALLOGIC VolumeXI. CHARACTERPOWER OR POSITIVE INDIVIDUALITY VolumeXII. REGENERATIVEPOWER OR VITALREJUVENATION 

WALLACE WATTLES 
SUCCESS 
The Science of Getting Rich (also published as Financial Success Through CreativeThought) LaCienciadeHacerseRico(Spanish) 
TheScienceof BeingGreat La 
Ciencia 
de 
Ser 
Extraordinario 
(Español) 
Makingthemanwhocan(publishedlateras How toPromoteYourself) 

SELF-HEALING 
TheScienceof BeingWell 
The New Science of Living And Healing (also published as Health Through New ThoughtandFasting) 

CHRISTIANITY 
ANew ChristandJesus& TheManandHisWork,sold asone book UnNuevo 
Cristo(Español) 
Hellfire Harrison(his onlynovel). 

NAPOLEON HILL 
TheLaw ofSuccess. The Complete 16Lessonsbased onthe1928Edition. 
Think and Grow Rich. 75 anniversary edition based on the original 1938 version. 
Piense y Hágase Rico. Español. Nueva Traducción 2013, completa y basada en laversiónoriginalde1938 

CHARLES F. HAANEL 
ABook aboutYou MentalChemistry TheAmazing Secrets oftheYogi 

DALE CARNEGIE 
Howto StopWorryingandStartLiving 

FRANK CHANNING HADDOCK 
POWER BOOKS LIBRARY: 
Power of Will: a Practical Companion-Book for Unfoldment of Selfhood 
Through DirectPersonalCulture(1907) 
PowerforSuccess Through CultureofVibrantMagnetism 
PracticalPsychology TheCultureofCourage:Unfoldinga FearlessPersonality. ThePersonalAtmosphere. Ten StudiesinPoiseandPower. HowBrain-PowerWinsBusinessSuccess(TheWill inSalesmanship) 
CreativePersonality Business Power 

ROBERT COLLIER 
TheSecretoftheAges 

PRENTICE MULFORD 
YourForcesandHowtoUse Them (completesixvolumes) 

ELIZABETH TOWNE 
Ffteen Lessonsin NewThought orLessonsinLife JustHowtoWaketheSolarPlexus Howto GrowSuccess TheLifePowerandHowto UseIt 
WILLIAM TOWNE 
TheWay To Perfect Health 

EDMUND SHATESBURY 
InstantaneousPersonalMagnetism 

MAX FREEDOM LONG 
Self-Suggestion& 
The 
NewHunaTheory 
ofMesmerismandHypnosis 
TheSecretScience 
Behind 
Miracles 


BROWN LANDONE 
How 
To 
TurnYourDesiresAndIdealsIntoRealities 

DAVID BUSH 
TheSilence. 
What 
ItIs 
And 
HowToUseIt 

RUSSELL H. CONWELL 
TheKeytoSuccess 


PSYCHOLOGY 
C.HARRY BROOKS 
ThePractice 
Of 
AutosuggestionByTheMethodOfEmileCoue 


EMILE COUE 
Autosuggestion:MyMethod 
SelfMastery 
Through 
Conscious 
Autosuggestion 


ALFRED ADLER 
WhatLifeCouldMean 
To 
You 
ThePattern 
Of 
Life 
TheScienceof 
Living 

ISADOR CORIAT 
TheMeaningofDreams 

CARL JUNG 
Analytical Psychology 

CHRISTIAN INSPIRATIONAL AND MOTIVATIONAL 
RALPH WALDO TRINE 
TheHigher PowersofMindandSpirit 
What The World Is A’Seeking: The Vital Law Of True Life, True Greatness, 
Power,And Happiness 
InTuneWithTheInfinite:FullnessOfPeace,Power AndPlenty 
TheWinning Of The Best 
Every LivingCreature. Why toLoveandRespect Animals. 
New Alinement Of Life. AChristianitybasedonJesus,notPaul. 
MyPhilosophy And MyReligion 
InTheHollow Of HisHand 
ThisMysticalLife Of Ours 
GreatestThingEverKnown 
OnTheOpenRoad 
IntheFire oftheHeart:ACallforSocial Justiceinthe XXth Century 
Through The Sunlit Year. 365 Inspirational Thoughts For Each Day Of The 
Year 
CHRISTIAN D. LARSON 

SUCCESS AND MOTIVATIONAL 
The Ideal Made Real. Change your Fate and Obtain Health, Happiness and Prosperity. HowtheMindWorks. Using the GreatestHumanPower. Mastery ofFaith. AttainingtheSupreme SelfthroughSuperior Thought. TheGreatWithin. Discovering andUsingthePower ofyourSubconscious. ThinkingforResults Business Psychology. How To BecomePowerfulAndSuccessful InBusiness BrainsandHowtoGetThem JustBe Glad Concentration Mastery ofSelf MyidealofMarriage 

SELF HEALING: 
How To Stay Young. TheMind Cure. Howto OvercomeNervousnessandFear Howto StayWell HealingYourself 

CHRISTIANITY: 
Whatis Truth StepsinHumanProgress OnTheHeights TheGoodSideofChristianScience ThePathwayofRoses TheScientificTrainingofChildren Poise And Power IntheLightoftheSpirit 

HENRY WOOD 
TheLawsof MentalHealing:IdealSuggestion Through Mental Photography Studiesin theThoughtWorld NaturalLawintheBusinessWorld TheNew OldHealing The Symphony of Life: A Series Of Constructive Sketches And 
Interpretations LifeMoreAbundant:ScripturalTruth inModernApplication God’s Imagein Man TheNew ThoughtSimplified ThePoliticalEconomyofHumanism 
VictorSerenus:AStoryof the Pauline Era EdwardBurton(Anovel) 

ERNEST HOLMES 
CreativeMind CreativeMindandSuccess TheScienceof Mind 

FENWICKE HOLMES 
TheLaw ofMindin Action Being andBecoming 

HENRY THOMAS HAMBLING 
DivineAdjustment DynamicThought ThePowerofThought MySearch For Truth WithinYou Is The Power 

CHARLES BRODIE PATTERSON 
Thought Studies Of The Fourth Dimension. A New Heaven And A New Earth. 
TheScience Of Life AndLiving. Dominion And Power. 
TheMeasure Of A Man TheWilltoBeWell. New ThoughtandHealing. TheRhythmof Life 

CHARLES FILLMORE 
AtomSmashingPowerofMind ChristianHealing MysteriesofGenesis The12 PowersofMan Prosperity 

BRUCE MACLELLAND 
Prosperity Through ThoughtForce Into TheLight 

HORATIO W. DRESSER 
APhysician To TheSoul AHistory oftheNewThought Movement 
GENEVIEVE BEHREND 
YourInvisible Powers 
Howto LiveLifeandLoveIt 

THOMAS PARKER BOYD 
TheFinger 
Of 
God 
ABook 
Of 
DailyMeditation 
TheEvolution 
Of 
Human 
Thought 
Prospectus 
Of 
LifeInTheUniversity 
Of 
Hard 
Knocks 
TheArmour 
Of 
Light 
TheChristScience 
Of 
Being 
TheVoiceEternal 
TheMental 
Highway 



THEOSOPHY 
WILLIAM Q. JUDGE 
TheOceanofTheosophy& The Epitomeof Theosophy Notes ontheBhagavadGita EchoesfromtheOrient. ABroadOutlineofTheosophical Doctrines (1921) TheYogaAphorismsofPatanjali. 
Aninterpretation. TheBhagavadGita. Anoriginaltranslation. 

ANNIE BESANT 
Reincarnation 
TheAncientWisdom 


CHARLES LEADBEATER 
TheMastersandthePath 
TheStoryofAtlantis 
& 
The 
LostLemuria(withW. 
Scott-Elliot) 


A.P. SINNETT 
TheOccultWorld 
Esoteric 
Buddhism 

TheGrowthofthe 
Soul,asequel 
toEsotericBuddhism. CollectedFruits 
Of 
OccultTeaching 


ERNEST WOOD 
TheSevenRays 
IsthisTheosophy? 



CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY 
CHARLES M. SCHWAB. Succeedingwithwhatyouhave 

HENRY 
FORD. 
My 
life 
and 
Work. 
Edison 
As 
I 
Know 
It. 
Ford 
Ideals. 
My 
Philosophy 
Of 
Industry 

ANDREW 
CARNEGIE. 
The 
Empire 
of 
Business. 
The 
Gospel 
of 
Wealth 
and 
Other 
Timely 
Essays 

VARIOUS ECONOMY & PHILOSOPHY 
FRANCIS M. CORNFORD. Microcosmografia 
Academica, 
GEORGES POLTI. TheArt 
Of 
InventingCharacters, 
JOHN 
MAYNARD 
KEYNES. 
The 
Economic 
Consequences 
of 
Peace 
& 
A 

ReviewoftheTreaty. 
BERTRAND RUSSELL. TheProblemsofPhilosophy; MysticismandLogic. J.W.DUNNE. An 
ExperimentwithTime. TheSerialUniverse. 


MAURICIO CHAVES-MESEN 
THE KNIGHTS OF NOSTRADAMUS 
COMING SOON, A REVOLUTIONARY SERIES OF FOUR NOVELS 
Based on prophecies, mysteries, and ancient secrets, each book is aboutonepieceofabigcosmicpuzzle. Oncethefourpiecesaretogether,somethingisgoingtohappen… 
I. FOUR PROPHECIES. 
An ancient group of Europeans Nobles are about to retake the power of the 
world… Their power comes from four prophecies of Nostradamus, and the secrets of theMonaLisa,DaVinci’smasterpiece. 
Howfarwouldthe Circle of Power goto bring those propheciesto life? To be released November 30, 2013 (theauthor’s44thbirthday). A weird date for the author, as it sums 56: a number that has always followed 
him. 
5+6=11, the magical number of the dimensions (according to ancient theories;andthetheory ofthestrings) 44,his agethatday. 4 times11… 


II. THE PYRAMID OF APOCALYPSE 
Whatreallyhappened attheGreat Flood? Whowasthis Noah? Did hebringsomeancientsecretsto the “NewWorld”? Istherealapocalypse, therevelation,aboutto begin? 
To be released February 28, 2014. 


III. THE CHALICE 
All the great prophets had a chalice. From the Holy Grail to Da Vinci; from Nostradamus to Jules Verne and William Atkinson, there was always a chalice. 
Wasitthesame?Hasitthepowertocommunicate with Something? Whereisthatchalicenow,if indeedit exists?Whohasit, andWhy? 
To be released July 12, 2014 (7-12-7) 


IV. THE THIRTEEN PROPHECY: THE GATES OF EDEN 
Noinformationwill beofferedonthis book,untilthevery dayofitsrelease. TobereleasedonDecember 21,2014, at11:11a.m. 


NOVELS 
If your title is not available at Amazon.com, try Amazon.ca (Canada). Just change .com for .ca in the hyperlinks. 
WILLIAM 
FAULKNER. 
The 
sound 
and 
the 
Fury. 
Absalon, 
Absalon! 
As 
I 
Lay 
Dying,IntruderintheDust,TheHamlet,TheMansion, 
TheTown,Sartoris, 
TheSanctuary. 
C.S.LEWIS. 
CHRONICLES 
OF 
NARNIA. 
(1) 
The 
Magician’s 
Nephew; 
(2) 
The 
Lion, 
the 
Witch 
and 
the 
Wardrobe; 
(3) 
The 
Horse 
and 
His 
Boy; 
(4) 
Prince 
Caspian; 
(5) 
The 
Voyage 
of 
the 
Dawn 
Treader; 
(6) 
The 
Silver 
Chair; 
(7) 
The 
LastBattle. 

H.G.WELLS. The 
Time 
Machine. 
The 
War 
of 
the 
Worlds. The Island of DoctorMoreau. TheInvisibleMan. 
ALDOUS HUXLEY. BraveNewWorld. 
PointCounterPoint. 
ERNEST 
HEMINGWAY. 
The 
Sun 
Also 
Rises. 
The 
Old 
Man 
and 
the 
Sea. 
A 
Farewell 
to 
Arms. 
For 
Whom 
the 
Bell 
Tolls. 
Men 
Without 
Women. 
AcrosstheRiverand 
IntotheWoods. 
THEODORE DREISER. AnAmericanTragedy. 

MALCOLM LOWRY. Underthe 
Volcano. 

HUGH 
LOFTING. 
The 
Voyages 
of 
Doctor 
Dolittle, 
The 
Story 
of 
Doctor 
Dolittle. 

GEORGE ORWELL. NineteenEightyFour; AnimalFarm. 



