 

 

Social Choice
Individual Values

I S R 1) = e s e @

Kenneth J. Arrow

rize in £conor

 

 
                      COWLES FOUNDATION



            for Research in Economics at Yale University





                                    Monograph 12                      COWLES FOUNDATION


            For Research in Economics at Yale University



The Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics at Yale University,

established as an activity of the Department of Economics in 1955, has as its

purpose the conduct and encouragement of research in economics and related

social sciences with particular emphasis on the development and application

of logical, mathematical, and statistical methods of analysis. The

professional research staff have, as a rule, a departmental appointment and

some teaching responsibility.

  The Cowles Foundation continues the work of the Cowles Commission for

Research in Economics founded in 1932 by Alfred Cowles at Colorado

Springs, Colorado. The Commission moved to Chicago in 1939 and was

affiliated with the University of Chicago until 1955. In 1955 the professional

research staff of the Commission accepted appointments at Yale and, along

with other members of the Yale Department of Economics, formed the

research staff of the newly established Cowles Foundation.

  A list of Cowles Foundation Monographs appears at the end of this

volume.                                  THIRD EDITIONSocial Choice and Individual Values





                                  Kenneth J. Arrow


                          Foreword by Eric S. MaskinYale
UNIVERSITY PRESS
N T e Lt
    Copyright © 1951, 1963, 2012 by Cowles Foundation for Research in

Economics at Yale University. Originally published by John Wiley & Sons,

                                          Inc.


All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced, in whole or in part,

    including illustrations, in any form (beyond that copying permitted by

Sections 107 and 108 of the U.S. Copyright Law and except by reviewers for

      the public press), without written permission from the publishers.


Yale University Press books may be purchased in quantity for educational,

  business, or promotional use. For information, please e-mail sales.press@

          yale.edu (U.S. office) or sales@yaleup.co.uk (U.K. office).


                      Printed in the United States of America.


Library of Congress Control Number: 2011945943 ISBN 978-0-300-17931-6

                                          (pbk.)


  A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.


                                10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1        FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION


                                  Eric S. Maskin


  Kenneth Arrow is a towering figure in economics and the social sciences

more generally. And so I felt extraordinarily honored when Yale University

Press asked me to write a foreword to a new edition of his landmark

monograph Social Choice and Individual Values. Ken also happens to be my

former teacher and a mentor and role model—facts that made the invitation a

great personal pleasure as well, and an excuse for some nostalgia.

  I first met Ken when I was an undergraduate at Harvard in the early 1970s.

I was a math major but somehow wandered into his graduate course on

information economics. It was a hodgepodge of some of the cutting-edge

topics he was thinking about then—e.g., mechanism design, adverse

selection, and communication in organizations—and proved to be utterly

fascinating. I can’t say that Ken—despite his interest in the theory of

organizations—was the most organized of teachers. His lectures sounded

improvised, largely because they were: he apparently decided what to talk

about on his way over to the classroom (and sometimes not even then). On

one unusual occasion, he prepared a lecture in advance—on a highly

technical result called the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem (not yet published

at the time)—but then forgot to bring his notes. He worked out a new and

detailed proof of the theorem for us on the spot.

  One feature that made the course so gripping was Ken’s ability to pack so

much into so little time. This was partly because he talks unusually fast. But

even Ken’s rapid-fire speaking style couldn’t keep pace with his lightning-

quick mind. So his presentations had an elliptical quality—he would leave

out the ends of sentences so that he could race ahead to the next thought. His

listeners would have to stay alert to fill in the missing words.

  Another thing that struck us students was the breadth of Ken’s knowledge,

which extended far beyond economics. He would be lecturing on some

technical point when an apt quotation from Maimonides or an analogy from

thermodynamics would occur to him. Ken evidently knew more on virtually

any subject than any of the rest of us. There was a story at Harvard that agroup of junior faculty once concocted a plan by which they could finally

appear to outshine their erudite senior colleague. They read up on the most

arcane topic they could think of: the breeding habits of gray whales. On the

appointed day they gathered in the coffee room and waited for Ken to come

in. Then they started talking about the elaborate theory of a marine biologist

named Turner on how gray whales find their way back to the same breeding

spot year after year. Ken was silent . . . they had him at last! With a delicious

sense of triumph, they continued to discuss Turner, while Ken looked

increasingly perplexed. Finally, he couldn’t hold back: “But I thought

Turner’s theory was discredited by Spenser, who showed that the supposed

homing mechanism couldn’t possibly work.”

  With its publication in 1951, Social Choice and Individual Values initiated

the modern theory of social choice, the study of how a society should choose

among its various options based on the preferences of the individual members

of society. There had been sporadic literature on the subject before Arrow,

going back (at least) to Jean-Charles Borda and the Marquis de Condorcet in

the late eighteenth century. But the earlier essays lacked the generality and

power of Arrow’s approach, and the subject did not really take off until

Social Choice. But take off it did: by the time the second edition was

published, in 1963, there were already several hundred works building on the

book. A recent count on Google Scholar turned up over ten thousand

citations.

  Let me try to explain why the monograph has turned out to be so

immensely influential—of interest to political scientists, sociologists,

lawyers, and philosophers as well as economists. First, Arrow’s abstract

formulation of the social choice problem makes it very widely applicable. He

begins with a society and a set of social alternatives (the different possible

options from which society must choose), which, depending on the context,

could be almost anything. For example, in a setting where a town is

considering whether or not to build a bridge across the local river, “society”

comprises the citizens of the town, and the social alternative set consists of

just two options: “build the bridge” or “don’t build it.” In a context of pure

distribution where there is a jug of milk and a plate of cookies to be divided

among a group of children, the children are the society, and the social

alternative set consists of the different ways the milk and cookies could be

allocated to them. In a setting where a committee is interested in electing a

chairman, society is the committee, and the social alternatives are the variouscandidates for the chairmanship.

  Arrow’s definition of a social welfare function (SWF) is also very general.

An SWF is any rule for determining society’s preferences over the social

alternative set on the basis of the preferences of the individual members.

More precisely, because individuals’ preferences might not be known in

advance, the SWF is a function: it must determine social preferences for

every different configuration of preferences that individuals could have, i.e.,

for every profile of possible preferences.

  The most famous example of an SWF is probably majority rule, which

Condorcet himself particularly advocated for elections. Under majority rule,

alternative a is socially preferred to b for a given profile if a majority of

individuals prefer a to b for that profile.

  A second reason for the great impact of Arrow’s monograph is the

powerful and unexpected Impossibility Theorem that constitutes its central

finding. Arrow discovered that there is no SWF that satisfies all of a few

natural and seemingly undemanding conditions. These conditions are:


    Unrestricted Domain (U): the SWF must determine social

        preferences for all logically possible profiles; in other words,

      there are no limitations on the preferences that individuals

        might have.

    Pareto Property (P): if all individuals prefer alternative a to b,

      then a must be socially preferred to b.

    Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives (IIA): if there are two

        profiles and each individual ranks alternatives a and b the

      same way in both of them, then the social preference between

      a and b must also be the same for both. In other words, the

        social preferences between a and b depend only on

        individuals’ preferences between these two alternatives—and

      not on preferences involving some third alternative.

      Nondictatorship (ND): there does not exist a member of society

      who always gets his way, in the sense that, for any profile, the

        social preferences coincide with his preferences.

    Transitivity (T): for any profile, if a is socially preferred to b and

      b is socially preferred to c, then a must be socially preferred to      c.


  The Impossibility Theorem establishes that if there are at least three

alternatives in the set of social alternatives, then there is no SWF that satisfies

all of U, P, IIA, ND, and T.

  It is worth noting why majority rule is not a counterexample to the

theorem. As Condorcet himself pointed out, majority rule violates T. Suppose

there are three alternatives a, b, and c, and consider a profile in which 35

percent of individuals prefer a to b and b to c, 33 percent prefer b to c and c

to a, and the remaining 32 percent prefer c to a and a to b. Then, 67 percent

of individuals prefer a to b, and so a is socially preferred to b. Similarly, b is

socially preferred to c (because 68 percent of individuals prefer b). But c is

socially preferred to a (65 percent prefer c), and so T is violated.

  Much of the literature stemming from Social Choice amounts to trying to

avoid the Impossibility Theorem by relaxing one or more of the Arrow

conditions. Condition ND is already so mild that relaxing it further seems

pointless. The same might be said for condition P (but there is interesting

work in this direction by Robert Wilson). By contrast, condition T is judged

by some (see, in particular, James Buchanan) to be too strong a requirement.

Nevertheless, relaxations of T turn out not to take us very far away from

impossibility.

  But relaxing condition U—which amounts to restricting the domain of

preferences that an individual might have—has proved very fruitful. Even

before Arrow, Duncan Black showed that in some applications, a natural

restriction on preferences ensures that majority rule will satisfy T (in other

words, it rules out the sort of T-violating example I gave above). In

subsequent work, Amartya Sen characterized all possible restrictions under

which majority rule is transitive, while Ehud Kalai and Eitan Muller and,

independently, I characterized all possible restrictions under which there

exists some SWF satisfying Arrow’s remaining conditions. In recent work,

Partha Dasgupta and I have shown that there is a sense in which majority rule

satisfies Arrow’s conditions (somewhat strengthened) for more domains of

preferences than any other SWF.

  Weakenings of IIA—the most controversial of Arrow’s conditions—have

spawned the biggest literature of all. As formulated, IIA rules out

interpersonal comparisons: if in a two-member society, individual 1 prefers ato b and individual 2 prefers b to a in each of two profiles, then IIA requires

that the social preferences between a and b be the same for both profiles—

despite the possibility that in one profile, individual 1 has a strong preference

for a over b and 2 only slightly prefers b to a, and the opposite is true for the

other profile. Hence, in the extensive literature on interpersonal comparisons,

IIA is weakened so that differences in preference intensity across individuals

can be reflected in the SWF (although there are serious difficulties with

trying to take account of such intensity differences when conducting

elections). Recently, there has also been work developing other important

relaxations of IIA, notably that of Marc Fleurbaey and François Maniquet,

and also of Michel Balinski and Rida Laraki.

  IIA also lies behind my final explanation for Social Choice’s great sway:

the condition is intimately connected with the vast literature on mechanism

design theory. Mechanism design was developed to overcome an important

obstacle to social choice, namely, that individuals′ preferences—the inputs to

the SWF—may not be publicly known. An SWF is said to be implementable

if it is possible to design a mechanism—a procedure or game for individuals

to follow—that leads to the choice of the top-ranked alternative according to

the SWF (despite this lack of public knowledge). Arrow’s monograph was a

crucial foundation for mechanism design, because it turned out that

conditions closely related to IIA are the key to an SWF’s being

implementable.

  A book’s importance can be crudely gauged by how many other works

cite it. But perhaps a better measure is its longevity: how long it continues to

inspire new work. By that criterion, Social Choice and Individual Values is

an amazing success: having passed its sixtieth birthday, it continues to

generate a steady stream of original research. I suspect that the same will be

true when it reaches one hundred.                                  To Selma, my wife              PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION


  The literature on the theory of social choice has grown considerably

beyond the few items in existence at the time the first edition of this book

appeared in 1951. Some of the new literature has dealt with the technical,

mathematical aspects, more with the interpretive. My own thinking has also

evolved somewhat, although I remain far from satisfied with present

formulations. The exhaustion of the first edition provides a convenient time

for a selective and personal stocktaking in the form of an appended

commentary entitled, “Notes on the Theory of Social Choice, 1963,”

containing reflections on the text and its omissions and on some of the more

recent literature. This form has seemed more appropriate than a revision of

the original text, which has to some extent acquired a life of its own.


                                                                            K. J. A.


Tokyo, Japan

August 1963                          ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


                                  FIRST EDITION


  This study was initiated in the summer of 1948 while I was on leave from

the Cowles Commission as a consultant to The RAND Corporation, which is

engaged in research under contract with the United States Air Force. It was

further developed and assumed its present form at the Cowles Commission

during the period of October, 1948, to June, 1949, as part of the general

research program of the Commission which is conducted under a grant from

the Rockefeller Foundation. During part of this period support was also

received from The RAND Corporation under a contract between RAND and

the Cowles Commission for the study of resource allocation. To these

organizations I wish to express my appreciation for the interest shown in this

study and for the facilities accorded to me.

  I wish to express my indebtedness to the following individuals at RAND:

A. Kaplan, University of California at Los Angeles, and J. W. T. Youngs,

University of Indiana, for guidance in formulating the problem, and D. Black

well, Howard University, and 0. Helmer for other helpful discussions. The

manuscript has been read by A. Bergson and A. G. Hart, Columbia

University, and by T. C. Koopmans, Cowles Commission for Research in

Economics and the University of Chicago, and I owe much, both in

improvement of presentation and in clarification of meaning, to their

comments. Development of the economic implications of the mathematical

results has been aided by the comments of F. Modigliani, Cowles

Commission and the University of Illinois, T. W. Schultz, University of

Chicago, and H. Simon, Cowles Commission and Carnegie Institute of

Technology. I have had the benefit of comments by J. Marschak, Cowles

Commission and the University of Chicago, on the question of the

measurability of utility, touched on in Chapter II. The section in Chapter VII

on the decision process as a value in itself has benefited from suggestions by

P. J. Bjerve, Central Statistical Bureau, Oslo, Norway, then a guest of the

Cowles Commission, and M. Friedman, University of Chicago. For guidance

in the unfamiliar realms of political philosophy, I must thank D. Easton,

University of Chicago. The mathematical exposition has been considerablyimproved as a result of comments by T. W. Anderson, Cowles Commission

and Columbia University, E. Nagel, also of Columbia University, J. C. C.

McKinsey, The RAND Corporation, and J. W. T. Youngs. I must also

mention the stimulation afforded by several staff meetings of the Cowles

Commission in which my thesis was submitted to the research group for

discussion and criticism. Needless to say, any error or opacity remaining is

my responsibility.

  I cannot fully acknowledge here the great debt I owe to my many teachers,

but I cannot refrain from singling out H. Hotelling, now of the University of

North Carolina, to whom I owe my interest in economics and particularly my

interest in the problems of social welfare.

  Acknowledgment is also due Mrs. Jane Novick, Editorial Secretary of the

Cowles Commission, for preparing the manuscript for publication and seeing

it through the press and to Miss Jean Curtis, Editorial Assistant, for valuable

aid in proofreading and preparation of the index.


                              SECOND EDITION

  I wish to thank Miss Laura Staggers, of the Stanford Institute for

Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences, for her patient typing and

retyping of the manuscript for Chapter VIII.


                                                                            K. J. A.                                  CONTENTS




I. INTRODUCTION

II. THE NATURE OF PREFERENCE AND CHOICE

III. THE SOCIAL WELFARE FUNCTION

IV. THE COMPENSATION PRINCIPLE

V. THE GENERAL POSSIBILITY THEOREM FOR SOCIAL WELFARE

  FUNCTIONS

VI. THE INDIVIDUALISTIC ASSUMPTIONS

VII. SIMILARITY AS THE BASIS OF SOCIAL WELFARE JUDGMENTS

VIII. NOTES ON THE THEORY OF SOCIAL CHOICE, 1963

  INDEX                                  CHAPTER I


                                INTRODUCTION


                1. THE TYPES OF SOCIAL CHOICE

  In a capitalist democracy there are essentially two methods by which

social choices can be made: voting, typically used to make “political”

decisions, and the market mechanism, typically used to make “economic”

decisions. In the emerging democracies with mixed economic systems, Great

Britain, France, and Scandinavia, the same two modes of making social

choices prevail, though more scope is given to the method of voting and

decisions based directly or indirectly on it and less to the rule of the price

mechanism. Elsewhere in the world, and even in smaller social units within

the democracies, social decisions are sometimes made by single individuals

or small groups and sometimes (more and more rarely in this modern world)

by a widely encompassing set of traditional rules for making the social choice
                                                  1
in any given situation, e.g., a religious code.

  The last two methods of social choice, dictatorship and convention, have

in their formal structure a certain definiteness absent from voting or the

market mechanism. In ideal dictatorship there is but one will involved in

choice, in an ideal society ruled by convention there is but the divine will or

perhaps, by assumption, a common will of all individuals concerning social
                                                                                2
decisions, so in either case no conflict of individual wills is involved. The

methods of voting and the market, on the other hand, are methods of

amalgamating the tastes of many individuals in the making of social choices.

The methods of dictatorship and convention are, or can be, rational in the

sense that any individual can be rational in his choices. Can such consistency

be attributed to collective modes of choice, where the wills of many people

are involved?

  It should be emphasized here that the present study is concerned only with

the formal aspects of the above question. That is, we ask if it is formally

possible to construct a procedure for passing from a set of known individual

tastes to a pattern of social decision-making, the procedure in question being

required to satisfy certain natural conditions. An illustration of the problem isthe following well-known “paradox of voting.” Suppose there is a community

consisting of three voters, and this community must choose among three

alternative modes of social action (e.g., disarmament, cold war, or hot war). It

is expected that choices of this type have to be made repeatedly, but

sometimes not all of the three alternatives will be available. In analogy with

the usual utility analysis of the individual consumer under conditions of

constant wants and variable price-income situations, rational behavior on the

part of the community would mean that the community orders the three

alternatives according to its collective preferences once for all, and then

chooses in any given case that alternative among those actually available

which stands highest on this list. A natural way of arriving at the collective

preference scale would be to say that one alternative is preferred to another if

a majority of the community prefer the first alternative to the second, i.e.,

would choose the first over the second if those were the only two alternatives.

Let A, B, and C be the three alternatives, and 1, 2, and 3 the three individuals.

Suppose individual 1 prefers A to B and B to C (and therefore A to C),

individual 2 prefers B to C and C to A (and therefore B to A), and individual 3

prefers C to A and A to B (and therefore C to B). Then a majority prefer. A to

B and a majority prefer B to C. We may therefore say that the community

prefers A to B and B to C. If the community is to be regarded as behaving

rationally, we are forced to say that A is preferred to C. But in fact a majority
                                    3
of the community prefer C to A. So the method just outlined for passing

from individual to collective tastes fails to satisfy the condition of rationality,

as we ordinarily understand it. Can we find other methods of aggregating

individual tastes which imply rational behavior on the part of the community
                                                    4
and which will be satisfactory in other ways? 

  If we continue the traditional identification of rationality with

maximization of some sort (to be discussed at greater length below), then the

problem of achieving a social maximum derived from individual desires is

precisely the problem which has been central to the field of welfare
                                                                                      5
economics. There is no need to review the history of this subject in detail.

There has been controversy as to whether or not the economist qua economist

could make statements saying that one social state is better than another. If

we admit meaning to interpersonal comparisons of utility, then presumably

we could order social states according to the sum of the utilities of

individuals under each, and this is the solution of Jeremy Bentham, accepted                                6
by Edgeworth and Marshall. Even in this case we have a choice of different

mathematical forms of the social utility function in terms of individual

utilities; thus, the social utility might be the sum of the individual utilities or

their product or the product of their logarithms or the sum of their products

taken two at a time. So, as Professor Bergson has pointed out, there are value
                                          7
judgments implicit even at this level. The case is clearly much worse if we

deny the possibility of making interpersonal comparisons of utility. It was on

the latter grounds that Professor Robbins so strongly attacked the concept that
                                                              8
economists could make any policy recommendations, at least without losing

their status as economists and passing over into the realm of ethics. On the

other hand, Mr. Kaldor and, following him, Professor Hicks have argued that

there is a meaningful sense in which we can say that one state is better than
                                              9
another from an economic point of view, even without assuming the reality

of interpersonal comparison of utilities. The particular mechanism by which

they propose to accomplish the comparison of different social states, the

compensation principle, will be examined in more detail in Chapter IV.

  The controversy involves a certain confusion between two levels of

argument. There can be no doubt that, even if interpersonal comparison is

assumed, a value judgment is implied in any given way of making social

choices based on individual utilities; so much Bergson has shown clearly.

But, given these basic value judgments as to the mode of aggregating

individual desires, the economist should investigate those mechanisms for

social choice which satisfy the value judgments and should check their

consequences to see if still other value judgments might be violated. In

particular, he should ask the question whether or not the value judgments are

consistent with each other, i.e., do there exist any mechanisms of social

choice which will in fact satisfy the value judgments made? For example, in

the voting paradox discussed above, if the method of majority choice is

regarded as itself a value judgment, then we are forced to the conclusion that

the value judgment in question, applied to the particular situation indicated, is

self-contradictory.

  In the matter of consistency, the question of interpersonal comparison of

utilities becomes important. Bergson considers it possible to establish an

ordering of social states which is based on indifference maps of individuals,
                              10
and Samuelson has agreed. On the other hand, Professor Lange, in his

discussion of the social welfare function, has assumed the interpersonal                          11
measurability of utility, and elsewhere he has insisted on the absolute
                                                                          12
necessity of measurable utility for normative social judgments. Professor

Lerner similarly has assumed the meaningfulness of an interpersonal

comparison of intensities of utility in his recent work on welfare
            13
economics.

  In the following discussion of the consistency of various value judgments

as to the mode of social choice, the distinction between voting and the market

mechanism will be disregarded, both being regarded as special cases of the

more general category of collective social choice. The analogy between

economic choice and political choice has been pointed out a number of times.

For example, Professor Zassenhaus considered the structure of a planned

economy by considering the free market replaced by influence conceived
                                                                14
generally as a means of distributing the social product. He argued that,

under conditions analogous to free competition, the market for exchanging

influence for goods would come to equilibrium in a manner analogous to that

of the ordinary market, political influence taking the place of initial

distribution of goods. His model, however, is expressed only in very general

terms, and it is not easy to see how it would operate in a socialist democracy,

for example.

  Dr. Howard Bowen has considered voting as the demand for collective
              15
consumption. In his treatment he regards distribution of income and costs

as given, and other simplifying assumptions are made. Close analogies are

found with the ordinary market demand curve.

  Knight has also stressed the analogy between voting and the market in that
                                                                                16
both involve collective choice among a limited range of alternatives. He has

also stressed certain differences, particularly that there is likely to be a greater

tendency toward inequality under voting than under the market; these

differences are, however, largely of a socio-psychological type rather than of

the formal type which alone is relevant here.

  More recently, there has been a series of papers by Professor Duncan

Black, dealing with various aspects of the theory of political choice under

certain special assumptions and emphasizing the close similarity between the
                                              17
problems of market and electoral choice. His work will be dealt with in

greater detail in Chapter VII, Section 2. There is also a literature on the

technical problems of election. The chief relevant point here is that virtuallyevery particular scheme proposed for election from single-member

constituencies has been shown to have certain arbitrary features. The problem

of choosing by election one among a number of candidates for a single

position, such as the Presidency of the United States or membership in a

legislative body when each district returns only a single member, is clearly of

the same character as. choosing one out of a number of alternative social

policies; indeed, selection among candidates is presumably a device for

achieving selection among policies.


          2. SOME LIMITATIONS OF THE ANALYSIS

  It has been stated above that the present study confines itself to the formal

aspects of collective social choice. The aspects not discussed may be

conveniently described as the game aspects, especially since that term has

acquired a double meaning. In the first place, no consideration is given to the

enjoyment of the decision process as a form of play. There is no need to

stress the obvious importance of the desire to play and win the game as such
                                              18
in both economic behavior and political. That such considerations are real

and should be considered in determining the mechanics of social choice is not

to be doubted; but this is beyond the scope of the present study.

  The other meaning of the term “game” is that which has been brought to
                                                                                      19
the attention of economists by Professors von Neumann and Morgenstern.

The point here, broadly speaking, is that, once a machinery for making social

choices from individual tastes is established, individuals will find it

profitable, from a rational point of view, to misrepresent their tastes by their

actions, either because such misrepresentation is somehow directly profitable
20
 or, more usually, because some other individual will be made so much

better off by the first individual’s misrepresentation that he could compensate

the first individual in such a way that both are better off than if everyone

really acted in direct accordance with his tastes. Thus, in an electoral system

based on plurality voting, it is notorious that an individual who really favors a

minor party candidate will frequently vote for the less undesirable of the

major party candidates rather than “throw away his vote.” Even in a case

where it is possible to construct a procedure showing how to aggregate

individual tastes into a consistent social preference pattern, there still remains

the problem of devising rules of the game so that individuals will actually

express their true tastes even when they are acting rationally. This problem isallied to the problem of constructing games of fair division, in which the

rules are to be such that each individual, by playing rationally, will succeed in

getting a preassigned fair share; in the case of two people and equal division,

the game is the very familiar one in which one player divides the total stock
                                                                                        21
of goods into two parts, and the second player chooses which part he likes.

  In addition to ignoring game aspects of the problem of social choice, we

will also assume in the present study that individual values are taken as data

and are not capable of being altered by the nature of the decision process

itself. This, of course, is the standard view in economic theory (though the

unreality of this assumption has been asserted by such writers as Veblen,
                                      2223
Professor J. M. Clark, and Knight) and also in the classical liberal creed.

If individual values can themselves be affected by the method of social

choice, it becomes much more difficult to learn what is meant by one

method’s being preferable to another.

  Finally, it is assumed that all individuals in the society are rational. The

precise meaning of this assumption will be enlarged on in the next chapter.                                CHAPTER II


        THE NATURE OF PREFERENCE AND CHOICE


        1. MEASURABILITY AND INTERPERSONAL

                      COMPARABILITY OF UTILITY

  The viewpoint will be taken here that interpersonal comparison of utilities

has no meaning and, in fact, that there is no meaning relevant to welfare

comparisons in the measurability of individual utility. The controversy is

well-known and hardly need be recited here. During the entire controversy,

the proponents of measurable utility have been unable to produce any

proposition of economic behavior which could be explained by their
                                                                          1
hypothesis and not by those of the indifference-curve theorists. Indeed, the

only meaning the concepts of utility can be said to have is their indications of

actual behavior, and, if any course of behavior can be explained by a given

utility function, it has been amply demonstrated that such a course of

behavior can be equally well explained by any other utility function which is

a strictly increasing function of the first. If we cannot have measurable utility,

in this sense, we cannot have interpersonal comparability of utilities a

fortiori.

  Recently, the issue of measurable utility has been reopened by the results
                                                    2
of Professors von Neumann and Morgenstern. These results have been

widely misunderstood. They consider a preference pattern not only among

certain alternatives but also among alternative probability distributions.

Making certain plausible assumptions as to the relations among preferences

for related probability distributions, they find that there is a utility indicator

(unique up to a linear transformation) which has the property that the value of

the utility function for any probability distribution of certain alternatives is

the mathematical expectation of the utility. Put otherwise, there is one way

(unique up to a linear transformation) of assigning utilities to probability

distributions such that behavior is described by saying that the individual

seeks to maximize his expected utility.

  This theorem does not, as far as I can see, give any special ethical

significance to the particular utility scale found. For instead of using theutility scale found by von Neumann and Morgenstern, we could use the

square of that scale; then behavior is described by saying that the individual

seeks to maximize the expected value of the square root of his utility. This is

not to deny the usefulness of the von Neumann-Morgenstern theorem; what it

does say is that among the many different ways of assigning a utility

indicator to the preferences among alternative probability distributions, there

is one method (more precisely, a whole set of methods which are linear

transforms of each other) which has the property of stating the laws of

rational behavior in a particularly convenient way. This is a very useful

matter from the point of view of developing the descriptive economic theory

of behavior in the presence of random events, but it has nothing to do with

welfare considerations, particularly if we are interested primarily in making a

social choice among alternative policies in which no random elements enter.

To say otherwise would be to assert that the distribution of the social income

is to be governed by the tastes of individuals for gambling.

  The problem of measuring utility has frequently been compared with the

problem of measuring temperature. This comparison is very apt.

Operationally, the temperature of a body is the volume of a unit mass of a

perfect gas placed in contact with it (provided the mass of the gas is small

compared with the mass of the body). Why, it might be asked, was not the

logarithm of the volume or perhaps the cube root of the volume of the gas

used instead? The reason is simply that the general gas equation assumes a

particularly simple form when temperature is defined in the way indicated.

But there is no deeper significance. Does it make any sense to say that an

increase of temperature from 0° to 1° is just as intense as an increase of

temperature from 100° to 101°? No more can it be said that there is any

meaning in comparing marginal utilities at different levels of well-being.

  Even if, for some reason, we should admit the measurability of utility for

an individual, there still remains the question of aggregating the individual

utilities. At best, it is contended that, for an individual, his utility function is

uniquely determined up to a linear transformation; we must still choose one

out of the infinite family of indicators to represent the individual, and the

values of the aggregate (say a sum) are dependent on how the choice is made

for each individual. In general, there seems to be no method intrinsic to utility
                                                                3
measurement which will make the choices compatible. It requires a definite

value judgment not derivable from individual sensations to make the utilitiesof different individuals dimensionally compatible and still a further value

judgment to aggregate them according to any particular mathematical

formula. If we look away from the mathematical aspects of the matter, it

seems to make no sense to add the utility of one individual, a psychic

magnitude in his mind, with the utility of another individual. Even Bentham
                                4
had his doubts on this point.

  We will therefore assume throughout this book that the behavior of an

individual in making choices is describable by means of a preference scale

without any cardinal significance, either individual or interpersonal.


  2. A NOTATION FOR PREFERENCES AND CHOICE

  In this study it is found convenient to represent preference by a notation

not customarily employed in economics, though familiar in mathematics and

particularly in symbolic logic. We assume that there is a basic set of

alternatives which could conceivably be presented to the chooser. In the

theory of consumer’s choice, each alternative would be a commodity bundle;

in the theory of the firm, each alternative would be a complete decision on all

inputs and outputs; in welfare economics, each alternative would be a

distribution of commodities and labor requirements. In general, an alternative

is a vector; however, in the theory of elections, the alternatives are

candidates. These alternatives are mutually exclusive; they are denoted by the

small letters x, y z, On any given occasion, the chooser has available to him a

subset S of all possible alternatives, and he is required to choose one out of

this set. The set S is a generalization of the well-known opportunity curve;

thus, in the theory of consumer’s choice under perfect competition it would

be the budget plane. It is assumed further that the choice is made in this way:

Before knowing the set S, the chooser considers in turn all possible pairs of

alternatives, say x and y, and for each such pair he makes one and only one of

three decisions: x is preferred to y, x is indifferent to y, or y is preferred to x.

The decisions made for different pairs are assumed to be consistent with each

other, so, for example, if x is preferred to y and y to z, then x is preferred to z;

similarly, if x is indifferent to y and y to z, then x is indifferent to z. Having

this ordering of all possible alternatives, the chooser is now confronted with a

particular opportunity set S. If there is one alternative in S which is preferred

to all others in S, the chooser selects that one alternative. Suppose, however,

there is a subset of alternatives in S such that the alternatives in the subset areeach preferred to every alternative not in the subset, while the alternatives in

the subset are indifferent to each other. This case would be one in which the

highest indifference curve that has a point in common with a given

opportunity curve has at least two points in common with it. In this case, the

best thing to say is that the choice made in S is the whole-subset; the first

case discussed is one in which the subset in question, the choice, contains a

single element.

  Since we have not restricted the type of sets allowed, a third possibility

presents itself; there may be no alternative in S which is preferred or

indifferent to aall others. That is, for every alternative in S, there is another

which is preferred to it. For example, suppose that an individual prefers more

money to less and that the alternatives in S include every integral number of

dollars. Or, if we wish to require that S is in some sense bounded, consider

the sequence of alternatives ½, , ¾, … 1 - (1/n), … dollars. There cannot

really be said to be any rational choice in this case. However, this

mathematical point will not play any part in the present work.

  Preference and indifference are relations between alternatives. Instead of

working with two relations, it will be slightly more convenient to use a single

relation, “preferred or indifferent.” The statement “x is preferred or

indifferent to will be symbolized by x R y. The letter R, by itself, will be the

name of the relation and will stand for a knowledge of all pairs such that x R

y. From our previous discussion, we have that, for any pair of alternatives x

and y, either x is preferred to y or y to x, or the two are indifferent. That is, we
                                                                5
have assumed that any two alternatives are comparable. But this assumption

may be written symbolically, as


  AXIOM I: For all x and y, either x R y or y R x.

A relation R which satisfies Axiom I will be said to be connected. Note that

Axiom I is presumed to hold when x = y, as well as when x is distinct from y,

for we ordinarily say that x is indifferent to itself for any x, and this implies x
  6
R x. Note also that the word “or” in the statement of Axiom I does not

exclude the possibility of both x R y and y R x. That word merely asserts that

at least one of the two events must occur; both may.

  The property mentioned above of consistency in the preferences between

different pairs of alternatives may be stated more precisely, as follows: If x is

preferred or indifferent to y and y is preferred or indifferent to z then x mustbe either preferred or indifferent to z. In symbols,

  AXIOM II: For all x, y and z, x R y and y R z imply x R z.

                                                                  7
  A relation satisfying Axiom II is said to be transitive. A relation

satisfying both Axioms I and II is termed a weak ordering or sometimes

simply an ordering. It is clear that a relation having these two properties taken

together does create a ranking of the various alternatives. The adjective

“weak” refers to the fact that the ordering does not exclude indifference, i.e.,

Axioms I and II do not exclude the possibility that for some distinct x and y,

both x R y and y R x. A strong ordering, on the other hand, is a ranking in
                              8
which no ties are possible. A weak ordering is a generalization of the

concept “greater than or equal to” applied to real numbers; a strong ordering
                                                                            9
generalizes the concept “greater than” applied to the same realm.

  It might be felt that the two axioms in question do not completely

characterize the concept of a preference pattern. For example, we ordinarily

feel that not only the relation R but also the relations of (strict) preference and

of indifference are transitive. We shall show that, by defining preference and

indifference suitably in terms of R, it will follow that all the usually desired

properties of preference patterns obtain.


    DEFINITION 1: x P y is defined to mean not y R x.


The statement “x P y” is read “x is preferred to y.”


    DEFINITION 2: x I y means x R y and y R x.

The statement “x I y” is read “x is indifferent to y.” It is clear that P and J,

so defined, correspond to the ordinary notions of preference and indifference,

respectively.


  LEMMA 1: (a) For all x, x R x.

                (b) If x P y, then x R y.

                (c) If x P y and y P z, then x P z.

                (d) If x I y and y I z, then x I z.

                (e) For all x and y, either x R y or y P x,

                (f) If x P y and y R z, then x P z.All these statements are intuitively self-evident from the interpretations

placed on the symbols. However, it may be as well to give sketches of the

proofs, both to show that Axioms I and II really imply all that we wish to

imply about the nature of orderings of alternatives and to illustrate the type

of reasoning to be used subsequently.

  PROOF: (a) In Axiom I, let y = x; then for all x, either x R x or x R x which

is to say, x R x.

  (b) Directly from Definition 1 and Axiom I.

  (c) From x P y and y P z, we can, by (b), deduce x R y. Suppose z R x.

Then, from z R x and x R y, we could deduce z R y by Axiom II. However,

from y P z, we have, by Definition 1, not z R y. Hence the supposition z R x

leads to a contradiction, so that we may assert not z R x, or x P z, by

Definition 1.

  (d) From x I y and y I z, we can, by Definition 2, deduce x R y and y R z.

From Axiom II, then, x R z. Also from x I y and y I z, by Definition 2, we

have z R y and y R x, which imply z R x, by Axiom II. Since both x R z and z

R x, x I z by Definition 2.

  (e) Directly from Definition 1.

  (f) Suppose z R x. From z R x and y R x follows y R x, by Axiom II. But,

by Definition 1, x P y implies not y R x. Hence the supposition z R x leads to a

contradiction. Therefore, not z R x, or x P z.

  For clarity, we will avoid the use of the terms “preference scale” or

“preference pattern” when referring to R, since we wish to avoid confusion

with the concept of preference proper, denoted by P. We will refer to R as an

“ordering relation” or “weak ordering relation,” or, more simply, as an

“ordering” or “weak ordering.” The term “preference relation” will refer to

the relation P.

  In terms of the relation R, we may now define the concept of choice,

recalling that in general we must regard the choice from a given set of

alternatives as itself a set. If S is the set of alternatives available, which we
                              10
will term the environment, let C(S) be the alternative or alternatives chosen

out of S. C(S) is, of course, a subset of S. Each element of C(S) is to be

preferred to all elements of S not in C(S) and indifferent to all elements of

C(S); and, therefore, if x belongs to COS), x R y for all y in S. On the other

hand, if in fact x R y for all y in S and if x belongs to S, then, by Definition 1,there is no element z in S such that z P x. Hence, we may define C(S)

formally as follows:


    DEFINITION 3: C(S) is the set of all alternatives x in S such that, for every y

in S, x R y.

  C(S), it is to be noted, describes a functional relationship in that it assigns

a choice to each possible environment. We may call it the choice function; it

is a straightforward generalization of the demand function as it appears in the

theory of consumer’s choice under perfect competition, the sets S there being

budget planes.

  Let [x, y] be the set composed of the two alternatives x and y. Suppose x P

y. Then x R y by Lemma 1(b), and x R x by Lemma 1(a), so that x belongs to

C([x, y]); but, again by Definition 1, since x P y not y R x, so that y does not

belong to C([x y]), i.e., C ([x y]) contains the single element x.

  Conversely, suppose C([x y]) contains the single element x. Since y does

not belong to C([x y]), not y R x; by Definition 1, x P y.


  LEMMA 2: A necessary and sufficient condition that x P y is that x be the

sole element of C([x, y]).

  In case neither x P y nor y P x, we have, clearly, x I y, and this is

equivalent to saying that C ([x, y]) contains both x and y. If, then, we know

C([x, y]) for all two-element sets, we have completely defined the relations P

and I and therefore the relation R; but, by Definition 3, knowing the relation

R completely determines the choice function C(S) for all sets of alternatives.

Hence, one of the consequences of the assumptions of rational choice is that

the choice in any environment can be determined by a knowledge of the
                                            11
choices in two-element environments.

  The representation of the choice mechanism by ordering relations, as

suggested above, has certain advantages for the present analysis over the

more conventional representations in terms of indifference maps or utility

functions. In regard to indifference maps, there is first the obvious advantage

of being able to consider alternatives which are represented by vectors with

more than two components. Second, the usefulness of an indifference map

usually rests to a large measure on the assumption that the chooser desires

more of each component of the alternative to less, all other components
                                                                        12
remaining the same; this assumption serves to orient the chart. Since thepresent study is concerned with the choice of a social state, each alternative

has many components which may be desirable under certain circumstances

and undesirable under others. Third, the use of an indifference map involves

assumptions of continuity which are unnecessarily restrictive for the present

purpose, especially since, in order to handle such problems as indivisibilities,

which have been productive of so much controversy in the field of welfare

economics, it is necessary to assume that some of the components of the

social state are discrete variables.

  As for utility functions, there is first of all the formal difficulty that, if

insufficient continuity assumptions are made about the ordering, there may

exist no way of assigning real numbers to the various alternatives in such a

way as to satisfy the usual requirements of a utility function. In any case, we

would simply be replacing the expression x R y by the expression U(x) >

U(y), and the structure of all proofs would be unchanged, while the elegance

of the whole exposition would be marred by the introduction of the

superfluous function U(x), whose significance lies entirely in its ordinal

properties. If we are concerned with ordinal properties, it seems better to
                          13
represent these directly.


            3. THE ORDERING OF SOCIAL STATES

  In the present study the objects of choice are social states. The most

precise definition of a social state would be a complete description of the

amount of each type of commodity in the hands of each individual, the

amount of labor to be supplied by each individual, the amount of each

productive resource invested in each type of productive activity, and the

amounts of various types of collective activity, such as municipal services,

diplomacy and its continuation by other means, and the erection of statues to

famous men. It is assumed that each individual in the community has a

definite ordering of all conceivable social states, in terms of their desirability

to him. It is not assumed here that an individual’s attitude toward different

social states is determined exclusively by the commodity bundles which

accrue to his lot under each. It is simply assumed that the individual orders all

social states by whatever standards he deems relevant. A member of Veblen’s

leisure class might order the states solely on the criterion of his relative

income standing in each; a believer in the equality of man might order them

in accordance with some measure of income equality. Indeed, since, asmentioned above, some of the components of the social state, considered as a

vector, are collective activities, purely individualistic assumptions are useless

in analyzing such problems as the division of the national income between

public and private expenditure. The present notation permits perfect

generality in this respect. Needless to say, this generality is not without its

price. More information would be available for analysis if the generality were

restricted by a prior knowledge of the nature of individual orderings of social

states. This problem will be touched on again.

  In general, there will, then, be a difference between the ordering of social

states according to the direct consumption of the individual and the ordering

when the individual adds his general standards of equity (or perhaps his
                                        14
standards of pecuniary emulation). We may refer to the former ordering as

reflecting the tastes of the individual and the latter as reflecting his values.

The distinction between the two is by no means clear-cut. An individual with

esthetic feelings certainly derives pleasure from his neighbor’s having a well-

tended lawn. Under the system of a free market, such feelings play no direct

part in social choice; yet psychologically they differ only slightly from the

pleasure in one’s own lawn. Intuitively, of course, we feel that not all the

possible preferences which an individual might have ought to count; his

preferences for matters which are “none of his business” should be irrelevant.

Without challenging this view, I should like to emphasize that the decision as

to which preferences are relevant and which are not is itself a value judgment

and cannot be settled on an a priori basis. From a formal point of view, one

cannot distinguish between an individual’s dislike for having his grounds

ruined by factory smoke and his extreme distaste for the existence of

heathenism in Central Africa. There are probably not a few individuals in this

country who would regard the former feeling as irrelevant for social policy

and the latter as relevant, though the majority would probably reverse the

judgment. I merely wish to emphasize here that we must look at the entire

system of values, including values about values, in seeking for a truly general

theory of social welfare.

  It is the ordering according to values which takes into account all the

desires of the individual, including the highly important socializing desires,

and which is primarily relevant for the achievement of a social maximum.

The market mechanism, however, takes into account only the ordering

according to tastes. This distinction is the analogue, on the side ofconsumption, of the divergence between social and private costs in
                                                15
production developed by Professor Pigou.

  As for notation, we will let R be the ordering relation for alternative social
                                    i

states from the standpoint of individual i. Sometimes, when several different

ordering relations are being considered for the same individual, the symbols

will be distinguished by adding a superscript. Corresponding to the ordering

relation R, we have the (strict) preference relation P and the indifference
          ii

relation I. If the symbol for the ordering has a prime or second attached
        i

(thus, R', R"), then the corresponding symbols for preference and
      ii

indifference will have the prime or second attached, respectively.

  Similarly, society as a whole will be considered provisionally to have a

social ordering relation for alternative social states, which will be designated

by R, sometimes with a prime or second. Social preference and indifference

will be denoted by P and I, respectively, primes or seconds being attached

when they are attached to the relation R.

  Throughout this analysis it will be assumed that individuals are rational,

by which is meant that the ordering relations Ri satisfy Axioms I and II. The

problem will be to construct an ordering relation for society as a whole that

will also reflect rational choice-making so that R may also be assumed to

satisfy Axioms I and II.


  4. A DIGRESSION ON RATIONALITY AND CHOICE

  The concept of rationality used throughout this study is at the heart of

modern economic analysis, and it cannot be denied that it has great intuitive

appeal; but closer analysis reveals difficulties. These may be illustrated by

consideration of the modern developments in the theory of games and, in
                                                              16
particular, the theory of zero-sum two-person games.

  As noted in Chapter II, Section 2, one of the consequences of the

assumption of rationality is that the choice to be made from any set of

alternatives can be determined by the choices made between pairs of

alternatives. Suppose, however, that the situation is such that the chooser is

never confronted with choices between pairs of alternatives; instead, the

environment may always involve many alternatives. Indeed, that is precisely

the situation in the theory of consumer’s choice under perfect competition;

the actual environment is always a whole line or plane. But, under certainplausible conditions, we can say that the choices made from the actual

environments can be explained as though they were derived from choices

between pairs of alternatives; and, at least conceptually, it makes sense to

imagine the choices actually being made from pairs of alternatives.

  Superficially, the theory of rational behavior in the zero-sum two-person

game seems to fall into the same pattern. We could imagine each of the

players considering all his possible strategies in turn, ordering them on the

basis of the minimum profit (or maximum loss) that he could expect under

each, and then choosing his best strategy by going as high up on the resulting

scale as he can. But the only reason why we regard this solution as truly

rational is that, if both players follow it, neither one will have any incentive to

change his strategy even if he finds out the opponent’s. This is the essence of

the famous min-max or saddle-point theorem. The validity of this theorem,

however, arises from the fact that every time we admit a set of pure strategies

into the player’s environment, we also admit all mixtures of them, i.e., all

probability distributions over such a set of pure strategies. Hence, the

environment (set of admissible strategies), if it contains more than one

strategy, automatically contains an infinite number. Nor can we even

conceptually imagine the choice between two strategies; for, if this limitation

were real, a saddle-point would exist only in special cases, and the ordering

of the strategies by minimum profit would not lead to a solution having the

stability properties described above.

  Thus, the model of rational choice as built up from pair-wise comparisons

does not seem to suit well the case of rational behavior in the described .game

situation. It seems that the essential point is, and this is of general bearing,

that, if conceptually we imagine a choice being made between two

alternatives, we cannot exclude any probability distribution over those two

choices as a possible alternative. The precise shape of a formulation of

rationality which takes the last point into account or the consequences of such

a reformulation on the theory of choice in general or the theory of social

choice in particular cannot be foreseen; but it is at least a possibility, to which

attention should be drawn, that the paradox to be discussed below might be

resolved by such a broader concept of rationality.

  Many writers have felt that the assumption of rationality, in the sense of a

one-dimensional ordering of all possible alternatives, is absolutely necessary

for economic theorizing; for example, Professor Rothschild remarks, “Unlesseconomic units act in conformity with some rational pattern no general theory
                                                                                17
about what would follow from certain premises would be possible.”  There

seems to be no logical necessity for this viewpoint; we could just as well

build up our economic theory on other assumptions as to the structure of
                                                        18
choice functions if the facts seemed to call for it. The work of the

institutionalist school may be regarded in part as such an attempt, though no

systematic treatment has emerged.

  The concept of choice functions not built up from orderings seems to

correspond to Rothschild’s “real irrationality” ; however, such choice

functions need not be the product of impulsive behavior but may conceivably

arise from full reflection, as in the theory of games discussed above.                                CHAPTER III


                THE SOCIAL WELFARE FUNCTION


1. FORMAL STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM OF SOCIAL

                                      CHOICE

  I will largely restate Professor Bergson’s formulation of the problem of
                              1
making welfare judgments  in the terminology here adopted. The various

arguments of his social welfare function are the components of what I have

here termed the social state, so that essentially he is describing the process of

assigning a numerical social utility to each social state, the aim of society

then being described by saying that it seeks to maximize the social utility or

social welfare subject to whatever technological or resource constraints are

relevant or, put otherwise, that it chooses the social state yielding the highest

possible social welfare within the environment. As with any type of behavior

described by maximization, the measurability of social welfare need not be

assumed; all that matters is the existence of a social ordering satisfying

Axioms I and II. As before, all that is needed to define such an ordering is to

know the relative ranking of each pair of alternatives.

  The relative ranking of a fixed pair of alternative social states will vary, in

general, with changes in the values of at least some individuals; to assume

that the ranking does not change with any changes in individual values is to

assume, with traditional social philosophy of the Platonic realist variety, that

there exists an objective social good defined independently of individual

desires. This social good, it was frequently held, could best be apprehended

by the methods of philosophic inquiry. Such a philosophy could be and was

used to justify government by the elite, secular or religious, although we shall

see below that the connection is not a necessary one.

  To the nominalist temperament of the modern period, the assumption of

the existence of the social ideal in some Platonic realm of being was

meaningless. The utilitarian philosophy of Jeremy Bentham and his followers

sought instead to ground the social good on the good of individuals. The

hedonist psychology associated with utilitarian philosophy was further used

to imply that each individual’s good was identical with his desires. Hence,the social good was in some sense to be a composite of the desires of

individuals. A viewpoint of this type serves as a justification of both political

democracy and laissez-faire economics or at least an economic system

involving free choice of goods by consumers and of occupations by workers.

  The hedonist psychology finds its expression here in the assumption that

individuals′ behavior is expressed by individual ordering relations R.
                                                                                i

Utilitarian philosophy is expressed by saying that for each pair of social

states the choice depends on the ordering relations of all individuals, i.e.,

depends on R …, R, where n is the number of individuals in the
              1n

community. Put otherwise, the whole social ordering relation R is to be

determined by the individual ordering relations for social states, R … R We
                                                                              1n

do not exclude here the possibility that some or all of the choices between

pairs of social states made by society might be independent of the preferences

of certain particular individuals, just as a function of several variables might

be independent of some of them.


    DEFINITION 4: By a social welfare function will be meant a process or

rule which, for each set of individual orderings R, …, R for alternative
                                                        in

social states (one ordering for each individual), states a corresponding social

ordering of alternative social states, R.

  As a matter of notation, we will let R be the social ordering corresponding

to the set of individual orderings R … R, the correspondence being that
                                        1n

established by a given social welfare function; if primes or seconds are added

to the symbols for the individual orderings, primes or seconds will be added

to the symbol for the corresponding social ordering.

  There is some difference between the concept of social welfare function

used here and that employed by Bergson. The individual orderings which

enter as arguments into the social welfare function as defined here refer to the

values of individuals rather than to their tastes. Bergson supposes individual

values to be such as to yield a social value judgment leading to a particular

rule for determining the allocation of productive resources and the

distribution of leisure and final products in accordance with individual tastes.

In effect, the social welfare function described here is a method of choosing

which social welfare function of the Bergson type will be applicable, though,

of course, I do not exclude the possibility that the social choice actually

arrived at will not be consistent with the particular value judgmentsformulated by Bergson. But in the formal aspect the difference between the

two definitions of social welfare function is not too important. In Bergson’s

treatment, the tastes of individuals (each for his own consumption) are

represented by utility functions, i.e., essentially by ordering relations; hence

the Bergson social welfare function is also a rule for assigning to each set of

individual orderings a social ordering of social states. Furthermore, as already

indicated, no sharp line can be drawn between tastes and values.

  A special type of social welfare function would be one which assigns the

same social ordering for every set of individual orderings. In this case, of

course, social choices are completely independent of individual tastes, and

we are back in the Platonic case.

  If we do not wish to require any prior knowledge of the tastes of

individuals before specifying our social welfare function, that function will

have to be defined for every logically possible set of individual orderings.

Such a social welfare function would be universal in the sense that it would

be applicable to any community. This ideal seems to be implicit in

Benthamite social ethics and in its latter-day descendant, welfare economics.

  However, we need not ask ourselves if such a universal social welfare

function can be defined. Let an admissible set of individual ordering relations

be a set for which the social welfare function defines a corresponding social

ordering, i.e., a relation satisfying Axioms I and II. A universal social welfare

function would be one for which every set of individual orderings was

admissible. However, we may feel on some sort of a priori grounds that

certain types of individual orderings need not be admissible. For example, it

has frequently been assumed or implied in welfare economics that each

individual values different social states solely according to his consumption

under them. If this be the case, we should only require that our social welfare

function be defined for those sets of individual orderings which are of the

type described; only such should be admissible.

  We will, however, suppose that our a priori knowledge about the

occurrence of individual orderings is incomplete, to the extent that there are

at least three among all the alternatives under consideration for which the

ordering by any given individual is completely unknown in advance. That is,

every logically possible set of individual orderings of a certain set S of three

alternatives can be obtained from some admissible set of individual orderings

of all alternatives. More formally, we have    CONDITION 1: Among all the alternatives there is a set S of three

alternatives such that, for any set of individual orderings T, … T of the
                                                                    1n

alternatives in S, there is an admissible set of individual orderings R, …, R
                                                                                1n

of all the alternatives such that, for each individual i, x R y if and only if x T
                                                                  ii

y for x and y in S.

  Condition 1, it should be emphasized, is a restriction on the form of the

social welfare function since, by definition of an admissible set of individual

orderings, we are requiring that, for some sufficiently wide range of sets of

individual orderings, the social welfare function give rise to a true social

ordering.

  We also wish to impose several other apparently reasonable conditions on

the social welfare function.


        2. POSITIVE ASSOCIATION OF SOCIAL AND

                            INDIVIDUAL VALUES

  Since we are trying to describe social welfare and not some sort of illfare,

we must assume that the social welfare function is such that the social

ordering responds positively to alterations in individual values, or at least not

negatively. Hence, if one alternative social state rises or remains still in the

ordering of every individual without any other change in those orderings, we

expect that it rises, or at least does not fall, in the social ordering.

  This condition can be reformulated as follows: Suppose, in the initial

position, that individual values are given by a set of individual orderings R
                                                                                        1

…, R and suppose that the corresponding social ordering R is such that x P
    n

y, where x and y are two given alternatives and P is the preference relation

corresponding to R, i.e., defined in terms of R in accordance with Definition

1. Suppose values subsequently change in such a way that for each individual

the only change in relative rankings, if any, is that x is higher in the scale than

before. If we call the new individual orderings (those expressing the new set

of values) R, …, R ′ and the social ordering corresponding to them R′, then
            1n

we would certainly expect that x P′ y, where P′ is the preference relation

corresponding to R′. This is a natural requirement since no individual ranks x

lower than he formerly did; if society formerly ranked x above y, we should

certainly expect that it still does.  We have still to express formally the condition that x be not lower on each

individual’s scale while all other comparisons remain unchanged. The last

part of the condition can be expressed by saying that, among pairs of

alternatives neither of which is x, the relation R′ will obtain for those pairs
                                                      1

for which the relation R holds and only such; in symbols, for all x ≠ x and y′
                          i

≠ x, x′ R i′ y′ if and only if x′ R i y′. The condition that x be not lower on the R
                                                                                          i

′ scale than x was on the R scale means that x is preferred on the R scale to
                              ii

any alternative to which it was preferred on the old (Ri) scale and also that x

is preferred or indifferent to any alternative to which it was formerly

indifferent. The two conditions of the last sentence, taken together, are

equivalent to the following two conditions: (1) x is preferred on the new scale

to any alternative to which it was formerly preferred; (2) x is preferred or

indifferent on the new scale to any alternative to which it was formerly

preferred or indifferent. In symbols, for all y′ x R′ y′ implies x R′ y′, and x P
                                                        iii

y′ implies x P′ y′. We can now state the second condition which our social
              i

welfare function must satisfy.


    CONDITION 2: Let R …, R and R′, …, R′ be two sets of individual
                          1n1n

ordering relations, R and R′ the corresponding social orderings, and P and P

′ the corresponding social preference relations. Suppose that for each i the

two individual ordering relations are connected in the following ways: for x′

and y′ distinct from a given alternative x, x′ R′ y′ if and only if x′ R y′ for all y
                                                    ii

′, x R′ y′ implies x R y′ for all y′, x P y′ implies x P′ y′. Then, if x P y, x P′ y.
    iiii


          3. The Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives

  If we consider C(S), the choice function derived from the social ordering

R, to be the choice which society would actually make if confronted with a

set of alternatives S, then, just as for a single individual, the choice made

from any fixed environment S should be independent of the very existence of

alternatives outside of S. For example, suppose that an election system has

been devised whereby each individual lists all the candidates in order of his

preference and then, by a preassigned procedure, the winning candidate is

derived from these lists. (All actual election procedures are of this type,

although in most the entire list is not required for the choice.) Suppose that an

election is held, with a certain number of candidates in the field, eachindividual filing his list of preferences, and then one of the candidates dies.

Surely the social choice should be made by taking each of the individual’s

preference lists, blotting out completely the dead candidate’s name, and

considering only the orderings of the remaining names in going through the

procedure of determining the winner. That is, the choice to be made among

the set S of surviving candidates should be independent of the preferences of

individuals for candidates not in S. To assume otherwise would be to make

the result of the election dependent on the obviously accidental circumstance

of whether a candidate died before or after the date of polling. Therefore, we

may require of our social welfare function that the choice made by society

from a given environment depend only on the orderings of individuals among

the alternatives in that environment. Alternatively stated, if we consider two

sets of individual orderings such that, for each individual, his ordering of

those particular alternatives in a given environment is the same each time,

then we require that the choice made by society from that environment be the

same when individual values are given by the first set of orderings as they are

when given by the second.


    CONDITION 3: Let R, … R and R, …, R ′ be two sets of individual
                          1n1n

orderings and let C(S) and C′(S) be the corresponding social choice

functions. If, for all individuals i and all x and y in a given environment S, x

R y if and only if x R′ y, then C(S) and C′(S) are the same (independence of
ii

irrelevant alternatives).

  The reasonableness of this condition can be seen by consideration of the

possible results in a method of choice which does not satisfy Condition 3, the
                                                              2
rank-order method of voting frequently used in clubs. With a finite number

of candidates, let each individual rank all the candidates, i.e., designate his

first-choice candidate, second-choice candidate, etc. Let preassigned weights

be given to the first, second, etc., choices, the higher weight to the higher

choice, and then let the candidate with the highest weighted sum of votes be

elected. In particular, suppose that there are three voters and four candidates,

x, y, z, and w. Let the weights for the first, second, third, and fourth choices

be 4, 3, 2, and 1, respectively. Suppose that individuals 1 and 2 rank the

candidates in the order x, y, z, and w, while individual 3 ranks them in the

order z, w, x, and y. Under the given electoral system, x is chosen. Then,

certainly, if y is deleted from the ranks of the candidates, the system applied

to the remaining candidates should yield the same result, especially since, inthis case, y is inferior to x according to the tastes of every individual; but, if y

is in fact deleted, the indicated. electoral system would yield a tie between x

and z.

  A similar problem arises in ranking teams in a contest which is essentially

individual, e.g., a foot race in which there are several runners from each

college, and where it is desired to rank the institutions on the basis of the

rankings of the individual runners. This problem has been studied by
                                3
Professor E. V. Huntington, who showed by means of an example that the

usual method of team scoring in those circumstances, a method analogous to

the rank-order method of voting, was inconsistent with a condition analogous

to Condition 3, which Huntington termed the postulate of relevancy.

  The condition of the independence of irrelevant alternatives implies that in

a generalized sense all methods of social choice are of the type of voting. If S

is the set [x, y] consisting of the two alternatives x and y, Condition 3 tells us

that the choice between x and y is determined solely by the preferences of the

members of the community as between x and y. That is, if we know which

members of the community prefer x to y, which are indifferent, and which

prefer y to x, then we know what choice the community makes. Knowing the

social choices made in pair-wise comparisons in turn determines the entire

social ordering and therewith the social choice function C(S) for all possible

environments. Condition 2 guarantees that voting for a certain alternative has

the usual effect of making surer that that alternative will be adopted.

  Condition 1 says, in effect, that, as the environment varies and individual

orderings remain fixed, the different choices made shall bear a certain type of

consistent relation to each other. Conditions 2 and 3, on the other hand,

suppose a fixed environment and say that, for certain particular types of

variation in individual values, the various choices made have a certain type of

consistency.


    4. THE CONDITION OF CITIZENS’ SOVEREIGNTY

  We certainly wish to assume that the individuals in our society are free to

choose, by varying their values, among the alternatives available. That is, we

do not wish our social welfare function to be such as to prevent us, by its very

definition, from expressing a preference for some given alternative over

another.    DEFINITION 5: A social welfare function will be said to be imposed if, for

some pair of distinct alternatives x and y, x R y for any set of individual

orderings R,…, R, where R is the social ordering corresponding to R … R
            1n1n

  In other words, when the social welfare function is imposed, there is some

pair of alternatives x and y such that the community can never express a

preference for y over x no matter what the tastes of all individuals are, even if

all individuals prefer y to x; some preferences are taboo. (Note that, by

Definition 1, asserting that x R y holds for all sets of individual orderings is

equivalent to asserting that y P x never holds.)

  At the beginning of this study, allusion was made to the type of social

choice in which decisions are made in accordance with a customary code. It

is arguable whether or not Definition 5 catches the essence of the intuitive

idea of conventional choice. In the true case of customary restraints on social

choice, presumably the restraints are not felt as such but really are part of the

tastes of the individuals. The problems here involve psychological subtleties;

can we speak, in the given situation, of true desires of the individual members

of the society which are in conflict with the custom of the group?

  If the answer to the last question is yes, then Definition 5 is indeed a

correct formalization of the concept of conventionality. But we need not give

a definite answer, and this is especially fortunate since an examination of the

question would take us very far afield indeed. For certainly we wish to

impose on our social welfare function the condition that it not be imposed in

the sense of Definition 5; we certainly wish all choices to be possible if

unanimously desired by the group. If Definition 5 is not a model of

customary choice, it is at least a model of external control, such as obtains in

a colony or an occupied country.


    CONDITION 4: The social welfare function is not to be imposed.

  Condition 4 is stronger than need be for the present argument. Some

decisions as between given pairs of alternatives may be assumed to be

imposed. All that is required really is that there be a set S of three alternatives

such that the choice between any pair is not constrained in advance by the

social welfare function. This set S must also have the properties indicated in

Condition 1.

  If the answer to the question asked earlier is that there is no sense in

speaking of a conflict of wills between the individual and the sacred code,then we have a situation in which it is known in advance that the individual

orderings of social alternatives conform to certain restrictions, i.e., that

certain of the choices made by individuals are preassigned. In that case, we

might desire that the social welfare function be defined only for sets of

individual orderings compatible with the known socio-ethical norms of the

community; this requirement may involve a weakening of Condition 1. This

point will be discussed at greater length in Chapter VII.

  It should also be noted that Condition 4 excludes the Platonic case

discussed in Section 1 of this chapter. It expresses fully the idea that all social

choices are determined by individual desires. In conjunction with Condition 2

(which insures that the determination is in the direction of agreeing with

individual desires), Condition 4 expresses the same idea as Bergson’s

Fundamental Value Propositions of Individual Preference, which state that,

between two alternatives between which all individuals but one are

indifferent, the community will prefer one over the other or be indifferent

between the two according as the one individual prefers one over the other or
                                  4
is indifferent between the two. Conditions 2 and 4 together correspond to the

usual concept of consumer’s sovereignty; since we are here referring to

values rather than tastes, we might refer to them as expressing the idea of

citizens’ sovereignty.


        5. THE CONDITION OF NONDICTATORSHIP

  A second form of social choice not of a collective character is the choice

by dictatorship. In its pure form, it means that social choices are to be based

solely on the preferences of one man. That is, whenever the dictator prefers x

to y, so does society. If the dictator is indifferent between x and y, presumably

he will then leave the choice up to some or all of the other members of

society.


    DEFINITION 6: A social welfare function is said to be dictatorial if there

exists an individual i such that, for all x and y, x P y implies x P y regardless
                                                          i

of the orderings R, …, R of all individuals other than i, where P is the
                    1n

social preference relation corresponding to R, … R
                                                    in

  Since we are interested in the construction of collective methods of social

choice, we wish to exclude dictatorial social welfare functions.    CONDITION 5: The social welfare function is not to be dictatorial (non-

dictatorship).

  Again, it cannot be claimed that Definition 6 is a true model of actual

dictatorship. There is normally an element of consent by the members of the

community or at least a good many of them. This may be expressed formally

by saying that the desires of those individuals include a liking for having
                                        5
social decisions made by a dictator  or at least a liking for the particular

social decisions which they expect the dictator to make. The idea of a taste

for dictatorship on the part of individuals will be discussed in Chapter VII at

somewhat greater length. However, in any case, Condition 5 is certainly a

reasonable one to impose on the form of the social welfare function.

  We have now imposed five apparently reasonable conditions on the

construction of a social welfare function. These conditions are, of course,

value judgments and could be called into question; taken together they

express the doctrines of citizens′ sovereignty and rationality in a very general

form, with the citizens being allowed to have a wide range of values. The

question raised is that of constructing a social ordering of all conceivable

alternative social states from any given set of individual orderings of those

social states, the method of construction being in accordance with the value

judgments of citizens′ sovereignty and rationality as expressed in Conditions

1-5.


                6. THE SUMMATION OF UTILITIES

  It may be instructive to consider that proposed social welfare function

which has the longest history, the Bentham-Edgeworth sum of individual

utilities. As it stands, this form seems to be excluded by the entire nature of

the present approach, since, in Chapter II, Section 1, we agreed to reject the

idea of cardinal utility, and especially of inter-personally comparable utility.

However, presumably the sum of utilities could be reformulated in a way

which depends only on the individual orderings and not on the utility

indicators. This seems to be implied by Bergson’s discussion of this social
                  6
welfare function; though he presents a number of cogent arguments against

the sum-of-utilities form, he does not find that it contradicts the Fundamental

Value Propositions of Individual Preference (see Section 4 above), which he

would have to if he did not consider that form to be determined by the

individual orderings. The only way that I can see of making the sum ofutilities depend only on the indifference loci is the following: Since to each

individual ordering there corresponds an infinite number of utility indicators,

set up an arbitrary rule which assigns to each indifference map one of its

utility indicators; then the sum of the particular utility indicators chosen by

the rule is a function of the individual orderings and can be used to establish a

social ordering.

  Obviously, this formation of the sum of utilities will lead to different

decisions in a given situation with different choices of the rule. For any rule,

Condition 1 is satisfied. However, Conditions 2 and 3 essentially prescribe

that, for a given environment, the choice made shall vary in a particular way

with certain variations in the orderings of individuals. This being so, it is

clear that for the sum of utilities to satisfy Conditions 2 and 3, it would be

necessary for the rule to be stringently limited; in fact, the general theorem,

established in Chapter V, guarantees that the only rules which would make

the sum of utilities satisfy Conditions 2 and 3, if any, lead it to violate either

Condition 4 or Condition 5. Indeed, according to Theorem 3 in Chapter VI,

Section 3, the same would be true even if it were assumed that the utility of

each individual depended solely on his own consumption. I have not been

able to construct a special proof of this fact for the sum of utilities which is

essentially different from the proof of the general theorem.

  It may be of interest, however, to consider a particular rule for assigning
                                              7
utility indicators to individual orderings. Assume that the individual

orderings for probability distributions over alternatives obey the axioms of
                                    8
von Neumann and Morgenstern; then there is a method of assigning utilities

to the alternatives, unique up to a linear transformation, which has the

property that the probability distributions over alternatives are ordered by the

expected value of utility. Assume that for each individual there is always one

alternative which is preferred or indifferent to all other conceivable

alternatives and one to which all other alternatives are preferred or

indifferent. Then, for each individual, the utility indicator can be defined

uniquely among the previously defined class, which is unique up to a linear

transformation, by assigning the utility 1 to the best conceivable alternative

and 0 to the worst conceivable alternative. This assignment of values is

designed to make individual utilities interpersonally comparable.

  It is not hard to see that the suggested assignment of utilities is extremely

unsatisfactory. Suppose there are altogether three alternatives and threeindividuals. Let two of the individuals have the utility 1 for alternative x, .9

for y, and 0 for z; and let the third individual have the utility 1 for y, .5 for x

and 0 for z. According to the above criterion, y is preferred to x. Clearly, z is a

very undesirable alternative since each individual regards it as worst. If z

were blotted out of existence, it should not make any difference to the final

outcome; yet, under the proposed rule for assigning utilities to alternatives,

doing so would cause the first two individuals to have utility 1 for x and 0 for

y while the third individual has utility 0 for x and 1 for y, so that the ordering

by sum of utilities would cause x to be preferred to y.

  A simple modification of the above argument shows that the proposed rule

does not lead to a sum-of-utilities social welfare function consistent with

Condition 3. Instead of blotting z out of existence, let the individual orderings

change in such a way that the first two individuals find z indifferent to x and

the third now finds z indifferent to y while the relative positions of x and y are

unchanged in all individual orderings. Then the assignment of utilities to x

and y becomes the same as it became in the case of blotting out z entirely, so

that again the choice between x and y is altered, contrary to Condition 3.

  The above result appears to depend on the particular method of choosing

the units of utility. But this is not true, although the paradox is not so obvious

in other cases. The point is, in general, that the choice of two particular

alternatives to produce given utilities (say 0 and 1) is an arbitrary act, and this

arbitrariness is ultimately reflected in the failure of the implied social welfare

function to satisfy one of the conditions laid down.                                CHAPTER IV


                THE COMPENSATION PRINCIPLE


                    1. The Payment of Compensation

  TO clarify further the difficulties in constructing a social welfare function,

let us consider another proposed form, the compensation principle. This term

has been used to denote two different, though related, methods of forming
                                              1
social choices from individual orderings. One is the dictum that, if there is a

method of paying compensations such that, if society changes from state y to

state x and then makes compensations according to the rule, each individual

prefers the resultant state to state y (or each individual either prefers the

resultant state to state y or is indifferent between them and at least one

individual actually prefers the resultant state), then the community ought to

prefer x to y if the compensations are made.

  This formulation is certainly not debatable except perhaps on a philosophy

of systematically denying people whatever they want. Actually, it is a rather

roundabout way of saying something simple. For what is relevant is not the

state x before the compensations are paid but the state which is achieved by

first changing from y to x and then making the indicated compensations. It is

really the latter state which is preferred to y; let us redesignate this state by x.

In the language we have been using, we may say that x P y if x R y for all i
                                                                            i

and x P y for at least one value of i, where P is the social preference relation
      i

corresponding to the individual orderings R … R If we supplement this
                                                  1n

with the statement that x I y if x I y for all i, then we have simply Professor
                                      i
                                                                                2
Bergson’s Fundamental Value Propositions of Individual Preference.

  Let us now define a relation, x Q y, as follows:

(1)                x Q y means that, for all i, x R y.
                                                i

It has been assumed that, for all i, Ri is a weak ordering relation and so

satisfies Axioms I and II. From Lemma 1(a),

(2)                  for all i, x R x.
                            iFrom Axiom II,

(3)                  for all i, x R y and y R z imply x R z.
                            iii

From (2) and (1), it is clear that,

(4)                  for all x, x Q x.

Suppose that we have x Q y and y Q z; then, for each i, x R y and y R z, by
                                                                    ii

(1), so that, for each i, x R Z, by (3). But then, by (1), x Q z. Therefore,
                            i

(5)                  for all x, y, and z, x Q y and y Q z imply x Q z.

  For convenience, we will introduce a formal definition for relations having

properties (4) and (5).


    DEFINITION 7: Q is said to be a quasi-ordering if,

  (a) for all x, x Q x;
                                                              3
  (b) for all x, y, and z, x Q y and y Q z imply x Q z.

Note that under this definition some pairs of alternatives can be compared

under a given quasi-ordering while there may be other pairs that are not

comparable, i.e., such that neither x Q y nor y Q x.

  We are saying, then, that the particular relation Q defined by (1) is a quasi-

ordering of the space of alternatives. Suppose that, in the case of our

particular Q, we know that the individual orderings R, … R are such that x
                                                              1n

Q y. Then we certainly feel that we could assert that x R y, though we would

not be able to assert that x P y, since, for example, we can have x Q y because

x I y for each i.
i

  Suppose, in the case of the relation Q defined by (1), we know that the

individual orderings are such that x Q y and not y Q x. From (1), this means

that for all i, x R y, while, for at least one i, not y R x, which, by Lemma 1(e),
                  ii

means that, for at least one i, x P y. This is the assumption of the form of the
                                    i

compensation principle with which we started. We would feel it reasonable to

require that, under these circumstances, x P y. Summing up, the relations

between Q and the social ordering R are that x Q y implies x R y, and that x Q

y and not y Q x imply x R y and not y R x. We shall introduce this as a general

definition.


    DEFINITION 8: R is said to be compatible with Q if  (a) R is a weak ordering;

  (b) Q is a quasi-ordering;

  (c) for all x and y, x Q y implies x R y;

  (d) for all x and y, x Q y and not y Q x imply not y R x.


  Let the particular quasi-ordering Q denned by (1) be known as the

unanimity quasi-ordering. It depends, of course, on the particular set of

individual orderings. The “compensation principle” discussed in this section

may be restated as follows; For any set of individual orderings, the

corresponding social ordering is compatible with the unanimity quasi-

ordering. As already noted (fn. 4, Chapter III), this principle is not deducible

from Conditions 1-5 as they now stand, but it would be de-ducible if a slight

modification in the statement of Condition 2 were made.

  This formulation suggests the following problem: If x and y are both in an

environment S, and x Q y but not y Q x, then x P y, so that, by Definition 3, y

would not belong to C(S). Hence, if we could find all alternatives y in S for

which there exists an x in S such that x Q y and not y Q x, we could exclude

all such y from consideration in seeking to determine C(S); or, if we could

find all alternatives x for which there do not exist any y such that y Q x but

not x Q y, we would know that C(S) must be contained among such

alternatives. Alternatives x having this property may be termed maximal.

  The study of the last problem, under particular assumptions as to the

nature of S and of the individual orderings, has indeed been the main content
                                                                  4
of what is sometimes called the new welfare economics. Investigation along

these lines has been encouraged by the idea that these results are independent

of any but the most indisputable value judgments. But though the study of

maximal alternatives is possibly a useful preliminary to the analysis of

particular social welfare functions, it is hard to see how any policy

recommendation can be based merely on a knowledge of the maximal

alternatives. There is no way of determining which maximal alternative to

decide on; furthermore, even if the current social state is known to be

nonmaximal, so that several other alternatives are known to be better than it,

there is no way of knowing which of these other alternatives to change to, so

that the community will find itself in much the same position as Buridan’s

ass. There is the less need to discuss the insufficiency of the new welfare

economics as a basis for social choice since this point has been argued so                                  5
well by Professor Samuelson.

  However, we may go even further than Samuelson and doubt that any

study of maximal alternatives will actually be useful in studying those aspects

of social choice which are directly related to consumer’s (and worker’s)

choice. The currently accepted doctrine in this field is that at the social

optimum the marginal rate of substitution between two commodities be the

same for all consumers. This is derived on the hypothesis that each individual

orders social states solely in accordance with the commodities that he

receives under each. But it will be shown in Chapter VI that no social welfare

function consistent with Conditions 1-5 can be formed if it is assumed that

individual orderings of social states are formed in the individualistic manner

just sketched, for this is precisely the situation in which the valuations placed

on alternative income distributions by different individuals conflict most

sharply. That is, the current analysis of maximal social states is applicable

precisely when it cannot serve the function of a preliminary to a complete

enumeration of the social ordering. This argument will be somewhat qualified

in Chapter VI, Section 3.

  Of course, a study of maximal social states can be made on other than

individualistic assumptions as to the tastes of individuals. But clearly it is

necessary first to study the assumptions on individual orderings which will

permit the formation of satisfactory social welfare functions before

proceeding with the determination of maximal social states.

  The same argument does not hold against the corresponding study of the

optimum conditions on the production side; but the reason is that these

conditions relate to resources whose employment in alternative uses is

indifferent to every member of the community except indirectly because of
                                                                          6
the varying productivity of those resources in the different uses. It is only

this assumption that really distinguishes the optimal conditions of production

from those of exchange.


          2. THE POSSIBILITY OF COMPENSATION

  The compensation principle has been given another meaning first
                              7
introduced by Mr. Kaldor: In a choice between two alternatives x and y, if

there is a method of compensation under state x such that everybody can be

made better off in the state resulting from making the compensations under xthan they are in y (or everybody can be made at least as well off as in state y

and at least one person better off), then x should be chosen above y, even if

the compensation is not actually paid. It is not contended that the choice

pattern dictated by the above rule, which we may term the Kaldor

compensation principle, is necessarily optimal from a deeper ethical

viewpoint since, of course, it is not precluded that the income distribution

prevailing under x might be very unjust indeed. However, Kaldor argues that

we can at least say that x is better than y from the viewpoint of aggregate

production, leaving the problem of distribution to be settled separately.

  The Kaldor compensation principle has been strongly endorsed by
                                                      8
Professor Hicks, and criticized by Mr. Baumol. The latter’s argument is

twofold: (1) the principle carries with it an implicit interpersonal comparison

of utility since the potential (but not actual) compensations which are used in

the reckoning are measured in money terms, and the social value of a unit of

money is therefore reckoned to be the same in the hands of a rich man as in

the hands of a poor man; (2) even in the seemingly innocuous case where

everybody is actually better off under alternative x than under alternative y, to

say that x is better would be valid only in some sort of utilitarian scheme of

ethics. The latter point, as has already been seen, is no doubt formally valid in

that some sort of value judgment is involved; but the value judgment in

question is such a generalized one that we would all be well content to

assume it. This is especially so if it is realized that being “better off” may be

a function not only of the individual’s own consumption, but also of that of

others and of the social structure in general, as Baumol himself observes in a

footnote.

  The first objection seems to be somewhat vague. It is true that the results

of applying the Kaldor principle would be the same as those of applying the

summation-of-utilities criterion when the marginal utility of real income is

constant and the same from individual to individual—assuming that the last

proviso makes any sense—but this statement is not the same as saying that

the Kaldor compensation principle assumes interpersonal comparison of

utility. Rather, the Kaldor principle amounts to choosing utility indicators for

various individuals′ indifference maps according to a rule which makes the

marginal utility of income have certain properties; see Chapter III, Section 6.

Of course, this means that the principle is arbitrary in the sense that some

other rule of choosing utility indicators could have been chosen. For example,instead of finding out from each individual how much of a compensation

(positive or negative) each individual would require in state x so that he

would be just as well off as in state y and then saying that the community is

better off under x than under y if the sum of these compensations is positive,

we might find out what fraction (positive or negative) of his income under

state x each individual would require to be as well off as in state y and then

say that the community is better off under x than under y if the sum of these
                      9
fractions is positive. The latter rule bears the same relation to the Bernoulli

assumption, that the marginal utility of income is inversely proportional to

the income, that the Kaldor rule bears to the assumption of constant marginal

utility of income. Essentially, Baumol’s objection, then, is to the arbitrary

nature of Kaldor’s principle.

  However, even though the Kaldor compensation principle is one of an

infinite class, all of which have about the same degree of “reasonableness,” it

still may be in order to ask if this class at least belongs among the principles

for social action which are not to be definitely discarded for some reason. A

matter which immediately springs to mind is the desirability of the goal

which Kaldor and Hicks set for themselves, that of separating the production

aspects of a desired change in social state from the distribution aspects. Any

given choice is made on the basis of both considerations; even if a clear-cut

meaning were given to an ordering of social states in terms of production, it

would not be in the least obvious what use that ordering would be in relation

to the desired ordering of social states in terms of all relevant factors,

including distributional elements as well as production.

  But a deeper objection is that, in a world of more than one commodity,

there is no unequivocal meaning to comparing total production in any two

social states save in terms of some standard of value which makes the

different commodities commensurable; and usually such a standard of value

must depend on the distribution of income. In other words, there is no

meaning to total output independent of distribution. In a one-commodity

world, i.e., one consumers′ good and no labor, of course, the ambiguity

disappears, and the Kaldor principle says to maximize the total output of the
                  10
one commodity. But in general it would appear that, if a state y is discarded

and replaced by a state x in accordance with the instructions given by the

Kaldor principle, the standard of value used in defining total output is then

different from what it formerly was, so that we have, as Baumol says, “ameasuring rod which bends, stretches, and ultimately falls to pieces in our
        11
hands.” 

  This argument fits well into our formal framework. The Kaldor

compensation principle is being proposed as a social welfare function in the

sense of Definition 4. Consider the relation x C y, meaning “x is derivable

from y by means of compensation payments.” For a given set of individual

orderings, let R be the corresponding social ordering, P the corresponding

social (strict) preference relation (see Definition 1), and Q the unanimity

quasi-ordering introduced in the last section. Then Kaldor’s principle says

that x P y if there exists an alternative x′ such that x′ C x, x′ Q y, and not y Q x

′. It is immediately clear that the Kaldor principle, as stated, violates

Condition 3, for, if we do not have both x Q y and not y Q x, the choice

between x and y depends on the relation Q as between some alternatives not

in [x, y] and y, and therefore depends on the orderings of individuals for

alternatives not in [x, y].

  However, we may restate matters in such a way that the Kaldor principle

does not violate Condition 3, and I believe this restatement will carry out the

meaning of Kaldor and Hicks. The relation C which was introduced may be

postulated to have the following properties:

(1)                                            for all x x C x;

(2)                              for all x and y, x C y implies y C x;

(3)                 for all x y and z, x C y and y C z imply x C z.

The meaning of these properties is obvious: the first property holds since x

can be derived from itself by having everybody pay zero compensation; the

second holds since, if x can be derived from y by having individual i pay

compensation c (positive or negative), then y can be derived from x by
                i

having individual i pay compensation − c; the third holds since, if x can be
                                                i

derived from y by having individual i pay c and y from z by having
                                                  i

individual i pay c′, then x can be derived from z by having individual i pay c
                  ii

+ c′.
  i

  A relation C having properties (l)-(3) is frequently referred to as an
                                          12
equivalence or equivalence relation. The relation of indifference is one

example of such a relation. As is well known, the indifference relation or any

other equivalence can be used to divide the entire original space into mutuallyexclusive subsets such that each element of any one subset bears the given

relation to any other element of that subset, while, if two elements belong to

different subsets, the given relation does not hold between them. For

example, the indifference relation divides the space of commodity bundles

into indifference loci, which have the prescribed properties. In a similar way,

the relation C divides all possible social states into mutually exclusive subsets

such that x C y for any x and y in the same subset, while neither x C y nor y C
                                            13
x if x and y are not in the same subset. Any one of these subsets may be

referred to as a compensatory-equivalent class. The spirit of the Kaldor-Hicks

approach is to consider two elements of the same compensatory-equivalent

class as being at the same level of production; the choice among such

elements is a question of ethical standards concerning distribution. In line

with this, we may imagine a preliminary value judgment as to distribution,

selecting from each compensatory-equivalent class one social state which is

to be considered admissible. The purpose of the Kaldor principle is then only

to rank the admissible alternatives. The other alternatives in any

  compensatory-equivalent class exist only for the purpose of calculation.

Suppose we interpret Condition 3 as requiring only that the choice between

any two admissible alternatives be invariant under a change in the individual

orderings of other admissible alternatives (not necessarily under changes in

the individual orderings of nonadmissible alternatives or in the comparisons

between nonadmissi-ble and admissible alternatives). Then Condition 3 is
                                                                14
satisfied by this restricted form of the Kaldor principle.

  But, even with this modification, the social welfare function defined by

the Kaldor compensation principle is not compatible with Condition 1, i.e.,

the social ordering of alternatives generated out of the individual orderings is

not even a consistent ranking of those alternatives in the sense of satisfying
                                                                  15
Axioms I and II. For, as Professor Scitovsky has shown, it is possible under

the Kaldor principle that there exists a set of individual orderings such that

both x P y and y P x, a result which is obviously incompatible with the
                                                                16
existence of a true social ordering of alternative states.

  As stated, Scitovsky’s argument is applicable even if there are only two

admissible alternatives to rank. That is, there are other logically conceivable

alternatives, derived from one or the other of the two given alternatives by a

process of compensations, but, as above, a preliminary value judgment as to

distribution has removed them from consideration and the only socialordering desired is between the two given alternatives. In the case of two

alternatives, however, a simple modification of the Kaldor principle

immediately suggests itself for the purpose of removing the contradiction.

We may call it the Scitovsky compensation principle; x R y if and only if

there is an alternative x′ such that

(4) x’ C x

and

(5)                 x′ Q y.

We shall assume that, as will usually be the case, for any two alternatives x

and y, either there is a method of compensation under x which will make

everyone as well off as under y or, if not, there will be a method of

compensation under y which will make everyone as well off as under x. This

amounts to saying, by (4) and (5), that

                                                        17
(6)                 for all x and y, either x R y or y R x.


  Since Q is a quasi-ordering, it follows from Definition 7(a) that,

(7)                 for all x, x Q x.

From (7) and (1), it follows that (4) and (5) are satisfied if both x′ and y are

equal to x.

(8)                 For all x, x R x.


  Now suppose that x R y and y R z. Since there are only two alternatives

altogether, two of the three alternatives, x, y, and z, must be the same. If x =

y, then y R z implies x R z; if y = z, then x R y implies x R z; if x = z, then x R

z is equivalent to x R x, which is known to be true by (8).

(9)                 For all x, y, and z, x R y and y R z imply x R z.


  By (6) and (9), the relation R defined by the Scitovsky compensation

principle is a true weak ordering relation in the case where there are only two

admissible alternatives. The relation R is the double test proposed by
                                        18
Scitovsky and accepted by Kaldor; that is, apply the Kaldor principle in

those cases where it does not lead to inconsistency; otherwise, say the two

alternatives are indifferent.  But the real force of Scitovsky’s argument is felt when the number of

admissible alternatives becomes more than two, e.g., when the choice is not

between free trade and some particular tariff, but the problem is to rank a

large number of different possible tariff schedules. Let us consider the

Scitovsky compensation principle in this case. If R is really a weak ordering

relation, then, by Lemma 1(d), the indifference relation formed from it by

Definition 2 is transitive. We shall show by means of an example that

Scitovsky indifference is not transitive, and hence that the Scitovsky

compensation principle is not a social welfare function satisfying Condition

1. Note that, from (4) and (5), indifference between alternatives x and y

means that there is a way of redistributing the goods under x so that everyone

is at least as well off as under y and also a way of redistributing the goods

under y so that everyone is at least as well off as under x. We will suppose

that there are two commodities, two individuals, and three alternative social

states, each state being described by giving the amount of each commodity

held by each individual under that state. The description is given by the table

below. We will assume that each individual orders different social states by

the commodity bundles he gets under each. Let a commodity bundle be

designated by (a, 6), where a is the amount of the first commodity in the

bundle and b the amount of the second commodity. Suppose that the

indifference map of individual 1 is such that the bundles (2.1, 1.0), (1.0, 2.0),

(2.4, .7), (1.7, 1.3), and (2.0, 1.0) are preferred in that order and that the

indifference curve through the bundle (1.0, 2.0) contains no bundle in which

the quantity of the second commodity is less than .9. Similarly, suppose that

the indifference map of individual 2 orders the bundles (1.4, 1.4), (1.0, 2.0),

(1.6, 1.3), (1.8, 1.1), and (2.0, 1.0) in that order and that the indifference

curve through (1.0, 2.0) has no point on it for which the second coordinate is

less than 1.2. It can easily be seen that there are indifference maps having the

indicated properties in which the indifference curves are continuous, convex,

and downward-sloping. 

Individual 1 Individual 2

 

Social State
Commodity 1 | Commodity2 | Commodity 1 | Commodity 2

 

wew
o
oNo
0o
owo
P
owo
PO o
oo

 
  In state y, each individual is better off or not worse off than in state x, so

that it is trivial to say that there exists a redistribution of the goods in state y

which will make everybody no worse off than in state x. On the other hand,

there are a total of four units of commodity 1 and two of commodity 2 in

state x. Suppose we redistribute the quantities in state x as follows: give 2.4

units of commodity 1 and .7 unit of commodity 2 to individual 1 and the

remainder, 1.6 units of commodity 1 and 1.3 units of commodity 2, to

individual 2. Then both individuals are better off than in state y. Therefore,

there is a redistribution of the goods in state x which makes everybody at

least as well off as in state y and hence, by the above definition of Scitovsky

indifference, states x and y are indifferent.

  By looking at their preference scales, it is clear that both individuals are

better off in state z than in state y. On the other hand, there are 3.5 units of

commodity 1 in state y and 2.4 units of commodity 2. Redistribute them as

follows: (2.1, 1.0) to individual 1 and (1.4, 1.4) to individual 2. Then both

individuals are better off than in z. Therefore, again states y and z are

indifferent.

  It will now be shown that states x and z are not indifferent. It is again

obvious that each individual prefers z to x. For individual 1 to be at least as

well off as in z, he must have at least .9 unit of the second commodity, while

individual 2 must have at least 1.2 units. In any distribution of goods which

will make both individuals at least as well off as in state z, there must, then,

be a total of at least 2.1 units of the second commodity; but there are only 2

units of the second commodity available in state x. Therefore, every possible

redistribution in state x leads to a situation in which at least one individual is

worse off than in z, so that x and z are not indifferent, and hence Scitovsky’s

indifference is not transitive.  The comparison of states x and y illustrates another difficulty with any

form of the compensation principle which does not involve actual payments.

It is possible for every individual to be better off in one state than another

(here, state y as compared with state x), and yet there is a redistribution of the

goods in state x so that everybody is no worse off than in the obviously

superior state y. This suggests strongly that unaccomplished redistributions

are irrelevant.

  It is to be noted that the arguments presented here against the

compensation principle in its various forms are independent of the contention

that that principle involves an undue sanctification of the status quo. The last

argument amounts to objecting on ethical grounds to a certain value judgment

implicit in the principle, whereas the previous arguments have been to the

effect that the value judgments defining the principle were inconsistent with

the possibility of rational choice by the community as a whole.                                  CHAPTER V


THE GENERAL POSSIBILITY THEOREM FOR SOCIAL

                          WELFARE FUNCTIONS


              1. THE NUMBER OF ALTERNATIVES

  The discussion of particular social welfare functions in Chapter III,

Section 6, and Chapter IV suggests strongly that it will be very difficult to

construct a social welfare function consistent with Conditions 1–5. The

example of the Scitovsky compensation principle, as given in Chapter IV,

Section 2, indicates that there is likely to be a difference between the case

where the total number of alternatives to be ranked is two and the case where

the number exceeds two. Indeed, if there are two alternatives, it is possible to

construct such a social welfare function. Condition 1 must, of course, be

altered for this case. We demand now that every set of individual orderings of

the two alternatives in question give rise to a social ordering satisfying

Axioms I and II.

  DEFINITION 9: By the method of majority decision is meant the social

welfare function in which x R y holds if and only if the number of individuals

such that x R y is at least as great as the number of individuals such that y R
              ii

x.

  It is not hard to see that the method of majority decision satisfies

Conditions 1–5 when there are only two alternatives. To show that it satisfies

Condition 1 we must show that R, as defined, is a weak ordering, i.e., is

connected and transitive. For convenience, let N (x, y) be the number of

individuals such that x R y. Then
                          i

(1)                 x R y if and only if N (x, y) ≥ N (y, x).

Clearly, always either N (x, y) ≥ N (y, x) or N (y, x) ≥ N (x, y), so that,

(2)                 for all x and y, x R y or y R x,

by (1), and R is connected. To show transitivity, suppose x R y and y R z.

Since there are only two alternatives, two of x, y, and z are equal. As already

shown in the case of the Scitovsky compensation principle, the conclusion xR z is trivial if x = y or y = z. To show x R z in the case x = z is equivalent to

showing x R x. But, by (1), x R x is equivalent to the proposition N (x, x) ≥ N

(x, x), and is certainly true. Hence, transitivity holds. In conjunction with (2),

this proves that R is a weak ordering, so that

(3)                 the method of majority decision satisfies Condition 1.

  Now consider Condition 2. Let R, …, R be such that x P y, i.e., x R y and
                                          1n

not y R x. By (1), this means N (x, y) ≥ N (y, x) but not N (y, x) ≥ N (x, y) i.e.,

(4)                 N (x, y) ≥ N (y, x).

Let R′, …, Rn′ be a new set of individual orderings satisfying the hypothesis
    i

of Condition 2, i.e., for x′ ≠ x, y′ ≠ x, x′ R′ y′ if and only if x′ R y′; x R y′
                                              iii

implies x R′ y′; and x P y′ implies x P′ y′. Consider, in particular, the last
            iii

two conditions with y′ = y.

(5)                 x R y implies x R′ y;
                ii

(6)                 x P y implies x P′ y.
                ii

Suppose, for some i, y R′ x. By Definition 1, not x P′ y, and therefore, by
                            ii

(6), not x P y. Hence, by Lemma 1(e), y R x. That is,
            ii

(7)                 y R′ x implies y R x.
                ii

Let N′ (x, y) be the number of individuals for whom x R′ y; similarly, N′ (y,
                                                                i

x) is the number of individuals for whom y R′ x. By (5), every individual for
                                                    i

whom x R′ y has the property x R′ y; hence, N′ (x, y) ≥ N (x, y). Similarly,
          ii

from (7), N (y, x) ≥ N′ (y, x). From (4), N′ (x, y) ≥ N′ (y, x) or N′ (x, y) ≥ N′(y,

x) and not N′ (y, x) ≥ N′ (x, y). By (1), this means that x R′ y but not y R′,

where R′ is the social ordering corresponding to the set of individual

orderings R′ …, R′, or x P′ y, by Definition 1. Therefore, Condition 2 is
            1n

satisfied.

  Condition 3 (independence of irrelevant alternatives) is trivial in this case

because the only set S that contains more than one member contains the entire

universe, which consists of two members. If S contains one element, C (S) is

that one element independent of tastes about alternatives not in S; if S

contains two elements, C (S) is certainly determined by individual orderings

for elements in S since there are no others.  As for Condition 4 for any x and y, suppose that individual orderings were

such that y P x for all i. Then, for everybody, y R x, while, for nobody, x R
              iii

y. Hence, N (y, x) ≥ N (x, y) but not N (x, y) ≥ N (y, x), so, by (1), y P x, and

therefore not x R y, by Definition 1. Hence, we do not have x R y independent

of the individual orderings R …, R 
                                ln

  Finally, as for Condition 5 (nondictatorship), suppose that there were an

individual i satisfying the conditions of Definition 6. Call him 1. Suppose x P
                                                                                          i

y, while y P x for all i ≠ 1. Then, x R y, not x R′ y for i ≠ 1, by Definition 1,
            i1i

so that N (x, y) = 1. Also, y R x for 1, so that N (y, x) ≥ 1 = N (x, y). By (1), y
                                i

R x, and therefore, by Definition 1, not x P y. By Definition 6, however, x P
                                                                                        1

y implies x P y. Hence there cannot be any dictator, so that Condition 5 is

satisfied.

  THEOREM 1 (Possibility Theorem for Two Alternatives): If the total

number of alternatives is two, the method of majority decision is a social

welfare function which satisfies Conditions 2–5 and yields a social ordering

of the two alternatives for every set of individual orderings.


  Theorem 1 is, in a sense, the logical foundation of the Anglo-American

two-party system.

  For later reference, observe that the proof given above that the method of

majority decision satisfies Conditions 2, 4, and 5 was independent of the

assumption that there were only two alternatives. It is also true that the

method of majority decision satisfies Condition 3 regardless of the total

number of alternatives. From Definition 9, it is obvious that the truth or

falsity of the statement x R y is invariant under any change of individual

orderings which leaves invariant, for each individual, the relative positions of

x and y. By Definition 3, C (S) is completely determined by knowing the truth

or falsity of the statement x R y for every pair x, y of elements of S; hence, C

(S) is certainly invariant under any change of the individual orderings which

leaves the orderings within S invariant.

  LEMMA 3: For any space of alternatives, the method of majority decision

is a social welfare function satisfying Conditions 2–5.

  The example of the paradox of voting given in Chapter I, Section 1, shows

that the method of majority decision does not satisfy Condition 1 when thereare more than two alternatives. We are now prepared to examine the

construction of social welfare functions in this last case.

  We shall hereafter assume that Condition 1 holds in its original form.


  2. TWO INDIVIDUALS AND THREE ALTERNATIVES

  To illustrate the methods of analysis and serve as an introduction to the

more general case, we shall consider first the formation of a social welfare

function for two individuals expressing their preferences for three

alternatives. Some consequences will be drawn from Conditions 1–5. It will

be shown that the supposition that there is a social welfare function satisfying

those conditions leads to a contradiction.

  Let x, y, z be the three alternatives among which choice is to be made, e.g.,

three possible distributions of commodities. Let x′ and y′ be variable symbols

which represent possible alternatives, i.e., which range over the values x, y, z.

Let the individuals be designated as 1 and 2, and let R and R be the
                                                              12

orderings by 1 and 2, respectively, of the alternatives x, y z. Let P and P be
                                                                            12

the corresponding preference relations; e.g., x′ P y′ means that individual 1
                                                        1

strictly prefers x′ to y′. It is assumed that there is no a priori reason to suppose

that the individuals will not order the alternatives in any given way. For

example, if it is supposed that each individual values each distribution of

commodities in accordance with his preference for his personal share alone

(individualistic behavior), if there is more than one commodity, and if no

alternative gives any individual more of all commodities than any other

alternative, then, by suitable variation of tastes, each individual may order the

alternatives in any logically possible manner (see Chapter VI, Section 4, for

an example).

    CONSEQUENCE 1: If x′ P y′ and x′ P y′ then x′ P y′.
                              12

  That is, if both prefer x′ to y′, then society must prefer x′ to y′.

  PROOF: By Condition 4, there are orderings R′ and R′ for individuals 1
                                                        12

and 2, respectively, such that, in the corresponding social preference, x′ P′ y′.

Form R″ from R′ by raising x′, if need be, to the top while leaving the
      11

relative positions of the other two alternatives alone; form R″ from R′ in the
                                                                      12

same way. Since all we have done is raise alternative x′ in everyone’s esteemwhile leaving the others alone, x′ should still be preferred to y′ by society in

accordance with Condition 2, so that x′ P″ y′. But, by construction, both

individuals prefer x′ to y′ in the orderings R″, R″, and society prefers x′ to y′.
                                                  12

Since, by Condition 3, the social choice between x′ and y′ depends only on

the individual orderings of those two alternatives, it follows that whenever

both individuals prefer x′ to y′, regardless of the rank of the third alternative,

society will prefer x′ to y′, which is the statement to be proved.

    CONSEQUENCE 2: Suppose that for some x′ and y′, whenever x′ P y′ and y
                                                                              1

P x′, x P′ y. Then, whenever x′ P y′, x′ P y′.
21

  That is, if in a given choice the will of individual 1 prevails against the

opposition of 2, then individual l’s views will certainly prevail if 2 is

indifferent or if he agrees with 1.

  PROOF: Let R be an ordering in which x′ P y′, and let R be any ordering.
                  112

Let R′ be the same ordering as R, while R′ is derived from R by
    1122

depressing x′ to the bottom while leaving the relative positions of the other

two alternatives unchanged. By construction, x′ P′ y′, y′ P′ x′. By
                                                          12

hypothesis, x′ P′ y′, where P′ is the social preference relation derived from the

individual orderings R R Now the only difference between R, R and R R
                          1212l2

is that x′ is raised in the scale of individual 2 in the latter as compared with

the former. Hence, by Condition 2 (interchanging the R’s and the R′’s), it
                                                                ii

follows from x′ P′ y′ that x′ P y′. That is, whenever R, R are such that x′ P y′
                                                            l21

then x′ P y′.

    CONSEQUENCE 3: If x′ P y′ and y′ P x′, then x′ I y′.
                              12

  That is, if the two individuals have exactly opposing interests in the choice

between two given alternatives, then society will be indifferent between the

alternatives.

  PROOF: Suppose the consequence false. Then, for some orderings R and
                                                                                  2

R and for some pair of alternatives x′ and y′ we would have x′ P y′, y′ P x′,
212

but not x′ I y′. In that case, either x′ P y′ or y′ P x′. We will suppose x′ P y′ and

show that this supposition leads to a contradiction; the same reasoning would

show that the assumption y′ P x′ also leads to a contradiction.

  Without loss of generality, it can be assumed that x′ is the alternative x y′= y. Then we have, for the particular orderings in question, xP y, y P x, and
                                                                        12

x P y. Since the social choice between x and y depends, by Condition 3, only

on the individual choices as between x and y, we must have

(1)                 whenever x P y and y P x, x P y.
                              12

It will be shown that (1) leads to a contradiction.

  Suppose that individual 1 prefers x to y and y to z, while individual 2

prefers y to z and z to x. Individual 2 then prefers y to x. By (1), society

prefers x to y. Also, both prefer y to z; by Consequence 1, society prefers y to

z. Since society prefers x to y and y to z, it must prefer x to z. Therefore we

have exhibited orderings R R such that x P z, z P x, but x P z. Since the
                              1212

social choice between x and z depends only on the individual preferences for

x and z,

(2)                 whenever x P z and z P x, x P z.
                              12

  Now suppose that R is the ordering y, x, z, and R is the ordering z, y, x.
                          12

By Consequence 1, y P x; by (2), x P z, so that y P z. By the same reasoning

as before,

(3)                 whenever y P Z and z P y, y P z.
                              12

  If R is the ordering y, z, x, and R is the ordering z, x, y, it follows from
      12

Consequence 1 and (3) that z P x and y P z, so that y P x. Hence,

(4)                 whenever y P x and x P y, y P x.
                              12

  If R is the ordering z, y, x, and R is the ordering x, z, y, then, from
      12

Consequence 1 and (4), z P y and y P x, so that z P x.

(5)                 Whenever z P x and x P z, z P x.
                              12

  If R is the ordering z, x, y, and R is the ordering x, y, z, then, using (5), z
      12

P x and x P y, so that z P y.

(6)                 Whenever z Py and y P z, z P y.
                              12

  From (1) it follows from Consequence 2 that, whenever x P y, x P y.
                                                                        1

Similarly, from (l)-(6), it follows that for any pair of alternatives x′, y′,

whenever x′ P y′, then x′ P y′. That is, by Definition 6, individual 1 would be
              1

a dictator. This is prohibited by Condition 5, so that (1) must be false.Therefore Consequence 3 is proved.

  Now suppose that individual 1 has the ordering x, y, z, while individual 2

has the ordering z, x, y. By Consequence 1,

(7)                 x P y.

Since y P z, z P y, it follows from Consequence 3 that
          12

(8)                 y I z.

From (7) and (8), x P z. But also x P z, z P x, which implies x I z by

Consequence 3. It cannot be that x is both preferred and indifferent to z.

Hence the assumption that there is a social welfare function compatible with

Conditions 1–5 has led to a contradiction.


3. PROOF OF THE GENERAL POSSIBILITY THEOREM

  In the following proof we assume a given social welfare function

satisfying Conditions 1–5 and show that the assumption leads to a

contradiction. Without loss of generality we may suppose that the entire

universe is the set of three alternatives mentioned in the statement of

Condition 1. In this set, all sets of individual orderings are admissible, so that

we need not discuss in each case whether or not a given set is admissible.

That is, the orderings which appear in the argument will be orderings only of

the three alternatives in question. If we wish to be formally correct and

consider the ordering of all alternatives, we can replace each set of orderings

of the three given alternatives by a corresponding admissible set of individual

orderings which orders the three given alternatives in the same way.

  In what follows, V will stand for a set of individuals. In particular, V′ will

be a set containing a single individual and V″ will be the set of all individuals.

  DEFINITION 10: The set V is said to be decisive for x against y if x ≠ y and

x P y for all sets of admissible individual ordering relations such that x P y
                                                                                      i

for all i in V.

  This definition may be explained as follows: Let  stand for the set of

individual ordering relations R, …, R The condition x P y for all i in V
                                  1ni

restricts the ’s under consideration by restricting the range of variation of

those components of  whose subscripts are in V to ordering relations having

the given property with respect to x and y. To each , a given social welfarefunction assigns a social ordering R; according to this scale we may have, in

general, x P y or x I y or y P x. Suppose that it so happens that, for all 

consistent with the condition that x P y for all i in V, the resultant R is such
                                          i

that x P y; then we can say that V is decisive for x against y. Intuitively, the

concept of decisive set can be explained as follows: A set of individuals is

decisive if, whenever they all prefer x to y, society prefers x to y regardless of

what preferences any individuals may have concerning any alternatives other

than x or y. Note that a set may be decisive for x against y without being

decisive for y against x. For example, in the process of ratification of treaties

by the Senate, any set of 64 senators is decisive for acceptance against

rejection, any set of 33 senators is decisive for rejection against acceptance.

  It should be emphasized that the question of whether or not a given set of

individuals is decisive with respect to a given pair of alternatives, x and y, is

determined by the social welfare function and does not vary with the actual

orderings of individuals at any given time.

    CONSEQUENCE 1: Let R …, R and R′, R′ be two sets of individual
                              1n1n

orderings such that for a given distinct x and y, x P′ y for all i for which x R
                                                            ii

y. Then, if x P y, x P′ y, where P and P′ are the social preference relations

corresponding to R, …, R and R, …, R′, respectively.
                      1n1n

  This consequence extends Condition 2. If x rises or does not fall relative to

y for each individual and actually rises if x and y were indifferent, and if x

was socially preferred to y to begin with, then x is still preferred to y,

regardless of changes in preferences for alternatives other than y.

  PROOF: In accordance with the preceding remarks, we assume there are

only three alternatives altogether. Let z be the alternative which is distinct

from x and y. For each i, define the ordering R", as follows:

(1)         x′ R″ y′ if and only if either x′ R′ y′ and x′ ≠ z or y′ = z.
                                            i

  This amounts to moving z from its position in R to the bottom but
                                                          i

otherwise leaving R unchanged. It is easy to verify that R″ is an ordering, i.e.,
                      i

satisfies Axioms I and II. Also, for each i, R″ orders the elements x, y in the

same way as R; i.e.,
                i

(2)         x′ R″ y′ if and only if x′ R′ y′ for x′, y′ in [x, y].
            ii

From (2) and Condition 3, C ([x, y]) = C″ ([x, y]), where C (S) and C″ (S) arethe social choices made from an environment S when R, …, R and R″ …,
                                                                1n1

R″ are the sets of individual orderings, respectively. By hypothesis, x P y;
n

from Lemma 2, C ([x, y]) contains the single element x. Hence, C″ ([x, y])

contains the single element x, or, by Lemma 2,

(3)                 x P″ y.

  Define the individual orderings R*, …, R*, as follows:
                                          1n

(4)         x′R* y′ if and only if either x′ R′ y′ and x′ ≠ z or y′ = z.
          ii

(4) is exactly parallel to (1). From (1), (4), and Definition 1, y P″ z, y P* z,
                                                                          ii

for all i. Hence,

(5)                 if x′ x, y’x, x′ R″ y′ if and only if x′ R* y′.
                              ii

Also, x P″ z, x P* z for all i. By (1), for all i such that x R″” y, x R y; by
          iiii

hypothesis, x P y for such i, and therefore, by (4), x P* y. Hence,
                ii

(6)                 for all y′, x R″ y′ implies x R* y′;
                            ii

(7)                 for all y′, x P″ y′ implies x P * y′.
                                              1

By (5)–(7) and (3), the hypotheses of Condition 2 are satisfied; hence, x P*

y. From (4), it follows, in the same manner as above, that C* ([x, y]) = C′ ([x,

y]), so that x P′ y. Q.E.D.

  This proof is really simple in principle. The purpose in introducing the

auxiliary ordering relations R″ and R* was to permit a comparison between
                                ii

the two sets which would satisfy the hypotheses of Condition 2. At the same

time, as far as the choice between alternatives x and y is concerned, the

relations R″ are essentially equivalent to the relations R and the relations R*
          ii′i

are equivalent to the relations R′; this is shown by the latter part of the proof.
                                    i


    CONSEQUENCE 2: If there is some set of individual ordering relations R,
                                                                                      1

…, R such that x P y for all i in V and y P x for all i not in V, for some
    ni1

particular x and y, and such that the corresponding social preference

relation yields the outcome x P y, then V is decisive for x against y.

  PROOF: Let R′, …, R′ be any set of individual orderings subject only to
                  1n

the condition that(8)                 x P′ y for all i in V.
                i

To show that V is decisive, it is necessary according to Definition 10 to show

that, for every such set R, …, R′, the corresponding social ordering R′ is
                            1n

such that x P′ y. But from (8) and the hypothesis that x P y for i in V, y P x
                                                                  1i

for i not in V, it follows that x P y whenever x R y. By Consequence 1, x P′
                                    ii

y. Q.E.D. The meaning of this consequence may be formulated somewhat as

follows: Imagine an observer seeing individuals write down their individual

orderings and hand them to the central authorities who then form a social

ordering based on the individual orderings in accordance with the social

welfare function. Suppose further that this observer notices that, for a

specific pair of alternatives x and y, every individual in a certain set V of

individuals prefers x to y, while everybody not in V prefers y to x, and that

the resultant social ordering ranks x higher than y. Then, the observer is

entitled to say, without looking at any other aspects of the individual and

social orderings, that V is a decisive set for x against y, i.e., that, if tastes

change, but in such a way that all the individuals in V still prefer x to y

(though they might have changed their ranking for all other alternatives and

though the individuals not in V might have changed their scale completely),

then the social ordering will still rank x higher than y.

    CONSEQUENCE 3: For every x and y such that x ≠ y, V″ is a decisive set for

x against y.

  That is, if every individual prefers x to y, then society prefers x to y.

  PROOF: If we interchange x and y in Definition 5, then Condition 4 says

that there exists a set of individual orderings R, …, R such that not y R x,
                                                      1n

where R is the social ordering corresponding to the set of individual ordering

relations R …, R That is to say, by Lemma 1 (e),
          1n

(9)                 x P y.

  Let R′, …, R′ be any set of individual orderings such that
        1n

(10)                 x P y for all i.
                  i

  From (10), certainly x P y for all i such that x R y. Then, from (9) and
                              ii

Consequence 1, x P′ y. Since this holds for any set of orderings satisfying

(10), it follows from the definition of V′ that x P′ y for any set of orderingssuch that x P y for i in V″, y P x for i not in V″ (i.e., for no i). By
              ii

Consequence 2, V′ is decisive for x against y.

    CONSEQUENCE 4: If V′ is decisive for either x against y or y against z, V is

decisive for x against z, where x, y, and z are distinct alternatives.

  Recall that V is a set consisting of a single individual. The consequence

asserts that, if a single individual is decisive for a given alternative x against

any other alternative, he is decisive for x against any alternative, and that, if

he is decisive for any alternative against a given alternative z, he is decisive

for any alternative against z. This is the first consequence in which some

paradoxes begin to appear.

  PROOF: (a) Assume that V′ is decisive for x against y. We seek to prove

that V′ is decisive for x against any z ≠ x.

  Let the individual in V be given the number 1. Let R …, R be a set of
                                                                1n

individual ordering relations satisfying the conditions

(11)                         x P y,
                        1

(12)                    y P z for all i,
                    i

(13)                 z P x for i ≠ 1
                  i

From (11), x P y for all i in V′ therefore, by Definition 10,
                i

(14)                 x P y,

where P is the social preference relation corresponding to the set of

individual orderings R …, R From (12), y P z for all i in V″, so that, from
                        1ni

Consequence 3 and the definition of a decisive set,

(15)                  y P z.

  By Condition 1, the social ordering relation satisfies Axioms I and II and

hence Lemma 1(c). Therefore, from (14) and (15),

(16)                  x P z.

  But, from (11) and (12), x P y and y P z, so that x P z, or
                                    111

(17)                      x P z for all i in V′.
                      i

  (13) may be written

(18)                  z P x for all i not in V′.
                  iBy (16)-(18), the hypotheses of Consequence 2 are satisfied, so that V′ must

be decisive for x against z. That is, there is one set of individual ordering

relations in which all the individuals in V′ (in this case, one individual) prefer

x to z while all other individuals prefer z to x, and the social welfare function

is such as to yield a social preference for x as against z. This suffices, by

Consequence 2, to establish that V′ is decisive for x against z.

  (b) Now assume that V′ is decisive for y against z. Let the individual in V

have the number 1, and let R, … R be a set of individual ordering relations
                                1n

such that

(19)                 x P y for all i,
                  1

(20)                     y P *≥
                      1

(21)                 z P x for i ≠ 1.
                  1

  Then, as in part (a) of the proof, (19) implies that x P y, while (20) implies

that y P z, so that x P z. But, from (19) and (20), x P z, which, in conjunction
                                                            1

with (21), shows that the hypotheses of Consequence 2 are satisfied, and

therefore V′ is decisive for a: against z again.

    CONSEQUENCE 5: For every pair of alternatives x, y and every one-

member set of individuals V, it is not true that V′ is decisive for x against y.

  This consequence states that no individual can be a dictator for even one

pair of alternatives; i.e., there is no individual such that, with the given social

welfare function, the community automatically prefers a certain £ to a certain

y whenever the individual in question does so.

  PROOF: Suppose the consequence false. Let the one member of V′ be

designated by 1.

  Let y′ be any alternative distinct from x and y. Then, from the hypothesis

and Consequence 4, V′ is decisive for x against y′. Since this statement is still

true for y′ = y, we may say

(22)                 V′ is decisive for x against any y′ ≠ x.

For a fixed y′ ≠ x′, let x′ be an alternative distinct from x and y′. This choice

is possible by Condition 1 (there are three alternatives). Then, from (22) and

Consequence 4, V′ is decisive for x′ against y′. By (22), this statement still

holds if x′ —x.(23)          V′ is decisive for x′ against y′ provided x′ j£ y′ ≠ y′ j& x.

Choose any x′ x, and a particular y″ distinct from both x and x′. This choice is

possible by Condition 1. Then (23) holds; since x′ y″, x are distinct, it follows

from Consequence 4, if we substitute x′ for x, y″ for y, and x for z, that

(24)                 V′ is decisive for x′ against x, provided x′ ″ x.

(23) and (24) together can be written

(25)                V′ is decisive for any x′ against any y′ provided x′ y′

  But, by Definition 10, (25) says that, for all x′ and y′ (distinct), x′ P y′

whenever x′ P y′. By Definition 6, this means that the social welfare function
              1

is dictatorial, which, however, is excluded by Condition 5. Hence, the

supposition that the consequence is false leads to a contradiction with one of

the conditions. Q.E.D.

  It will now be shown that Conditions 1–5 lead to a contradiction. Use will

be made of the preceding five consequences of the conditions. Let S be the

set composed of three distinct alternatives which occurs in the statement of

Condition 1. For each possible ordered pair x′, y′ such that x′ and y′ both

belong to S and x′ ≠ y′ (there are six such ordered pairs), there is at least one

set of individuals which is decisive for x′ against y′ by Consequence 3.

Consider all sets of individuals who are decisive for some x′ in S against

some y′, distinct from x′, in S. Among these sets, choose the one with the

fewest number of individuals; if this condition does not uniquely specify the

set, choose any of those decisive sets which does not have more members in

it than some other decisive set. For example, if, among all the sets which are

decisive for some x′ in S against some (distinct) y′ in S, there is one with two

members and all the others have more than two members, choose that one; on

the other hand, if there are two sets decisive for some x′ in S against some y′

in S which have three members each while all the other decisive sets have

more than three members, choose any one of the three-member sets.

Designate the chosen set by V. It is decisive for some alternative in S against
                                  1

some other one in S; by suitable labeling, we may say that V is decisive for x
                                                                      1

against y. S contains just one alternative other than x and y; call that

alternative z. Let the number of members of V be k; designate the members
                                                    1

of V by the numbers 1, …, k, and number the remaining individuals k + 1,
  1

…, n. Let V′ contain the single individual 1, V the individuals 2, k, and V i
                                                    23individuals k + 1, …, n. Note that V may contain no members. From the
                                        3

construction of V, we may conclude that
                  1

(26) V is decisive for x against y,
    1

(27) any set which is decisive for some alternative in S against some other

  alternative in S contains at least k members.

  By construction, V contains k — 1 members. Hence, from (27),
                        2

(28) V is not decisive for any alternative in S against any other alternative in
    2

  S.

  Consequence 5 is equivalent to stating that, if V′ contains exactly one

member, then

(29) V′ is not decisive for any alternative against any other alternative.

  Let R, …, R be a set of individual ordering relations such that,
        1n

(30)                 for i in V, x P y and y P z,
                              11

(31)                  for i in V z P x and x P y,
                          2)11

(32)                 for i in F, y P z and z P x.
                          311

  From (30), (31), and the definitions of V V, and V′, x P y for all i in V
                                                  12i1

From (26),

(33)                      x P y,

where P is the social preference relation corresponding to R, …, R From
                                                                      in

(31), and the fact that R is a weak ordering relation and hence transitive,
                          1

(34)                 z P y for all i in V.
                  i2

From (30) and (32),

(35)                   y P z for all i not in V.
                    12

  Suppose z P y. Then from (34), (35), and Consequence 2, it would follow

that V was decisive for y against z; but this contradicts (28). Hence, we must
    2

say, not z P y, or

(36)                     y R z,where R is the social ordering relation corresponding to R …, R, the
                                                                    1n

relation from which the preference relation P was derived. By Condition 1,

the relation R is a weak ordering relation, having all the usual properties

assigned to preference scales, including that of transitivity. Hence, from (33)

and (36),

(37)                    x P z.

From (30), it follows from the transitivity of R that
                                                      1

(38)                x P z for i in V′,
                  1

while, from (31) and (32),

(39)                z P x for i not in V′.
                  1

From (37)–(39) and Consequence 2, it follows that V′ is decisive for x

against z. But this contradicts (29). Thus, we have shown that Conditions 1–5

taken together lead to a contradiction. Put another way, if we assume that our

social welfare function satisfies Conditions 2 and 3 and further suppose that

Condition 1 holds, i.e., that there are at least three alternatives which the

individuals may order in any way and still get a social ordering, then either

Condition 4 or Condition 5 must be violated. Condition 4 states that the

social welfare function is not imposed; Condition 5 states that it is not

dictatorial.

  THEOREM 2 (General Possibility Theorem): If there are at least three

alternatives which the members of the society are free to order in any way,

then every social welfare function satisfying Conditions 2 and 8 and yielding

a social ordering satisfying Axioms I and II must be either imposed or
            1
dictatorial.

  Theorem 2 shows that, if no prior assumptions are made about the nature

of individual orderings, there is no method of voting which will remove the

paradox of voting discussed in Chapter I, Section 1, neither plurality voting

nor any scheme of proportional representation, no matter how complicated.

Similarly, the market mechanism does not create a rational social choice.


4. INTERPRETATION OF THE GENERAL POSSIBILITY

                                    THEOREM  The interpretation of Theorem 2 is given by examination of the meaning

of Conditions 1–5. In particular, it is required that the social ordering be

formed from individual orderings and that the social decision between two

alternatives be independent of the desires of individuals involving any

alternatives other than the given two (Conditions 1 and 3). These conditions

taken together serve to exclude interpersonal comparison of social utility

either by some form of direct measurement or by comparison with other

alternative social states; the arguments in favor of this position have been

given in Chapter II, Section 1. Therefore, Theorem 2 can be restated as

follows:

  If we exclude the possibility of interpersonal comparisons of utility, then

the only methods of passing from individual tastes to social preferences

which will be satisfactory and which will be defined for a wide range of sets

of individual orderings are either imposed or dictatorial.

  The word “satisfactory” in the above statement means that the social

welfare function does not reflect individuals′ desires negatively (Condition 2)

and that the resultant social tastes shall be represented by an ordering having

the usual properties of rationality ascribed to individual orderings (Condition

1 and Axioms I and II).

  In view of the interpretations placed on the conditions for a social welfare

function in Chapter III, we can also phrase the result this way: If consumers′

values can be represented by a wide range of individual orderings, the

doctrine of voters′ sovereignty is incompatible with that of collective

rationality.

  If we wish to make social welfare judgments which depend on the values

of all individuals, i.e., which are not imposed or dictatorial, then we must

relax some of the conditions imposed. It will continue to be maintained that

there is no meaningful interpersonal comparison of utilities and that the
                                                                                2
conditions wrapped up in the word “satisfactory” are to be accepted. The

only condition that remains to be eliminated is the one stating that the method

of forming a social ordering should work properly for a wide range of sets of

individual orderings. That is, it will now be supposed that it is known in

advance that the individual orderings R, …, R for social actions satisfy
                                            1n

certain conditions more restrictive than those permitted in Condition 1, and it

is required to find a social welfare function which will be satisfactory for all

sets of individual values compatible with those restrictions but notnecessarily satisfactory or even defined for other types of individual values.

The remaining parts of this essay will be devoted to an examination of the

possibilities in this direction.                                CHAPTER VI


            THE INDIVIDUALISTIC ASSUMPTIONS


            1. STATEMENT OF THE ASSUMPTIONS

  One important possibility is to impose on the individual preference scales

two conditions which in fact have almost invariably been assumed in works

on welfare economics: (1) each individual’s comparison of two alternative

social states depends only on the commodities that he receives (and labor that

he expends) in the two states, i.e., he is indifferent as between any two social

states in which his own consumption-leisure-saving situations are the same or
                            1
at least indifferent to him; (2) in comparing two personal situations in one of

which he receives at least as much of each commodity (including leisure and

saving as commodities) and more of at least one commodity than in the other,

the individual will prefer the first situation. However, it can be shown that, in

a world of more than one commodity, these restrictions do not suffice to

remove the paradox.

  The situation we wish to formalize is one in which some but not all of the

choices made by an individual are known in advance. Of some pairs x, y it is

known that x is preferred to y; of some it is known that x is indifferent to y.

This can be reworded by saying that, for some pairs of alternatives, x is

known to be preferred or indifferent to y; the case where x is known to be

indifferent to y is covered by saying that x is known to be preferred or

indifferent to y, and y is known to be preferred or indifferent to x. We assume

further that, if x is known to be preferred or indifferent to y but x is not

known to be indifferent to y, then x is known to be preferred to y; this is in

fact what is found for the true orderings, knowledge for which is given by the

individualistic assumptions. The relation of “known preference or

indifference” is clearly transitive, but it is not connected since, for example, it

does not tell us how the individual compares two social alternatives, one of

which yields him more of one commodity than the second, while the second

yields him more of a second commodity than the first. On the other hand, we

may say certainly that any alternative is known to be preferred or indifferent

to itself. Comparison with Definition 7 shows that the relation of “knownpreference or indifference,” as given by the individualistic assumptions, is a

quasi-ordering. Furthermore, if, for any individual, R is his ordering and Q is
                                                              ii

the quasi-ordering expressing that knowledge about R yielded by the
                                                              i

individualistic assumptions, then the remarks above, in conjunction with

Definition 8, show that R must be compatible with Q.
                            ii

  Also note that the quasi-ordering of the social alternatives implied in the

individualistic assumptions is different for different individuals, since each

individual ranks the alternatives involved according to what he gets out of

them, and an alternative which yields more than a second alternative yields of

each commodity to one individual may yield less of each commodity than the

second alternative to a second individual.

  Formally, we may say that there are n quasiorderings Q, ..., Q, and it is
                                                                    in

known in advance that the individual ordering relations R, ..., R are
                                                                  1n

compatible with the quasi-orderings Q, ..., Q, respectively. If this
                                            in

knowledge is available before we construct our social welfare function, we

might feel it superfluous to require that our social welfare function be so

defined as to yield a social ordering for a set of individual orderings R ... R,
                                                                                  lfn

where, for some i y R is not compatible with Q. Hence, Condition 1 can be
                        i

replaced by the following condition:

  CONDITION 1′: The admissible sets of individual ordering relations R ...,
                                                                                    i

R are precisely those for which R is compatible with Q for each i.
nii


            2. THE POSSIBILITY THEOREM UNDER

                  INDIVIDUALISTIC ASSUMPTIONS

  Clearly, from Theorem 2, Condition 1′ will be inconsistent with

Conditions 2–5 if the admissible sets of individual orderings are not restricted

more sharply by Condition 1′ than by Condition 1. Let S be a set of three

alternatives about the ordering in which none of the known quasi-orderings

tells us anything; i.e., suppose that, for each individual i and for each pair x, y

y of distinct alternatives in S, not x Q y. Under the individualistic hypotheses
                                          i

discussed above, an example of such a set would be a set of three alternative

distributions of fixed stocks of commodities such that, for each pair of

distributions, one gives to any given individual more of one commodity while

the second distribution gives more of another commodity.  It is, I think, intuitively clear that restricting the individual orderings to be

compatible with the quasi-orderings Q is no restriction at all as far as the set
                                            i

S is concerned. Let T, ..., T be any set whatever of n orderings of the set S.
                        1n

For each i, there exists an individual ordering R which is compatible with Q
                                                      ii

and which coincides with T on the set S a rigorous proof of this statement is
                              i

contained in Lemma 4, proved in the following section. The set of individual

orderings R, ..., R is admissible by Condition 1′. But then Condition 1 is
            1n

satisfied, so Theorem 2 applies, and Conditions 2–5 cannot all be satisfied.

  THEOREM 3: If Q, ... Q are a set of quasi-orderings for which there exists
                      1n

a set S containing at least three alternatives such that, for all i and all x and y

in S where x ≠ y, not x Q y, then every social welfare function satisfying
                            i

Condition V and Conditions 2 and 8 is either imposed or dictatorial.

  COROLLARY (Possibility Theorem for Individualistic Assumptions): If

there is more than one commodity and if every set of individual orderings

each of which satisfies the individualistic assumptions is admissible, then

every social welfare function satisfying Conditions 2 and 8 is either imposed

or dictatorial.

  Although the motivation for developing Theorem 3 was the analysis of the

individualistic case, the conclusion is applicable to any attempt to restrict the

range of individual orderings by requiring them to be consistent with any

preassigned partial orderings. Thus, if we had modified the previous

individualistic ordering by saying that, between two alternatives which

yielded the same commodity bundle to a given individual, the individual was

not indifferent but chose on the basis of some measure of income equality,

while, however, he still preferred any alternative which gave him at least as

much of all commodities and more of at least one, the above negative

conclusions as to the possibility of a social welfare function would still be

applicable, since we could still form the set S which would satisfy the

hypotheses of Theorem 3.

  The corollary casts light on the usefulness of the analysis of maximal

states, as discussed in Chapter IV, Section 1, if we make the assumption that

individual desires for social alternatives are formed in the individualistic way

discussed in this chapter. If the only restrictions that we wish to impose on

individual tastes are those implied by the individualistic assumptions, then nosatisfactory social welfare function is possible. Since, as we have seen, the

only purpose of the determination of the maximal states is as a preliminary to

the study of social welfare functions, the customary study of maximal states

under individualistic assumptions is pointless. There is, however, a

qualification which should be added. It is conceivable that, if further

restrictions are added to the individualistic ones, a social welfare function

will be possible; indeed, an example will be given in Chapter VII, Section 2.

Any state which is maximal under the combination of individualistic and

other restrictions will certainly be maximal if only individualistic restrictions

are imposed on the individual orderings. Hence, if the proper handling of the

social welfare problem is deemed to be the imposition of further restrictions

in addition to the individualistic ones, then the social maximum in any given

situation will be one of the maximal elements under the combined restrictions

and hence one of the maximal elements under individualistic conditions. It is

therefore not excluded that the current new welfare economics will be of

some use in restricting the range in which we must look for the social

maximum.


    3. QUASI-ORDERINGS AND COMPATIBLE WEAK

                                    ORDERINGS


  A lemma with regard to quasi-orderings and weak orderings compatible

with them will be proved in this section (see Definitions 7 and 8). The
                                                                  2
following theorem is equivalent to one of E. Szpilrajn’s.


  SZPILRAJN’S THEOREM: If Q is a quasi-ordering, then there is a weak

ordering R which is compatible with Q.

  Thus, in ordinary demand theory, we may establish a quasi-ordering

among all commodity bundles by saying that a bundle all of whose

components are larger than another is superior to it. Szpilrajn’s theorem tells

us that it is possible to construct a complete indifference map in which the

comparisons of such pairs of bundles will satisfy this condition; i.e., we can

construct an indifference map with downward-sloping indifference curves.

The theorem is trivial in any particular application; nevertheless, it is not

trivial in its full generality.

  From Szpilrajn’s theorem, we will deduce the following lemma.  LEMMA 4: Let Q be a quasiordering, S a set of alternatives such that, if x ≠

≠ y and x and y both belong to S, then not x Q y, and T a relation which

establishes a weak ordering on S. Then there is a weak ordering R of all

alternatives compatible with Q such that x Ry if and only if x T y for x and y

in S.


  This means the following: Suppose that, of all possible pairs of

alternatives, the choices among some pairs are fixed in advance, and in a

consistent way, so that if x is fixed in advance to be chosen over y and y fixed

in advance to be chosen over z, then x is fixed in advance to be chosen over z.

Suppose, however, that there is a set S of alternatives such that the choice

between no pair of them is prescribed in advance. Then the lemma states that,

given any ordering of the elements in S, there is a way of ordering all the

alternatives which will be compatible both with the given ordering in S and

with the choice made in advance. In other words, if we know there is some

ordering and we know some of the choices implied by that ordering but the

known choices do not give any direct information as to choices between

elements in a subset S, then there is also no indirect information as to the

choices in S, i.e., the ordering of all the alternatives is compatible with any

ordering in S.

  Thus, to continue with the example of demand theory, suppose we have,

as before, the quasiordering implied by the condition that all marginal utilities

are positive. Such a quasi-ordering tells us nothing directly about the ordering

of the bundles on a given budget plane (assuming positive prices). Lemma 4

tells us, then, that no information whatever is conveyed as to the choice from

a given budget plane by the assumption that all marginal utilities are positive;

any ordering of the bundles on a given budget plane can be extended to an

indifference map for all bundles which can be represented by a utility

function all of whose partial derivatives are positive. (Of course, the

assumption that marginal utilities are positive does tell us that the choice will

be made on the budget plane and not below it.)

  PROOF: Let Q" be any quasiordering such that,

(1)                     for all x and y, x Q y implies x Q" y,

(2)                 for all x and y in S, x T y implies x Q" y.

  The relation of universal indifference, i.e., x Q “y for all x and y, is a

quasiordering and satisfies (1) and (2), so that there is at least one Q”satisfying (1) and (2). Define a relation Q′ as follows:

(3)                 x Q′ y if and only if x Q “y for all quasi-orderings Q” satisfying

(1) and (2).

Since each Q″ is a quasi-ordering, it follows from (3) and Definition 7 that

(4)                     Q′ is a quasi-ordering.

From (l)–(3);

(5)                    for all x and y, x Q y implies x Q′ y′

(6)                 for all x and y in S, x T y implies x Q′ y.

  Suppose, for some particular x′ and y′ in S, not x′ T y′. Let x be the set of
                                                                        1

all alternatives x such that either

(7) x in S, x T y′

or

(8)                    for some z in S, x Q z and z T y′.

Let Q be defined as follows:
    1

(9)                 x Q y if and only if either x in x or y not in X.
                  111

  It follows from (9) and Definition 7 that

(10) Qi is a quasi-ordering.

  Suppose, for some x and y, x Q y and y in X . Then, from (7) and (8),
                                                      1

either y in S, y T y′, in which case x is in X by (8), or, for some z, y Q z, z in
                                                1

S z T y′. In the latter case, x Q y and y Q z imply x Q z, since Q is a quasi-
y

ordering, so that again x is in X by (8). Hence, in any case, if x Q y and y is
                                    1

in X then x is in X. From (9),
  i1

(11)                    x Q y implies x Q y.
                                      1

  Now suppose, for some x and y in S, x T y, y in X . Then, either y T y ’y in
                                                            1

which case x T y′ since T is a weak ordering, and therefore x is in X by (7),
                                                                              1

or y Q z, z in S, z T y′. But since both y and z are in S, the latter can hold only

if y = z by hypothesis, and we have y T y′, which is the previous case. As

above,

(12)                   for x and y in S y x T y implies x Q y.
                                                          iFrom (10)–(12), Q is a quasiordering satisfying (1) and (2). But, from (7), y′
                    1

belongs to X, since y′ T y′. Since, by assumption, not x′ T y′ (7) cannot hold
              1

for x = x′. If x′ belongs to X, then (8) must hold, i.e., x′ Q z, z in S, z T y′ but,
                                1

since x′ and z both belong to S, we must have z = x′, so that x′ T y′ contrary
                                                                              y

to assumption. Hence, x′ does not belong to X so that not x′ Q y′. From (3),
                                                      11

not x′ Q′ y′. Replacing x′ by x and y′ by y we have,
                                              y

(13)                 for x and y in S, not x T y implies not x Q′ y.

  Now suppose, for some particular x′ and y′, x′ Q y′ and not y′ Q x′. Let X
                                                                                        2

be the set of all alternatives x such that one of the following holds:

(14)                        x Q x′

(15)               x in S and, far same z in S, x T z, z Q x′,

(16)            for some z and z in S, x Q Z, Z T z, z Q x′.
                        121122

Define the relation Q as follows:
                        2

(17)                 x Q y if and only if either x in X or y not in X .
                    222

From (17) and Definition 7,

(18)                 Q is a quasi-ordering.
                2

  Suppose, for some x and y, x Q y, y in X . One of (14)-(16) must hold,
                                                  2

with x replaced by y. If y Q x′, then x Q x′, so that x is in X . If y in S, z in S,
                                                                    2

y T z, z Q x′, then x is in X by (16). If y Q z, z T z, z Q x′, then, since x Q
                              21122

y we have x Q z z T z z Q x′, so x is in X by (16). Hence, as before,
                  11222

(19)                    x Q y implies x Q y.
                                      2

  Suppose, for some x and y in S, x T y, y in X . If y Q x′ then x is in X by
                                                      2y2

(15). If y T z, z Q x′, then, since x T y, x T z, z Q x′, so x is in X by (15). If y
                                                                          2

Q z z T z z Q x′, z and z in S, then, since both y and z are in S, y = z by
    11221211

hypothesis, so this reduces to the previous case as y T z .
                                                                2

(20)              If x and y are in S, x T y implies x Q y.
                                                        2

  If y′ had belonged to X, one of (14)-(16) would have held, with x = y′.
                            2

Since not y′ Q x′ by assumption, (14) cannot hold. If y′ and z in S, y′ T z, z Qx′, then, since x′ Q y′ by assumption, z Q y′, so that z = y′ by the hypothesis

about S, and y′ Q x′, contrary to assumption. If y′ Q z, z T z z Q x′, z and
                                                              11221

z in S, then z Q y′ since x′ Q y′, and therefore z Q z . This implies z = z
222112

so that y′ Q z, z Q x′, and therefore y′ Q x′, contrary to assumption.
              11

Therefore, y′ does not belong to X ; on the other hand, x′ belongs to X by
                                      22

(14) since x′ Q x′. Therefore, not y′ Q x x′, by (17). From (18)-(20) and (l)-
                                          2

(3), not y′ Q′ x′. Replacing x′ by x and y′ by y we get
                                                    y

(21)               x Q y and not y Q x imply not y Q′ x.

  From (4) and Szpilrajn’s theorem, there is a weak ordering R of all

alternatives such that

(22)                 R is compatible with Q′.

  From (5), (22), and Definition 8(c),

(23)                      x Q y implies x Ry.

From (5), (21), (22), and Definition 8(d), x Q y and not y Q x imply x Q′ y

and not y Q′ x, which in turn imply not x R y.

(24)                   x Q y and not y Qx imply not xRy.

  From (23), (24), and Definition 8,

(25)                 R is compatible with Q.

  From (6), (22), and Definition 8(c),

(26)                     for x and y in S, x T y implies x R y.

  Suppose x and y in S and not x T y. Then y T x, since T is a weak ordering.

From (6) and (13), y Q′ x and not x Q′ y; from (22) and Definition 8(d), not x

R y. Combining with (26) shows that,

(27)                 for x and y in S, x R y if and only if x T y.

(25) and (27) establish the lemma.


                                4. AN EXAMPLE

  Suppose that among the possible alternatives there are three, none of

which giyes any individual at least as much of both commodities as any

other. For example, suppose that there are two individuals and a total of tenunits of each of two commodities. Consider three alternative distributions

described by the table below. The individualistic restrictions imposed do not

tell us anything about the way either individual orders these alternatives. All

preferences are permitted, so that we are essentially back in the original

situation of unrestricted choice where the paradox holds.












 

Individual 1 Individual 2
Alternative |—————————————————|—
Commodity 1 | Commodity 2 | Commodity 1 | Commodity 2

 

-
Y
o
—oo
©

 
  In fact, the same example shows that even further restrictions that have

sometimes been used will not suffice. Thus, in the individualistic case, it is

occasionally further assumed, at least as a basis for welfare statements, that

all men have the same preferences in regard to their individual situations.

Given any ordering of the various social alternatives by the two individuals,

we can construct a preference scale for the six individual situations involved

by assuming the three available to individual 2 to be ranked according to his

preferences and all to be superior to the three individual situations available

to individual 1, the last being ranked among themselves in accordance with

individual l’s tastes. If each allocation of each commodity in alternative 2 is

reduced by .5, it is even possible to embed this last preference scale for the

individual situations into an indifference map with convex indifference

curves; so even assuming convexity does not impose enough restriction on

individual preference scales to permit a satisfactory social welfare function.

  The results of this section suggest strongly that the difficulties in forming

a social welfare function arise from the differing social attitudes which follow

from the individualistic hypothesis, especially in the case of similar tastes for

individual consumption. It follows that the possibility of social welfare

judgments rests upon a similarity of attitudes toward social alternatives.


                  5. A ONE-COMMODITY WORLD

  The insufficiency of the individualistic hypotheses to permit the formationof a social welfare function, as developed in the previous sections, hinged on

the assumption that there was more than one commodity involved. An

investigation of the one-commodity case may be of interest in bringing out

more clearly the issues involved.

  In a one-commodity world, if we impose Conditions 1 and 2 of Section 1,

there is for any given individual only one possible ordering of the social

states. He orders various social states solely according to the amount of the

one commodity he gets under each. In such a situation, the individual

orderings are not variables; Conditions 2, 3, and 4 become irrelevant since

they relate to the variation in the social ordering corresponding to certain

specified types of changes in the individual orderings. Condition 5

(nondictatorship) becomes a much weaker restriction, though not completely

irrelevant. Any specification of a social ordering which does not coincide

completely with the ordering of any one individual will be a social welfare

function compatible with all the conditions. For example, for each fixed total

output, we might set up arbitrarily an ordering of the various distributions; we

then order any two social states with different total outputs in accordance

with the total output, any two social states with the same total output

according to the arbitrary ordering. This sets up a genuine weak ordering

which does not coincide with the ordering of any one individual. For

example, let x and y be two states with total outputs s and t, respectively, and

with apportionments s′ and t′, respectively, to the given individual. If s′ > t,

but s′ < t′, then society prefers x to y, while the individual prefers y to x.

  The qualitative nature of the difference between the single- and multi-

commodity cases makes any welfare arguments based on an implicit

assumption of a single commodity dubious in its applicability to real

situations. The fundamental difficulty is the same as that pointed out in

connection with the Kaldor compensation principle in Chapter IV, Section 2:

as soon as more than one commodity exists, there is the question of making

them commensurable, i.e., of introducing a standard of values.


      6. GROUP CHOICE IN THE THEORY OF GAMES


  In the present development of the theoiy of multi-person games, an

important role is played by the assumption that each possible coalition ranks

all possible alternative strategies according to the sum of the payments to its          3
members. It may be asked why this group choice function does not run into

the paradox discussed here. It is true that it is assumed in the theory of games
                                                            4
that each individual is playing for his own interests; but it has already been

pointed out (see Section 2) that the individualistic hypothesis is insufficient to

yield a satisfactory social welfare function.

  The world of the theory of games is a one-commodity world, but the

situation is somewhat more complicated than that envisaged in the previous

section. If there are a number of different possible money payments, any

probability distribution over this range is also the outcome to an individual of

a possible social alternative (imputation), and each individual ranks not only

money payments but also probability distributions of money payments. If no

other restriction were imposed, the probabilities of different outcomes would

act like different commodities, and the situation of Section 2 would appear.

However, Professors von Neumann and Morgenstern assume for the purposes

of the theory that individuals rank probability distributions solely according

to the expected value of the money return; this ranking is implicit in the
                                        5
assumption of a transferable utility. Again, therefore, the ranking by each

individual of alternative social states is prescribed in advance, and the

situation is that of the preceding section.


      7. DISTRIBUTIONAL ETHICS COMBINED WITH

                                INDIVIDUALISM


  We may examine briefly a set of assumptions about individual values

which seems to be common to those who feel that the new welfare economics

is applicable in a fairly direct way to the solution of specific economic

problems. It is assumed that there are: (1) an accepted (let us say,

unanimously accepted) value judgment that if everybody is better off (more

precisely, if everybody is at least as well off and one person better off) in one

social state than another according to his tastes, then the first social state is

preferred to the second; and (2) a universally accepted ordering of different

possible welfare distributions in any given situation. The latter value

judgment usually takes an egalitarian form.

  This ethical scheme is quite explicit in the work of Professor Bergson; the
                                                                                      6
second value judgment is contained in his Propositions of Relative Shares.

The same set of ethics underlies the compensation principle of Mr. Kaldorand Professor Hicks; we have already observed the difficulties with that

approach (Chapter IV, Section 2). More recently, some proposals made by

Professors Johnson and Modigliani for meeting the problem of the increased

cost of food due to European demand seem to have been based on value
                                7
judgments (1) and (2) above. To prevent the inequitable shift in real income

to farmers, it was proposed that there be imposed an excise tax on food,

accompanied by a per capita subsidy to consumers. Under the assumption

that the supply of agricultural goods is completely inelastic, the tax would be

absorbed by the farmers while the subsidy would have no substitution effects

at the margin, so that the marginal rate of substitution for any pair of

commodities would be the same for all consumers and hence the first value

judgment would be fulfilled. The taxes and subsidies perform a purely

distributive function and can be so arranged as to restore the status quo ante

as nearly as may be desired, though actually the payment of a per capita

subsidy implies a certain equalizing effect.

  The value judgments are assumed here to hold for any individual. Note

that to even state these judgments we must distinguish sharply between

values and tastes (see Chapter II, Section 3). All individuals are assumed to

have the same values at any given instant of time, but the values held by any

one individual will vary with variations in the tastes of all. Our previous

arguments as to the nonexistence of social welfare functions were based, on

the diversity of values; do they carry over to this particular kind of

unanimity?

  The actual distribution of welfare dictated by the second value judgment

cannot be stated simply in money terms. As Professor Samuelson points out,

such a value judgment is not consistent with any well-defined social ordering
                              8
of alternative social states. The distribution of real income, for a given

environment, must vary with individual tastes. Thus, for a given set of

individual tastes (as represented by the ordering relations of all individuals,

each for his own consumption) and a given environment, there is a given

distribution of purchasing power (somehow defined); then exchange under

perfectly competitive conditions proceeds until an optimum distribution is

reached. The given distribution of real income and the individual tastes

uniquely determine the final outcome, which is a social state. Therefore, the

given ethical system is a rule which defines the social state chosen from a

given environment as a function of the tastes of all individuals. If, for a givenset of tastes, the environment varies, we expect that the choices will be

consistent in the sense that the choice function is derivable from a social

weak ordering of all social states. Thus, the ethical scheme discussed in this

section, which we may term the Bergson social welfare function, has the

form of a rule assigning a social ordering to each possible set of individual

orderings representing tastes. Mathematically, the Bergson social welfare

function has, then, the same form as the social welfare function we have

already discussed, though, of course, the interpretation is somewhat different

in that the individual orderings represent tastes rather than values, and the

whole function is the end product of certain values assumed unanimously

held rather than a method of reconciling divergent value systems. If the range

of tastes is not restricted by a priori considerations (except that they must

truly be tastes, i.e., they must refer only to an individual’s own consumption,

however that may be defined), then indeed the Bergson social welfare

function is mathematically isomorphic to the social welfare function under

individualistic assumptions. Hence, the Possibility Theorem under

Individualistic Assumptions (Corollary to Theorem 3) is applicable here; we

cannot construct a Bergson social welfare function, i.e., one satisfying value

judgments (1) and (2), that will satisfy Conditions 2–5 and that will yield a

true social ordering for every set of individual tastes. Essentially, the two

value judgments amount to erecting individualistic behavior into a value

judgment; it is not surprising, then, that such ethics can be no more successful

than the actual practice of individualism in permitting the formation of social

welfare judgments.

  It must, of course, be recognized that the meaning of Conditions 2–5 has

changed. The previous arguments for their validity assumed that the

individual orderings represented values rather than tastes. It seems obvious

that Conditions 2, 4, and 5 have the same intrinsic desirability under either

interpretation. Condition 3 is perhaps more doubtful. Suppose that there are

just two commodities, bread and wine. A distribution, deemed equitable by

all, is arranged, with the wine-lovers getting more wine and less bread than

the abstainers. Suppose now that all the wine is destroyed. Are the wine-

lovers entitled, because of that fact, to more than an equal share of bread?

The answer is, of course, a value judgment. My own feeling is that tastes for

unattainable alternatives should have nothing to do with the decision among

the attainable ones; desires in conflict with reality are not entitled to

consideration, so that Condition 3, reinterpreted in terms of tastes rather thanvalues, is a valid value judgment, to me at least.                                CHAPTER VII


    SIMILARITY AS THE BASIS OF SOCIAL WELFARE

                                    JUDGMENTS


                      1. COMPLETE UNANIMITY


  Suppose that we do not assume in advance the shape of the preferences of

any one individual, but we do assume that all individuals have the same

preferences for social alternatives. This implies a social-minded attitude and

also a homogeneous society. If we consider the preferences in question to

refer not to expressed preferences but to the preferences which would be

expressed if the corruptions of the environment were removed, the
                                                                                1
assumption of unanimity is the idealist view of political philosophy. In this

case, the obvious way of defining the social welfare function is to choose

some one individual and then say that the social preference scale shall be the

same as his. This satisfies all the conditions set forth in Chapter III except the

condition that the social welfare function not be dictatorial. Under the

assumptions of this section, since it makes no difference who is dictator, the

condition of nondictatorship loses its intrinsic desirability.

  We may generalize somewhat. Suppose it is assumed in advance that a

majority of the individuals will have the same ordering of social alternatives;

it is immaterial whether the particular membership of the majority is known

in advance or not. Then the method of majority decision (see Definition 9)

will pick out this agreed-on ordering and make it the social ordering. Again

all the conditions laid down in Chapter III will be satisfied.

  These results, which are trivial from the mathematical point of view,

reinforce the suggestion at the end of Chapter VI, Section 4, that like attitudes

toward social alternatives (not like, tastes for individual consumption) are

needed for the formation of social judgments. Some values which might give

rise to such similarity of social attitudes are the desires for freedom, for
                                    2
national power, and for equality; likeness in individual tastes, by its very

nature, leads to likeness in desires for social alternatives. Somewhat less

direct in its social implication is the desire for prolongation of life, which wemay take to be one of the most universal of all human motives. This desire is

essentially individualistic, extending to only a few individuals at most; but,

since the means for achieving increased longevity are in such large part

social, there is a strong factor making for like attitudes on special issues.
                                                                    3
Differences may still arise owing to imperfect knowledge. Of like nature are

the various types of collective consumption.


    2. THE CASE OF SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES

  A radical restriction on the range of possible individual orderings has been
                                                      4
proposed recently by Professor Duncan Black. He assumes that, if U, ..., U
                                                                                  1n

are utility indicators for the individual orderings R, ..., R, then the
                                                          in

alternative social states can be represented by a one-dimensional variable in

such a way that each of the graphs of U, ..., U has a single peak. An
                                              1n

example in which this assumption is satisfied is the party structure of prewar

European parliaments, where there was a universally recognized Left-Right

ordering of the parties. Individuals might have belonged to any one of the

parties; but each recognized the same arrangement, in the sense that, of two

parties to the left of his own, the individual would prefer the program of the

one less to the left, and similarly with parties on the right. Nothing need be

specified as to the relative choice between a party to the right and a party to

the left of an individual’s first choice.

  It is possible to find economic examples in which Black’s postulate may

be expected to be satisfied. Thus, suppose that, for reasons of technological

efficiency, it is required that all workers work the same number of hours, and

it is desired to fix the number of hours to be worked. If we assume that wages

are to be paid in accordance with marginal productivity, the real wage rate is

a known decreasing function of the number of hours selected; hence each

social alternative is completely specified by a single number, the number of

hours worked. For each individual, the relation between wages and hours

worked defines an income-leisure transformation curve. Under individualistic

assumptions, we may assume that individuals rank different numbers of hours

to be worked by considering the corresponding points on the income-leisure

transformation curve and comparing the income-leisure indifference curves

which pass through them. We may reasonably suppose that there is one point

on the transformation curve for which the individual’s utility is maximizedand that the individual’s utility decreases as the number of hours worked

varies in either direction from the optimum. Then Black’s postulate is

satisfied.

  Black shows that, under his assumption of single-peaked preferences, the

method of majority decision (see Definition 9) will lead to determinate

results, since there is exactly one alternative which will receive a majority
                                                              5
over any other, provided the number of voters is odd. If the total number of

alternatives is finite, this result shows that, for any set of individual orderings

representable by single-peaked preferences, the method of majority decision

leads to a transitive ordering of the alternatives; for we may remove the best

alternative and then consider the one that is best among the remainder, in the

sense of being preferred by a majority of the individuals to any other
                                                6
alternative left, as being second-best, etc. However, the proof in the general

case of any number of alternatives requires other methods. Let us therefore

redefine the assumption of single-peaked preferences in a formal way.

  Under this assumption, there is a way of ordering the alternatives so that

each individual ordering will be representable by a single-peaked utility

curve. This basic reordering of the alternative social states is not a weak

ordering of the type defined by Axioms I and II since, of any two distinct

alternatives, one must precede the other. Such an ordering is analogous to the

relation of “less than” in the domain of real numbers; we may call it a strong

ordering.

  DEFINITION 11: The relation S is said to be a strong ordering relation if,

  (a) for all x, not x S x;

  (b) for all x 7 ≠ y, either x S y or y S x;

  (c) for all x, y, and z, x S y and y S z imply x S z.

In terms of a strong ordering, we can define the concept of “betweenness” in

an obvious way. Let B(x, y, z) mean “y is between x and z.”

  DEFINITION 12: If S is a strong ordering, define B(x, y, z) to mean thai

either x S y and y S z or z S y and y S x.

  An obvious consequence of Definitions 11 and 12 is the following lemma.

  LEMMA 5: If x, y, z are distinct, then one and only one of the following

holds: B(x, y, z), B(y, x, z), B(y, z, x).  Black’s assumption may be written as follows.

    ASSUMPTION OF SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES: There exists a strong

ordering S such that, for each i, x R y and B (x, y, z) together imply y P z,
                                        ii

where B(x, y, z) is the betweenness relation derived from S by Definition 12.

    Consideration of a one-peaked graph will show that the above statement

corresponds precisely to that given originally.

  In the terminology of the present study, Black proposes replacing

Condition 1 by


  CONDITION 1″: For all sets of individual orderings R, ..., R satisfying the
                                                                1n

Assumption of Single-Peaked Preferences, the corresponding social ordering

R shall be a weak ordering.


  We have already noted (Theorem 1) that the method of majority decision

is a social welfare function satisfying Conditions 1–5 when there are only

two alternatives altogether, but that method does not satisfy Condition 1

when there are more than two alternatives. The method of majority decision

does, however, satisfy Conditions 2–5 for any number of alternatives. We

will show that this method satisfies Condition 1″ and hence is a valid social

welfare function for single-peaked preferences.

  As before, let N(x, y) be the number of individuals for whom x R y. Then,
                                                                              i

by Definition 9, if R is formed by the method of majority decision,

(1)                    x R y if and only if N(x, y) > N(y, x).


  LEMMA 6: If R is formed by the method of majority decision from a given

set of individual orderings R, ..., R, and if, for all i, x R y implies z P w (for
                                inii

a given x, y, z, and w), then x R y implies z R w.


  PROOF: Suppose the hypothesis holds, and also x R y. We wish to prove

that z R w. By hypothesis, for every individual for whom x R y, we can also
                                                                      i

say z R w, so that
      i

(2)                   N(z, w) ≥ N(x, y).

  Also, since x R y, we have, by (1),(3)                   N(x, y) ≥ N(y, x).

If w R z, then not z P w. Hence, by hypothesis, not x R y, and therefore y R
      iiii

x. That is, w R z implies y R x, so that
                ii

(4)                   N(y, x) ≥ N(w, z).

By (2)-(4), N(z, w) ≥ N(w, z), so that, by (1), z R w. Q.E.D.


  THEOREM 4 (Possibility Theorem for Single-Peaked Preferences): The

method of majority decision is a social welfare function satisfying Condition

1″ and Conditions 2–5 for any number of alternatives, provided the number

of individuals is odd.


  PROOF: By Lemma 3, the method of majority decision satisfies Conditions

2-5. Hence, it is only necessary to prove that if R, ..., R satisfy the
                                                        in

Assumption of Single-Peaked Preferences, then the social ordering R formed

by the method of majority decision satisfies Axioms I and II. Clearly, either

N(x, y) ≥ N(y, x) or N{y, x) ≥ N(x, y), so that, by (1), for all x and y, either x R

y or y R x. Hence, R satisfies Axiom I.

  To show that R is transitive, assume x R y and y R z. We seek to prove that

x R z. If x = y, then x R z follows from y R z; if y = z, then x R z follows from

x R y. If x = z, then we seek to prove that x R x; but this follows immediately

from (1) and the trivial fact that N(x, x) ≥ N(x, x).

  Now assume that x, y, and z are distinct. By Lemma 5, there are three

possibilities:

  (a) B(x, y, z): By the Assumption, if x R y holds, then y P z holds. From x
                                                ii

R y and y P z, it follows that x P z; i.e., x R y implies x P z.
iiiii

Now apply Lemma 6, replacing z by x and w by z; from x R y, which is

assumed, follows x R z.

  (b) B(y, x, z): Suppose y R z but not x P z. From the second statement
                                ii

follows z R x. From y R z and z R x, we can conclude y R x. By the
            iiii

Assumption, replacing x by y and y by x, y R x implies x P z, which
                                                    ii

contradicts the original supposition that both y R z and not x P z hold.
                                                        ii

Therefore, if y R z, then x P z. By Lemma 6, replacing x by y, y by z, z by x,
                  ii

and why z, x R z follows from y R z.  (c) B(y, z, x): Suppose y R z. Then, by the Assumption, replacing x by y, y
                                i

by z, and z by x, we can assert z P x. From y R z and z P x, we have y P x.
                                      iiii

That is,

(5)                    y R z implies y P x.
                    ii


Let N′ be the number of individuals for whom y P x, and N the number of
                                                          i

individuals. Then, x R y if and only if not y P x, so that
                        ii

(6)                   N(x, y)= N—N′.

If y P x, then certainly y R x, so that
    ii

(7)                   N(y, x) ≥ N′.

Since x R y, we have, by (1), that N(x, y) ≥ N(y, x); by (6) and (7), N —N′ ≥ N

′, or


(8)                 

A
ol
From (5),

(9)                    N′ ≥ N(y, z).

For each i, either y R z or z R y; therefore,
                      ii

(10)                    N(y, z) + N(z, y) ≥ N.

As y R z, we have, by (1), that N(y, z) ≥ N(z, y). By (10), this implies that

N(y, z) ≥ N/2. From (9), it follows that N′ ≥ N/2, and, with the aid of (8), N′ =

N/2. But this contradicts the hypothesis that the number of voters is odd.

Hence, case (c) cannot arise; if B(y, z, x), then we cannot have both x R y and

y R z.

  Therefore, in every case where it was possible that x R y and y R z, it was

also true that x R z. R is transitive; this completes the proof of Theorem 4.

  It may be noted that Theorem 1, the Possibility Theorem for Two

Alternatives, is really a special case of Theorem 4 since, if there are only two

alternatives, the individual orderings are necessarily single-peaked. The case

of complete unanimity, discussed in the last section, is also a case of single-

peaked preferences if alternatives that are indifferent to every individual are

regarded as identical, for we may then use as the basic strong ordering the

common individual ordering. Also note that in the example of the paradox of

voting mentioned in Chapter I, Section 1, there was no way of ordering the

three alternatives so that the orderings were of the single-peaked variety.  The condition in Theorem 4 that the number of individuals be odd is

essential. Suppose there are two individuals, one of whom prefers x to y and y

to z, while the other prefers y to z and z to x. These orderings satisfy the

Assumption of Single-Peaked Preferences if the ordering x, y, z is taken as

the basic strong ordering. Then majority decision yields x indifferent to y and

y preferred to z, but x is indifferent and not preferred to z.

  Thus, if the Assumption of Single-Peaked Preferences is satisfied by the

orderings of the various individuals, assumed odd in number, we could, under

certain assumptions about the environment, find the social choice by

considering each pair of alternatives, having individuals vote between them,

and then selecting that alternative which has a majority over every other in

pair-wise comparisons. Actually, as Black points out, if the Assumption is

made, it is not necessary to make all those comparisons to find the optimum;

it suffices to look only at the first choices of the various individuals and find

the median of these first choices when they are considered arrayed according
                                7
to the basic strong ordering.

  The fact that Black’s restrictions on individual orderings suffice to permit

a social welfare function casts new light on what is meant by similarity of

social attitudes. In the present case, individuals can have varied first choices;

but they must have a fundamentally similar attitude toward the classification
                                                                                  8
of the alternatives since they all order the alternatives in the same way.


  3. THE IDEALIST POSITION AND THE CONCEPT OF

                                    CONSENSUS


  The results of the preceding two sections show that mathematically, at

least, it is possible to construct suitable social welfare functions if we feel

entitled to say in advance that the tastes of individuals fall within certain

prescribed realms of similarity. Do these or possibly other mathematical

restrictions have any social significance? I do not pretend to have any definite

answer; but some reflections and tentative suggestions are in order, especially

on the relation between the mathematics and the views contained in a small

sample of the vast literature on the foundations of social morality.

  The assumption of Section 1, that of complete agreement among

individuals on the ordering of social alternatives, may seem obviously

contrary to fact. But, properly interpreted, it is at the basis of a great portionof political philosophy, namely, the idealist school. The fundamental doctrine

of the group is that we must distinguish between the individual will, as it

exists at any given instant under varying external influences, and the general

will, which is supposed to inhere in all and which is the same in all; social

morality is based on the latter. This view is expressed in the works of
                                                                9
Rousseau, Kant, and T. H. Green, among many others. There may, indeed,

be wide divergencies between the individual will, corrupted by the

environment, and the true general will, which can never err though it may be
                                                                                    10
mistaken as to means; indeed, the two wills will only agree by accident. But

the existence of the general will as the basis for the very existence of a
                        11
society is insisted on.

  Kant has developed the idealistic viewpoint in morals in the most

systematic fashion. He distinguished among three imperatives for an

individual: the technical, the pragmatic, and the moral. The technical

imperative is identical with what we have here called the environment; it

represents knowledge of the means necessary to carry out given ends. The

pragmatic imperative is the direction to the individual to seek his happiness;

it corresponds to our individual orderings of social alternatives. Happiness is,

according to Kant, a vague and uncertain guide to action. These two

imperatives are of a contingent nature, lacking in the ultimate necessity which

should characterize moral obligation; hence, he refers to them as hypothetical

imperatives, as contrasted with the moral imperative, which is a categorical
                                                12
imperative having an objective existence. The moral imperative

corresponds to our concept of the social ordering, in a sense, but it is also an

individual ordering for every individual; it is the will which every individual

would have if he were fully rational.

  The content of the moral imperative stems from its categorical nature. The

moral or categorical imperative must have full interpersonal validity; this is

Kant’s principle of the Autonomy of the Will. For this to hold, each

individual must treat every other individual as an end in himself. Kant’s

famous rule of the categorical imperative is, then, to adopt such principles of

behavior that, if everyone followed them, they would lead to no self-

contradiction. A group of individuals each rationally obeying the moral

imperative constitutes a “kingdom of ends”—in our terminology, a society
                                                13
with a satisfactory social welfare function.

  The idealist doctrine then may be summed up by saying that eachindividual has two orderings, one which governs him in his everyday actions

and one which would be relevant under some ideal conditions and which is in

some sense truer than the first ordering. It is the latter which is considered

relevant to social choice, and it is assumed that there is complete unanimity

with regard to the truer individual ordering.

  It is overly strong to require that the pragmatic imperatives of different

individuals be identical and perhaps even too much to ask that there exist

moral imperatives which have this property. The results of Section 2 show

that the condition of unanimity is mathematically unnecessary to the

existence of a social welfare function, and we may well hope that there are

still other conditions than those laid down there under which the formation of

social welfare functions, possibly other than the method of majority decision,

will be possible. But it must be demanded that there be some sort of

consensus on the ends of society, or no social welfare function can be

formed. If we deny the possibility or meaningfulness of two wills, the

consensus must be found in the overtly expressed individual orderings; if we

accept the possibility, we may find the desired agreement in the moral

imperatives of the various members of society.

  The importance of consensus on ends as part of the process of making

judgments on matters of social welfare has been stressed by economists of

both the Left and Right persuasions. Professor Knight is very explicit. “We

contend not only that such ideals are real to individuals, but that they are part

of our culture and sufficiently uniform and objective to form a useful
                                                                      14
standard of comparison for a given country at a given time.” This

formulation is especially valuable for pointing out that the consensus of

moral imperatives need not be grounded in a metaphysical absolute but may

be based on the relative socio-ethical norms of a particular culture. Implicit in

Knight’s stand is the inference that there are two wills; as noted below, he

evidently regards the moral imperative as having to be discovered by special

techniques, which would hardly be the case if the concept of consensus

applied to the pragmatic imperatives of individuals.

  Professor Stigler has made it a burden of reproach to the new welfare
                                                                              15
economics that it does not take into account the consensus on ends. It is not

clear from his discussion whether he regards the agreed-on ends as being

obvious from introspection or casual observation (i.e., relating to the

pragmatic imperatives) or as requiring special inquiry; his comments seemrather to incline in the former direction, in which case he lays himself open to

Professor Samuelson’s request for immediate enlightenment on various
                            16
specific economic issues.

  The distinction between moral and pragmatic imperatives was one of the

strands in the debate a few years back between Mr. Dobb and Professor
      17
Lerner. One of Dobb’s chief points in denying the possibility of operating a

socialist economy under the price system was an attack on the “sacredness of

consumers′ preferences,” especially in the matter of time-preference. “In
                                                                                      18
judgment of the future, the ’natural′ individual is notoriously unreliable.” In

this question and in such matters as the number of varieties of goods to be put

on the market, it is held that collective choices are superior to individual

ones; his reference to a Gresham’s law of tastes is a clear indication of the

distinction between moral and pragmatic imperatives and the need for special

methods of choice to arrive at the imperative. The liability of the individual

will to corruption enters in Dobb’s emphasis on the variability of individual
                                                                                        19
tastes in the presence of advertising and of the emergence of new products.

His remarks are not too far from Kant’s about the vagueness and uncertainty

of the drive for personal happiness as a guide to action. Lerner quite justly

observes that Dobb “implies some transcendental optimum other than that
                                                      20
shown ’by a free market or in any other way′”; and Dobb himself, with the

rationalistic tradition common to utilitarianism and Marxism in his mind,

grows a little worried: “Yet I do not wish to follow Kant and ’limit

knowledge in order to make way for faith.′ Planned economy will have its
                                                          21
economic laws,” though he does not specify them.

  Dobb’s work presents clearly the dilemma posed by accepting the doctrine

of consensus as a foundation for social ethics. Empirically, we can reject the

idea that the consensus can be found in the expressed individual wills. If

consensus is to be found in the moral imperative, what is the basis for it?

Ethical absolutism is unsatisfying to a mind brought up in the liberal heritage,

however much specific shortcomings in the liberal formulation are rejected.

Knight’s version, depending on ethical relativism, leads to the danger of a

glorification of the status quo, though it still seems to be the better

alternative.

  From the point of view of seeking a consensus of the moral imperative of

individuals, such consensus being assumed to exist, the problem of choosing

an electoral or other choice mechanism, or, more broadly, of choosing asocial structure, assumes an entirely different form from that discussed in the

greater part of this study. The essential problem becomes that of choosing our

mechanism so as best to bring the pragmatic imperative into coincidence with

the moral. It is from this point of view that Rousseau discusses the relative
                                              22
merits of different forms of government.

  In this aspect, the case for democracy rests on the argument that free

discussion and expression of opinion are the most suitable techniques of
                                                                    23
arriving at the moral imperative implicitly common to all. Voting, from this

point of view, is not a device whereby each individual expresses his personal

interests, but rather where each individual gives his opinion of the general
    24
will.

  This model has much in common with the statistical problem of pooling

the opinions of a group of experts to arrive at a best judgment; here
                                                                                25
individuals are considered experts at detecting the moral imperative. An

antidemocrat might argue that only a minority are sufficiently capable of

discerning the moral imperative beneath the obscuring veil of the pragmatic

to make them useful experts in this sense; thus Plato calls for a small

specialized group of guardians to make the social choices. A prodemocrat

might argue that all men have natively an equal portion of the light; all are

children of God. The analogy to the problem of pooling experts′ opinions is,

of course, incomplete; for, in the social welfare problem, the very method of

pooling, i.e., of social decision, may affect the degree of expertness of

individuals. For example, marking off a certain group, such as army officers,

to hold power may, because of the greater leisure and better living conditions

which follow, enable them to make better decisions, even though there is no

native superiority to the remainder of the society; or it may cause them to lose

contact with the daily problems of the ordinary man and so lower their ability

to make “good” decisions in certain contexts. More broadly, the very act of

establishing a dictator or elite to decide on the social good may lead to a

distortion of the pragmatic from the moral imperative. “Power always

corrupts; and absolute power corrupts absolutely” (Lord Acton).

  Any view which depends on consensus as the basis for social action

certainly implies that the market mechanism cannot be taken as the social

welfare function since that mechanism cannot take account of the altruistic

motives which must be present to secure that consensus. If, in particular, the

consensus in question is that of moral imperatives, the case is even worsesince the market can certainly only express pragmatic imperatives. This does

not deny the possibility of a limited use of the market as an instrument for

achieving certain parts of the social optimum, especially if it is deliberately

manipulated to make behavior under pragmatic imperatives coincide with

that which would exist under moral ones.


    4. KNOWLEDGE AND THE MEANING OF SOCIAL

                                  ALTERNATIVES

  The distinction between the overtly expressed will and some truer desires

may be put in a slightly different way. Any individual may be presumed to

have some ultimate values, partly biological, partly specific to the culture

pattern; these are, however, largely unconscious. His overt preferences are for

values instrumental in achieving these ultimate values. The relation between

the two sets of values is not unique; for a given set of ultimate values, there

may be differing sets of instrumental values, depending on the greater or

lesser knowledge of the individual as to the best means of achieving his

ultimate values and as to what his ultimate values are. The second type of

ignorance seems to be particularly in the mind of Dobb, for example, as

discussed in the last section, and all through the idealist tradition. The reality

of the first type of ignorance in economic life is well evidenced by the fact

that the price ratio between two chemically indistinguishable brands of

aspirin has exceeded ten to one; here the hierarchy of instrumental values

leads to different preferences for different brands of aspirin, though they are

in fact equally efficacious in achieving the ultimate end of mitigating

headaches. Though welfare economics in its formal aspects typically takes

individuals′ overt behavior as unanalyzable, few economists would oppose

laws against false advertising.

  In this connection, it must be pointed out that the alternatives, among

which social preference is to be defined, may be interpreted in (at least) two

ways: (1) each alternative is a vector whose components are values of the

various particular decisions actually made by the government, such as tax

rates, expenditures, antimonopoly policy, and price policies of socialized

enterprise; (2) each alternative is a complete description of the state of every

individual throughout the future. For convenience, we shall refer to the first

interpretation of the concept “alternative” as the concept “social decision,” to

the second as the concept “social end.” Social ends either are themselvesultimate ends or at least completely determine the ultimate ends; the relation

between social ends and ultimate ends is unknown only to the extent that the

ultimate ends are unknown. On the other hand, it is also true that social

decisions determine, wholly or partially, social ends; but the relation here is a

matter, in part, of the empirical laws of the social sciences. In the present

state of these disciplines, it is too much to expect the relations to be well

known. Therefore, the relation between the orderings concerning social ends

and those concerning social decisions is afflicted with uncertainty.

  One of the great advantages of abstract postulational methods is the fact

that the same system may be given several different interpretations,

permitting a considerable saving of time. In the present case, the argument

given in Chapter V is valid whether the variables, x, y, ..., are assumed to

refer to social decisions or social ends. It might therefore be argued that the

problem is equally acute in either case. However, it could be held that, since

ultimate ends arise out of biological and cultural needs, they are, in part at

least, objective. Thus, orderings of social ends, while not identical from

individual to individual, are likely to be more similar than individual

preference scales for social decisions. It may be that the biological and

cultural basis of ultimate ends limits preferences about them sufficiently so

that a social welfare function can be formed; then the social ordering of social

decisions should be based on the social ordering of social ends plus the use of

scientific and statistical methods to limit the ^amount of ignorance in passing

from decisions to ends and to limit the effects of the remaining ignorance.

  It may also be remarked that, in terms of the analysis in the present

section, the doctrine of “enlightened self-interest” would be justified in the

event that it is assumed that all individuals have the same ultimate ends for

the community. In that case, different opinions on social issues arise from

lack of knowledge and can be removed by discovering the truth and letting it

be widely known. In our present pessimistic age, even this seems like a very

difficult problem, not to be dismissed as lightly as it was by our more

exuberant predecessors of the last century.

  The fact of uncertainty as to the relation between decisions and ends has

important implications for the controversy as to the relative efficiency of

centralized and decentralized planning, particularly in a dynamic economy. It

may well be argued that centralized planning will necessarily reduce this
                                                                            26
uncertainty since more facts are available to the central planners. It is truethat the effect of a given error may be greater under centralization; but this

will not be so if a rational method of planning against uncertainty is
        27
adopted. The relation of uncertainty to the optimum form of the economic

system has been insufficiently explored in the recent formal work on welfare
            28
economics, probably because of the lack of a well-developed theory of

behavior under uncertainty. Thus, the stimulating discussion of Professor
    29
Hicks is vitiated by his very restricted certainty-equivalent theory of

uncertainty, the limitations of which have been very well shown by
                                  30
Professors Hart and Friedman.


                        5. PARTIAL UNANIMITY

  The discussion of the last two sections suggests, however vaguely, that the

solution of the social welfare problem may lie in some generalization of the

unanimity condition of Section 1, applied perhaps to individual orderings

found by special inquiries rather than those overtly expressed. But the correct

mathematical generalization of the unanimity condition is not easy to see.

Black’s postulate, elegant though it be, is not obviously applicable, though

perhaps deeper investigation would change the verdict.

  An attempted generalization which immediately suggests itself is to

assume that all individuals are unanimous about some choices but not

necessarily about others. That is, among all possible ordered pairs (x, y) of

social alternatives, there are some for which it is known that all individuals

feel alike. These common feelings can be expressed by saying that there is a

quasi-ordering Q of all social alternatives such that the orderings of all

individuals are compatible with this same quasi-ordering. If there are three

alternatives such that Q tells us nothing about the comparison of any two, i.e.,

if there are three alternatives such that we do not assume unanimity of

agreement as to the choice between any two, then clearly the assumption of a

partial unanimity does not exclude any of the three alternatives in question.

  This result can be rigorously deduced from Theorem 3. First, suppose that

not merely is it known that certain choices will be unanimous but in fact it is

known in advance what the choice will be. That is, suppose Q is known in

advance. If we let S be the set of three alternatives mentioned above, then

Theorem 3 applies with Q, ..., Q, all Q’s being the same. If now we merely
                              1n

postulate unanimity of those choices without specifying how the choices willcome out, we have clearly imposed less restraint on the orderings of

individuals, and therefore a fortiori it remains valid that the only possible

social welfare functions are imposed or dictatorial.


          6. THE DECISION PROCESS AS A VALUE

  Up to now, no attempt has been made to find guidance by considering the

components of the vector which defines the social state. One especially

interesting analysis of this sort considers that, among the variables which

taken together define the social state, one is the very process by which the

society makes its choice. This is especially important if the mechanism of

choice itself has a value to the individuals in the society. For example, an

individual may have a positive preference for achieving a given distribution

through the free market mechanism over achieving the same distribution

through rationing by the government. If the decision process is interpreted

broadly to include the whole socio-psychological climate in which social

decisions are made, the reality and importance of such preferences, as

opposed to preferences about the distributions of goods, are obvious.

  From a logical point of view, some care has to be taken in defining the

decision process since the choice of decision process in any given case is

made by a decision process. There is no deep circularity here, however. If x is

the vector describing a possible social state, let x be the components of that
                                                        n

vector which are not decision processes; let x b be the process of deciding
                                                    2

among the alternative possible x’s; in general, let x be the process of
                                    1n

deciding among the alternative possible x –’s. We may refer to x as the
                                                n11

first-order decision, x as a second-order decision, etc.; then an nth-order
                        2

decision is a process of choosing an (n—1)th-order decision method. Any

particular social state is described in its entirety by a vector of the form (x x
                                                                                      12

..., x ...). In describing the United States Government, we might say that x is
  n1

a proposed bill or, more precisely, the proposed bill taken into conjunction

with all the legislation now on the books; x is the process by which bills are
                                                  2

enacted into law by Congress and the President; z is the process of choosing
                                                          3

a Congress and President, set down by the Constitution; and x± is the process

of constitutional amendment.

  Suppose that for some value of n there is one possible x which is so
                                                                    nstrongly desired by all individuals that they prefer any social state which
                                                                    31
involves accepting that particular x to any which does not. For example,
                                        n

the belief in democracy may be so strong that any decision on the distribution

of goods arrived at democratically may be preferred to such a decision

arrived at in other ways, even though all individuals might have preferred the

second distribution of goods to the first if it had been arrived at

democratically. Similarly, the desire for a dictatorship or for a particular

dictator may be overwhelming under certain conditions. In such a case, again,

our social welfare problem may be regarded as solved since the unanimous

agreement on the decision process may resolve the conflicts as to the

decisions themselves.

  Some such valuation as the above seems to be implicit in every stable

political structure. However, there is a certain empirical element in practice;

individuals prefer certain political structures over others, not only because of

their liking for the structure as such, but also because they have some idea of

the preference patterns of the other individuals in the society and feel that on

the whole they can expect the particular structure in question, taken in

conjunction with the expected behavior of other individuals under that

structure, to yield decisions on current matters which will usually be

acceptable to themselves. Thus, we may expect that social welfare judgments

can usually be made when there is both a widespread agreement on the

decision process and a widespread agreement on the desirability of everyday

decisions. Indeed, the sufficiency of the former alone, as implied in the

preceding paragraph, would require that individuals ascribe an

incommensurably greater value to the process than to the decisions reached

under it, a proposition which hardly seems like a credible representation of

the psychology of most individuals in a social situation.                              CHAPTER VIII


  NOTES ON THE THEORY OF SOCIAL CHOICE, 1963

  When the first edition of this book was prepared, the relevant literature

was summarized in four pages. Since 1951 there has been a considerably

greater volume of discussion. In preparing a second edition, I felt that the

most useful procedure would be to append to my previous discussion a series

of reflections inspired by the recent discussions. Despite their high quality, I

do not find it obligatory to prepare a revision of the text itself. It is not the
                                                  1
results that have been significantly affected  but their interpretation and the

relation to other contemporary work. There is no attempt here at exhausting

the relevant references.

  Let me begin by calling attention to some excellent expositions of the

theory of social choice which have appeared in the last decade. A remarkably
                                                                                2
clear exposition at an elementary level has been given by M. Barbut. A

number of interesting papers on the foundations of welfare economics has
                                                            3
appeared in a special issue of Économic Appliquée. I particularly call

attention to a remarkable exposition of the theory of collective choice and the
                                                                4
general problem of aggregation due to G.-Th. Guilbaud.

                                      5
  A recent paper by W. Vickrey has reviewed the proof of the main

theorem of this book under somewhat different assumptions and traced out

some possible implications and further lines of development in the

foundations of the theory. By restating the axioms in a somewhat different

form, he has achieved an extremely simple exposition which brings out the

lines of the argument very clearly.

  Perhaps the most complete and up-to-date summary of the problem of

aggregation of individual choices into collective ones, with particular
                                                                          6
emphasis on political aspects, has been carried out by W. Riker. The
                                                                        7
economic literature has been ably reviewed by J. Rothenberg.

  Finally, it should be noted that the pioneer work of D. Black (see pp. 75–

80 of the text) has recently been collected and systematically expounded in a
    8
book.                      I. HISTORICAL REMARKS

  I must confess to a certain want of diligence in tracking down the

historical origins of the theories of social choice. When I first studied the

problem and developed the contradictions in the majority rule system, I was

sure that this was no original discovery, although I had no explicit reference,

and sought to express this knowledge by referring to the “well-known

’paradox of voting′” (text, p. 2). When the basic ideas of the book were first

read as a paper to the Econometric Society in December, 1948, Professor C.

P. Wright of the University of New Brunswick called my attention to the
                        9
work of E. J. Nanson. Nanson, in discussing a proposal of his for a method

of election, refers without great emphasis to the possibility of intransitivity

arising from majority choice (pp. 213-214) for which he gives no previous

reference. It is true, however, that the tone of his remarks does not suggest

that this possibility is a discovery of his own, although it is rather difficult to

be sure.

                          10
  However, Guilbaud  notes that the paradox was known and developed
                                                                11
by the Marquis de Condorcet in the eighteenth century, and refers to the

paradox therefore as the Condorcet effect. This development was part of

Condorcet’s great interest in methods of election and essentially, therefore, in

the theory of social choice. His work, in turn, seems to have been inspired by
                                                      12
an earlier paper, that of Jean-Charles de Borda.

          13
  Black  has given a history of the theory of social choice, starting with the

work of Borda and including that of Condorcet, Laplace, Nanson, Galton, and

most especially C. L. Dodgson (Lewis Carroll). In regard to the last, he has

uncovered some previously unpublished pamphlets in which Dodgson

cryptically, although with great acumen, analyzed problems of elections and

particularly what he called “cyclical majorities.” Both Dodgson’s work and

Black’s comments on it and on the circumstances of its origin are extremely

worthwhile.

  Black’s excellent history makes superfluous any need for recapitulation

here. However, there are a few comments that may be of some interest.

Borda’s starting point is the fact that plurality voting among several

candidates could easily lead to a very unreasonable choice. His major point—

and this, I believe, has been decisive in all subsequent work—is that the

entire ordering of the individual voters among alternative candidates isneeded for social decision. The method Borda proposes is the rank-order

method as defined on p. 27 of the present text. This, as Borda observes, gives

equal weight to the differences between adjacent candidates as well as to

different voters. The first raises thus the problem of the measurability of

utility, the second that of interpersonal comparisons. He justifies the first step

by an argument essentially based on ignorance. If a voter ranks B between A

and C, then we have as much reason to suppose that the difference in

intensity between A and B is greater than the difference in intensity between

B and C as to suppose that it is less. The adding up of different individual

votes is justified on the grounds of equality of voters. These themes have
                                                                                14
continued to recur. The argument of L. Goodman and H. Markowitz  may

be regarded as giving in effect an axiomatic justification of Borda’s position.

  As Granger and Black both observed, Condorcet has really two different

approaches. In the one most in line with subsequent developments, as well as

with Borda’s work, the chief contribution has been what might be termed the

Condorcet criterion, that a candidate who receives a majority as against each

other candidate should be elected. This implicitly accepts the view of what I

have termed the independence of irrelevant alternatives (see text, pp. 26-28).

It was in this context that Condorcet discovered that pairwise majority

comparisons might lead to intransitivity and hence to an indeterminacy in the

social choice. Condorcet did propose some methods for dealing with the

general case, but these have not been found clear by subsequent writers.

  The second approach is closely related to the theory of juries which

Condorcet and others were studying. Here the implication is rather that the

voters are judges of some truth rather than expressing their own preferences.

This position is essentially a stochastic version of an idealistic position and

has been discussed previously (see text, pp. 85-86).

  The work of Nanson and Dodgson deserves some mention, although we

must refer to Black’s work and the original sources for fuller treatment. Both

criticize various well-known methods of voting, mainly in terms of failing to

satisfy the Condorcet criterion. Most proposed methods do not even

accomplish this much, not even the rank-order method of Borda. Nanson

suggests the following procedure based on having the orderings of every

voter for all candidates: Rank the candidates according to the rank-order

method. Then eliminate all those whose total votes is less than the average.

With the remaining candidates form the rank-orders again, considering onlythose candidates, and repeat the process until one candidate is selected.

Nanson shows that if there exists a candidate who has a majority against any

other, he will be selected. Of course, the paradox of voting cannot be

eliminated by this technique.

  Dodgson accepts fully the Condorcet criterion, so much so that he comes

to the conclusion that if a cyclical majority persists, then there should be “no
          15
election.”  This position is rather curious. Indeed, Dodgson elsewhere

shrewdly points out that “no election,” if it is an allowable alternative, should
                                                      16
be considered on a par with all the candidates. This seems quite

inconsistent with the previous statement. It does point, however, to an

important empirical truth, especially about legislative matters rather than the

choice of candidates: The status quo does have a built-in edge over all

alternative proposals.

  Rather interestingly, though, in a discussion of alternative proposals for
                                  17
the case of cyclical majorities, he points out the unreasonableness of their

conclusions by reference to another criterion; namely, he points out that the

candidate who would have a majority over all others with the least number of

interchanges of orderings on the individual preference scales is not chosen.

This suggests that one could elevate this to a principle for election when we

do not admit the possibility of “no election,” or do not wish to give that

alternative any preference. In principle, and especially with computing

machines, the criterion itself provides a method of choosing candidates. I do

not know whether there is any simple way of characterizing this principle. It

does coincide with Nanson’s method for the case of three candidates.


II. THE FORMAL STATEMENT OF THE CONDITIONS

          AND A NEW EXPOSITION OF THE PROOF


  This section consists of some diverse observations on the formal aspects

of the theory. First, I show that some of the conditions can be replaced by the

Pareto principle (that a unanimity of individual preferences implies a social

preference). Since the Pareto principle is universally accepted, the new set of

conditions will be easier to compare with other formulations of the problem

of social choice. Second, I give what appears to be the simplest formulation

of the proof that the conditions are inconsistent. Third, I state some other,

stronger, conditions leading to majority rule of some type; thesedevelopments are due to May and Murakami. Finally, I comment on an error

in the original statement of the theorem, which was discovered by Blau.


1. The Pareto Principle and the Conditions for a Social Welfare Function


  The Pareto principle was originally given in the text (p. 36) as a form of

the compensation principle. We give it here in a slightly weaker form

(involving only strict preferences).


  CONDITION P: If x P y for all i, then x P y.
                        i


  (In words, if every individual prefers x to y, then so does society.)

                                                          18
  To meet an important objection raised by Blau, which will be discussed

in paragraph 4, I will also at this stage replace Conditions 1 and 2 by the

stronger


  CONDITION 1′: All logically possible orderings of the alternative social

states are admissible.

  CONDITION 2′: For a given pair of alternatives, x and y, let the individual

preferences be given. (By Condition 3, these suffice to determine the social

ordering.) Suppose that x is then raised in some or all of the individual

preferences. Then if x was originally socially preferred to y, it remains

socially preferred to y after the change.

  Condition 1′ is unnecessarily strong, but it will be useful in permitting a

simpler exposition of the proof. Condition 2′ is equivalent to Condition 2 in

the presence of Conditions 1′ and 3.

  We note here


  THEOREM 1: Condition P is deducible from Conditions 2′, 3, and 4

(Positive Association of Social and Individual Values, Independence of

Irrelevant Alternatives, and Citizens’ Sovereignty).


  Indeed, Condition P is identical with Consequence 3 (text, p. 54).

Consequence 1 (whose proof involves a fallacy pointed out by Blau) is

identical with Condition 2′. A careful reading of the proofs of Consequences

2 and 3 (pp. 52-54) shows then that their proofs depend only on Conditions

2′, 3, and 4.  In the next paragraph, the inconsistency of Conditions 1′, 3, P, and 5 will

be shown. Since Condition P follows from Conditions 2′, 3, and 4, the

inconsistency of Conditions 1′, 2′, 3, 4, and 5 will follow. However, the new

list of conditions will be easier to compare with other formulations of the
                                                                          19
social choice problem; this comparison is made in Section III.l.


                                                                        20
                2. A Proof of the General Possibility Theorem


  In this paragraph, we demonstrate


                                                                    21
  THEOREM 2: Conditions 1′, 3, P, and 5 are inconsistent.


  Hence the substitution of the Pareto principle for Conditions 2 and 4 does

not affect the inconsistency shown in the text. Furthermore, since Condition

P follows from Conditions 2, 3, and 4, as shown in the preceding paragraph,

this proof also constitutes a proof of the theorem shown in the text (except for

the substitution of the stronger Condition 1′ for Condition 1). This proof, and

indeed any proof of which I am aware, does not differ essentially from that

given in the text, but I believe the general lines of the proof and the role

played by the different conditions are a little more evident.

  We use a slightly different definition of a decisive set than that in the text

(Definition 10, p. 52). A set of individuals V is decisive for x against y if x is

socially chosen when every individual in V prefers x to y and every individual

not in V prefers y to x.

  The proof falls into two parts. It is first shown that if an individual is

decisive for some pair of alternatives, then he is a dictator, which is excluded

by Condition 5; the impossibility theorem itself then follows very easily from

the first result and the Pareto principle.

  That an individual decisive for some pair of alternatives must be a dictator

will be shown to follow from the assumptions of Collective Rationality

(Condition 1’ together with the definition of a social welfare function), the

Pareto principle, and the Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives (Condition

3). We distinguish one individual, called 7, and introduce the following

notations for statements about the social welfare function, or constitution:

(1) x  y means that x is socially preferred to y whenever I prefers x to y,

 
  regardless of the orderings of other individuals;(2) x D y means that x is socially preferred to y if individual I prefers x to y

  and all other individuals have the opposite preference.


  This notation is only legitimate because of Condition 3, which assures us

that the choice between x and y depends only on the preferences of all

individuals concerning those two alternatives. If Condition 2 were assumed,

the two concepts would be equivalent (see Consequence 2, p. 53), but we are

now assuming the Pareto principle instead.

  Note that the statement, x  y, implies x D y and that x D y is the same as

 
the assertion that 7 is a decisive set for z against y.

  Suppose then that x D y holds for some x and y. We will first suppose that

there are only three alternatives altogether. Let the third alternative be z.

Suppose I orders the alternatives, x, y, z, in descending order, whereas all

other individuals prefer y to both x and z, but may have any preferences as

between the last two. Then I prefers x to y, whereas all others prefer y to x;

from (2), this means that x P y. All individuals prefer y to z; by Condition P,

y P z. Then by transitivity, x P z; but then this holds whenever x P z,
                                                                            I

regardless of the orderings of other individuals. In symbols,

(3)                 x D y implies x  z.


 
  Again suppose x D y, but now suppose that i orders the alternatives, z, x, y,

whereas all other individuals prefer both z and y to x. By a similar argument,

x P y and z P x, so that z P y.

(4)                 x D y implies z  y.

 
  Interchanging y and z in (4) yields

(5)                 x D z implies y  z.

 
  Replacing x by y, y by z, and z by x in (3) yields

(6)                 y D z implies y  x.

 
Since x  z implies x  z, and y D z implies y D z, we can, by chaining the

 
 
implications (3), (5), and (6), deduce

(7)                 x D y implies y  x.

 
If we interchange x and y in (3), (4), and (7), we arrive at the respective

implications                                y D x implies y  z,

 
                                y D x implies z  x,

 
                                y D x implies x  y,

 
and these can each be chained with the implication (7) to yield

  (8) x D y implies y  z, z  x, and x  y.

 
 
 
Implications (3), (4), (7), and (8) together can be summarized as saying

(9) If x D y, then u  v holds for every ordered pair u, v from the three

 
  alternatives x, y, and z;

i.e., individual I is a dictator for the three alternatives.

  Because of Condition 1′, we can extend this result to any number of
                                              22
alternatives by an argument due to Blau. Suppose a D b holds, and let x and

y be any pair of alternatives. If x and y are the same as a and b, either in the

same or in the reverse order, we add a third alternative c to a and b; then we

can apply (9) to the triple a, b, c and deduce x  y by letting u = x, v = y. If

 
exactly one of x and y is distinct from a and b add it to a and b to form a
                                                    f

triple to which again (9) is applicable. Finally, if both x and y are distinct

from a and 6, two steps are needed. First, add x to a and b, and deduce from

(9) that a  x and therefore a D x. Then, again applying (9) to the triple a, x,

 
y, we find that x  y. Thus, a D b for some a and b implies that x  y for all x

 
 
and y, i.e., individual I is a dictator. From the Condition of Nondictatorship

(Condition 5), it can be concluded that

(10)      x D y cannot hold for any individual I and any pair x, y.


  The remainder of the proof is now an appropriate adaptation of the

paradox of voting. By Condition P, there is at least one decisive set for any

ordered pair, x, y, namely, the set of all individuals. Among all sets of

individuals which are decisive for some pairwise choice, pick one such that

no other is smaller; by (10) it must contain at least two individuals. Let V be

the chosen set, and let the ordered pair for which it is decisive be x, y. Divide

V into two parts, V, which contains only a single individual, and V which
                    12

contains all the rest. Let F be the set of individuals not in V. Consider now
                            3

the case where the preference order of V is x, y, z, that of all members of V
                                              12

is z, x, y, and that of all members of V is y, z, x.
                                          3  Since V is decisive for x against y, and all members of V prefer x to y while

all others have the opposite preference, x P y. On the other hand, it is

impossible that society prefers z to y since that would require that V b be
                                                                                2

decisive on this issue; this is impossible since V has fewer members than V,
                                                        2

which, by construction, has as few members as a decisive set can have.

Hence, y Rz, and, since x P y, society must prefer x to z. But then the single

member of V would be decisive, and we have shown that to be impossible.
              i

  Thus the contradiction is established.


                  3. The Principles of Equality and Neutrality


  Since the conditions given in the text or in the preceding paragraph are

inconsistent, there is not much point in strengthening any of them unless

another is dropped. One approach most consistent with electoral practice has
                                                                                      23
been to weaken or omit the condition of Collective Rationality. Guilbaud

weakens the condition to require simply avoiding contradictions on two

successive decisions (rather than three, when the full force of transitivity

comes into play). He then conducts the bulk of his analysis under the

assumption that the decision rule between any two alternatives be the same.

This assumption has later been termed “neutrality,” and may be defined

formally as follows.

  CONDITION OF NEUTRALITY: Let T(x) be a one-one transformation of the set

of alternatives into itself which preserves all individual orderings. Let the

environment S be transformed into the environment S′ by the transformation

T. Then the social choice from S, C(S), is transformed by T into the social

choice, C(S′), from the environment S′.


  If we confine ourselves to choices among pairs of alternatives, neutrality

says essentially that the decisive sets for one pair of alternatives are the same

as those for another.

  Under the assumption of neutrality, Guilbaud shows that his weakei form

of the Collective Rationality condition requires that the decision rules are

completely specified by the decisive sets, with the conditions that enlarging a

decisive set leads to another decisive set and that the set of all individuals is

decisive. Guilbaud then seeks to drop the neutrality assumption and argues

that one can extend the previous result by introducing fictitious individualswhose preferences are specified in advance (p. 569). The same results then
                                                                            24
apply except that the decisive sets may contain these ideal voters.

  The principle of neutrality is not intuitively basic, although one expects it

to hold in a wide variety of ordinary decisions; practice always insists on

special decision rules (special majorities, for example) for particular
                        25
decisions. K. O. May has combined neutrality with a second and more

significant condition.

  CONDITION OF EQUALITY: A permutation of the individual orderings among

individuals leaves all social choices unchanged.


  May adds to these conditions a requirement that the social choice be well

defined and that a slightly stronger version of the Positive Association of

Social and Individual Values holds. For the case of preference (pair-wise
                                          26
choice) which is all that he considers, he shows that majority voting is the
                                                                  27
only method of social decision satisfying his conditions.

  The Condition of Equality is clearly highly appealing; it is also closely

connected with Kant’s categorical imperative.


              28
  Murakami generalized May’s results, making use of some theorems on

logical functions. The conditions that social pair-wise choice be well defined

and that Condition 2′ (see paragraph 1) hold imply that social preference is

determined by a generalized form of majority voting. More specifically, there

is prescribed a sequence of steps, in each of which decision is made by

majority choice, but the outcome of one step may be used as a ballot in the

next, and also some ballots with outcomes prescribed in advance may be

added to the ballots of real individuals. If, in addition, neutrality is required,
                                              29
then the fixed ballots can be eliminated.


      4. An Error in the Statement of the General Possibility Theorem


  Blau has pointed out that the General Possibility Theorem is incorrectly
      30
stated. The difficulty in the proof arises in attempting to reduce the general

problem to the case of three alternatives; specifically, Conditions 2 and 5

were implicitly assumed to hold for the three-member subset mentioned in

Condition 1; however, the conditions could hold for a set of alternatives and

not for a subset. If Conditions 1 and 2 are replaced by Conditions 1′ and 2′,Blau shows that the difficulty is avoided, as we have seen in paragraph 4.

However, Condition 1′ is a strong condition, as the discussion in the text (p.

24) shows.

              31
  Murakami suggested as an alternative to the strengthening of Condition

1 a weakening of the definition of a dictator (and thereby a strengthening of

the Condition of Nondictatorship). If we introduce

  CONDITION 5′: Among the triples of alternatives satisfying Condition 1,

there is at least one on which no individual is a dictator.

  Then the arguments of paragraph 2, with slight modification, show


  THEOREM 3. Conditions 1, 3, P, and 5′ are inconsistent.


  Condition 5′ is a very reasonable extension of the notion of a dictator; to

deny it means roughly to say that for every choice on which there can be real

disagreement there is a dictator.


  III. WHAT IS THE PROBLEM OF SOCIAL CHOICE?


  A long series of distinguished critics have argued, in one form or another,
                                                                                      32
that the problem of social choice has been incorrectly posed in this book. I

will now argue that these criticisms are based on misunderstandings of my

position and indeed of the full implications of the critics′ own positive views.

Upon close examination, all implicitly accept the essential formulation stated

here: The social choice from any given environment is an aggregation of

individual preferences. The true grounds for disagreement are the conditions

which it is reasonable to impose on the aggregation procedure, and even here

it is possible to show that the limits of disagreement are not as wide as might

be supposed from some of the more intemperate statements made.


                                1. Welfare Judgments


                                                      33
  Bergson’s deservedly classic paper of 1938 set the pattern in which most

of the subsequent discussion, and in particular my own, has been carried on.

It is a refined form of classical utilitarianism, but one which at least faces the

problem of commensurating the utilities of different individuals.

  At the risk of boring the reader with the obvious, let me restate the logic ofthe welfare judgment, as crystallized in Bergson’s formulation. Any social

decision has consequences for the individual members of the society. It is

first assumed that for each individual there is a way of evaluating these

consequences; we do not at the moment specify whether this evaluation is

cardinal or ordinal. But so far there are as many evaluations as there are

individuals in the society. Classical utilitarianism implicitly and Bergson

explicitly call for a second-order evaluation, which I for the moment call a

welfare judgment. This is an evaluation of the consequences to all individuals

which is based on the evaluations for individuals; specifically, if in each

individual valuation, two sets of consequences are indifferent, then the

welfare judgment as between the two must also be one of indifference.

  The individual values are thus the raw material out of which the welfare

judgment is manufactured. As good economists, let us look more closely at

the technology of the transformation process and the sensitivity of the output

to variations in the inputs.

  The collection of welfare judgments on all possible environments is

determined by the individual valuation schedules, or individual orderings of

social states, to use the terminology of this book. This point is accepted and

even urged by Bergson and by Little, although their emphasis sounds very

different. They argue that the social welfare function (in Bergson’s sense)

takes individuals′ tastes as given. Given a set of individual orderings, the

Bergson procedure is first to associate to each ordering a corresponding

utility indicator and then to prescribe a function of the individual utilities

whose values serve as an indicator of social welfare. But presumably such a

social welfare function could be drawn up for any given set of individual

orderings; if we substitute a new set of individual orderings, we have, in

Bergson’s terminology, a new social welfare function, i.e., a new formula for

determining all possible welfare judgments.

  This formulation is in no wise different from mine; to each given set of

individual orderings is associated a social choice function (see Definition 4,
            34
p. 23 of text). It would perhaps have been better for me to use a different

term from “social welfare function” for the process of determining a social

ordering or choice function from individual orderings, although the

difference between Bergson’s definition and my own was pretty carefully

spelled out (p. 23 of text). I will therefore now use the term “constitution,” as
                                              35
suggested by Kemp and Asimakopulos. The difference, however, is largelyterminological; to have a social welfare function in Bergson’s sense, there
                        36
must be a constitution.

  The real point of the Bergson-Little criticisms, then, is not the formulation

of the social choice problem as the choice of a constitutuion, but the

acceptability of my particular set of conditions. These conditions are of two

kinds: those that relate to the social choice function produced by any given

set of individual orderings, and those that relate to the way social choices

vary with respect to changes in the individual orderings. It is the latter set

which are rejected by Bergson and Little. This point was made very clearly

by Little: “If tastes change, we may expect a new ordering of all the

conceivable states; but we do not require the difference between the new and

the old ordering should bear any particular relation to the changes of taste

which have occurred. We have, so to speak, a new world and a new order;

and we do not demand correspondence between the change in the world and
                            37
the change in the order.” 

  Just how much weight this point can bear is seen better from the revised

set of conditions given in Section II. 1 than from the original set. It turns out

that there is only one condition which in fact requires a correspondence of the

type that Little objects to, the Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives. The

area of fundamental disagreement thus narrows down to this one assumption,

to be discussed further in Section IV. It should be noted that of the other

conditions, two, Collective Rationality and the Pareto principle, are satisfied

by Bergson’s social welfare function, and the third, Nondictatorship, hardly

raises any fundamental questions.

  I therefore conclude that the formulation of the social choice problem as

the selection of a constitution is not only compatible with the views of such

critics as Bergson, Little, and Kemp, but in fact is a logical corollary of their

positive position.


                          2. The Social Decision Process


        38
  Little has argued cogently that a rule for social decision-making is not

the same as a welfare judgment. A welfare judgment requires that some one

person is judge; a rule for arriving at social decisions may be agreed upon for

reasons of convenience and necessity without its outcomes being treated as

evaluations by anyone in particular.  This distinction is well taken. I would consider that it is indeed a social

decision process with which I am concerned and not, strictly speaking, a

welfare judgment by any individual. That said, however, I am bound to add

that in my view a social decision process serves as a proper explication for

the intuitive idea of social welfare. The classical problems of formulating the

social good are indeed of the metaphysical variety which modern positivism

finds meaningless; but the underlying issue is real. My own viewpoint

towards this and other ethical problems coincides with that expressed by

Popper: “Not a few doctrines which are metaphysical, and thus certainly

philosophical, can be interpreted as hypostatizations of methodological
      39
rules.”  All the writers from Bergson on agree on avoiding the notion of a

social good not defined in terms of the values of individuals. But where

Bergson seeks to locate social values in welfare judgments by individuals, I

prefer to locate them in the actions taken by society through its rules for

making social decisions. This position is a natural extension of the ordinalist

view of values; just as it identifies values and choices for the individual, so I

regard social values as meaning nothing more than social choices.

  In fact, the Bergson formulation cannot be kept distinct from the

interpretation of social welfare in terms of social decision processes. In the

first place, the argument of paragraph 1 shows that the Bergson social welfare

function is necessarily a constitution, that is, a potential social decision

process; the body of welfare judgments made by a single individual are

determined, in effect, by the social decision process which the individual

would have society adopt if he could. In the second place, the location of

welfare judgments in any individual, while logically possible, does not

appear to be very interesting. “Social welfare” is related to social policy in

any sensible interpretation; the welfare judgments formed by any single

individual are unconnected with action and therefore sterile. Bergson

recognizes the possible difficulty in his 1954 paper; I quote the passage at

length since it displays the issue so well.

  “I have been assuming that the concern of welfare economics is to counsel

individual citizens generally. If a public official is counseled, it is on the

same basis as any other citizen. In every instance reference is made to some

ethical values which are appropriate for the counseling of the individual in

question. In all this I believe I am only expressing the intent of welfare

writings generally; or if this is not the intent, I think it should be. But somemay be inclined nevertheless to a different conception, which allows still

another interpretation of Arrow’s theorem. According to this view the

problem is to counsel not citizens generally but public officials [emphasis

added]. Furthermore, the values to be taken as data are not those which might

guide the official if he were a private citizen. The official is envisaged instead

as more or less neutral ethically. His one aim in life is to implement the

values of other citizens as given by some rule of collective decision-making.

Arrow’s theorem apparently contributes to this sort of welfare economics the

negative finding that no consistent social ordering could be found to serve as
                                                                                      40
a criterion of social welfare in the counseling of the official in question.”

  I need only add that my interpretation of the social choice problem agrees

fully with that given by Bergson beginning with the italicized statement.

  Where Bergson, Little, and I seek in varying ways to explicate the notion

of social welfare in operational terms, Buchanan’s positivism is more
        41
extreme. Choice is only individual; the very concept of social welfare is

inadmissible, and my use of the term “collective rationality” (by which I

meant that social choices corresponding to any given set of individual

orderings were so interrelated as to satisfy the definition of an ordering) was
                                                                                  42
strongly attacked on the grounds that only individuals can be rational.
                                          43
Nevertheless, Buchanan and Tullock do put great stress on the selection of

a constitution as the central step in developing a social choice mechanism.


            3. Welfare Economics, Compensation and Log-Rolling


  Unlike the criticisms discussed in the last two paragraphs, which raise

important questions of meaning, I feel that those I am about to discuss

represent elementary confusions or word play. Little, Bergson, and Mishan

all agree that my theorem is not part of welfare economics. Thus, “Arrow’s

work has no relevance to the traditional theory of welfare economics, which

culminates in the Bergson-Samuelson formulation” (Little); “The theorem
                                                                  44
has little or no bearing on welfare economics” (Bergson). The most obvious

remark to be made is that one can hardly think of a less interesting question

about my theorem than whether it falls on one side or another of an arbitrary

boundary separating intellectual provinces. Since Little and Bergson (and

also Samuelson, according to little) accept the Bergson social welfare

function as part of welfare economics, the arguments of the last twoparagraphs show that any attempt to divide welfare economics in their sense

from the theory of social choice must be artificial. At the very least, welfare

economics, no matter how defined, has something to do with the public

adoption of economic policy, and it is hard to see how any study of the

formation of social decisions can have “no relevance to” or “no bearing on”

welfare economics.

  A more natural division between welfare economics and the theory of

social choice, if there is any point in locating one, is provided by defining the

former as the implications of Pareto optimality. I take this to be Mishan’s

meaning in reading my work out of the honorific domain of welfare

economics. In the terms used in this book, instead of seeking a social

ordering, we confine ourselves to the unanimity quasi-ordering.

  Of course, as has been repeated over and over in the literature, this “new

welfare economics” says nothing about choices among Pareto-optimal
            45
alternatives. The purpose of the soical welfare function was precisely to

extend the unanimity quasi-ordering to a full social ordering. The

compensation principle, based on the new welfare economics, is not an

adequate substitute for a social ordering, as has been shown by Scitovsky,
                      46
Baumol, and others. However, it has been again used by Buchanan and

Tullock in their construction. They very correctly argue that trading of votes

on different issues (log-rolling) is essentially equivalent to the payment of

compensation, but they fail to recognize the ambiguity of the compensation

principle as a social decision process. Tullock goes so far as to state that “in

processes in which votes are traded . . . the particular type of irrationality
                                        47
described by Arrow is impossible.” He seems to be under the impression

that I am describing a procedure for deciding separate issues, without any

regard to complementarities and substitutions among them. This is a simple

misreading; I am concerned, as are the writers on the compensation principle,

with choices among social states; a social state is a whole bundle of issues,

and I presupposed that all possible combinations of decisions on the separate

issues are considered as alternative social states. That this included logrolling

seemed to me so obvious as not to be worth spelling out. The paradox of
                                                  48
social choice cannot be so easily exorcised.


          IV. THE INDEPENDENCE OF IRRELEVANT

ALTERNATIVES AND INTERPERSONAL COMPARISONS                                OF INTENSITY


1. Ordinalism, Observability, and the Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives


  The essential point of the modern insistence on ordinal utility is the

application of Leibniz’s principle of the identity of indiscernibles. Only

observable differences can be used as a basis for explanation. In the field of

consumers′ demand theory, the ordinalist position turned out to create no

problems; cardinal utility had no explanatory power above and beyond

ordinal.

                                                      49
  It is the great merit of Bergson’s 1938 paper to have carried the same

principle into the analysis of social welfare. The social welfare function was

to depend only on indifference maps; in other words, welfare judgments were

to be based only on interpersonally observable behavior.

  The Condition of Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives extends the

requirement of observability one step farther. Given the set of alternatives

available for society to choose among, it could be expected that, ideally, one

could observe all preferences among the available alternatives, but there

would be no way to observe preferences among alternatives not feasible for

society.

  The austerity imposed by this condition is perhaps stricter than necessary;

in many situations, we do have information on preferences for nonfeasible

alternatives. It can be argued that, when available, this information should be

used in social choice, and some possibilities in this direction will be briefly

commented on in the following paragraphs. But clearly, social decision

processes which are independent of irrelevant alternatives have a strong

practical advantage. After all, every known electoral system satisfies this

condition.

  It may be worth noting more explicitly than in the text that the market

mechanism also operates independently of irrelevant alternatives. If we alter

the utility functions of individuals with respect to allocations which are

socially infeasible, we do not alter the competitive equilibrium. Indeed, the

decentralization of knowledge which is such a virtue of the market

mechanism is incompatible with the use of utility comparisons among
                                                                  50
irrelevant alternatives in arriving at resource allocations.

  This paragraph may be concluded by summarizing some conclusions ofGuilbaud and Inada, which bring out the underlying meaning of

Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives in somewhat different ways.
          51
Guilbaud  argues that a social welfare function based on individual utilities

which are meaningful only up to monotonic transformations must be what is

mathematically termed a functional, not a function in the ordinary sense. That

is, each social choice must depend on the entire individual ordering. Inada’s
52
 result is somewhat similar; if the social welfare function is to be

determined from individual orderings, then the marginal social rates of

substitution among commodity allocations to individuals cannot be

determined exclusively from the individuals′ marginal rates of substitution at

that point; even local social choices must depend upon individual preferences
            53
in the large.


              2. The Impossibility of Purely Ethical Comparisons


  Bergson, in both his papers, takes the position that interpersonal

comparisons are purely ethical in nature; this is just another way of saying

that only individual indifference maps (and not cardinal utilities) are used in

forming welfare judgments. However, especially in his second paper, his
                                                      54
exposition brings out the difficulties involved. He comes at points very

close to asserting a meaningful empirical interpersonal comparison: “The

ultimate criterion would be the perfectly plausible one of the comparative

degree to which wants of different orders are satisfied for different

individuals. . . . The individual members of the community are all supposed

to order social states on the ethical premise that distribution should be

according to need.” The meaningfulness of “wants of different orders” or of

“need” seems to depend on an empirical comparison. But Bergson then

veers? way: “It might even be necessary to pair by separate ethical premises

all the indifference curves of each household with all those of every other

one.” Later, although not necessarily rejecting the existence of meaningful

empirical interpersonal comparisons, he reemphasizes that purely ethical

comparisons are adequate for the formation of social welfare judgments:

“The criterion must be ethical in character. This does not by itself rule out

empirical comparability, but it means that even with this supposition one

must establish why the criterion is ethically compelling ... If one can advance

the Utilitarian criterion with empirical comparability then it should also be
                                  55
possible to do so without it.”   It seems that the last sentence should almost be inverted. If there is no

empirical way of comparing two states (say, indifference curves of two

different individuals), there can be no ethical way of distinguishing them.

Value judgments may equate empirically distinguishable phenomena, but

they cannot differentiate empirically indistinguishable states. The pairing of

indifference curves referred to above requires that there be some operational

meaning, if only an ideal one, to the comparison.


      3. Interpersonal Comparisons and Enlarged Indifference Maps


  If empirically meaningful interpersonal comparisons have to be based on

indifference maps, as we have argued, then the Independence of Irrelevant

Alternatives must be violated. The information which enables us to assert that

individual A prefers x to y more strongly than B prefers y to x must be based

on comparisons by A and B of x and y not only to each other but also to other

alternatives.

  In fact, the indifference map that must be used will probably contain many

more dimensions than might ordinarily be considered. Verbal or other

expressive behavior might possibly be added to the economists′ more usual

comparison of bundles. One cannot help being influenced by such
                                                  56
psychological work as that of S. S. Stevens, who could find a cardinal scale

for such a phenomenon as pitch by asking subjects which of two reference

notes a given note was closer to. The resemblance to (better, identity with) a

well-known line of thought, stemming from Pareto, which justifies cardinal

utility on the basis of ordinal comparisons of changes from one commodity
                                57
vector to another, is obvious.

  The strategy of deriving empirically and then ethically meaningful

interpersonal comparisons is apparently to proceed as follows. (1) The

preference system of the individual is explored with respect to many

irrelevant alternatives, indeed well beyond the regions that are relevant for

individual choice. (2) This wider realm of choices can, of course, be

represented by utility functions; although these are in principle unique only

up to monotonic transformations, in fact a set of utility functions sufficiently

restricted to define a cardinal utility appear most natural (as in the use of

cardinal utility in explaining risk-taking). (3) Finally, one of the utility

differences is widely accepted to have an interpersonal ethical significance

and can be used to arrive at the ethical interpersonal equation of utilitydifferences which are not directly comparable.

                                                                            58
  A simple illustration of the preceding is the suggestion of Dahl that

voting and other forms of political activity may be taken as an interpersonal

measure of preference intensity. It is assumed, of course, that voting is per se

a disutility. Let x and y be two alternative social states, let v be the act of

voting, and let (x, v) be the combination of the social state x and the act of

voting. If an individual prefers (x, v) to y, then his preference for x over y

must be at least sufficiently great to cover the disutility of voting. We can

find a family of utility indicators in the joint space of social states and the act

of voting. Suppose in particular we can find one utility indicator for which

the social state and the act of voting are independent, i.e., the utilities of the

two are additive. Then to say that (x, v) is preferred to y is to say that

                                  U(x) - c(v) > U(y),

where U is the utility ascribed to a social state, and c(v) is the disutility

ascribed to voting. Equivalently, we can say that

                                  U(x) - U(y) > c(v).


If finally we make the ethical assumption that the disutility of voting is

equivalent for all individuals, then the utility differences between x and y for

all those voting for x can be assumed at least equal to the disutility of voting

and vice versa.

  Unfortunately, most of the links in this chain are weak. In the first place,

all that can be established about a utility difference is an inequality; we know

that the utility difference of one who votes for x is at least the disutility of

voting, but it might be a good deal more. Hence, counting the votes is not

sufficient to find the sum of the utilities. Nor is this problem peculiar to this

example; it is intrinsic in the mechanism of political choice.

  Second, the ethical assumption of interpersonal equality of the disutility of

voting is not one which we would really insist on; the disutility of voting

might be expected to differ among individuals depending on wealth or

intelligence or health.

  Third, even with all the strong assumptions that have been made, the

problems raised by not requiring the Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives

occur. If the voting actually takes place, then the disutility of voting has been

incurred and has partially wiped out for the winners their gain in the victoryof x; at the same time those losers who felt strongly enough to vote for y have

not only suffered the social acceptance of x but also the disutility of voting.

Thus if x is chosen as the result of voting, it could easily happen that the sum

of utilities of the entire process, including the act of voting, be less than if y

were imposed without voting.

  Of course, the best solution of all, according to this logic, would be to

impose x without voting. This indeed would be the true meaning of using

irrelevant alternatives as a measure of preference intensities; it is the

willingness to incur the sacrifice of voting, not the sacrifice itself, which is

the measure of intensity. But how can this be made operational?

  Basically, I can only leave the matter with this conundrum. But in the next

two paragraphs two particular classes of interpersonal comparisons based on

enlarged indifference maps will be discussed.


                                                          59
                          4. Extended Sympathy 

  One type of interpersonal comparison to be found in the most ancient

ethical writings has yet to receive significant expression and formalization in

political and economic contexts. It is exemplified, in perhaps an extreme

form, by an inscription supposedly found in an English graveyard.

                      Here lies Martin Engelbrodde,

                      Ha’e mercy on my soul, Lord God,

                      As I would do were I Lord God,

                      And Thou wert Martin Engelbrodde.


  People seem prepared to make comparisons of the form: State x is better
                                              60
(or worse) for me than state y is for you. This is certainly one way of

approaching the notion of an appropriate income distribution; if I am richer

than you, I may find it easy to make the judgment that it is better for you to

have the marginal dollar than for me.

  The ordinalist would ask what possible meaning the comparison could

have to anyone; a comparison should represent at least a conceivable choice

among alternative actions. Interpersonal comparisons of the extended

sympathy type can be put in operational form; the judgment takes the form: It

is better (in my judgment) to be myself in state x than to be you in state y.  In this form, the characteristics that define an individual are included in

the comparison. In effect, these characteristics are put on a par with the items

usually regarded as constituting an individual’s wealth. The possession of

tools would ordinarily be regarded as part of the social state; why not the

possession of the skills to use the tools and the intelligence which lies behind

those skills? Individuals, in appraising each other’s states of well-being,

consider not only material possessions but also find themselves “desiring this
                                      61
man’s scope and that man’s art.” 

  The principle of extended sympathy as a basis for interpersonal

comparisons seems basic to many of the welfare judgments made in ordinary

practice. But it is not easy to see how to construct a theory of social choice

from this principle.


                          5. The Ability to Discriminate


  A recurrent approach to interpersonal comparisons has been the use of just
                                                                    62
noticeable utility differences as interpersonally valid units. The clearest

discussion, which will be analyzed here, is that of Goodman and Markowitz.

They argue that no individual can make indefinitely fine comparisons of

alternatives. Hence, it may be supposed that each individual has only a finite

number of levels of discrimination; a change from one level to the next

represents the minimum difference which is discernible to an individual.

Goodman and Markowitz then make the basic ethical assumption that the

significance of a change from one discretion level to the next is the same for

all individuals and independent of the level from which the change is made.

  The consequence of this assumption (in conjunction with other, more

usual, conditions, Collective Rationality, the Pareto principle, and Equality)

is that social choice is made according to a sum of individual utilities, where

the utility of any individual for any social state is the number of

discrimination levels below the level in which the individual places the given

social state.

  Two problems are raised by this procedure: one is the operational meaning

of the discrimination levels and the other is the ethical desirability of using

discrimination levels as an interpersonal measure. In regard to the first, it

must be asked what experiments could one conduct, at least ideally, which

would define the discrimination level to be attached to any social alternativeby any individual? Actually, Goodman and Markowitz do not give a clear
                              63
account. They distinguish  between knowing the true discrimination level l
                                                                                          ij

of the alternative j for the individual i and the ranking a j of that alternative

among a fixed set of alternatives. They suggest that only the latter are

observable and should or could be used. The implied e vperiment can be

stated as follows: There is a subset S of all logically possible social states

such that every environment (set of actually attainable social states) which is

at all likely to occur will be a subset of S. Each individual then draws his

indifference map within S; by the assumption of finite discriminatory ability,

he will simply divide S into a finite number of subsets within each of which

he is completely indifferent. These subsets are then assigned ranks, which are

the utilities.

  The ranks can, however, easily depend on the choice of S. Suppose, for

example, that a new commodity becomes available but is prohibitively

expensive. If S is expanded by adding distributions of commodities including

the new one, it may contain elements more desirable than any of the old ones,

as well as some less desirable than some old ones. The additional components

of the social state vector will increase the possibility of discrimination, so that

it is to be expected that the enlargement of S will introduce new

discrimination levels whose ranks lie between some of the old ones. Then the

perceived ranks, a of the original alternatives will be altered by the
                    ij

introduction of new alternatives which may not be technologically feasible.

  This objection is, of course, simply another illustration of the argument for

the principle of Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives.

  The ethical desirability of basing welfare judgments on discrimination

levels can be examined best by means of an illustration. Since the

fundamental function of any theory of social welfare is to supply criteria for

income distribution, let us assume the existence of a single commodity

(income) to be distributed between two individuals; the total quantity of the

commodity will be taken as 1. Let x be the amount given to individual 1, 1 —

x the amount given to individual 2. According to Goodman and Markowitz, x

is chosen to maximize U (x) + U (l —x), where the functions U represent
                            12i

the discrimination levels of the two individuals.

  Each individual could receive from 0 to 1 unit, but because of his finite

discriminatory ability this interval is divided into a finite number ofsegments, within each of which the individual cannot discriminate. Suppose

then individual 1 divides the interval into m equal parts, within each of which

he is indifferent; for definiteness, suppose that each part includes its lower

limit and excludes its upper. The amount 1 is in a class by itself. The utility

function for individual 1 is then

                                    U (x) = [mx],
                                      1

  where [y] means the largest integer not exceeding y. Similarly, if

individual 2 divides the interval from 0 to 1 into n parts, his utility function is

                                U (1 —x) = [n(l - x)].
                                  2

  Suppose now the n > m, i.e., individual 2 is capable of finer discrimination

than individual 1. Then the Goodman-Markowitz criterion yields the

remarkable conclusion that the entire income should go to individual 2. For

suppose that x ≥ 0 at the optimum. Then Ui(x) ≥ 0. If Ui(x) ≥ 0, let

                                      U (x) = r.
                                        1

Then

                              mx ≥ [mx] = U (x) —r,
                                                1

so that




Ua(l — 2) = [l = 2)] < [n - r(,';“)]
                                Since n ≥ m and r ≥ 0,




o
ner(Z)<n~r
z
and since the right-hand side is an integer,




r/za-;)g[nﬂ('ﬂn)]<n-r=n-v,<z)
or

                              U (x) + U (1 —x) <n.
                                12

On the other hand, if x = 0, 1—x = 1, we have

  U (0) + U (l) = [0] + [n ] = n ≥ U (x) + U (1 —x),
    1212

which contradicts the presumed optimality of x ≥ 0, provided U(x) ≥ 0. If x
                                                                          1

≥ 0, but U (x) = 0, note that
          1          U (x) + U (l —x) = 0 + [n (l - x)] < n = U (O) + U (l),
              1212

                                          64
so that the same contradiction holds.

  That a slight difference in sensitivity should lead to complete inequality
                                      65
hardly seems ethically reasonable.


                    V. COLLECTIVE RATIONALITY

  The condition that welfare judgments should take the form of an ordering

has been much less disputed than others, although Buchanan (see Section

III.3) argues that rationality is a property of individuals only and there is no

reason to attribute rationality to society. There have been other incidental
                            66
comments (e.g., by Kemp) that a social decision process might well

sacrifice transitivity if necessary to satisfy other conditions.

  The two properties which characterize an ordering are connectedness and

transitivity (see p. 13 of text). Connectedness, when understood, can hardly

be denied; it simply requires that some social choice be made from any

environment. Abstention from a decision cannot exist; some social state will

prevail.

  However, it cannot be denied that there is an important sense in which one

may speak, although loosely, of the absence of decision. In any historically

given situation there is a social state which has a preferred status in social

choice in that it will be adopted in the absence of a specific decision to the

contrary. Politically, the status quo has this property, as is frequently all too

obvious. If one considers the entire distribution of goods, the preferred

alternative is slightly different. Suppose that social state x obtains when the

environment is S. Now suppose there is an innovation, so that the

environment expands. In a basically free enterprise economy there will be an

adaptation which is controlled by property laws and the workings of the
                                            1
system. The resulting social state, say x, which in general differs from x, will

automatically prevail unless there is a specific legislative decision to alter it.

  There is a fundamental divergence of opinion, which has not been fully

recognized, on whether or not social choices should be historically

conditioned, or, equivalently, whether or not inaction is an alternative
                                    67
different from other alternatives. The social welfare function approach,

whether in Bergson’s version or in mine, and “populistic democracy,” as
    68
Dahl terms it, both imply that the social choice at any moment isdetermined by the range of alternative social states available (given the

preferences of individuals); there is no special role given to one alternative

because it happens to be identical to or derived from a historically given one.

In the case of choice between two alternatives, this point of view tends
                        69
toward majority rule.

  Buchanan and Tullock, on the other hand, distinguish between retaining
                                                                                70
and changing the status quo most clearly in the following quotation: “We

must sharply differentiate between two kinds of decisions: (1) the positive

decision that authorizes action for the social group, and (2) the negative

decision that effectively blocks action proposed by another group. If a group

is empowered to make decisions resulting in positive action by/for the whole

group, we shall say that this group effectively ’rules′ for the decisions in

question. It does not seem meaningful to say that the power to block action

constitutes effective ‘rule’. ... The power of blocking action is not what we

normally mean, or should mean, when we speak of ‘majority rule’ or

‘minority rule.’” The asymmetry between action and inaction is closely
                                                                              71
related to their support of unanimity as the ideal criterion of choice; under

such a rule, the status quo is a highly privileged alternative.


  It is against this background that the importance of the transitivity

condition becomes clear. Those familiar with the integrability controversy in
                                            72
the field of consumer’s demand theory  will observe that the basic problem

is the same: the independence of the final choice from the path to it.

Transitivity will insure this independence; from any environment, there will

be a chosen alternative, and, in the absence of a deadlock, no place for the

historically given alternative to be chosen by default.

  That an intransitive social choice mechanism may as a matter of observed

fact produce decisions that are clearly unsatisfactory has been brought out in
                            7374
different ways by Riker  and by Dahl.  Riker’s emphasis is on the

possibility that legislative rules may lead to choice of a proposal opposed by

a majority, Dahl’s rather on the possibility that the rules lead to a deadlock

and therefore a socially undesired inaction. The notion of a “democratic

paralysis,” a failure to act due not to a desire for inaction but an inability to

agree on the proper action, seems to me to deserve much further empirical, as

well as theoretical, study.

  Collective rationality in the social choice mechanism is not then merely anillegitimate transfer from the individual to society, but an important attribute

of a genuinely democratic system capable of full adaptation to varying

environments.                                      INDEX




Alternatives, 2, 11, 12–15, 20, 24, 26, 28, 35, 40, 46, 57, 87; maximal, 36, 37;

  social, 89; unattainable, 73

Armstrong, W. E., 115 fn.

Asimakopulos, A., 105

Autonomy of the will, 82


Bain, J. S., 19 fn.

Barone, E., 36 fn.

Barbut, M., 92

Baumol, W. J., 38–40, 109

Bentham, J., 4, 11, 22, 31

Bergson, A., 3 fn., 4, 5, 22, 23, 29, 30 fn., 31, 34, 37 fn., 61 fn, 71, 72, 103,

  104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 110, 111, 119

Bernoulli, D., 39

“Betweenness,” 77

Birkhoff, G, 35 fn.

Black, D, 6, 14 fn, 75, 76, 80, 81 fn, 89, 93, 94

Blau, J. H, 92 fn, 96, 97 fn, 99, 102 Borda, J.-C. de, 94, 95, 115 fn. Bowen,

  H. R, 6, 7 fn. Budget plane, 12, 15, 65 Buchanan, J. M, 103 fn, 107, 109,

  118


Cardinal utility, 11, 31, 111, 113 Choice, 12, 15, 17, 20, 23; collective, 6, 84;

    consumer’s, 11, 12, 13 fn, 15, 16 fn, 20, 37; conventional, 28; economic,

  5; individual, 107, 112; political, 5, 6; rational, 12, 16, 45, 59; social, 2, 5,

  7, 8, 10, 20, 23, 26, 29, 30, 37, 59, 80, 83, 93, 94, 103, 105, 107, 108,

  109, 110, 111, 115, 119, 120; worker’s, 37 Choice function, 21; group,

  70; see also Social choice function

Choice mechanism, 85

Clark, J. M, 8Compatible ordering, 35, 62, 64, 89

Compensation, 19 fn, 41, 108; payment of, 34, 109; possibility of, 38

Compensation principle, 4, 34–36, 45, 71, 109; Kaldor, 38–40, 42, 70;

    Scitovsky, 42–44, 46

Compensatory-equivalent class, 41, 42

Competition, perfect, 15, 19 fn, 20

Condorcet, Marquis de, 93, 94, 95

Condorcet criterion, 94, 95

Condorcet effect, 93

Connected relation, 13, 46, 61, 118

Consensus, 83–86

Consistency, 5, 28

Constitution, 98, 105, 106, 108

Consumption, 24, 32; collective, 6, 75

Convention, 2 Cournot, A, 16 fn.

Cyclical majority, 94, 95


Dahl,R, 109, 113, 119, 120

Davis, R. G, 105 fn.

Decision process, 7, 90

Decisions, 88, 91, 118, 119; social, 30, 59, 86, 87, 106, 108, 109, 110

Decisive set, 52, 54, 56, 57, 98, 100, 101

Demand function, 15, 16 fn.

Demand theory, 64, 65

Democracy, 23, 85, 90, 120

Dickinson, F. G, 75 fn.

Dictatorship, 1 fn, 2, 30, 56, 86, 90, 98; see also Nondictatorship

Discrimination levels, 116, 117, 118 fn.

Distribution, 6, 10, 11, 37–39, 42, 71, 72, 90, 116

Divergence between social and private costs, 18

Dobb, M.H., 84, 87, 88 fn.

Dodgson, C. L., 94, 95Downs, A., 119 fn.


Economy, planned, 5, 84; socialist, 84

Edgeworth, F. Y., 4, 31, 115 fn.

Election, 6, 12, 26, 93, 94, 96

Ends, 83, 87, 88; social, 87; ultimate, 88

Enlightened self-interest, 88

Environment, 15, 20, 26–28, 53, 72, 80, 82, 101, 119, 120; corruptions of, 74;

    two-element, 16

Equality, 17, 63, 74, 100, 116

Equivalence, 41

Ethical absolutism, 84

Ethical relativism, 85

Extended sympathy, 114, 115


Firm, 11, 19 fn.

Fisher, R. A, 85 fn.

Forsythe, G. E., 27 fn.

Freedom, 74

Friedman, M., 18 fn., 88

Frisch, R, 112 fn.

Fromm, E, 30 fn.

Fundamental value propositions of individual preference, 29, 31, 34


Games, 6, 7; of fair division, 7; multi-person, theory of, 59 fn, 70; theory of,

  19, 21; zero-sum two-person, 19, 20

Georgescu-Roegen, N, 13 fn.

Granger, G.-G., 93 fn, 94, 110

Grazia, A. de, 94 fn.

Green, T. H., 81, 82fn.

Goodman, L., 94, 115, 116, 117, 118 fn.

Guilbaud, G.-Th, 92, 93, 100, 101


Hart, A. G, 88Hedonist psychology, 22, 23

Helmer, O., 85 fn.

Hicks, J. R, 4, 38, 40, 41, 71, 88

Hotelling, H., 36 fn, 38 fn.

Houthakker, H, 120 fn.

Huntington, E. V., 27


Idealist, 74, 81, 82, 87, 95

Ignorance, 86–88

Imperative, categorical, 82; moral, 82–86; pragmatic, 82–86; technical, 82

Inaction, 119

Inada, K, 110

Income, distribution of, 40; real, 71, 72; see also Distribution

Independence of irrelevant alternatives, 26, 27, 47, 95, 97, 98, 105, 109, 110,

  112, 114, 116

Indifference, 12–14, 19, 31, 41, 44; Scitovsky, 44, 45; universal, 65

Indifference maps, 5, 16, 64, 110, 111, 112; household, 9fn.

Individualistic assumptions, 37, 61–63, 76

Indivisibilities, 17

Influence, 5

Institutionalist school, 21

Integrability, 13 fn, 125

Interpersonal comparisons of utility, 4, 9, 31, 38, 39, 59, 60, 94, 109, 111,

  112, 113, 114, 115


Johnson, D. G, 71 fn.

Just noticeable difference, 115


Kaldor, N, 4, 38–43, 71

Kant, I., 81, 82, 84, 102

Kaplan, A, 32 fn.

Kemp, M. C., 103 fn, 105, 106, 118

“Kingdom of ends,” 82Knight, F. H, 1 fn, 3fn, 6, 7fn., 8, 40 fn, 81 fn, 83, 85 fn.

Knowledge, 86

Known preference or indifference, 61, 62

Kuznets, S, 36 fn.


Laissez-faire economics, 23

Lange, O, 3fn, 5, 21 fn, 36 fn, 61 fn.

Lerner, A. P, 5, 36 fn, 84

Liberalising fn, 84, 85

Little, I. M. D, 103 fn, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108

Log-rolling, 108, 109


McKinsey, J. C. C, 64 fn.

Majority decision, 46–48, 74, 76–78, 83, 96, 101, 102, 119

Marginal rate of substitution, 37, 71

Market, 6, 18

Market mechanism, 1, 2, 5, 18, 59, 86, 110

Markowitz, H., see Goodman, L.

Marschak, J., 15 fn, 27 fn.

Marshall, A, 4

Marxism, 84

Maximal states, 63

May, K. 0, 96, 101, 102, 119 fn.

Milton, J, 85 fn.

Mishan, E. J, 103 fn, 108

Mitchell, W. C, 11 fn.

Modigliani, F, 39 fn, 71 fn.

Morgenstern, O, 7, 9, 10, 11 fn, 19 fn, 32, 59 fn, 70, 81 fn, 118 fn.

Murakami, Y, 96, 102


Nanson, E. J, 3 fn, 93, 94, 95, 96

Neumann, J. von, see Morgenstern, O.

Neutrality, 100, 101, 102, 119 fn.Nominalist, 22

Nondictatorship, 30, 47, 69, 74, 100, 102, 105; see also Dictatorship


One-commodity world, 40, 69, 70

Opportunity curve, 12

Opportunity set, 12

Ordering, 16, 17, 19, 39, 62; social, 5, 9 fn, 19, 22–26, 28, 31, 40, 54, 58, 59,

  62, 69, 72, 77, 82, 87, 97, 108; strong, 13, 14, 77, 80; weak, 13, 14, 16 fn,

  34, 35, 43, 44, 46, 47, 58, 64, 69, 72, 77; see also Quasi-ordering

Ordering relations, 15; individual, admissible sets of, 62; weak, 15

Orderings, individual, 9fn, 18, 23–25, 27, 28, 31, 32, 35–37, 40, 47, 59, 60,

  62, 69, 72, 75, 77, 82, 83, 89, 96, 104, 105, 111; admissible sets of, 24, 51

Ordinal properties, 17


Paradox of voting, 2, 3fn, 48, 59, 80, 93, 100

Pareto, V, 13 fn, 36 fn, 112

Pareto optimality, 108

Pareto principle, 96, 97, 98, 105, 116

Pigou, A. C, 18

Planning, centralized and decentralized, 88

Plato, 86

Platonic philosophy, 22, 24, 29 Play, 7

Popper, K. R., It, 106

Positive association of social and individual values, 25–26, 97, 101

Possibility theorem, general, 51, 59, 97; for individualistic assumptions, 63;

  for single-peaked preferences, 78; for two alternatives, 48, 79

Power, national, 74

Preference, 11, 12, 14, 18, 19, 25, 28, 96, 97, 101, 110; collective, 2;

  individual, 103, 111, 119; social, 7, 19, 26, 30, 40, 52, 53, 58, 74, 87, 102

Preference pattern, 9, 14, 15, 91

Preference relation, 15

Preference scale, 11, 15, 45

Preferences, single-peaked, 75–77, 80Preferred or indifferent relation, 12, 13

Probability distribution, 20, 32, 70

Production, 37–39

Prolongation of life, 75

Proportional representation, 59

Propositions of relative shares, 71


Quasi-ordering, 35, 43, 62, 64, 65, 89; unanimity, 36, 40, 108; see also

    Ordering


Rational behavior, 2, 3, 19 fn, 20

Rationality, 19–21, 31, 59, 60fn.; citizens′, 31; collective, 3fn, 60, 97, 98,

  100, 101, 105, 116, 118–120

Reder, M. W, 3 fn, 18 fn, 34 fn, 88 fn.

Redistribution, 44, 45; unaccomplished, 45

Relations, 12; P, I, and R, 16

Relevancy, postulate of, 27

Riker, W, 93, 120

Robbins, L, 4

Rothenberg, J, 93, 115 fn.

Rothschild, K. W, 21

Rousseau, J. J, 81, 82 fn, 85, 90 fn.

Saddle-point theorem, 20

Samuelson, P. A, 3fn, 4fn, 5, 16 fn, 18 fn, 37, 61 fn, 72, 84, 108, 110 fn, 120

  fn.

Schuyler, G. L, 85 fn.

Scitovsky, T., 42, 43, 109

Similarity, 69, 74, 80

Simons, H. C., 85 fn.

Single-peaked preferences, 75–77, 80

Social choice function, C(S), 15, 16, 21, 26–28, 36, 48, 53, 72, 101, 104, 105

Social states, 4, 16–18, 22–24, 31, 37, 39, 41, 42, 90, 109, 113, 116, 119; see

  also OrderingSocial welfare function, 22–25, 28, 29, 31–34, 37, 40, 44, 46, 48, 51, 52, 54,

  58, 60, 62, 63, 69, 72, 74, 77, 81–83, 86, 87, 98, 104, 105, 108, 110, 111,

  119; dictatorial, 30, 56, 59; imposed, 28, 59

Social welfare judgments, 60, 69, 91, 111; problem of, 64, 86, 89, 90

Socio-ethical norms, 29, 83

Sovereignty, citizens’, 28, 30, 31; consumers’, 30; voters’, 60

Standard of value, 39, 40, 70

Steinhaus, H, 7 fn.

Stevens, S. S, 112

Stigler, G. J., 83

Summation of utilities, 31, 39, 116

Suppes, P., 114 fn.

Szpilrajn, E., 64


Tarski, A., 13 fn., 14 fn, 41 fn.

Tastes, 2, 7, 18, 23, 24, 30, 37, 71, 72

Tawney, R. H, 1 fn.

Time-preference, 84

Tintner, G, 18 fn.

Transformation, 17 fn.

Transitive relation, 13, 14, 44–46, 58, 61,

76, 78, 79, 118, 120 Tullock, G, 103 fn, 107, 109, 119 fn.


Unanimity, 72, 74, 79, 83, 120; partial, 89

Uncertainty, 87, 88; certainty-equivalent theory of, 88

Utilitarianism, 22, 23, 38, 84, 103

Utility, measurability of, 5, 9, 10, 94; of probability distributions, 10; social,

  4; transferable, 70

Utility functions, 16, 17, 23, 110, 113

Utility indicators, 32, 39, 75

Uzawa, H, 120 fn.


Value judgments, 4, 5, 11, 18, 23, 31, 36,38, 42, 45, 71–73, 112 Values, 7, 8, 18, 22–24, 28, 30, 31, 60, 71;

individual, 25, 104, 106; instrumental,

86, 87; social, 25; ultimate, 86 Veblen, T, 7 fn, 8, 17

Vickrey, W.S, 9fn, 92 Ville, J, 13 fn, 16 fn, 120 fn.

Voting, 1, 2, 5, 6, 28, 85, 113; plurality, 7, 59, 94; rank-order method of, 27,

  94, 95


Wald, A, 88 fn.

Walsh, V.C, 115 fn.

Welfare economics, 3. 11, 17, 24, 87, 88, 107, 108; new, 36, 37, 64, 71, 83,

  108, 109

Welfare judgments, 22, 103, 104, 106, 110, 115, 116

Welker, E. L, 75 fn.

Wicksell, K., 40 fn.

Will, general, 81, 82, 85; individual, 81, 82

Wright, C. P, 3 fn, 93


Zassenhaus, H. K, 5, 114 fn.      COWLES FOUNDATION MONOGRAPHS


1. Charles F. Roos, Dynamic Economics (out of print)

2. Charles F. Roos, NRA Economic Planning (out of print)

3. Alfred Cowles and Associates, Common Stock Indexes (2d edition) (out

      of print)

4. Dickson H. Leavens, Silver Money (out of print)

5. Gerhard Tintner, The Variate Difference Method (out of print)

6. Harold T. Davis, The Analysis of Economic Time Series (out of print)

7. Jacob L. Mosak, General Equilibrium Theory in International Trade (out

      of print)

8. Oscar Lange, Price Flexibility and Employment (out of print)

9. George Katona, Price Control and Business (out of print)

10. Tjalling C. Koopmans, ed., Statistical Inference in Dynamic Economic

      Models (out of print)

11. Lawrence R. Klein, Economic Fluctuations in the United States, 1921 –

      1941 (out of print)

12. Kenneth J. Arrow, Social Choice and Individual Values (2d edition)

13. Tjalling C. Koopmans, ed., Activity Analysis of Production and

      Allocation

14. William C. Hood and Tjalling C. Koopmans, eds., Studies in

        Econometric Method (out of print)

15. Clifford Hildreth and F. G. Jarrett, A Statistical Study of Livestock

      Production and Marketing (out of print)

16. Harry M. Markowitz, Portfolio Selection: Efficient Diversification of

      Investments

17. Gerard Debreu, Theory of Value: An Axiomatic Analysis of Economic

        Equilibrium

18. Alan S. Manne and Harry M. Markowitz, eds., Studies in Process

      Analysis: Economy-Wide Production Capabilities (out of print)

19. Donald D. Hester and James Tobin, eds., Risk Aversion Portfolio Choice

      (out of print)

20. Donald D. Hester and James Tobin, eds., Studies of Portfolio Behavior

      (out of print)21. Donald D. Hester and James Tobin, eds., Financial Markets and

      Economic Activity

22. Jacob Marschak and Roy Radner, Economic Theory of Teams

23. Thomas J. Rothenberg, Efficient Estimation with A Priori Information

      (out of print)

24. Herbert Scarf, The Computation of Economic Equilibria

25. Donald D. Hester and James L. Pierce, Bank Management and Portfolio

      Behavior (out of print)

26. William D. Nordhaus, The Efficient Use of Energy Resources

27. Katsuhito Iwai, Disequilibrium Dynamics: A Theoretical Analysis of

      Inflation and Unemployment


  Orders for Monographs 12, 17, and 26 should be sent to Yale University

Press, 92 A Yale Station, New Haven, Conn. 06520, or 23 Pond Street,

Hampstead, London NW3 2PN, England.

  Orders for Monographs 13, 14, 21, 22, and 27 should be sent to University

Microfilms, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, Mich. 48106.1 The last two methods of making social choices are in a sense extreme opposites, developments of
conflicting tendencies in a democracy. The rule of the single individual is the extreme of administrative
discretion, the rule of a sacred code the extreme of rule by law. But in dynamic situations the rule of a
sacred code leads by insensible steps to dictatorship. The code needs interpretation, for conditions
change, and, no matter how explicit the code may have been in the first place in determining how
society shall act in different circumstances, its meaning becomes ambiguous with the passage of time. It
might conceivably happen that the job of interpretation passes to society as a whole, acting through
some democratic process—“vox populi, vox dei.” Or it can happen that interpretation passes to the
hands of the people individually and not collectively; in this case, as soon as differences of opinion
arise, the religious code loses all its force as a guide to social action. See, for example, the ultimate
consequences in the field of economic ethics of the Protestant insistence on the right of each individual
to interpret the Bible himself (R. H. Tawney, Religion and the Rise of Capitalism, London: J. Murray,
1926, pp. 97–100). But more likely, in view of the authoritarian character of the sacred code, the
interpretation will pass into the hands of a single individual or a small group alone deemed qualified.

The classification of methods of social choice given here corresponds to Professor Knight’s
distinction among custom, authority, and consensus, except that I have subdivided consensus into the
two categories of voting and the market (F. H. Knight, “Human Nature and World Democracy,” in
Freedom and Reform, New York: Harper and Bros., 1947, pp. 308–310).2 It is assumed, of course, that the dictator, like the usual economic man, can always make a
decision when confronted with a range of alternatives and that he will make the same decision each
time he is faced with the same range of alternatives. The ability to make consistent decisions is one of
the symptoms of an integrated personality. When we pass to social decision methods involving many
individuals (voting or the market), the problem of arriving at consistent decisions might analogously be
referred to as that of the existence of an integrated society. Whether or not this psychiatric analogy is
useful remains to be seen. The formal existence of methods of aggregating individual choices, the
problem posed in this study, is certainly a necessary condition for an integrated society in the above
sense; but whether the existence of such methods is sufficient or even forms an important part of the
sufficient condition for integration is dubious.3 It may be added that the method of decision sketched above is essentially that used in deliberative
bodies, where a whole range of alternatives usually comes up for decision in the form of successive
pair-wise comparisons. The phenomenon described in the text can be seen in a pure form in the
disposition of the proposals before recent Congresses for federal aid to state education, the three
alternatives being no federal aid, federal aid to public schools only, and federal aid to both public and
parochial schools. The “paradox of voting” seems to have been first pointed out by E. J. Nanson
(Transactions and Proceedings of the Royal Society of Victoria, Vol. 19, 1882, pp. 197–240). I am
indebted for this reference to C. P. Wright, University of New Brunswick.4 The problem of collective rationality has been discussed by Knight, but chiefly in terms of the
socio-psy etiological prerequisites. See “The Planful Act: The Possibilities and Limitations of
Collective Rationality,” in Freedom and Reform, op. cit., pp. 335–369, especially pp. 346–365.5 Good sketches will be found in P. A. Samuelson’s Foundations of Economic Analysis, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1947, Chapter VIII; and A. Bergson (Burk), “A
Reformulation of Certain Aspects of Welfare Economics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 52,
February, 1938, pp. 310–334. A summary of recent developments will be found in the article, “Socialist
Economics,” by A. Bergson, in A Survey of Contemporary Economics, H. S. Ellis, ed., Philadelphia:
The Blakiston Co., 1948, Chapter XII. In addition to the above, restatements of the present state of the
field will be found in O. Lange, “The Foundations of Welfare Economics,” Econometrica, Vol. 10,
July-October, 1942, pp. 215–228; and M. W. Reder, Studies in the Theory of Welfare Economics, New
York: Columbia University Press, 1947, Chapters I-V.6 F. Y. Edgeworth, Mathematical Psychics, London: C. Kegan Paul and Co., 1881, pp. 56–82,
especially p. 57; “The Pure Theory of Taxation,” in Papers Relating to Political Economy, London:
Macmillan and Co., 1925, Vol. II, pp. 63–125, especially pp. 100–122. The interpretation of social
utility as the sum of individual utilities is implicit in Marshall’s use of the doctrine of consumers′
surplus, though other assumptions are also involved. (A. Marshall, Principles of Economics, New York:
The Macmillan Co., eighth edition, 1949, pp. 130–134, 467–476.)7 Bergson, “A Reformulation ...,” op. cit., passim. See also Samuelson, op. ext., pp. 219–252.8 L. Robbins, An Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science, second edition,
London: Macmillan and Co., 1935. Chapter VI; “Interpersonal Comparisons of Utility: A Comment,”
Economic Journal, Vol. 43, December, 1938, pp. 635–641.9 N. Kaldor, “Welfare Propositions of Economics and Interpersonal Comparisons of Utility,”
Economic Journal, Vol. 49, September, 1939, pp. 549–552; J. R. Hicks, “The Foundations of Welfare
Economics,” Economic Journal, Vol. 49, December, 1939, pp. 696–700, 711–712.10 See the discussion of the Fundamental Value Propositions of Individual Preferencein Bergson,
“A Reformulation . . . op. cit., pp. 318–320; Samuelson, op. cit., p. 228.11 Lange, op. cit., pp. 219–224, especially top of p. 222; but there are contradictorystatements on p.
223 and at the top of p. 224.12 O. Lange, “The Determinateness of the Utility Function,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 1,
June, 1934, pp. 224–225.13 A. P. Lerner, Economics of Control, New York: The Macmillan Co., 1944, Chapter III.14 H. Zassenhaus, “Über die okonomische Theorie der Planwirtschaft,” Zeitschriftfur
Nationaldkonomie, Vol. 5, 1934, pp. 507–532.15 H. R. Bowen, “The Interpretation of Voting in the Allocation of Economic Resources,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 58, November, 1943, pp. 27–48.16 F. H. Knight, “Economic Theory and Nationalism,” in The Ethics of Competition and Other
Essays, New York: Harper and Bros., 1931, pp. 294–305.17 D. Black, “On the Rationale of Group Decision-Making,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 56,
February, 1948, pp. 23–34; “The Decisions of a Committee Usinga Special Majority,” Econometrica,
Vol. 16, July, 1948, pp. 245–261; “The Elasticityof Committee Decisions with an Altering Size of
Majority,” ibid., pp. 262–270; and “Un approccio alia teoria delle decisioni di comitato,” Giornale
degli economisti eannali di economica, Vol. 7, Nuova Serie, 1948, pp. 262–284. For the
analogybetween voting and the market, see especially “The Elasticity of Committee Deci-sions . . . pp.
262, 270; and “Un approccio ...,” pp. 262–269.18 Knight has constantly emphasized the importance of play motives in human life; see, for
example, the reference in fn. 16. The importance of emulative motiveshas nowhere been so forcefully
stressed as by T. Veblen (The Theory of the Leisure Class, New York: The Macmillan Co., 1899).19 J. von Neumann and O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, second edition,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1947.20 A similar point is made by Bowen, op. cit., pp. 45, 48.21 See H. Steinhaus, “The Problem of Fair Division” (abstract), Econometrica, Vol. 16, January,
1948, pp. 101–104.22 T. Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class, op. cit., and “Why Is Economics Not an
Evolutionary Science?” in The Place of Science in Modern Civilisation and Other Essays, New York:
B. W. Huebsch, 1919, pp. 73–74; J. M. Clark, “Economics and Modern Psychology,” in Preface to
Social Economics, New York: Farrar and Rinehart,1936, pp. 92–160, and “Realism and Relevance in
the Theory of Demand,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 54, August, 1946, pp. 347–351; F. H.
Knight, “Ethicsand the Economic Interpretation,” in The Ethics of Competition and Other Essays, op.
cit., pp. 19–40, passim.23 “Liberalism takes the individual as given, and views the social problem as one of right relations
between given individuals.” (Italics in the original.) F. H. Knight, “Ethics and Economic Reform,” in
Freedom and Reform, op. cit., p. 69.1 Classical demand theory leaves ambiguous the relation between the indifference map of a
household and the indifference maps of the individual members thereof. It is the former which is
relevant for the behavior of the market. The passage from individual to household maps is a special
case of the passage from individual to social orderings; if the present thesis is accepted, household
indifference maps can, indeed, only arise from the presence of common standards of value of some sort.
But these are, as will be seen, empirically determinable by examination of the individual indifference
maps and are not based on some type of intrinsic comparison of intensities of feeling. In what follows
we shall ignore the distinction between individual and household indifference maps; this action may be
regarded as meaning either that the intra-household aggregation is somehow solved or that that problem
is being considered simultaneously with the general problem.2 Op. cit., pp. 15–31, 617–632. See also W. S. Vickrey, “Measuring Marginal Utility by Reactions
to Risk,” Econometrica, Vol. 13, October, 1945, pp. 319–333.3 It must be granted, though, that, if it is assumed to begin with that all preference scales for
individuals are the same (all individuals have the same tastes), then we could choose the utility function
the same for all. However, if we take seriously the idea of interpersonal comparison of utilities, we
must allow for the possibility that, of two individuals with the same indifference map, one is twice as
sensitive as the other, and so the proper utility function for one should be just double that for another. It
would be interesting, indeed to see an operational significance attached to this concept of differing
sensitivity.

Von Neumann and Morgenstern (op. cit., pp. 608–616) have considered a case where two
individuals have differing powers of discernment, but they have not represented this case by assuming
different utilities for the same bundle of goods. Instead, they assume both utility scales can take on only
discrete values, though one can take on more such values than the other.4 “Tis in vain to talk of adding quantities which after the addition will continue distinct as they were
before, one man’s happiness will never be another man’s happiness: a gain to one man is no gain to
another: you might as well pretend to add 20 apples to 20 pears. ...” (Quoted by W. C. Mitchell in
“Bentham’s Felicifio Calculus,” in The Backward Art of Spending Money and Other Essays, New
York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1937, p. 184.)5 The assumption of comparability of all alternatives is the heart of the integra-bility controversy in
the theory of consumer’s choice. See V. Pareto, Manuel d’economie -politique, déuxieme Édition,
Paris: M. Giard, 1927, pp. 546–569. For some of the paradoxical consequences of nonintegrability
(which is equivalent to noncomparability of alternatives not infinitesimally close together), see N.
Georgescu-Roegen, “The Pure Theory of Consumer’s Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 50, August, 1936, pp. 545–569. Professor Ville has derived the integrability condition, and
therewith the comparability of all alternatives, from some plausible hypotheses on the nature of demand
functions (J. Ville, “Sur les conditions d’existence d’une ophélimité” to tale et d’un indice du niveau
des prix," Annales de I’University de Lyon, Section A, Vol. 3, No. 9, 1946, pp. 32–39).6 Strictly speaking, a relation is said to be connected if Axiom I holds for x j& y. A relation R is said
to be reflexive if, for all x,xRx. (See A. Tarski, Introduction to Logic, New York: Oxford University
Press, 1941, pp. 93–94.) Thus a relation satisfying Axiom I is both connected and reflexive. However,
for convenience, we will use the slightly inaccurate terminology in the text, that is, we will use the
word “connected” for the longer expression “connected and reflexive.”7 Tarski, ibid., p. 94.8 Frequently, indeed, the term “ordering relation” is reserved for strong orderings (Tarski, ibid., pp.
96–97). However, in the present book the unmodified term “ordering” or “ordering relation” wiii be
reserved for weak orderings.9 • A formal characterization of strong ordering relations will be given later, in discussing the recent
work of Professor Duncan Black on the theory of elections; see Chapter VII, Section 2.10 This term is J. Marschak’s.11 Instead of starting, as here, with a weak ordering relation R satisfying certain axioms and then
obtaining a choice function, it is possible to impose certain axioms directly on the choice function. It is
not hard, in fact, to construct a set of plausibleaxioms concerning the choice function from which it is
possible to deduce that thereexists a weak ordering relation which could have generated the choice
function, so that the two approaches are logically equivalent. Starting with the choice functioninstead of
the ordering relation is analogous to the approach of Cournot, who startedwith demand functions
having postulated properties instead of deriving those prop-erties from a consideration of indifference
maps or utility functions. (A. Cournot, Mathematical Principles of the Theory of Wealth, English
translation, New York: The Macmillan Co., 1897, pp. 49–50.) The assumptions made by Cournot
aboutthe demand function were not very restrictive. More sophisticated treatment ofdemand from this
point of view is to be found In the work of Ville, op. cit., and Samuelson, op. cit., pp. 111–117. Both
treatments concern only the case of consumer’s choice under perfectly competitive conditions, but
suitable generalizationto imperfectly competitive environments does not seem impossible.12 This brief statement is not accurate when the existence of a point of saturationis assumed.
However, the chart is then at least oriented uniformly within each ofseveral large segments, and the
interesting economic problems presumably occur inthe region where the assumption made in the text
holds.13 Similarly, in the field of production economics, it seems more natural to express the
transformation restrictions by saying that the input-output vector lies in a certain point set than to
introduce a transformation function and then subject the operations of the firm to the condition T = 0. In
this case, the irrelevance of the functional representation is even clearer since, if F(t) = 0 if and only if t
= 0, then F(T) can be used as the transformation function just as well as T.14 This distinction has been stressed to the author by M. Friedman, The University of Chicago.15 A. C. Pigou, The Economics of Welfare, London: Macmillan and Co., 1920, Part II, Chapter VI.
For the analogy, see Samuelson, op. cit., p. 224; Reder, op. cit., pp. 64–67; G. Tintner, “A Note on
Welfare Economics,” Econometrica, Vol. 14, January, 1946, pp. 69–78.16 The theory of games involving more than two persons or games in which the sum of the
payments to the various players is not independent of the methods of play is still in a dubious state
despite the mathematically beautiful development in von Neumann and Morgenstern, op. cit., Chapters
V-XII. For example, the highly developed mechanism of compensations needed for their theory of
rational behavior in such games appears to have little counterpart in the real world, as was pointed out
by Professor Bain in another connection (J. S. Bain, “Output Quotas in Imperfect Cartels,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 62, August, 1948, pp. 617–622). On the other hand, there can be little
doubt that the theory of rational play of a zero-sum two-person game has been completely solved, at
least under certain restrictive assumptions as to the risk-neutrality of the players and as to the
completeness of their information concerning the rules of the game. (See J. von Neumann, “Zur
Theorie der Gesellschaftsspiele,” Mathematische Annalen, Vol. 100, August, 1928, pp. 295–320; von
Neumann and Morgenstern, op. cit., Chapters III-IV.) Hence the theory of behavior in zero-sum two-
person games affords some sort of check on the concepts of rationality derived to a large extent by
analogy with the static theory of the firm under perfect competition.17 K. W. Rothschild, “The Meaning of Rationality: A Note on Professor Lange’s Article,” Review of
Economic Studies, Vol. 14, No. 1, 1946–47, p. 50. Rothschildalso attributes this view to Professor
Lange, but there seems to be a misinterpretation. Lange regards the assumption of rationality (which he
identifies with ordering) asa highly convenient postulate, if true, but not necessary. (O. Lange, “The
Scopeand Method of Economics,” ibid., Vol. 13, No. 1, 1945–46, p. 30.)18 Like Lange, the present author regards economics as an attempt to discover uniformities in a
certain part of reality and not as the drawing of logical consequencesfrom a certain set of assumptions
regardless of their relevance to actuality. Simplifiedtheory-building is an absolute necessity for
empirical analysis; but it is a means,not an end.1 Bergson, “A Reformulation . . . op. cit., passim.2 This example was suggested by a discussion with G. E. Forsythe, National Bureau of Standards.3 E. V. Huntington, “A Paradox in the Scoring of Competing Teams,” Science, Vol. 88, September
23, 1938, pp. 287–288. I am indebted for this reference to J. Marschak.4 Bergson, “A Reformulation . . .” op. cit., pp. 318–320. The Fundamental Value Propositions of
Individual Preference are not, strictly speaking, implied by Conditions 2 and 4 (in conjunction with
Conditions 1 and 3), though something very similar to them is so implied; see Consequence 3 in
Chapter V, Section 3. A slightly stronger form of Condition 2 than that stated here would suffice to
yield the desired implication.5 See E. Fromm, Escape from Freedom^ New York: Rinehart and Co., 1941, 305 pp.6 • Bergson, “A Reformulation . . . op. cit., pp. 324, 327–328.7 This particular rule was suggested by A. Kaplan.8 See fn. 1, Chapter II.1 See Reder, op. cit., Chapter 1, especially pp. 14, 17.2 See fn. 4, Chapter III.3 G. Birkhoff, Lattice Theory, New York: American Mathematical Society, 1940, p. 7.4 The first formulation of the problem in this form is by V. Pareto (op. cit., pp. 354–365, 617–657).
The details were elaborated by E. Barone (“The Ministry of Production in the Collectivist State,” in
Collectivist Economic Planning, F. A. von Hayek, ed., London: Routledge and Sons, 1935, pp. 245–
290). Subsequently, there was a revival and further development by A. P. Lerner (“The Concept of
Monopoly and the Measurement of Monopoly Power,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 1, June,
1933, pp. 162–165; see also his Economics of Control, op. cit.). A completely rigorous formulation of
the results was given by H. Hotelling (“The General Welfare in Relation to Problems of Taxation and
Railway Rates,” Econometrica, Vol. 6, July, 1938, pp. 248–256), and the whole subject is
systematically expounded by O. Lange (“The Foundations of Welfare Economics,” op. cit., pp. 215–
218). It may be remarked that use is made of the maximization methods of the calculus or their
graphical equivalents in deriving the result that the maximal alternatives are precisely those states
which would be achieved if each individual acted rationally and selfishly in the presence of prices taken
as parameters by him. The use of the calculus in these circumstances involves the assumption that each
individual consumes some amount of each commodity. The role of this assumption has been pointed
out by S. Kuznets in a slightly different context (“On the Valuation of Social Income-Reflections on
Professor Hicks′ Article,” Economica, Vol. 15, New Series, February, 1948, pp. 2–6). The theorem in
question is valid without the additional assumption; but ordinary calculus methods apparently fail.5 Op. uit ., pp. 249–252.6 Bergson, “A Reformulation ...,” op. cit., pp. 316–317.7 Op. cit., Chapter I, fn. 9.8 Hicks, op. cit., pp. 698–701, 711–712; W. J. Baumol, “Community Indifference,” Review of
Economic Studies, Vol. 14, No. 1, 1946–47, pp. 44–48. Professor Hotelling (op. cit, p. 267) also has
suggested application of a principle equivalent to the Kaldor principle but in a much more
circumscribed way. It is clear from the context that the situation he envisages is one in which the
society to begin with is in a maximal state, as denned in the last section (all prices equal marginal
costs), and the choice is between making and not making an indivisible investment, the opportunity for
which had not previously existed. In such a case, the Kaldor principle serves merely as a device to keep
the economy in a maximal state in the face of changing conditions.9 This rule has been tentatively suggested by F. Modigliani.10 The assumption of a single commodity has been employed in some of the most iUuminating
discussions of optimal conditions. See K. Wicksell, Lectures on Political Economy, London: G.
Routledge and Sons, 1935, Vol. I, p. 140; F. H. Knight, “Fallacies in the Interpretation of Social Cost,”
in The Ethics of Competition and Other Essays, op. cit., p. 219.11 Op. cit., p. 46.12 Tarski, op. cit., pp. 94–96.13 A formal proof of this assertion can easily be given. It is required that the totality of social states
be divided into subsets having the following properties: (a) every social state is in at least one of the
subsets; (b) if x and y are in the same subset, then x C y ; (c) if two subsets do not coincide in their
entirety, then they are completely disjoint, i.e., either every element of one is an element of the other or
the two sets have no elements in common; (d) if x and y are in different subsets, then neither x C y nor y
C x.

We may construct these subsets, or equivalence classes, as we shall call them, as follows: for any
given alternative x, let the set of all alternatives x′ such that x′ C x be known as the equivalence class
generated by x. The equivalence classes generated by all the social states constitute the subsets having
the desired properties.

  PROOF: (a) By (1), every alternative x is in the equivalence class generated by x.

(b) Let x and y both be in the equivalence class generated by z. Then, by definition, x C z and y C z.
By (2), the second statement implies z C y; from x C z and z C y follows x C y by (3).

(c) Let C and C be two equivalence classes which have an element z in common. Let C be
        121
generated by x, and let x′ be any element of C By (b), x′ C z and z C x, since z is in both C and C; by
                                        212
(3), x′ C x, so that x′ is in C, by definition. Hence, every element of C is in C; similarly, every
                      121
element of C is in C, so that C and C coincide in their entirety.
          1212

(d) Suppose that x is in C y in C, and x C y, where C and C are not entirely coincident. Let C
                        12122
be generated by z; then y C z by definition, and x C z by (3), so that x is in C by definition. Then C
                                                                  21
and C have the element x in common and must, by (c), coincide completely, contrary to hypothesis.
  2
Hence, not x C y; by the same reasoning, not y C x.14 Of course, the reasoning underlying Condition 3 would be equally applicable to alternatives
which are not desired to be ranked; if the choice between any two alternatives is to be independent of
tastes for admissible alternatives, then certainly we would wish that choice to be independent of tastes
for alternatives which are not even regarded as admissible. We are simply waiving the issue here to get
on with other matters.15 T. Scitovsky, “A Note on Welfare Propositions in Economics,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol.
9, November, 1941, pp. 77–88.16 That the result, both x P y and y P x, is incompatible with Axioms I and II can be seen formally as
follows: By Definition 1 and Axiom I, x P y implies not y R x w while y P x implies y R x, so that both
                                                    r
cannot hold simultaneously.17 There exist individual orderings of social states based partly on jealousy of the possessions of
others for which (6) will not be satisfied for some particular pair x and y.18 T. Scitovsky, “A Reconsideration of the Theory of Tariffs,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 9,
Summer, 1941, pp. 92–95. “If [the community indifference curves through two given situations]
intersect, . . . according to our convention we mustregard the two situations as equally good” (pp. 94–
95). See also N. Kaldor, “A Comment,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 14, No. 1, 1946–47, p. 49.1 The negative outcome expressed in this theorem is strongly reminiscent of the intransitivity of the
concept of domination in the theory of multi-person games. (See von Neumann and Morgenstern, op.
cit., pp. 38–39.)2 The only part of the last-named conditions that seems to me to be at all in dispute is the
assumption of rationality. The consequences of dropping this assumption are so radical that it seems
worth while to explore the consequences of maintaining it. See Chapter II, Section 4.1 See, e.g., Samuelson, op. cit., pp. 222–224; Bergson, “A Reformulation . . .,” op. cit., pp.
31&-320; Lange, “Foundations of Welfare Economics,” op. cit., p. 216.2 E. Szpilrajn, “Sur l’extension de l’ordre partiel,” Fundamenta Mathematicae, Vol. 16, 1930, pp.
386–389. I am indebted for this reference to J. C. C. McKinsey.3 Von Neumann and Morgenstern, op. cit., p. 264. The above remark is implicit in the definitions of
effective set and domination.4 Ibid., pp. 8–9.5 Ibid., pp. 604, 629 fn.6 Bergson, “A Reformulation . . . op. cit, pp. 320–321.7 D. Gale Johnson, “The High Cost of Food—A Suggested Solution,” Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 56, February, 1948, pp. 54–57. Professor Modigliani’s proposals are contained in a press release
of the Institute of World Affairs, New York, October, 1948.8 Samuelson, op. cit., p. 225.1 See Section 3.2 These are here considered as ends in themselves; they also have an instrumental significance in
furthering or hindering other ends, and an individual who favors equality, for example, as an end in
itself may nevertheless favor a certain amount of inequality in order to increase total output.3 F. G. Dickinson, of the American Medical Association, has suggested orally that the prolongation
of life could itself be used as a social welfare guide. This view is especially attractive since the greater
part of social, and particularly economic, activity is devoted to that end, broadly construed. In contrast
to other basic motives, such as sex and prestige, the desire for longevity is socializing rather than
divisive, although, if one considers the world as one unit, the relation between population and food
supply is probably such that strong elements of conflict remain. However, life cannot be taken as a sole
objective since, for most human beings, there are specific situations in which human beings are willing
to give up their lives in the pursuit of other values, whether these be the aggrandizement of the political
unit to which one owes obedience (“Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori” —Horace) or the desire for
freedom (“It is better to die on your feet than to live on your knees”—Dolores Ibarruri). From a more
practical viewpoint, longevity is probably too insensitive to short-run economic adjustments to serve as
a meaningful guide, especially in view of the great uncertainty existing as to the factors making for
prolongation of life.

The very measurement of length of life for a whole society involves most of the ambiguities already
found in economic welfare analysis. Thus, in evaluating the relative importance of different causes of
death, simple death rates have been objected to on the grounds that they ignore age at death, which
should be considered since it determines the loss to society occasioned by the death. Therefore, new
measures are proposed which seek, at least to a rough approximation, to measure the economic loss to
society occasioned by the deaths due to each cause. (See F. G. Dickinson and E. L. Welker, What Is the
Leading Cause of Death? Two New Measures, Bulletin 64, Bureau of Medical Economic Research,
American Medical Association, Chicago, 1948.) Of course, carried to its logical conclusion, this course
involves all the difficulties already encountered in ascribing a meaning to social productivity.4 See fn. 17, Chapter I.5 Black, “On the Rationale ...,” op. cit., pp. 26–28; “Decisions of a Committee ...,” op. cit., pp. 250–
251.6 Black, “On the Rationale ...,” op. cit., p. 30.7 Black, “Decisions of a Committee . . .,” op. cit, p. 250.8 1 may add here that Black intended his work to be a contribution to the analysis of actual political
behavior rather than to that of social welfare. He envisages a committee before which successive
motions come. The committee chooses between the first two motions; then the winning motion is
paired off against the third for voting; and, similarly, the motion which has emerged victorious after the
first n votes is now voted on with the {n + l)th motion as the alternative. However, Black assumes that,
at each stage in the process, each individual votes in accordance with his ordering. This could only be
so if no individual had any incentive to misrepresent his true feelings in order to get a final result more
to his liking; if this were so, then certainly no individual would misrepresent his ordering if he knew
that nobody else would. An example will show the last statement to be false. Let individual 1 have
ordering x, y, z; individual 2, y, x, z; and individual 3, z y, x. Suppose that the motions come up in the
                                                }
order y, z, x. If all individuals voted according to their orderings, y would be chosen over z and then
over x. However, individual 1 could vote for z the first time, insuring its victory; then, in the choice
between z and x x x would win if individuals 2 and 3 voted according to their orderings, so that
            t
individual 1 would have a definite incentive to misrepresent. The problem treated here is similar to,
though not identical with, the majority game, and the complicated analysis needed to arrive at rational
solutions there suggests strongly the difficulties of this more general problem of voting. (See von
Neumann and Morgenstern, op. cit., pp. 431–445.) This difficulty is noted by Black (“On the Rationale
. . .” op. cit., p. 29 fn.).9 J. J. Rousseau The social contract, english translation, new york and London: G. P. Putnam’s
Sons, second edition, revised 1906, p. 25; I. Kant, “Fundamental Principles of the Metaphysic of
Morals,” in Kant, “Fundamental Principles of the Theory of Ethics, English translation by T. K. Abbott,
fifth edition, New York: Longmans, Green and Co., 1898, pp. 51′52; T. H. Green, Lectures on the
Principles of political obligation, New York and London: Longmans, Green and Co., 1895, pp. 44–48,
125–126 “To [a basis of political or free society] it is necessary, not indeed that everyone subject to the
laws should take part in voting them, still less that he should consent to their application to himself, but
that it should represent an idea of common good, which each member of the society can make his own
so far as he is rational, i.e., capable of the conception of a common good, however much particular
passions may lead him to ignore it and thus necessitate the use of force to prevent him from doing that
which, so far as influenced by the conception of a common good, he would willingly abstain from”
(Green, ibid., p.126). (see also Knight, “Ethics and Economic Reform,” op. cit., p.78.)10 Rousseau, op. cit., p. 35.11 Rousseau: “If the opposition of individual interests has rendered the establishment of societies
necessary, it is the accord of these same interests which has rendered it possible” (ibid., p. 34). Green:
“There can be no right without a consciousness of common interest on the part of members of a society.
Without this there might be certain powers on the part of individuals, but no recognition of these
powers by others as powers of which they allow the exercise, nor any claim to such recognition; and
without this recognition or claim to recognition there can be no right” (op. cit., p. 48); “No one
therefore can have a right except (1) as a member of a society, and (2) of a society in which some
common good is recognised as their own ideal good, as that which should be for each of them” (ibid.,
p. 44).12 Kant, op. cit., p. 34.13 Ibid., pp. 51–52.14 Knight, “The Ethics of Competition,” in The Ethics of Competition and Other Essays, op. cit., pp.
41–45.15 G. J. Stigler, “The New Welfare Economics,” American Economic Review, Vol. 33, June, 1943,
pp. 355–359, especially pp. 357–359.16 P. A. Samuelson, “Further Comment on Welfare Economics,” American Economic Review, Vol.
33, September, 1943, p. 605 fn.17 M. H. Dobb, “’Economic Theory and the Problems of a Socialist Economy,” Economic Journal,
Vol. 43, December, 1933, pp. 588–598; A. P. Lerner, “Economic Theory and Socialist Economy,”
Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 2, October, 1934, pp. 51–61; M. H. Dobb, “A Reply,” ibid.,
February, pp. 144–151; A. P. Lerner, “ARejoinder,” ibid., pp. 152–154.18 Dobb, “Economic Theory and the Problems of a Socialist Economy,” op. cit., pp. 591–593.19 Dobb, “A Reply,” op. cit., pp. 147–148.20 Lerner, “Economic Theory and Socialist Economy,” ibid., p. 58.21 Dobb, “Economic Theory and the Problems of a Socialist Economy,” op. cit., p. 597.22 Rousseau, op. cit., Book III, Chapters IV-VII.23 “All opinions, yea errors, known, read and collated, are of main service and assistance towards
the speedy attainment of what is truest.” (John Milton, “Areopagitica,” in Complete Poetry and
Selected Prose of John Milton, New York: Modern Library, 1942, p. 690.)24 Rousseau, op. cit., pp. 165–166. “The principle of majority rule must be taken ethically as a
means of ascertaining a real ’general will,′ not as a mechanism by which one set of interests is made
subservient to another set. Political discussion must be assumed to represent a quest for an objectively
ideal or ’best′ policy, not a contest between interests.” (Knight, “Economic Theory and Nationalism,”
op. cit., p. 296 fn.) The inner quotes point up all the difficulties beautifully. A similar view was
expressed by Professor Simons. (See H. C. Simons, “Introduction: A Political Credo,” in Economic
Policy for a Free Society, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1948, pp. 7–9.)25 This analogy was pointed out to me by O. Helmer. The problem in question is an application of
R. A. Fisher’s discriminant analysis. An interesting contribution is that of G. L. Schuyler (“The
Ordering of n Items Assigned to k Rank Categories by Votes of m Individuals,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, Vol. 43, December, 1948, pp. 559–563). Schuyler’s suggestion is
essentially a rank-order method of voting, modified by weighting the various individuals in such a way
as to make them more comparable. Considered simply as a device for reconciling opposing interests, it
would fall under the ban of Theorem 2; however, it is regarded rather as a method of reconciling
different estimates of some objective reality. The probability implications of the model are not worked
out, and the most interesting question for political theory, the weighting of the individuals in terms of
their intrinsic ability to judge, is blinked.26 This point has been stressed by Dobb, especially in relation to investment decisions and the
possibility of obsolescence. (“Economic Theory and the Problems of a Socialist Economy,” op. cit., pp.
596–597; also “A Note on Saving and Investment in a Socialist Economy,” Economic Journal, Vol. 49,
December, 1939, pp.726–727.)27 The type of flexibility required for rational planning against uncertainty has been well described
by A. G. Hart (“Risk, Uncertainty, and the Unprofitability of Compounding Probabilities,” in Studies in
Mathematical Economics and Econometrics, O. Lange, F. Mclntyre, and T. O. Yntema, eds., Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press, 1942, pp. 110–118). The rational theory of planning against
uncertainty is identical with the foundations of statistical inference (see A. Wald, “Foundations of a
General Theory of Sequential Decision Functions,” Econometrica, Vol. 15, October, 1947, pp. 279–
313).28 The most systematic discussion is that of Reder, op. cit., Chapter VII.29 J. R. Hicks, Value and Capital, second edition, Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1946, p. 135.30 Hart, op. cit.; M. Friedman, “Lange on Price Flexibility and Employment: A Methodological
Criticism,” American Economic Review, Vol. 36, September, 1946, pp. 627–630.31 Cf. Rousseau, op. cit., pp. 18–19: “The law of plurality of votes is itself established by
agreement, and supposes unanimity at least in the beginning.”1 There are, however, some revisions that must be made in precise mathematical statements, as Blau
(see Section II.4) has shown.2 “Quelques aspects mathématiques de la decision rationnelle,” Les Temps Modernes, Vol. 15,
October, 1959, pp. 725–45, trans, as “Does the Majority Ever Rule?” Portfolio and Art News Annual,
No. 4, 1961, pp. 79–83, 161–68.3 Volume 5, October-December, 1952.4 “Les theories de l’intérêt général et la probleme logique de Tagrégation,” ibid., pp. 501–84.5 “Utility, Strategy, and Social Decision Rules,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 74,
November, 1960, pp. 507–35.6 “Voting and the Summation of Preferences: An Interpretive Bibliographic Review of Selected
Developments During the Last Decade,” American Political Science Review, Vol. 55, December, 1961,
pp. 900–11.7 J. Rothenberg, The Measurement of Social Welfare, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall,
1961.8 The Theory of Committees and Elections, Cambridge, U. K.: Cambridge University Press, 1958.9 “Methods of Election,” Transactions and Proceedings of the Royal Society of Victoria, Vol. 19,
1882, pp. 197–240.10 Op. cit., pp. 513–15.11 Most especially in his Essai sur l’application de l’analyse à la probabilité des décisions rendues
à la pluralité des voix, Paris, 1785. A thorough study of Condorcet’s thought appears in G.-G. Granger,
La Mathématique Social du Marquis do Condorcet, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1956. The
work of Condorcet on voting ismostly analyzed in Chapter 3, especially pp. 94–129, an extensive
summary of Condorcet’s Essai.12 “Mémoire sur les elections au scrutin,” M6moires de l’Acadimie Royale deséciences, 1781, pp.
657–65. The paper was presented in 1770. For an English translation and incisive comments, see A. de
Grazia, “Mathematical Derivation of an Election System,” Isis, Vol. 44, June, 1953, pp. 42–51.13 Op. cit. in footnote 8, Part II.14 “Social Welfare Functions Based on Individual Rankings,” American Journal of Sociology, Vol.
58, November, 1952, pp. 257–62.15 Black, op. cit, p. 230.16 Black, op. cit., p. 232.17 Black, op. cit, pp. 227–30.18 J. H. Blau, “The Existence of Social Welfare Functions,” Econometrica, Vol. 25, April, 1957, pp.
302–13.19 The foregoing does not mean that Condition 2 or 2′ (Positive Association of Social and
Individual Values) can be disregarded in the general development of the theory of social choice. It can
be replaced by the Pareto principle for the purpose of demonstrating the inconsistency of the original
set of conditions; but if one of the other conditions is dropped in an effort to find a consistent set, then
Condition 2 or 2′ is certainty stronger than the Pareto condition (if we continue to maintain Condition 4,
the absence of imposed social decisions). For example, a version of Condition 2′ is used by May in
constructing a justification for majority rule; see paragraph 3.20 This proof originally appeared in my paper, ″Le principe de rationalité dans les decisions
collectives,” Économie Appliquée, Vol. 5, October, 1952, pp. 469–84, with, however, some confusing
misprints.21 Blau states a corresponding theorem (op. cit., p. 309) but adds Condition 2′ to the list of
conditions. It appears to be superfluous; the inconsistency holds without assuming Condition 2′ as the
subsequent proof will show.22 Op. cit., p. 310.23 » Op. cit., in. 4, pp. 555–72.24 The argument is very terse, and I am unable to determine if it is thoroughly correct.25 “A Set of Independent Necessary and Sufficient Conditions for Simple Majority Decision,”
Econometrica, Vol. 20, October, 1952, pp. 680–84.26 He remarks (ibid., p. 680) that, “Since it follows that the pattern of group choice may be built up
if we know the group preferences for each pair of alternatives, the problem [of determining group
choices from all sets] reduces to the case of two alternatives.” This, however, would only be correct if
transitivity were also assumed. Otherwise, there is no necessary connection between choices from two-
member sets and choices from larger sets. If there are more than two alternatives, then it is easy to see
that many methods of choice satisfy all of May’s conditions, for example, both plurality voting and
rank-roder summation. A complete characterization of all social decision processes satisfying May’s
conditions when the number of alternatives is any finite number does not appear to be easy to achieve.27 In a subsequent note, May showed that his four conditions were completely independent in the
sense that one could find a social decision procedure which satisfied any subset of the conditions and
failed to satisfy the others. See “A Note on the Complete Independence of the Conditions for Simple
Majority Decision,” Econometrica, Vol. 21, January, 1953, pp. 172–73. It follows that a possibly useful
way to classify social decision procedures is to enumerate which of May’s conditions it satisfies.28 Y. Murakami, “Some Logical Properties of Arrowian Social Welfare Function,” The Journal of
Economic Behavior, Vol. 1, No. 1, April, 1961, pp. 77–84.29 Strictly speaking, this last result has been proved only for the case where no individual is
indifferent between any two alternatives.30 Op. cit. in fn. 18.31 Y. Murakami, “A Note on the General Possibility Theorem of the Social Welfare Function,”
Econometrica, Vol. 29, April, 1961, pp. 244–46.32 See I. M. D. Little, “Social Choice and Individual Values,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
60, October, 1952, pp. 422–32, and “L’avantage collectif,” Éiconomie Appliqute, Vol. 5, October-
December, 1952, pp. 455–68; A. Bergson, “On the Concept of Social Welfare,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 68, May, 1954, pp.233–52; M. C. Kemp, “Arrow’s General Possibility Theorem,”
Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 21, 1953–54, pp. 240–43; J. M. Buchanan, “Individual Choice in
Voting and the Market,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 62, August, 1954, pp. 334–43; E. J.
Mishan, “An Investigation into Some Alleged Contradictions in Welfare Economics,” Economic
Journal, Vol. 68, September, 1957, pp. 445–54; G. Tullock, Appendix 2 to J. M. Buchanan and G.
Tullock, The Calculus of Consent, Ann Arbor:The University of Michigan Press, 1962, especially pp.
331–34.33 “A Reformulation of Certain Aspects of Welfare Economics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 52, February, 1938, pp. 310–34.34 The definition cited associates a social ordering with each set of individual orderings; it might
have been better to speak more generally of a social choice function and leave for a special assumption
the question whether the social choice function should be an ordering. The desirability of the
transitivity condition has been criticized and needs discussion: see Section V.35 M. C. Kemp and A. Asimakopulos, “A Note on ’Social Welfare Functions′ and Cardinal Utility,”
Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science, Vol. 18, May, 1952, pp. 195–200.36 A similar failure to appreciate the inescapability of the logical need for a constitution is found in
the criticism of M. C. Kemp, op. cit., footnote 32. He argues that the choice of a decision procedure
cannot be made except in terms of a particular choice situation, since choice procedures will be
evaluated in terms of their consequences. But this argument in no way invalidates the need for a
constitution; it says in fact that for each choice situation (or environment), there is an appropriate way
of combining individual orderings to arrive at a social decision. This is exactly equivalentto saying that
we can combine individual orderings to arrive at a system of welfare judgments sufficient to arrive at a
social choice from any environment.37 “Social Choice and Individual Values,” op. cit. in footnote 32, pp. 423–24.38 Ibid., p. 427, pp. 430–32.39 K. Popper, The Logic of Scientific Discovery, New York: Basic Books, 1959, p. 55.40 “On the Concept of Social Welfare,” p. 242.41 “Individual Choice ...,” op. cit. in fn. 32.42 I generally take the view that a definition is a more or less useful convention, no more. But
Buchanan and Little both take very seriously the exact words used in the definiendum. Thus, Buchanan
does not so much say that collective rationality, as I define it, is an unsatisfactory condition for a
constitution as flatly deny that there can be anything called collective rationality. No doubt, words have
penumbras of meaning which may not be easy to eliminate in the reader’s mind; but this type of
confusion seems secondary when explicit definitions are set forth. Buchanan and Little at some points
substitute verbal quibblings for genuine argument.43 The Calculus of Consent, op. cit. in fn. 32, Chapter 6. Since the subsequent references I will
make to this work are largely negative, I should note that they do not pertain to the work’s essential
contribution which is, in my opinion, of major importance.44 Little, “Social Choice and Individual Values,” p. 425; Bergson, “On the Concept of Social
Welfare,” p. 243.45 This point is made with admirable clarity by R. G. Davis, “Comment on Arrow and the *New
Welfare Economics,′” Economic Journal, Vol. 68, December, 1958, pp. 834–35, in a comment on
Mishan, op. cit. in footnote 32. In effect, Mishan accepted Davis’s argument; see “Arrow and the ’New
Welfare Economies′: A Restatement,” ibid., Vol. 68, September, 1958, pp. 595–37. For some odd
editorial reason, Mishan’srejoinder to Davis appeared before Davis’s note.46 T. Scitovsky, “A Note on Welfare Propositions in Economics,” Review; of Economic Studies,
Vol. 9, November, 1941, pp. 77–88; W. J. Baumol, “Community Indifference,” ibid., Vol. 14, No. 1,
1946–7, pp. 44–48; Chapter IV of the text.47 Op. cit. in fn. 32, p. 332.48 Dahl also notes that an election, in which mamy issues enter, cannot be interpreted as indicating a
majority on any specific issue; he there fore speaks of “minorities” rule as opposed to either majority or
minority rule; see A Preface to Democratic Theory, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1956,
pp. 127–32. However, the significant question is not the existence of a majority on each issue but the
existence of a majority on the bundle of issues represented by the candidate over any other attainable
bundle.49 ″A Reformulation ...,” pp. 318–20; see also P. A. Samuelson, Foundations of Economic Analysis,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1947, p. 228.50 Since the market mechanism does satisfy the Condition of Independence of Irrelevant
Alternatives, it must violate another condition, which is clearly that of Collective Rationality
(Condition 1 or 1′). This violation is precisely the well-knownintersection of community indifference
curves. Samuelson’s social indifference curves (see P. A. Samuelson, “Social Indifference Curves,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 70, February, 1956, pp. 1–22) satisfy the condition of Collective
Rationality but violate that of Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives; the income redistribution
associated with each change in social production possibilities requires a high degree of centralization of
knowledge about individual utility functions.51 Op. cit, pp. 576–84.52 K. Inada, “On the Economic Welfare Function,” Technical Report No. 97, Contract Nonr-
225(50) for the Office of Naval Research, Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences,
Stanford University, Stanford, California, July 13, 1961.53 This result presupposes that the social welfare function is defined for all possible utility functions
of individuals subject only to the usual conditions of quasi-concavity and monotonicity. If it is known a
priori that the utility functions of all individuals are purely individualistic (see Chapter VI) and fall into
some very restricted class, such as displaying constant marginal utility for some one commodity, then
social welfare functions can be drawn up for which social marginal rates of substitution are completely
determined by individual rates at the same point.54 “On the Concept of Social Welfare,” pp. 244–45.55 Ibid., pp. 250–51.56 S. S. Stevens, “The Psychophysics of Sensory Function,” The American Scientist, Vol. 48, June,
1961, pp. 226–53; see especially the discussion of alternative scales on pp. 231–33. The method
mentioned in the text is referred to by Stevens as a “category scale”; the “magnitude scale,” which he
prefers, is even more of a break with thetypical views of economists on the possibilities of observing
behavior.57 The classic and still best statement of this position is that of R. Frisch, “Sur un problème
d’économie pure,” Norsk Matematisk Forenings Skrifter, Serie I, No. 16, 1926, pp. 1–40.58 Op. cit., pp. 134–5.59 I am indebted to H. K. Zassenhaus for stressing to me the importance of this notion for welfare
judgments.60 A more formal presentation of this notion is given by my colleague, P. Suppes, “Two Formal
Models for Moral Principles,” Technical Report No. 15, Office of Naval Research Contract Nonr
225(17), Applied Mathematics and Statistics Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, California,
November 1, 1957, pp. 17–18.61 For an interesting discussion of the moral implications of the position that many attributes of the
individual are similar in nature to external possessions, see V. C. Walsh, Scarcity and Evil, Englewood
Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1961. I am indebted for this reference to R. A. Mundell.62 See the discussion of Borda in Part I, p. 99; F. Y. Edgeworth, Mathematical Psychics, London: C.
Kegan and Paul, 1881, pp. 7–8; W. E. Armstrong, “Utility and the Theory of Welfare,” Oxford
Economics Papers, New Series, Vol. 3, October, 1951, pp. 259–71; and L. Goodman and H.
Markowitz, op. cit., fn. 14. For excellent analy-ses of Armstrong’s and Goodman-Markowitz’s views,
see Rothenberg (op. cit. in fn.7), Chapters 7 and 8.63 Op. cit., pp. 5–6.64 This result is obviously closely related to the discussion of J. von Neumann andO. Morgenstern
of games with discrete utility scales; there too the less discerningplayer is completely discriminated
against. See Theory of Games and Economic Be-havior, second edition, Princeton, New Jersey:
Princeton University Press, 1947, pp.614–16.65 Examples such as the above may be more convincing than they should be, be-cause of hidden
empirical content. If in fact we never run across two individuals re-lated as above, then our intuitive
rejection of the completely unequal income distri-bution may be incorrect; our intuition is guided by
situations we have encountered,and it could be that if we were to meet two individuals, one of whom is
more sensitivethan the other, no matter what their income levels are, we would accept the Good-man-
Markowitz solution. Goodman and Markowitz have suggested to me orallythat in fact discrimination
levels would become closer together at lower levels of in-come (this is one interpretation of
diminishing marginal utility of income); thus, thesum of utilities would be maximized at some point
short of complete inequality.Since in realistic cases, it could be argued, the Goodman-Markowitz social
welfare func-tion does not lead to blatant absurdity, we should not use the evidence of the examplein
the text. Actually, it would not be difficult to construct examples similar to the onein the text for which,
however, increasing ability to discriminate at lower levels of in-come is sufficient to prevent complete
inequality, but nevertheless a moderate dif-ference in the number of levels of discrimination leads to a
very great inequality of in-come.66 Op. cit. in fn. 32, pp. 242–43.67 The sharpest confrontation of opposing views is found in the controversy between A. Downs, “In
Defense of Majority Voting,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 69, April, 1961, pp. 192–99, and G.
Tullock, “Reply to a Traditionalist,” ibid., pp. 200–03.68 See Dahl, op. cit, Chapter 2, especially p. 41.69 The refusal to consider any alternative as being preferred on historical grounds removes one
reason for nonneutrality (see Section II.3) and hence, ac-cording to May’sargument, implies majority
rule if his other, less controversial, conditions are ac-cepted. However, there may be other reasons for
rejecting neutrality in specificsituations, so that qualified majorities may still be called for.70 Op. cit, pp. 258–59.71 In the absence of costs of decision-making; it is only these costs which, in their theory, explain
the acceptance of less-than-unanimous decisions.72 See footnote 5, p. 13 of text. Since the writing of the text, several important papers have been
written in this area; see H. Houthakker, “Revealed Preference andthe Utility Function,” Economica,
New Series, Vol. 17, May, 1950, pp. 159–74; H.Uzawa, “Preference and Rational Choice in the Theory
of Consumption,” Chapter 9in K. J. Arrow, S. Karlin, and P. Suppes (eds.), Mathematical Methods in
the Social Sciences, 1959, Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 1960. Ville’s paperhas been
translated by P. K. Newman as “The Existence-Conditions of a Total Utility Function,” Review of
Economic Studies, Vol. 19, No. 2, 1951–52, pp. 123–128.An excellent historical survey has been given
by P. A. Samuelson, “The Problem of Integrability in Utility Theory,” Economica, Vol. 17, November,
1950, pp. 355–85.73 W. H. Riker, “The Paradox of Voting and Congressional Rules for Voting on Amendments,”
American Political Science Review, Vol. 52, June, 1958, pp. 349–66.74 Op. cit., pp. 39–11.