Haing Ngor, a young doctor in his native Cambodia, saw his life transformed

when the Khmer Rouge communists, led by the notorious Pol Pot, took over

his country in 1975. He and his family, along with entire populations of cities

and towns, were forced into the countryside to become ‘war slaves’ in a vast

gulag  policed  by  brutal  enforcers  and  spies.  After  suffering  nearly

unbelievable hardships, Ngor finally escaped Cambodia in 1979, resettling in

the  US,  where  he  helped  fellow  refugees.  His  prospects  improved  when

director Roland Joffe cast him as the real-life character Cambodian translator

Dith Pran in the film The Killing Fields (1984). His performance earned him

an Academy Award. Ngor’s subsequent film work included parts in Oliver

Stone’s Heaven and Earth and various movies and TV shows, but acting was

secondary  to  his  main  concerns  of  aiding  Cambodians  and  bringing  his

Khmer Rouge persecutors to justice. In 1988, he wrote his autobiography, A

Cambodian Odyssey (Surviving the Killing Fields). Ngor died in 1996, while

attempting to prevent a drug-dealing Los Angeles street gang from stealing a

locket which contained a photo of his wife. This is his true story of finding

love and fighting for survival.


Roger  Warner  is  a  journalist,  historian  and  author  of  several  books  on

Southeast  Asia.  His Shooting  at  the  Moon:  The  Story  of  America’s

Clandestine War in Laos won an overseas Press Club award for the best book

on foreign affairs. He first met Haing Ngor when Dr Ngor was a refugee

fresh from the traumas of the Khmer Rouge, in a camp along the Thai border,

long before Haing Ngor starred in the film The Killing Fields.Praise for the first edition (A Cambodian Odyssey):


‘Gripping . . . Invaluable . . . A landmark book . . . This is the most revealing

book about the nature of evil I have ever read. But it is also a drama with

heroes and heroines – and comedy and laughter . . . Ngor starred in the best

film on Cambodia that has ever been produced. And now he has written the

best book on Cambodia that has ever been published.’

                                                      T.D. Allman, Chicago Tribune


‘Profound, personal, and proud . . . a story so essential to our understanding

that  it  deserves  to  be  considered  as  one  of  the  more  important

autobiographies of our time.’

                                                                    Los Angeles Times


‘A beautiful, frightening, gentle, terrifying tale . . . The brilliant testimony of

a courageous man . . . There might be moments when you read Haing Ngor’s

[book] and weep, but I promise you they will be tears of enlightenment.’

                                                                    Chicago Sun-Times


‘A potent tribute to the human spirit . . . With sure and simple prose, Ngor

sweeps  the  reader  inexorably  into  a  maelstrom  not  easily  forgotten.  Nor

should it be; this important document, which traces the suffering of a nation

within the torment of one life, deserves remembrance.’

                                                                          Kirkus Reviews


‘A terrible and thrilling story.’

                                                                      Publishers Weekly


‘Anyone  who  wants  to  understand  what  Khmer  Rouge  rule  did  to  the

Cambodian people must read Haing Ngor’s A Cambodian Odyssey. I venture

to say that if you do, it will be among the handful of books you will recall for

the rest of your life.’

                                                          Congressman Stephen Solarz


‘It  is  hard  to  imagine  a  more  remarkable  story.  It  is  a  record  –  and  anindictment – that will last for generations to come.’

                                                                        Pittsburgh Press


‘An emotional personal journey . . . harrowing . . . uncommonly candid . . .

compelling because it reminds us anew of man’s capacity for cruelty and self-

delusion. It also reminds us of the surpassing strength of the human spirit.

Most important, it implores the civilized world to remember the millions of

innocent  men,  women  and  children  who  lie  beneath  killing  fields  and  to

condemn those responsible for these brutal murders.’

                                                                  New York Daily News


‘A personal testament of courage . . . Ngor’s observations of war, the horror

of captivity, and the wholesale desecration of Buddhist culture and religion

make for sheer narrative power; but the book’s real impact has to do with the

triumph of human spirit.’

                                                            Christian Science Monitor


‘A  major  book  .  .  .  You  walk  away  from  this  autobiography  with  more

enrichment and understanding than any movie could provide.’

                                                                    Chicago Sun-Times


‘A searing eyewitness account of cultural genocide and personal triumph.’

                                                                                  Booklist


‘Stunning, triumphant . . . illuminating. Ngor not only describes the events of

his  own  life  but  also  delivers  an  insightful  analysis  of  the  events  that

transformed his native land from “an island of peace” in war-torn Southeast

Asia, to “a nation at war with itself.” His account bears witness for himself

and the hundreds of thousands of other Cambodians who lost loved ones

among the millions put to death under the Pol Pot regime.’

                                                                            Buffalo News                                  Constable & Robinson Ltd
                                    3 The Lanchesters
                                  162 Fulham Palace Road
                                      London W6 9ER
                                  www.constablerobinson.com

                  First published in 1987 as A Cambodian Odyssey in the US
                            by Macmillan Publishing Company

                  This edition published in paperback in the UK by Robinson,
                        an imprint of Constable & Robinson Ltd, 2003

                Copyright © 1987 by Sandwell Investment Ltd., and Roger Warner

                        A copy of the British Library Cataloguing in
                      Publication data is available from the British Library

                                    ISBN 1-84119-793-9
                                  ISBN 978-1-84119-793-7
                              Ebook ISBN 978-1-47210-388-8

                                Printed and bound in the EU

                                        10 9 8 7[I want to dedicate this book to the memories of my father, Ngor Kea, of my

mother, Lim Ngor, of my wife, Chang Huoy (Chang My Huoy), who have

died in the most miserable, uncivilized, and inhuman ways under the Khmer

communist regime. I have written this book for the world to better understand

                  communism and other regimes in Cambodia.]                                      Contents


 


Introduction: The Prize


1 Early Rebellions

2 Education

3 Romance and Coup

4 Civil War

5 The City of Bonjour

6 The Fall

7 The Wheel of History

8 Exodus from Phnom Penh

9 Wat Kien Svay Krao

10 Medicine for Angka

11 Return to the Village

12 The Crocodile Loses Its Lake

13 New Directions

14 The Plough

15 Sickness

16 The Parade of the Selfish and the Dying

17 Reorganization

18 Bells

19 Angka Leu20 The Wat

21 The King of Death

22 Candles

23 The Rains

24 Rice Farming

25 The Dam

26 The Cracks Begin to Show

27 Drops of Water

28 Happiness

29 Crossing the Sea

30 Grief

31 Retreat

32 Liberation

33 Battambang

34 The Danger Zone

35 The Locket

36 Saloth Sar

37 Okay, Bye-bye

38 To America

39 Starting Over

40 The Killing Fields

41 Celebrity

42 Kama


Epilogue by Roger Warner                                    Introduction



                                      The Prize


 




I have been many things in life: A trader walking barefoot on paths through

the jungles. A medical doctor, driving to his clinic in a shiny Mercedes. In the

past few years, to the surprise of many people, and above all myself, I have

been  a  Hollywood  actor.  But  nothing  has  shaped  my  life  as  much  as

surviving the Pol Pot regime. I am a survivor of the Cambodian holocaust.

That’s who I am.

  Between  the  years  of  1975  and  1979,  Pol  Pot  and  his  Khmer  Rouge

communists  exchanged  our  traditional  Cambodian  way  of  life  for  a  vast,

brutal experiment in communism. Toward the end of those years I was living

in the northwestern part of Cambodia in a tiny agricultural village. By then,

the luxuries of life before the revolution were a half-forgotten dream. I went

barefoot. My clothes were rags and my ribs were showing from hunger. To

keep the Khmer Rouge soldiers from killing me, I had to pretend I was not a

doctor. They had already killed most of my family. And my case was typical.

By destroying our culture and by enslaving us, the Khmer Rouge changed

millions of happy, normal human beings into something more like animals.

They turned people like me into cunning, wild thieves.

I  began  stealing  on  a  small  scale.  Slipping  out  of  my  hut  after  dark,

blending into the shadows, pausing to look and listen for soldiers, hearing

only the crickets and frogs in their loud nighttime chorus, I crept into the

village garden. Reaching into the rows of ripening corn, pulling the husks

carefully back, I twisted the corncobs from their stalks, pulled them out, and

smoothed the empty husks to their original shape around the hollow spaceinside. In the daytime, to a casual observer, the corn would appear to be

untouched.

At first I stole alone. But other people in the village were hungry too, and

they  needed  a  leader.  My  gang  raided  fields  and  gardens  by  night.  Our

favourite target was rice.

For Cambodians, rice is not a side dish. Rice is the centre of our meals, a

clean, neutral medium that sets off the flavours of other foods we add to it.

Traditionally, until the Khmer Rouge took over, we had eaten rice every day.

Under the Khmer Rouge, we hardly ever ate rice at all – not rice as it should

be, with each grain separate and moist, and a clean, fragrant steam rising

from the bowl.

Rice had become an obsession for my gang. I led them to rice paddies

ready for harvest. Like madmen, we broke the stalks and branches of the rice

plants with our hands, threshed the branches by rubbing them back and forth

on the ground with our feet, and filled huge hemp bags with unhusked rice

before hurrying away. Later, in hiding from the soldiers, we removed the

husks with mortars and pestles, cooked the grains, and ate until our stomachs

could hold no more.

We also raided vegetable gardens belonging to other villages nearby. I

built up a large supply of stolen food and gave the extra food away. In all I

fed more people in the village than anyone except the regime itself. But I

wasn’t content. It was time to strike back.

Under Khmer Rouge rule, all private property was outlawed. Cooking at

home was outlawed. Everything from work to sex to family life was tightly

controlled. Everyone in the village was supposed to eat together at a central

mess hall, called the common kitchen.

One day at the common kitchen while taking a meal, the usual starvation

ration  of  a  bowl  of  watery  broth  with  a  few  rice  grains  at  the  bottom,  I

glanced through the open doorway of a nearby storage shed. On the floor of

the shed lay a small hand-powered rice mill.

As soon as I saw it, I knew that it was only a matter of time before the rice

mill was mine.

  Stealing the rice mill was not a rational idea. It was not like stealing food,

where the benefits balanced the risks. Owning the rice mill wouldn’t keep me

from starvation. At most, it would allow me to remove the husks from stolen

rice a little faster than with a mortar and pestle. And the risks were higher

than stealing food. The shed was next to the common kitchen, and the kitchenwas guarded by soldiers night and day.

To me, stealing the mill was a test: It was a test of my abilities as a thief,

and a challenge to the miserable life I had been living. It was a way of finding

out whether the gods wanted me to live or die.

Each time I went near the common kitchen I watched the shed without

appearing to watch it. Very slyly. But there were always soldiers around.

  Eventually I concluded that the only chance lay in trying to steal the mill

when the area was full of people.

A  few  evenings  a  week  the  village  leader  held  political  indoctrination

meetings that everyone had to attend. Like most Khmer Rouge, the leader

had taken a new name to show that he had a new revolutionary identity. He

called himself Mao, probably in imitation of China’s Mao Tse-tung. He was

an  uneducated  man  who  wore  the  standard  black  pajama  uniform  of  the

Khmer Rouge.

  During the next meeting that Mao held near the common kitchen, I sat at

the edge of the crowd with my back against the shed. The walls of the shed

were made of a stiff, woven material, like rattan. The evening had turned to

black, starry darkness. No moon yet.

Mao opened the meeting with the usual slogans. The rest of us got wearily

to our feet and obediently shouted the slogans back to him, pounding our fists

against our chests, and raising them in straight-arm salutes. ‘Long live the

Cambodian revolution!’ he shouted. ‘Long live the Cambodian revolution!’

we yelled back, though we didn’t mean it. He said it twice more and we

repeated it for him, and then he started with the next set of slogans.

  When he was done we sat down and he began telling us how lucky we

were to be living under such a regime, where everyone was equal and where

meals were served to us every day. How lucky we were to be struggling

together to build a modern and powerful nation.

The truth was that under the communists the country was much worse off

than it had ever been during my lifetime. We had no electricity. No clocks or

automobiles. No modern medicines. No schools. No religious worship. Very

little food. And we lived in constant fear of the soldiers.

He went on with his speech, reciting phrases he had learned like a parrot

from his superiors. Every speech was almost exactly the same. The crowd

sighed and settled down.

It was time.

  ‘Lord Buddha,’ I prayed silently, ‘please forgive me. I do not steal to getrich. I share with others. Please protect my life once again.’

I leaned forward, pulling the wall of the shed with me. The bottom of the

wall overlapped the floor of the shed but was not fastened to it. I pulled

myself backward and up into the narrow gap between the wall and the floor

and into the even blacker darkness of the interior of the shed.

  ‘Our workers, peasants and revolutionary soldiers,’ Mao was saying, ‘have

launched  an  offensive  to  build  up  the  economy!  We  are  struggling  with

nature to become masters of our fate! All our cooperatives are waging an

offensive, working with great revolutionary zeal for the sake of a spectacular

great leap forward!’

  Groping around on the floor I found a round, heavy object, heavier than

expected. Fumbling, pulling at anything that stuck out, I broke the mill down

into its parts, two heavy grindstones plus the casing and crank.

‘. . . they are now resolved to launch another relentless offensive . . .’

Mao’s voice droned on.

  Pushing against the bottom of the wall, I managed to squeeze out the same

way I had come in.

‘. . . and on to victory!’ Mao bellowed.

In front of me, the silhouettes of heads and shoulders facing dutifully in

Mao’s direction. To the side, an irrigation ditch, part of a network of canals.

With a grindstone under each arm and the crank in my waistband, I settled

into the water. Go slowly, I told myself. Do not make a ripple. Do not make a

sound. Going slow is much better than going fast.

The  speech,  interrupted  by  mandatory  clapping,  grew  fainter.  Only  my

nose and eyes were above water, like a crocodile; my feet pushed on the mud

underneath. The stars shone in the sky and again in their reflections on the

surface of the water. But a glow had appeared on the horizon. The moon was

about to rise. Time to hurry. Time to speed up before it was too late.

  Climbing out of the ditch, I walked as fast as I could to the fertilizer shed

where I worked during the day and hid the mill under a manure pile. I ran to

my hut, changed into dry clothes and ran back toward the kitchen, where

once again slogans were being shouted and repeated loudly by the crowd.

Then long applause. Too late – the speech was over.

In the moonlight, soldiers had come to inspect the spot where I had been

sitting,  beside  the  shed.  Curious  civilians  peered  around,  some  of  them

calling my name. When I ran up, out of breath, Mao called me to the front

and demanded to know where I had been.  Walking toward him, I let my back and shoulders sag. My eyes lowered in

deference and my mouth formed a silly apologetic smile.

  ‘Sorry, comrade,’ I told him meekly, ‘my stomach was upset and I dirtied

myself.’ I patted the seat of my trousers in case my meaning wasn’t clear. ‘I

just went home to change my clothes.’

  Raucous laughter came from the crowd, even the soldiers. Everyone knew

what it was like to have intestinal problems. Everybody did, because of our

unsanitary living conditions. Even Mao, a man of more than average cruelty,

began  to  grin.  He  waved  me  off,  like  a  parent  who  is  amused  by  the

wrongdoings of a child.

I  walked  back  to  the  storage  shed  and  sat  with  my  back  against  it,  as

before.

I ground rice in the rice mill later that night.

And the next night I led my gang out to steal again.


On  a  very  different  night,  six  and  a  half  years  later,  I  was  sitting  in  the

Dorothy Chandler Pavilion in Los Angeles. I wore a tuxedo. On my feet were

shiny patent leather shoes. On the stage a woman announcer read, Haing S.

Ngor,  pronouncing  it Heng  S.  Nor,  which  is  as  close  to  the  correct

pronunciation as foreigners usually get.

  Since  leaving  Cambodia,  my  life  had  changed  as  completely  and  as

dramatically as it is possible to imagine. I had come to America as a refugee.

With  no  experience  in  theatre  or  film,  I  had  been  hired  to  play  a  fellow

Cambodian named Dith Pran in a film called The Killing Fields. I was aware

of mistakes in my performance, just as I was aware of making many mistakes

in  my  real  life.  Yet  I  had  been  nominated,  along  with  several  other

experienced professional actors, for an Academy Award.

But then, I thought, what is so special about acting in the movies? It is a

matter of taking on a new identity and convincing others of it. Convincing

others,  perhaps,  the  way  I  had  convinced  Mao  the  Khmer  Rouge  village

chief. Waiting for the envelope to be opened and the winner announced, I

was excited, but my heart was at peace. Whatever happened, I could accept.

Because I knew that my best performances were over before I left Cambodia.

And the prize there was much greater.                                            1



                                Early Rebellions


 




My earliest memory is standing at the back door of my parents’ house and

gazing at the rice fields. The fields fascinated me. Low earthen dikes divided

them  into  a  pattern  like  irregular  chequerboards,  with  paddies  instead  of

squares, and trees rising here and there where dykes met.

It was a sight that changed with the seasons. By January, partway through

the dry season, the fields were covered in brown stubble. By about April or

May when light rains fell, a few paddies were planted as seed beds, turning a

delicate green. When the rainy season itself brought its heavy storms, teams

of men and women transplanted the seedlings to the rest of the paddies. Over

the rainy months, the rice plants grew thick and green and lush, and the dykes

were hidden from sight until around August, when the rains stopped, and the

plants gradually began to turn golden. The farmers went out and harvested,

leaving only dry stubble behind. They threshed the stalks, milled the grains

and sold the rice to families like mine.

We ate the rice gladly, and we always set some aside for the monks, who

came to our house every morning with their alms bowls. The monks wore

robes, yellow or orange or even brown if they had made the dyes themselves

from tree bark. Their heads and eyebrows were shaved. They were calm and

silent, speaking not a word as they walked from one house to the next in a

single-file line.

  Those are my first memories, the rice fields changing with the seasons and

the monks coming to our house each morning. And that is how I would like

to remember Cambodia, quiet and beautiful and at peace.But in fact the first entire incident I remember was not so peaceful. I was

about three years old. The year was probably 1950. My mother sent my older

brother and me into the rice fields to get water from a pond. It was the dry

season. Soldiers from the village garrison fished at the pond with their shirts

and shoes off. We filled the pail. My older brother took one end of a pole on

his shoulder and I took the other on mine and we put the pail between us. We

were returning to the house, two little barefoot boys carrying a single pail,

when  we  heard  a  sharp bang!  behind  us,  near  the  pond.  Then  we  heard

another bang! and the soldiers shouting. My mother appeared at the door. I

had never seen that expression on her face before.

  ‘Come here, children! Put the pail down! Drop it right now! Hurry!’ she

said. We set the pail down and trotted obediently toward her. She ran out of

the house anyway, grabbed us by the wrists and dragged us in. There was

more shooting behind us, and our neighbours were yelling.

The next thing I knew, my brother and I were in the hole under the big low

wooden table that served as my parents’ bed. It was dark and cool in there,

with sandbags on the sides – my parents had known there was going to be

trouble. Some of my other brothers and sisters were already under there, and

more came tumbling in, a half-dozen wiggling children. Then my mother

came  in  and  finally  my  father,  who  had  run  from  the  market  and  was

breathing hard, his face wet with perspiration.

We  heard  a  shot  nearby,  then  more  shots  right  outside  our  house.

Something  crashed,  and  glass  broke  on  the  tabletop  above  us,  while  my

mother clutched us tighter and prayed and my father cursed. We children

tried to make ourselves even smaller in our hole in the floor under the table.

  Then  after  a  while  there  wasn’t  any  more  shooting.  We  heard  voices

outside.  Someone  called  my  father  by  his  name.  He  climbed  out.  A  few

minutes later the rest of us got out. There was broken glass on the floor and

holes in the wall above the front door. Outside there was a big crowd, and

more people running up to it on the street and everyone was talking at the

same time:

  ‘No, the rest got away. Nobody else killed . . .’

  ‘The soldiers got back to the garrison and fired down from the watchtower

. . .’

‘He used this tree for cover. So many bullet holes in the trunk of the tree,

huh? Even in the doorway of the Ngor house . . .’

I pushed my way through the legs of the crowd. I had to see for myself. Bythe tree in front of our house, in the centre of the crowd, a man lay face down

in blood. Next to him was a single-shot carbine. Other children had wormed

their way in with me, some of them with younger brothers or sisters hoisted

on their hips.

We looked on, wide-eyed.

The dead guerrilla was sturdily built, with a strong back and thick legs. His

bare feet were wide and calloused, like a farmer’s. His skin was dark brown.

Tattoos covered his arms and shoulders. He wore a pair of torn short trousers.

Around his waist were a krama – the Cambodian all-purpose scarf – and

some strings hung with Buddha amulets and prayer beads. He had no shirt.

He was not from the towns or cities. He was a man of the earth, from the

countryside. From the very heart of peaceful Cambodia. And he had rebelled.


Now, many years later, grown up and living far away, I think: Yes, there was

trouble even then. Maybe not revolution but a deep, hidden discontent.

To  outsiders,  and  often  even  to  ourselves,  Cambodia  looked  peaceful

enough. The farmers bound to their planting cycles. Fishermen living on their

boats, and their naked brown children jumping in and out of the water. The

robed monks, barefoot, walking with deliberate slowness on their morning

rounds. Buddhist temples in every village, the graceful, multilayered roofs

rising above the trees. The wide boulevards and the flowering trees of our

national capital, Phnom Penh. All that beauty and serenity was visible to the

eye.  But  inside,  hidden  from  sight  the  entire  time,  was kum.  Kum  is  a

Cambodian word for a particularly Cambodian mentality of revenge – to be

precise, a long-standing grudge leading to revenge much more damaging than

the original injury. If I hit you with my fist and you wait five years and then

shoot me in the back one dark night, that is kum. Or if a government official

steals a peasant’s chickens and the peasant uses it as an excuse to attack a

government garrison, like the one in my village, that is kum. Cambodians

know all about kum. It is the infection that grows on our national soul.

But  the  fighting  had  been  so  small-scale  back  then,  before  the  other

countries got involved, that the damage was limited. When those few ragged

guerrillas attacked the garrison in my village, it was only news for those of us

who lived there. Nobody else cared. The attack might have been reported in

the Phnom Penh newspapers, but not outside the country. It was only a minor

incident in an inconclusive, low-level civil war. Wars like this are always

going on in different parts of the world. And those in the outside world knowlittle about them.

  Cambodia: it is just a name to most people. Someplace far away where

something terrible happened, and few can remember exactly what. Mention

Pol  Pot  or  the  Khmer  Rouge  and  people  start  to  remember.  Or  bombs

dropping and genocide or even a film called The Killing Fields. But all that

came later.

  Cambodia is a part of Indochina, which in turn is part of the landmass of

Southeast Asia. ‘Indo-china’ because a couple of countries to the west lies

India,  which  gave  Cambodia  its  religion  and  alphabet;  and  a  couple  of

countries to the north is China, which gave Cambodia its merchant class,

including  my  father’s  side  of  the  family.  For  many  years  the  region  was

known as French Indochina, because France colonized Cambodia and the

neighbouring countries of Laos and Vietnam beginning in the mid-nineteenth

century. The guerrillas who came to my village were trying to get rid of

French rule. And in Vietnam at the same time as this shoot-out, Ho Chi Minh

and his communists were also trying to force the French to leave, with a

rebellion on a much larger scale.

  Vietnam has usually overshadowed Cambodia in world news, because the

wars there are larger, and because Western countries have gotten directly

involved  in  the  fighting.  So  more  people  know  about  Vietnam  than

Cambodia. But I have never liked having to explain that Cambodia is next to

Vietnam, or even near India and China. To me, Cambodia means something

very special. It was the name of the country around my village. And like all

children, I believed my village was the centre of the world.

The village was called Samrong Yong. It was a sleepy crossroads on the

highway south of Phnom Penh, with houses one row deep and rice fields and

forests beyond. After the shooting incident, my parents moved us children out

of the village to a friend’s house in the countryside, where they thought we

would be safer. Every afternoon my parents came to the house and spent the

night with us, and every morning they went back to the village to do business

at their dry-goods store. Until one afternoon Papa didn’t come back.

The guerrilla rebels kidnapped my father. My mother collected money for

his release. After she paid them, they set my father free but took her prisoner

instead, so then Papa had to raise ransom money for her. When they were

both  free,  corrupt  soldiers  of  the  other  side  –  Cambodian  officers  of  the

French-backed government – arrested my father and put him in jail. They

accused him of working for the guerrillas. After all, he had been seen leavingSamrong Yong every afternoon to visit them. Of course, the soldiers were

using this as an excuse for getting ransom money.

I was sent to stay in Phnom Penh. While I was there, the rebels and the

military  took  turns  kidnapping  my  father  again.  My  father  hated  paying

ransom, but there was nothing he could do. He had nobody to protect him.

Like nearly all merchants, he was Chinese-looking, with pale-coloured skin

and narrow eyes. This made him an easy target. Most other Cambodians were

of the Khmer race, with round eyes and dark brown skin, or else were of

mixed racial descent.

  When I finally came back to the village, the rice fields looked the same.

The monks still made their rounds in the morning. But every afternoon, a new

militia of young men and women marched around the village with machetes

and wooden rifles. They were always out of step, and never looked like a real

army, but they had the strong support of the people. The whole village was

tired of the corrupt soldiers of the French-backed government, and tired of

the corrupt guerrillas too. The man who had helped organize the militias, our

young king, Norodom Sihanouk, felt the same. Sihanouk was trying to get the

French to leave the country. He wanted the guerrillas to leave too, because

some of them were communists allied with Ho Chi Minh. Sihanouk didn’t

want  the  country  ruled  either  by  a  Western  power  like  France  or  by

communists.  He  wanted  Cambodia  to  be  independent  and  neutral.  In  the

Buddhist tradition, he wanted the middle way.

  Because of all the ransom payments my father was very poor. He sent me

to a Chinese school with my older brother, Pheng Huor, but soon he took me

out because he couldn’t afford the tuition for both of us. I didn’t mind. Pheng

Huor was smarter than me. He could take an abacus, the Chinese calculator

with rows of wooden beads, flick the beads around with the tip of his finger

and get the answer to a problem in seconds, while I would still be trying to

remember  what  each  bead  stood  for.  Pheng  Huor  had  always  helped  my

father after school. I had always helped my mother. My mother was darker in

colour, like me, partway between a Chinese and a dark rural Cambodian.

  While my father rebuilt his business and my brother studied at school, my

mother and I went off on daily bartering trips in the countryside to get the

family’s food. I carried a long piece of bamboo across my shoulders with a

hook at each end. From one hook hung a basket with fresh pastries cooked by

my hardworking father, and from the other hung another basket with peanuts,

dried fish, salt, soy sauce, and anything else we thought we could trade. Atsunrise we were off, on foot. The baskets bobbed up and down from my

shoulderboard and I adjusted my stride to fit the rhythm. My mother wrapped

her krama, or scarf, around her head and placed a basket on top, steadying it

with one hand.

We walked away from National Route 2, the paved highway that passed

through our village, onto oxcart trails and footpaths. Soon we were out of

earshot of the automobile traffic and into an entirely different world of fields

and forests. We walked through open rice fields to shady villages, where

thatched-roof houses built on tall stilts stood among tamarind, mango, banana

and  palm  trees.  The  villagers  were  ethnic  Khmer,  friendly,  dark-skinned

people who had mastered the art of living off the land without working very

hard. Each house had its garden surrounded by a reed fence, with vegetables

and tobacco growing inside. Chickens clucked and pecked at the dirt, and

roosters crowed at all hours. Mostly we bartered for rice, because we could

get it more cheaply from these villagers than we could in Samrong Yong.

We walked all day, and I became strong and healthy. On the way home, I

foraged for lotus plants, whose roots and seeds are tasty in soups; for water

convolvulus, which is something like spinach; and for sdao tree leaves, rather

bitter-tasting, as many of the rural foods are. Whenever we passed through

woods, my mother wrapped a few grains of rice in a leaf and placed it on the

ground as a gift to the local spirits.

  When I was about eight years old I was allowed to go out to barter on my

own, without my mother. My favourite village was in a grove of sugar palm

trees, which have tall, slender, curving trunks and fan-like fronds on top.

Every morning the men scampered up the sugar palms to gather nectar from

the flowers. They boiled the nectar in vats for many hours to make a crude

brown sugar that tastes like molasses. They sold the palm sugar in the market,

or traded it to me.

  They also made an alcoholic drink that was slightly bubbly and tasted like

beer.  They  made  their  best-quality  beer  right  up  in  the  palm  trees.  One

morning when I walked into their village the men waved at me from the
                                            1
treetops. ‘Hey, boy! Hey! Ngor Haing! Come up here! We’ve got something

for  you!’  I  climbed  up  the  bamboo  ladder.  At  the  top,  on  a  platform

connecting several nearby trees, the men were sitting with loose, happy grins

and glazed eyes. They were drinking fresh palm beer. I tried some. It was

delicious. I drank more. The hours passed. We were laughing and joking up

there in the tree until I realized that I had to get down and didn’t have anycontrol over my arms or legs. The ground looked far away and small, like the

earth under an airplane. They had to carry me down. No more bartering for

me that day. I was too busy weaving around on the footpaths and falling over.

When I got home my mother scolded me and my father gave me a stern,

angry look. He said I would never amount to anything if I spent time with the

wrong people.

I disagreed with my father. The country people had always been nice to

me.  But  I  was  very  stubborn  then;  if  my  father  said  I  was  wrong  about

anything, automatically I felt I was right, without even considering what he

said. That was my personality: If I hit my head against a wall accidentally, I

would butt it again, to see if I could make the wall hurt.

  Medically speaking, I was hyperactive as a child. I had a short attention

span and far too much energy. I liked sports. I loved fighting. My gang, from

the western side of the village, was always getting in fights with the gang

from the eastern side of the village. If the eastern gang came at me when I

was alone, I took my baskets off the hooks, waited calmly and got ready to

swing  my  shoulderboard  at  their  shins.  I  wasn’t  afraid.  My  fighting  and

playing displeased my father, who worked every day without a break and

who  expected  me  to  stay  home  and  help  his  business.  But  the  more  he

scolded me the more I stayed outside.

It became difficult to meet my father’s gaze. My oldest or number-one

brother,  who  was  slow-minded,  worked  for  my  father  all  day  long  as  an

ordinary labourer, as faithful as a water buffalo. My number-two brother,

Pheng Huor, the smart one, was already keeping my father’s accounts. I was

the number-three brother, with two more younger brothers behind me and

three sisters too. I wanted to help the family, but I didn’t want to work all the

time. It was too much fun to play.

  When  I  was  about  ten,  matters  came  to  a  head.  The  government  of

Thailand,  Cambodia’s  neighbour  to  the  west,  gave  a  large  sculpture  of

Buddha to a monk in a town near my village, called Tonle Batí. The monk

was very old and eminent, the equivalent of a bishop. The sculpture was to go

inside a stone building made around AD 1200, in the period of an ancient

Cambodian civilization known as Angkor. But before installing the statue,

my father and the monk had to drive to Thailand to get it.

  They set off together in Papa’s old black and brown Ford truck, north from

the village on National Route 2 to Phnom Penh and then in a northwesterly

direction around the huge lake known as Tonle Sap and toward the Thaiborder  town  of  Aranyaprathet.  The  roads  were  terrible.  The  truck  kept

breaking down. My father was irritated but he had to pretend to be calm,

because of the monk. When they finally got the statue, it turned out to be

unusually large and handsome. Once they re-entered Cambodia with it in the

back of the truck they had to stop in every small town along the way to give a

parade.  The  townspeople  gave  money,  to  make  merit  for  themselves,  to

improve their chances of being reborn into a better life. The money paid for

the  truck  repairs  and  for  the  gasoline.  Papa,  who  was  an  impatient  man,

couldn’t hurry things up.

In my father’s absence my mother ran the store. I got in more fights than

ever.

The morning before Papa returned, a box with a dozen packs of imported

playing cards was missing from the locked cupboard above my parents’ bed.

The cards would have made a nice profit for the family if they had been sold.

My  mother  came  to  me  and  asked  whether  I  had  taken  them.  I  told  her

truthfully that I hadn’t. But my mother was suspicious. Of all the children I

was the only one who got in trouble regularly.

  She got right to the point. ‘If you stole it and sold it, just say so,’ she said.

‘If I know you are telling me the truth, I won’t tell your father, and he won’t

beat you.’

  There was nothing I could say to her. Papa beat us occasionally, as all

Chinese fathers did. But he didn’t hurt us much.

That day I kept close watch on my older brother Pheng Huor. When he saw

I  was  looking  in  his  direction  he  lifted  his  gaze  and  looked  back  at  me

blankly. Whoever had stolen the cards had been a member of the family. But

even  if  my  brother  had  stolen  the  cards,  which  seemed  likely,  I  couldn’t

prove it.

The following day Papa drove up to the house in his Ford truck. He was

tired and irritated from having to behave so well.

My mother told him about the theft. He came angrily toward me. Perhaps

he felt that this was the sort of thing that went on when he was away and that

he needed to restore his authority.

He led me out back of the house and tied me hand and foot to a big piece

of lumber. Then he hit me on the shoulders with a wooden slat. He beat me

for an hour. When he was tired he went into the house, and then after a while

he came out again with the slat in his hand. My mother stood in the doorway

with a pitying look in her face, but she didn’t ask him to stop.I don’t know when he stopped beating me, because I lost consciousness.

When I came to, my feet and hands were still tied to the lumber, but I had

rolled over on my side. The sunlight was coming in at a low angle over the

rice fields. It was late afternoon. My mother and my favourite sister, Chhay

Thao, had come out of the house. They untied me, and they asked me what

they could do.

I lay on the ground without moving. They stood over me. Gradually I

collected my thoughts.

  ‘You didn’t trust me,’ I said slowly. ‘You treated me like an enemy of the

family. So don’t bother helping me.’

My mother knelt next to me.

  ‘Your will is still strong, eh?’ she said gently.

  They helped me upstairs and led me to my bed. I slept. But that evening I

woke up puzzled and angry. What had I done to deserve a beating like that? I

loved sports. I loved to get out of the house and play as often as I could. And

yes, I got in fights with other boys. If that made me bad, if they were going to

beat me for that, they could go ahead. That was their right. But I hadn’t stolen

anything. I didn’t need any money. There was nothing I wanted enough to

steal from my family. If they didn’t trust me, how could I live with them

under the same roof? How could I accept their authority?

  Early the next morning I ran away.


My first stop was Samrong Yong’s open-air market. It took up one corner of

the  village’s  only  road  intersection,  across  from  the  garrison  of  French-

backed troops and their tall stone watchtower.

The  market  was  the  centre  of  village  commerce  and  gossip.  Women

thronged the aisles, bargaining, pinching the neat piles of fresh vegetables

and fruits, peering critically at the basins of live, wiggling fish. Vendors sold

grilled chicken and rice confections wrapped in banana leaves. At restaurant

stalls, customers sat down to order bowls of soup prepared to their liking. I

couldn’t buy anything, though. No money. I talked with people I knew and

kept an eye out for my family.

In the early afternoon, an old passenger bus rolled into the lot next to the

market. The driver was a distant cousin, a man whose name was Kruy.
                                      2
  ‘Uncle, Uncle!’ I called to him.

  ‘Well! Ngor Haing, eh? What happened to you?’ Uncle Kruy said to me

from the driver’s window.I came around to the door of his bus. ‘My father beat me last night for

stealing playing cards from the store. But I didn’t steal them.’

  ‘Well, come along, then. I’ll give you a shirt to put over all those bruises.’

I got in, and off the bus went with a roar of its diesel engine as Kruy shifted

through the gears.

  Kruy and his wife lived south of my village, in central Takeo province. He

was the sole owner and operator of the rickety passenger bus. Every day he

made a trip from his village to Phnom Penh and back again along National

Route 2, stopping in the marketplace of every village and town along the

way.

At his house Kruy gave me a shirt and a straw hat. The next morning I

began working for him, collecting fares. It was unbelievably noisy inside the

bus: The pounding of the worn-out suspension on potholes had loosened all

the bolts and rivets. Passengers squeezed in next to one another on the hard

wooden benches until they were almost on each other’s laps. Just when it

seemed the bus could take no more, Kruy slowed and stopped for an old

wrinkled monk standing beside the road with his parasol. The monk climbed

up into the bus and headed for the seats in the back. The passengers shifted

over  to  accommodate  him  and,  amazingly,  there  was  plenty  of  room.

Everybody knew how important it was to treat monks with respect. It was

particularly important that women not touch them, even accidentally, because

monks had to be pure. And it would have been unthinkable to ask monks to

pay fares. They rode free. Even I knew that, on my first day.

  When he saw that I knew how to collect fares and count money, Kruy put

me on top of the bus, in the luggage rack, and made me responsible for cargo.

The luggage rack was piled higher than my head with packages and suitcases

and bicycles and furniture. There were wicker baskets with live pigs grunting

inside,  baskets  with  chickens  and  ducks  clucking  and  quacking,  tightly

woven baskets with live snakes and baskets with produce for the Phnom Penh

market. At every stop, I lowered cargo from the roof to the outstretched arms

of its owner on the ground, and reached down to pull the new cargo up.

I also helped with bribes. When Kruy came to government checkpoints, he

downshifted,  pulled  over  to  the  side  of  the  road  and  stopped,  while  I

scampered  down  the  ladder  on  the  back  of  the  bus,  adjusted  my  hat  and

walked into the sentry’s hut.

  Inside, the sentry pretended to scrutinize the bus for an overload, or for

communist guerrillas, or for whatever he might choose to think was wrongwith it. I took my hat off respectfully and placed it on the table next to his

clipboard, moved the hat so the riel notes in the hatband fell out and pushed

the money under the clipboard with my hand.

  ‘Your bus does not look so bad today,’ the sentry said in a bored voice.

‘All right, you may go on your way.’ Kruy was already revving the engine.

The wooden bar across the road lifted on its rope pulley, I ran for the bus and

hopped on the ladder on the back as Kruy drove on.

I loved my new life. I had no shoes, no change of clothing, and didn’t care.

As long as I was working on the bus I didn’t have to think about the beating

my father had given me. The problem was, the bus stopped in the Samrong

Yong market twice a day.

  When fate caught up with me I was lying on my back on the luggage rack,

watching the plume of dust rising behind. The engine noise changed as Kruy

downshifted. As the bus slowed I turned my head to look forward. The road

was so narrow that two vehicles could pass only if they pulled over to the

shoulder  and  drove  at  a  crawl.  A  vehicle  was  coming  from  the  other

direction.

It was a black and brown Ford truck.

  Uncle Kruy stopped the bus so that his window was directly opposite the

window of the truck. My father leaned across and spoke with him.

  ‘Your son is up on the luggage rack,’ I heard Kruy say.

‘Yes, I’d heard he was working for you. Tell him his mother wants him to

come home,’ my father’s voice said.

‘No problem,’ said Kruy. ‘No problem at all. Tell me, brother, did you

hear the king’s in Europe, negotiating again? Do you think he can get the

French out this time?’

‘I wish him luck,’ said my father. ‘If we have real peace maybe the times

will be good and I can get more customers.’

  ‘Well, if anyone can get those foreign bastards out the Royal Father can . .

.’

I buried myself deep in the cargo, next to a basket of ducks. I didn’t want

to talk to my father. He didn’t want to talk with me. All he really cared about

was his business, just like the rest of the grown-ups. Kruy too. It was all

indirect,  saying  that  my  mother  wanted  me  to  come  back.  Probably  they

needed my help at home.

The next morning I dropped off the bus when it stopped at my village and

walked warily toward my parents’ house. Luckily, the truck wasn’t there.When my mother saw me she began crying. She grabbed my wrist and she

wouldn’t let me go, even when I made a show of pulling away.

That wasn’t the end of the problems with my family. Not at all. But it was

the end of that stage of my rebellion. It was also the end of bartering in the

countryside or working for Kruy. Something marvellous had happened: just

by  negotiating,  without  firing  a  single  shot,  King  Sihanouk  obtained

Cambodia’s  independence  from  France.  Wild,  spontaneous  celebrations

broke out in the streets of my village. Now we Cambodians could govern

ourselves,  as  we  always  wanted  to  do.  Now  we  would  have  peace,  and

perhaps we could prosper.

One  of  Sihanouk’s  first  steps  as  sovereign  leader  was  to  increase  the

number of free public schools. I entered primary school, sitting with twelve-

and fourteen-year-old boys just learning how to read, like me. In that first

year I passed through four grades. The next year I passed through two more.

From there I went to a public secondary school in the provincial capital,

Takeo. In this school most of the classes were in French, because France still

culturally dominated the thin layer of Cambodian society that was educated

or rich.

I did well in this school, rising quickly to the category for gifted students.

One of the reasons was a teacher named Chea Huon, a thin, pale, stoop-

shouldered Chinese intellectual. Chea Huon believed in social equality. He

invited all the students who wanted extra tutoring to come to his house on

weekends for free classes. He was very kind to me. I didn’t know about his

politics  then,  and  I  never  imagined  the  strange  and  fateful  circumstances

under which we would meet later in life.

In the last year of this school we had to take exams. Those who passed

could begin the next stage of education, lycée, the equivalent of high school. I

studied and studied. I prayed to Buddha that I would get good marks. When I

passed, with high marks, there was only one thing to do.

I shaved my head. I shaved my eyebrows. For the few weeks required by

tradition,  I  became  a  monk.  In  the  induction  ceremony,  held  in  a wat or

temple outside Samrong Yong, my parents put their palms together in the

gesture of greeting and submission that we call sompeah. I nearly died of

nervousness – my parents, sompeahing me! But they were only saluting the

Buddha in me, the holiness that resided in me while I wore a monk’s robes.

Each morning I walked barefoot in a line of monks, keeping my eyes fixed

on the pavement, silently chanting prayers. Housewives put rice in the bowl Icarried in my shawl. The days were spent doing chores around the temple and

in prayer. We novice monks sat in the temple on the floor with our palms

together in the sompeah and our feet respectfully tucked to the side, because

pointing our feet is impolite in our culture. We prayed facing the altar, which

filled an entire wall. At the base of the altar were flowers and brass boat

figurines with votive candles and sticks of incense inside. Above were statues

of Buddha in ascending rows, gleaming softly in the candlelight. The largest

of the Buddhas sat highest up and farthest back, looking down with a tranquil

and mysterious expression.

  Buddha was not a god but a wise human being. He left a series of steps for

us to follow to lead a correct and moral life. He taught that after life comes

death, and after death comes rebirth and life again, on and on in a cycle. If we

follow Buddha’s guidance, the next life will always be better than the last.

Only by following his teachings can we ultimately escape the cycle of birth

and  suffering  and  rebirth,  which  we  Cambodians  call kama  and  other

countries call karma.

A wrinkled old monk made sure I understood the essential points. ‘What is

holy and divine,’ the monk explained, with his kindly smile, ‘is life itself, as

it  runs  through  your  family.  You  must  understand  this  clearly.  It  takes  a

father and a mother to bring a child into the world. They protect him when he

is young. It is the duty of the child to honour the parents and to protect them

when they grow old. You must also honour all the children of the family who

came into the world ahead of you. You must always serve and protect them.

Obey your elders, boy. If your family is happy, you will have a good life. If

all the families are happy, then the village will be happy. If all the villages are

happy, then the land will be strong and content.’

I believe what the old monk taught me. And everything he said came true,

only in reverse. My family was unhappy, my village was unhappy, and so

was  the  country.  And  now  I  look  back  at  it  all  and  think  about  the

connections, and wonder whether I myself was partly to blame.                                            2



                                      Education


 




With the country at peace, my father began to make more money from his

trucking business and from the dry-goods store. In 1964 he bought a lumber

mill  located  between  Samrong  Yong  and  Phnom  Penh,  just  off  National

Route 2. By Cambodian standards the mill was technologically advanced –

that is, the saw was driven by a motor rather than pulled by hand. But the

motor, which had been taken out of a jeep, still had a manual crank starter.

The first time I tried to start the engine the crank went around for a couple

of rotations until it built up compression. Then it kicked back suddenly in the

other direction, nearly breaking my wrist. In a rage, I pulled the crank off and

threw it at the engine as hard as I could. Water spurted from the radiator. My

mother’s dog, a miniature poodle, barked and yipped behind me. I turned

around and kicked the dog, which sailed off in the air. My father saw the

whole thing. He didn’t say a word. He just turned his back on me and sighed,

shaking his head as he sadly walked away.

I had been a monk but had not yet learned the monks’ self-control.

The mill was a success from the time my father took it over. Soon he had

added trucks to haul the logs to his mill. He hired men to cut trees for him in

distant forests. He bought a place to live near the mill so he could spend most

of  his  time  working.  Papa  knew  exactly  what  he  wanted,  which  was  to

become  a  rich  merchant,  to  have  his  sons  working  for  him,  and  to  have

grandsons sitting on his knees when he grew old. He gave generously to

charities, like the temples and the Chinese protective association, because it

was expected of him, but his view of the world was fixed and narrow.One of the things my father could not do was read and write Khmer, the

native language of Cambodia, though he spoke it fluently. My older brother

Pheng Huor could read and write Khmer but not well. Neither of them knew

French. Most of the government documents were in both Khmer and French.

On weekends I bicycled the five miles from Phnom Penh to the mill to help

with the paperwork.

It was my duty to work for my family, but I never felt comfortable doing it.

Early on, I found that Pheng Huor was tampering with the mill accounts and

putting the money in his own pockets. He also signed some of the mill’s

assets over to his own name, without telling my father. There was no easy

way for me to solve this problem, not when I was already known as the

family troublemaker. On one hand, my father was the head of the family, the

ruler. My brother shouldn’t have cheated him. On the other hand, I also had

to defer to my brother, because he was older than me. He worked hard at the

mill and was nearly as essential to its success as my father.

Two French words, honneur and bonheur, express what is important to

families like mine. Though my brother was violating the honneur or honour,

at least he was doing it quietly. For me to have pointed it out would result in

the  family  losing  its bonheur,  its  happiness  or  good-hearted  feeling.

Cambodians will do almost anything to keep the appearances of bonheur. We

try to stay polite even when we do not feel like being polite, because it is

easier that way. To be in conflict forces us to treat one another as enemies,

and then we lose control.

In the year 1968, the mill was prospering but my standing with the family

was particularly low. I had failed an exam which, if I had passed, would have

enabled me to go on to university. My father wanted me to leave school and

work for him full time as a clerk, but my mother had persuaded him to allow

me to continue my studies. So I was retaking the year’s courses that led up to

the exam. When I parked my bicycle outside the mill on a Saturday morning

and walked in, he turned his back on me and watched out of the corner of his

eye as I walked to my brother’s office.

  ‘How’s  the  business  going,  brother?’  I  asked,  dumping  my  satchel  of

schoolbooks in the corner.

‘We make a little money, in spite of the government,’ Pheng Huor said

gloomily. ‘But the bastards are getting greedier. Here, look at these papers

and tell me what they mean.’ I picked up the sheaf of papers on his desk.

They were written both in the Roman letters of French and in the ornate,looping letters of the Cambodian alphabet, with no spaces between the words.

I scanned them quickly.

  ‘You have solved the problem of the government foresters, I notice.’ On

the form listing the number of logs that my father’s trucks carried was a

figure far lower than the actual one.

  ‘“Bonjour, mon ami,” ’ my brother said sarcastically, quoting one of the

few French phrases he knew. Bonjour had two meanings. Literally it was a

greeting  like  ‘hello’,  but  the  French  practice  of  shaking  hands  offered  a

chance to pass folded money from one palm to another. In Cambodian slang,

bonjour  meant  graft.  My  brother  said,  ‘The  forester  does  not  have  his

Mercedes yet, but every time I see him he wears more gold.’

I read through the receipts and the taxation forms. How boring. What a

waste of time. After I filled in the forms they would lie unread, tied up in

bundles with string, in offices whose clerks moved in slow motion under

slowly  rotating  ceiling  fans.  Government  regulations  had  little  effect  on

businesses  like  ours.  The  officials  did  not  make  their  living  from  their

salaries. They made it from bribes. It was an age-old system: those in power

took from those who weren’t. As long as the officials did not take too much,

there was no protest. But it made me angry just the same. For most of the

week I lived in a world of idealistic students. We were young and believed in

progress and honesty and change. We were also Buddhist, and the tradition of

bonjour  conflicted  with  an  even  deeper  and  older  tradition  of  moral

behaviour.

I said, ‘If the government lowered its taxes it would be easier to pay the

full amount. Then nobody would have to cheat.’

  ‘You think so?’ said my brother. ‘The government loves to tax and tax.

That’s the problem. Look,’ he said, pointing at a map of Cambodia. ‘There’s

a new military checkpoint here and another one here. Bonjour and bonjour.

Worse, the soldiers just bought motorcycles. This week they started going

after the logging truck with their motorcycles, after the driver had already

stopped at the checkpoints. The soldiers wanted more money.’ Impatiently,

he returned to the table and flicked his fingers across his abacus. The wooden

beads made a rapid clacking sound.

  ‘Maybe we shouldn’t give it to them,’ I said, reading through the forms.

‘What do you mean?’

  ‘Well, the logging truck is new and powerful. Tell the driver to pay at the

checkpoints  but  to  head  the  soldiers  off  when  they  come  after  him  onmotorcycles. If the motorcycles try to pass him on the left, he veers to the

left. If they try to pass him on the right, he veers to the right. They’ll never

stop him.’

‘I think that’s a terrible idea,’ said my brother gloomily. ‘Come, fill out

these papers so we can finish here and go back to Samrong Yong.’ At the end

of work on Saturdays we always returned to our native village, which was

still our family’s home.

I went back to work with a sigh.

A week passed. The next Saturday morning I rode my bicycle into the mill

yard again. The logging truck was there, dust coating the cab and a load of

logs stacked on the back. So were several unmarked automobiles belonging

to the judicial police. The policemen had gotten out of the cars with pistols in

their  holsters.  They  had  knocked  at  the  office  door.  My  father  was  just

opening the door.

One of the policemen said loudly that the logging truck hadn’t stopped on

the road when the soldiers tried to pull it over. He paused for effect before

telling my father the reason. ‘Your driver was afraid to stop because he was

carrying communist literature. You have been distributing pamphlets for the

North Vietnamese!’

In  1954,  after  a  fierce  war,  France  withdrew  from  its  former  colony

Vietnam, which split into two countries, a communist North Vietnam with its

capital  at  Hanoi,  and  a  noncommunist  South  Vietnam  with  its  capital  at

Saigon. In the early 1960s, the North Vietnamese began trying to take over

the South militarily. The Americans sent in troops to protect South Vietnam,

and later more and more troops, and by 1968 war was again at its height.

Officially Cambodia was neutral, but neutrality was difficult to keep because

the war was next door and many Cambodian officials were dishonest.

The police were very clever. Instead of being defensive about collecting

illegal bribes, they accused my family of committing crimes against the state.

The charge was hard to disprove even though it wasn’t true. My father’s

logging  sites  were  near  the  Cambodia-South  Vietnam  border.  The  North

Vietnamese communists had supply routes through the area. And communist

sympathizers occasionally distributed their literature to the common people. I

even  knew  a  communist  myself.  The  judicial  police  had  arrested  my  ex-

teacher Chea Huon for subversive activities. I had visited him in jail. But

until then I hadn’t known he was communist. I didn’t have any communist

sympathies and neither did my father or brother. They were businessmen. Allthey cared about was making money.

The police interrogated my father and then Pheng Huor. My father saw me

standing around, watching and listening. He told me to go away. I answered

that I wanted to stay around to watch in case the police planted communist

pamphlets and pretended to find them.

A policeman overheard me. ‘So you think we are trying to trick you, eh?’

he said. He took me outside and threw me into one of the police cars. They

put my brother in another car and the truck driver in a third so we couldn’t

talk to each other and agree on a story. By then they were going through the

mill  and  through  my  father’s  house,  scattering  equipment  and  upending

furniture.

The police drove the three of us to their headquarters in Phnom Penh. They

put us in separate cells. Then they began to beat me to try to get me to

‘confess’.

I should explain that Cambodian society has a minor tradition of torture. In

the early 1950s, when my father was kidnapped, the government soldiers tied

him to a ladder, feet up and head down, and poured anchovy sauce into his

nostrils. It was extremely unpleasant for my father, but he didn’t suffer any

permanent harm. In Phnom Penh, in the late 1960s, the police put my hand in

a vice and kept tightening it as they questioned me, but they didn’t actually

try to crush my hand. When the vice didn’t work, because I wouldn’t admit to

anything, they put me in a rice sack and hit me with sticks, but not very hard.

As usual, the real reason for the torture was to raise the asking price for my

release.

On the third evening, my parents bought my way out. The truck driver had

already ‘confessed’ to distributing the communist leaflets. To get my older

brother out they had retained a prominent lawyer friend of Sihanouk’s. Day

after day, my father went to the lawyer to pressure for my brother’s release.

Eventually  the  lawyer,  whose  name  was  Penn  Nouth,  managed  to  get  an

audience  with  Sihanouk,  and  Sihanouk,  who  had  no  part  in  the  scheme,

issued a proclamation that my family was innocent. In this way my brother

obtained his freedom.

My father was discouraged. He had paid Penn Nouth 1.2 million riels,

which was then worth about $85,700 US. Presumably Penn Nouth had kept

some of the money for himself and spread the rest around to various officials,

including the secret police and Sihanouk’s hangers-on. Sihanouk himself was

not especially corrupt, but he did very little to stop corruption and seldompunished those who were caught. So we could not expect justice from the

government.

But at least the family was together again. After my brother and I were

released, Papa wanted more than ever to have us living and working together

as a unit. He told me gruffly that I ought to get married and come home. It

would be better, he said, if I worked full time for the family business.

I  answered  carefully.  ‘Papa,’  I  said,  ‘I  don’t  have  much  expertise  in

business. Perhaps it would be better if I had more schooling first.’

I didn’t tell him my real thoughts. I hated business. I didn’t like taking

orders from bosses or giving orders to employees. Above all, I didn’t want to

have to bribe government officials all my life. If you gave them enough they

just wanted more. If you didn’t give them enough they put you in jail and

beat you.

The eyebrows arched on my father’s plump face. ‘You want to stay in

school?’ he asked incredulously. He didn’t say what he thought either, but I

knew. Papa thought the longer students stay in school, the greater fools they

become. And in a way he was right. I’d suggested that the truck driver speed

past soldiers to avoid paying a few riels, and look what it had cost us.

I told my father that I’d like to study medicine at the university.

  ‘What? Seven more years before you can make any money?’ He turned

away, unwilling to look in my direction. ‘You expect me to pay for you to

study while the rest of us are working?’

He sent me off and we did not discuss it anymore. I felt terrible. Somehow

things were always going wrong and I was always getting the blame. And yet

of all eight children in the family, except perhaps for my sister Chhay Thao,

who was very religious, I was the one with the best intentions. Of five sons, I

was the one who cared most about living honestly, not cheating anybody, and

not being cheated in return. I had never stolen anything up to that point,

unlike Pheng Huor.

My mother talked to my father and got him to bend his views, against his

instinct. Over the next few years my father gave Pheng Huor money to give

to me for school. It was never as much as I needed. Even so, Pheng Huor, my

rival, gave it to me reluctantly, like a rich man giving a gift to a peasant who

does not really deserve it.


So I continued to live in Phnom Penh, where I had gone to lycée. It was a city

of wide boulevards, overlooking the juncture of the Mekong River and theTonle Sap River, which came together like a letter ‘X’ and separated again on
                                                                                          3
their slow, lazy course toward South Vietnam and the South China Sea.

During the dry season the rivers shrunk to narrow channels at the bottom of

their banks. In the wet season the water level rose and grew, until at the peak

of the floods the water from the Mekong reversed course and actually flowed

up the Tonle Sap River, filling the basin of the nation’s great freshwater lake,

Tonle Sap.

I  lived  in  a  temple  compound,  under  a  monk’s  quarters  built  on  stilts.

There was something rootless about the arrangement, but it cost me little and

I liked it. Everything about it struck me as natural and appropriate, from the

discipline  of  sweeping  the  courtyards,  to  the  sight  of  the  monk’s  robes

hanging on clotheslines in a dozen different shades of yellow and orange, to

the  wat  itself,  with  its  multicoloured  tile  roofs  and  the  curving  golden

ornaments protruding from the peaks like storks’ necks. Most of all I loved

the  freedom,  because  the  monks  let  me  alone.  Indirectly,  with  only  an

occasional word of advice, they helped me learn calmness. With my temper

under better control it was easier to study.

I  passed  my  exam  the  second  time  around  and  entered  the  medical

programme at the national university. The first year was premedical, with

courses in biology, physics, chemistry and other basic sciences. The next year

was the beginning of medical school itself, six years of clinical work, lectures

and labs. All the classes were in French. The curriculum followed the French

model, with one important difference: Because of the shortage of doctors in

Cambodia, we medical students were allowed to practise before we got our

degrees. So within a few years I would be able to get a part-time medical job

to  support  myself.  The  only  problem  was  getting  enough  money  in  the

meantime.

I decided to teach. By then I had a thorough grasp of the subjects on the

various  exams.  I  became  a  remedial  science  teacher  at  several  lycées,

squeezing the class time into my busy schedule, racing through the quiet

avenues on my bicycle.

I also became a tutor at private homes. A friend of mine from lycée, a girl

named Kam Sunary, had two younger sisters who were having trouble with

their studies. She arranged for me to teach them.

I arrived at the Kam residence, across an alley from a large temple called

Wat Langka, and parked my bicycle. It was early evening. The house was set

back from the street, behind a fenced enclosure holding several small dogs.Over the decades the house had settled unevenly on its foundations. The red-

tile roof had become weathered and discoloured. No bonjour here.

Mr Kam, a low-paid veterinarian in the government service, came to the

door. I greeted him respectfully and he showed me to a small room down a

side corridor. There was a blackboard on one wall. The two younger Kam

girls were sitting at a table. At another table was another girl, a cousin, who

had come to Phnom Penh from her home in Kampot Province.

I stepped to the blackboard and without any of the usual courtesies began

asking the girls why they were having trouble with their exams. I paced back

and  forth,  trying  to  discover  how  much  or  little  they  knew,  asking  one

question after another. I had to be impartial and correct with them – the door

to the hallway was open, and everything we said could be heard throughout

the house. But I also didn’t want to be excessively polite as Cambodians

often are, hiding excuses behind the mask of politeness, allowing failure for

the sake of keeping face.

The  girls  didn’t  know  much  about  the  sciences.  The  Kam  sisters,  in

particular, hadn’t grasped the concept of chemical valences. So I stepped to

the  blackboard,  drew  a  table  of  the  elements,  and  began  explaining  how

chemicals combine. Three evenings a week it went like this, reviewing basic

concepts, steadily making progress. I began looking forward to these sessions

more than to my other classes. There was always a glass of tea waiting when

I arrived, placed there by the cousin from Kampot. Her name was Chang My

Huoy:  Chang,  her  family  name;  ‘My’  meaning  beautiful;  and  ‘Huoy’

meaning  flower  in  Teochiew,  the  Chinese  dialect  most  widely  spoken  in

Cambodia, the same dialect spoken by my family.

  Once I started teaching those girls I couldn’t change my behaviour. I was

strict with them. They were polite to me. They called me luk, a form of

address with a meaning like ‘sir’ or the French monsieur. All the same, while

lecturing them I sometimes felt self-conscious, like a man who accidentally

sees his reflection in a mirror as he is walking down the street. Not much to

look at, I thought. Acne scars on my face. Glasses. Sneakers. Unfashionable

haircut. I looked like what I was, an unpolished bachelor who lived in a

temple.

‘So if you put carbon, hydrogen and oxygen together to make sugar, how

will  they  combine?’  I  heard  myself  saying.  I  called  on  the  girls  for  the

answer. One of the Kam girls looked in her notes in confusion. The other had

the wrong answer.  Chang My Huoy raised her eyes directly to me and said in her quiet voice,

‘It would be CH0, luk teacher, for sugars like glucose and sucrose.
                122211

  ‘Correct,’ I said, ‘though those three elements also combine with others to

form an entire class of organic compounds, the carbohydrates. Most edible

plants, like cabbages and yams, are composed of carbohydrates along with

proteins and minerals. If you burn these vegetables, the same thing happens

as when you burn sugar. You drive off the oxygen and hydrogen, and what is

left is carbon.’ I found myself babbling on like that without quite knowing

why. Who cared about chemistry? I didn’t. They didn’t care either. I wished

there were a way to take better advantage of being in a room with three

attractive young women. I had learned something about women in Phnom

Penh, though probably not enough.

Of these three in the class, My Huoy was the most conscientious. She was

also the most shy. She never said an extra word, but she phrased what she

said  precisely,  while  her  two  cousins  whispered  and  giggled.  She  wore

Chinese-style  pajamas.  Ordinary  house  clothes.  Her  pajamas  –  Huoy’s,  I

mean-were white with a tiny pink floral pattern. Though her cousins were

pretty,  Huoy,  with  her  light,  flawless  skin  and  large,  round  eyes,  had

something special about her, a grace and gentleness, and something else I

couldn’t put a name to, though I tried to, late at night, unable to sleep, in my

room under the monk’s quarters. During the break halfway through the class,

she asked if I wanted more tea, and at the end of class she brought oranges

for all of us from the kitchen, while her cousins chattered. The other girls

were no match for her.

The classes came to an end as the exams approached. Chang My Huoy was

going to return to Kampot. After the last class I lingered for a few minutes in

the doorway, holding the pay envelope in my hand. The family had treated

me well. I wasn’t in a hurry to go. In Phnom Penh, I had nobody to go to.

At  last  I  pedalled  off  through  the  warm,  quiet  streets.  A  Honda  90

motorcycle passed me, pulling a trailer with a cargo of firewood, the noise of

the sputtering engine gradually trailing off in the distance. There were few

cars. I stopped by a roadside vendor, bought a piece of peeled sugar cane and

sat down to chew it.

  From  a  nearby  restaurant  came  the  shouting  of  a  high-pitched  and

unmistakable voice. It was the Royal Father, Sihanouk, giving a speech on

the  radio.  He  was  a  familiar  presence.  Several  times  a  week  he  took  the

microphone of the government radio and talked about whatever was on hismind. Once he started he went on excitedly for hours about the honour and

the role of the country.

  Tonight the Royal Father was telling us about the dangers of the war in

Vietnam.  He  said  Cambodia  mustn’t  get  caught  between  the  American

imperialists  and  the  Vietnamese  communists.  Cambodia  must  remain

politically neutral, he said, an island of peace and prosperity. An ‘island of

peace’ – that’s what he always called it.

  Cambodia was the envy of its neighbours, he went on, a highly advanced

country. Famous throughout the world. We Cambodians were too intelligent

to get involved in the Vietnam war. We were a superior race, better than the

Vietnamese and the Thais. After all, he shouted, we were the descendants of

the builders of the mighty Angkor Wat, the most beautiful monument in the

ancient world! We were fortunate to live in such a marvellous country, one of

the most enlightened and progressive countries in all Asia!

All of a sudden in the middle of his speech the streetlights went out. The

light bulbs inside houses and the strings of coloured bulbs decorating the

restaurants went out too, all at the same time. Another power failure. They

happened all the time, and we were used to them. Because of the unreliable

power, most radios were battery run, and the radio station generated its own

electrical supply. So the Royal Father’s voice continued without a break.

He went on shouting in the darkness, but I stopped paying attention. Soon

the  dim  yellow  glow  of  lanterns  and  candles  appeared  in  the  houses.  A

sputtering  of  motors  gave  way  to  a  steady  throb  as  the  large  restaurants

started their private generators, and their coloured lights shone once again.

If the Royal Father said Cambodia was an advanced country, I supposed he

was right. If he said we were lucky to be Cambodian, he was undoubtedly

right about that too. But tonight the issues of national pride seemed remote

and unimportant. I hadn’t said an extra word to Chang My Huoy. She hadn’t

said an extra word to me. When she wore her hair up, it lay coiled over the

nape of her neck. When she let her hair down, it fell thick and soft to her

waist.

We had been teacher and pupil. Very correct.                                            3



                              Romance and Coup


 




It was a year before I saw her again, and then only by coincidence. She was

walking along the waterfront by the confluence of the rivers with an armful

of books. ‘Hello, luk teacher,’ she said shyly, her face lighting up with a

smile. I got off my bicycle and walked beside her.

In her home province, Huoy had passed the exam for which I had tutored

her. Then she moved back to Phnom Penh to begin training to become a

teacher herself. Just now she was returning from a meeting in the Chadomukh

conference hall near the Royal Palace. She said maybe I could help her with

an assignment, since I was in medical school. She was supposed to make

some drawings of human anatomy to use as teaching aids. I said I would help

her. Did she have drawing paper? She said she did, in the apartment she

shared with her mother.

  When we got outside her house, I asked if her mother would mind if I

came upstairs. Huoy hesitated. For a man to visit a woman in her house, even

for the most innocent reason, had implications. She looked away from me for

perhaps half a minute, staring across the street. I watched her closely. Finally

she said she would introduce me to her mother.

We climbed up the stairs to the third floor and into their tiny apartment.

The mother and daughter had the same light Chinese complexion and large

round Khmer eyes. Their surname, Chang, was Chinese. I wondered whether

to bow my head to Huoy’s mother in Chinese style or sompeah. I took a

chance and raised my palms together in the sompeah. She did the same to me,

and I knew they were like me, a mixture of both races and both cultures.  From a glance at their apartment it was clear they were poor. They had a

couple of chairs, a dining table, one bed for both of them and a small side

table with a statue of Buddha. That was all their furniture. On the wall hung a

photograph  of  Angkor  Wat,  the  pride  of  the  nation,  built  in  the  twelfth

century,  its  enormous  stone  corncob-like  towers  rising  in  the  air.  Very

Cambodian. The apartment was very clean. Not just clean but well cared for

and comfortable. We began a peaceful and gentle conversation.

An hour passed before I knew it. Huoy’s mother invited me to stay for

dinner. With classes to teach that evening, the answer had to be no, but she

asked me to come back when I could, and I accepted for a few evenings later.

On my way out Huoy reminded me about the anatomical drawings, which I

had forgotten about completely.

  When I came back I was struck once again by how simple and yet how

pleasant the apartment was. There were fresh flowers on the dining table and

orchids  in  a  vase  next  to  the  statue  of  Buddha.  Huoy’s  mother,  whom  I

politely  called  ‘Older  Aunt,’  was  even  more  shy  than  her  daughter.  She

excused herself so that we two young people could eat together. She served

stir-fried beef with ginger, snow peas with water chestnuts and several other

dishes  to  go  with  the  rice.  After  dinner  Huoy  and  I  practised  copying

drawings  from  an  anatomy  textbook.  We  didn’t  flirt.  That  is,  there  was

nothing we said or did that we couldn’t have claimed was perfectly innocent,

if we had needed to. But we established an unspoken understanding.

I came back the next evening, and the next evening and the next. Before

long I was a regular presence in their apartment. It was the most natural thing,

and yet it surprised me. Nothing like it had ever happened to me before. My

previous relationships with girls were the kind best not described in public.

My friendships with men were based on sports, jokes and quarrels. I was a

raw young man. Yet here were two very shy and gentle women who put me

on my best behaviour.

It  was  hard  to  understand.  I  was  hotheaded  and  stubborn,  the  kind  of

person who never changed his mind once he got in an argument, even if he

was wrong.

  Perhaps the explanation lies in a game that children play in Cambodia; it is

played around the world. The two opposing children make their hands into

the shape of scissors, paper or rock and show the shapes at the same time to

see who wins. Scissors defeats paper, rock defeats scissors and paper defeats

rock. I was a tough guy, a rock. My father was another rock. Two rockscannot defeat each other. My father and I were always battling and neither of

us could win. But these two women were soft. They wrapped and cushioned

me until hitting had no effect. The rock could not hurt anyone. Sometimes

life is like that child’s game. Sometimes soft and gentle people win.

It took me months to work up the courage for the next stage, which was

inviting the two of them to a movie. When I finally asked, Huoy’s mother

excused herself and sent Huoy and me off together. Huoy’s mother was a

widow. A burglar had killed her husband shortly after Huoy was born. Easily

frightened and withdrawn from society, she had sheltered Huoy, her only

child, but now that Huoy was a young woman her mother wanted her to see

something of the world.

  Huoy and I had tea in the cafe on the ground floor of her building. We

strolled through the smooth evening air down the boulevard to the Angkor

Theatre. We saw a sentimental love story filmed in Chinese with a Khmer

sound track dubbed in. I didn’t touch her.

We  had  begun  our  romance.  We  moved  slowly,  with  exquisite  and

agonizing decorum. Both of us were shy. If we had anything important to

say, we didn’t say it. We sent messages by allowing our glances to linger, and

by sprinkling our conversations with clues for the other person to interpret for

hidden significance.

In  Cambodia  romance  is  always  like  that.  In  our  traditional romvong

dance, men and women move around each other without touching, gracefully

waving  their  hands  in  the  air  to  the  music.  Men  and  women  don’t

demonstrate their affection in public. Even if Huoy and I saw one another

every day, we couldn’t have held hands on her street without shocking her

neighbours and giving rise to sensational gossip.

  Most Asian societies are chaste and prudish in their public behaviour. The

women don’t provoke men as much as they do in the West. In Phnom Penh

the women wore blouses with ruffles on the front; they weren’t trying to

show off their breasts. But they could dress modestly and still be attractive. A

sarong, wrapped around the waist and covering the legs down to the ankles,

or a sampot, which is a fancier version of a sarong, shows how a woman is

built. Huoy wore a sampot most days. I was a normal, healthy young male. I

couldn’t  help  sneaking  glances  at  her,  imagining  what  she  looked  like

underneath.

Of course, other men watched Huoy too, and that was the problem. When

she walked along the sidewalk by herself, calmly and slowly in the afternoonheat, there was something about her that would have made any sane man

want to walk up to her and start a conversation. I began to watch her, from far

away, just in case.

I discovered that Huoy did not talk to any other man regularly; she dropped

her eyes and found a polite but determined way to walk on alone. But I was

young and impatient and I needed to know what was in her heart. I was also

tired of behaving well. So perhaps six months after going to her apartment for

the first time, we had our first quarrel. I accused her of walking home with

another man, even though she hadn’t. I itemized the details of his appearance,

the colour of his shirt and trousers, his glasses. Huoy said it wasn’t true but I

said I knew it was. ‘Is he your boyfriend, or what?’ I said sarcastically. ‘If he

is, congratulations. He is very handsome. If you get married to him, it will be

very good. Congratulations.’

  Huoy began crying. She had grown up without the teasing and arguing of

brothers and sisters, and she had no defenses against the kind of game I was

playing. She was very soft. Tears came to her eyes quicker than anyone I

have ever known.

I said, ‘Okay, tonight I have to go teach a class, so I won’t be back.’ I

stayed away that evening and the two following.

On the third day Huoy went to the hospital to see me. She arrived at nine in

the morning. I was polite to her but let her know by my expression that I was

angry and jealous. I let her wait. At ten I summoned her to my tiny office.

She was crying again.

‘My  mother  has  invited  you  to  the  house  tonight,’  said  Huoy.  ‘She

wonders why you haven’t come the last few nights.’ It was Cambodian style

to be indirect like that, using other people’s causes to advance our own.

I  answered,  ‘Why  aren’t  you  in  class  today?’  Huoy  was  still  taking

university classes to get her teaching degree.

‘I skipped classes today because I wanted to talk to you. Why weren’t you

at my house?’

‘I wanted to go but I was busy. You know, with the patients and all the

work at the hospital and the lectures. Please excuse me, I have a lot to do.’

  Huoy  held  up  her  hand  as  if  taking  an  oath.  ‘Believe  me.  I  have  no

boyfriend.’

I said, ‘I believe it.’

‘If you believe it why don’t you go to my house? Come tonight. Don’t let

my mother be sad.’  When I went to her apartment that night the food was ready on the table.

Huoy gave me a hurt smile. I pretended that everything was normal. When

Huoy’s mother asked me why I had stayed away, I said I had been busy. She

pretended to believe me but she gave me a wise, sidelong look.

  She left the two of us to eat together and went into the kitchen as usual.

Huoy and I sat down and began to eat. I kept my eyes on the food, not

meeting Huoy’s gaze.

We had rice with the usual side dishes. As always, excellent home-style

Cambodian cooking.

  Halfway through the meal, Huoy said, ‘Sweet, are you still angry at me?’

I helped myself to another piece of fish and put it on my plate next to the

rice.

‘No,’ I said.

  ‘Then please, look at me.’

‘I know what you look like.’ I was still looking at the plate.

  ‘Don’t hurt me,’ she said. I still looked down at the plate.

  Startled, I felt the touch of her fingers on my cheek. I glanced at her arm

reaching across the table and then into her enormous brown eyes. ‘No, I

wouldn’t hurt you,’ I said nervously. ‘I just asked you – ‘

  ‘Hush,’ she said, and the gaze that answered mine held a depth of sadness

and wisdom that I had never seen in anyone before. ‘Don’t bring back bad

memories.’

I reached over to stroke her hair.

  Huoy had shown she cared for me. The rock had tried to work loose, but

the paper wrapped it even tighter than before.

  She went to her classes, I went to medical school and we saw each other in

the evenings. We were heading on converging courses, ones that in normal

times would bring us eventually to marriage. Engrossed in our daily lives, we

could not imagine that an event was about to happen that would set off a

chain reaction, push Cambodia into tragedy and affect us to the core of our

beings.


In early March 1970 Cambodia was still an island of peace. Politically it was

neutral. But all around it was war, or the equipment of war. To the east and

southeast  was  South  Vietnam,  where  the  North  Vietnamese  and  the

Americans were mired in a struggle that neither seemed able to win. To the

north  was  Laos,  mountainous  and  landlocked,  where  the  communists  androyalists waged a smaller war backed by the same outside powers. To the

west and northwest was Thailand, where the Americans based B-52s and

other warplanes. In the middle of all this was Cambodia, a small country,

roughly the size of the state of Washington or one third the size of France.

By  Western  standards  Cambodia  was  poor  and  primitive.  Most  of  our

people were peasants living off the land. We waited passively for the rains to

fill up our rice paddies. We caught tiny fish and foraged for wild foods. Even

our wealthiest class, made up of merchants and corrupt government officials

in Phnom Penh, wasn’t really rich. For all its charm, for all its flower beds

and  wide  boulevards,  Phnom  Penh  was  a  quiet  place  where  not  much

happened beyond the morning bustle in the markets and the long lunchtime

siestas. And yet how lucky we were, compared to our neighbours! Cambodia

was at peace. Nobody had to live in ‘strategic hamlets’ surrounded by barbed

wire. We could live where we wanted and do what we wanted. Few were

oppressed, beyond the level of oppression and corruption normal for Asian

societies. Life ran on in its age-old patterns. In the midmorning, the monks

made their silent rounds collecting alms. In the middle of the day, the farmers

came in from their fields to rest in the shade under their houses, and old

women chewed betel nut and wove their own cloth on looms. At night the

villages resounded with the music of homemade instruments and drums.

To me and the people I knew, the war seemed far away. Never mind that

the South Vietnamese border was only a few hours’ drive from Phnom Penh.

We were used to that. Never mind that the Vietnamese communists had a

network of hidden roads, the Ho Chi Minh Trail, along the Cambodia-South

Vietnam border. We were vaguely aware of it, but our press didn’t remind us

of it often. We had had no idea at all that communist supplies were arriving

in  the  ocean  port  of  Sihanoukville,  that  the  Americans  had  been  sending

Special Forces teams across the South Vietnamese border or that US B-52s

had been dropping bombs in Cambodia for nearly a year. Nobody told us

that. Most Cambodians were like me. We were from villages. Our horizons

were bounded by rice fields and trees.

We  had  been  at  peace  because  of  one  man,  Norodom  Sihanouk.  The

French  appointed  him  king  when  he  was  a  schoolboy,  expecting  that  he

would  be  easy  to  control,  but  Sihanouk  outmanoeuvred  them,  just  as  he

outmanoeuvred everyone else. After negotiating our independence in 1953,

by hinting at revolution if France refused, Sihanouk abdicated as king and ran

for election. He won by a huge margin and continued to be the country’sleader. Domestically he kept the support of the dark-skinned ethnic Khmers,

who made up the majority of the population, by appealing to their racial pride

and by telling everyone over and over how lucky we were to be Cambodians,

descendants of the ancient empire at Angkor. But he also protected the rights

of the light-skinned minorities, the ethnic Vietnamese and Chinese. In foreign

policy  he  played  the  communist  powers  against  the  Western  powers,

accepting aid from all of them until 1965, when he cut ties with the United

States after what he felt was an insult to his pride. He leaned to the left after

that, but officially he kept Cambodia neutral and nonaligned. The American

government didn’t like him because he wouldn’t let US troops come openly

into Cambodia to fight the North Vietnamese.

In Cambodia, Sihanouk was immensely popular. We barely noticed his

faults, like allowing corruption to go unpunished, and keeping incompetent

people in the government. Few of us were educated enough to care. When he

spoke to us in his loud, high-pitched voice, shouting and gesturing wildly,

eyes bulging with excitement, we listened with respect.

  Sihanouk loved drama of every kind. He made movies starring himself. He

supported the Royal Ballet; the ballerinas were his concubines. He held huge

rallies near his palace, where he heard the complaints of the common people,

then called the guilty government officials in and scolded them on the spot.

And every year he held a ceremony at the place where the Mekong and the

Tonle Sap rivers join and then separate again. At the precise moment when

the current reversed and the water began to flow uphill toward Tonle Sap

lake,  he  blessed  the  waters,  which  made  the  water’s  reversal  seem  like

something he had caused magically (though, of course, the moon’s tidal pull

on the rainy-season floods made it happen). Foreigners called him ‘Prince’

Sihanouk, because he had officially abdicated, but we still called him ‘King.’

Many peasants believed he was a god.

The  trouble  began  on  March  11,  1970,  when  Sihanouk  was  out  of  the

country and the press was playing up the North Vietnamese sanctuaries along

the eastern border. I was attending a lecture when the protest march started.

When I caught up to it later, rioting was under way. Young lycée students

were throwing papers, filing cabinets, desks and chairs out of the second

floor of the North Vietnamese embassy. They tossed bundles of currency on

the street below. They lowered the North Vietnamese flag from its flagpole

and  burned  it.  They  did  the  same  at  the  embassy  of  the  Provisional

Revolutionary  Government  of  South  Vietnam,  or  Viet  Cong,  which  waslocated nearby. ‘Vietnamese stay out of Cambodia!’ the students shouted.

‘Don’t invade Cambodia again!’

The riot had less to do with contemporary politics than with an old, old

racial  grudge  against  the  Vietnamese.  Cambodia  and  Vietnam  had  fought

many wars over the centuries. We Cambodians remembered our defeats and

waited for revenge – even those of us who were not ‘pure’ Khmer but a

mixture  of  Chinese  and  Khmer.  We  all  knew  the  legend  of  the  cooking

stones. According to the legend, Vietnamese soldiers took three Cambodians

captive long ago and buried them alive up to their necks with just their heads

sticking out of the ground. Then the Vietnamese made a fire between the

heads and set a kettle on top of the heads as cookstones. Whether this had

actually happened or not, most Cambodians believed it as fact. And in this

riot,  the  resentment  against  Vietnamese  of  all  kinds,  communist  and

noncommunist,  from  the  North  and  from  the  South,  and  even  against

Cambodians of Vietnamese descent, got rolled into one.

The  riot  put  Phnom  Penh  in  an  uproar.  Here  was  the  capital  of  a

supposedly  neutral  country  attacking  the  embassies  of  its  neighbours.

Sihanouk cabled from Paris to try to stop it. He knew what people like me

didn’t – that the rioters, for all their deep feelings, had been manipulated by

hidden organizers like puppets on strings. But in his absence officials of his

government  continued  to  push  the  North  Vietnamese.  The  two  highest-

ranking officials were Sihanouk’s royal rival, Prince Sisowath Sirik Matak,

and General Lon Nol, who was prime minister and also minister of defence

and minister of information. Lon Nol was a dark-skinned man who liked his

troops to call him ‘Black Papa’. He was proud of being Khmer, and he hated

the Vietnamese as much as the rioters themselves. He gave the Vietnamese

communists three days to leave their sanctuaries along the border.

Of  course,  the  North  Vietnamese  didn’t  leave.  If  they  could  fight

successfully against a superpower like the United States, why should they

obey a government with a tiny military like Cambodia’s? In Phnom Penh the

excitement and uncertainty rose. The airport closed. Armoured cars and tanks

took  up  positions  on  the  streets.  On  March  17  there  was  a  big  rally  and

parade. I was in it, carrying a sign, shouting for the Vietnamese to go home.

Everybody on the street was anti-Vietnamese and pro-Sihanouk. We all felt

the same – students, journalists, police, army. What we had forgotten was

that Sihanouk himself had carefully balanced the Vietnamese communists

and the Western powers to keep Cambodia neutral. He had also protectedethnic Vietnamese-Cambodians from persecution.

At lunch the following day I was having my usual bowl of sour-and-spicy

noodle soup. My friend Sam Kwil, a journalist for one of the newspapers, and

I were chatting when there was an announcement on the radio: The National

Assembly had passed a vote of no confidence against Sihanouk.

  Suddenly the food wasn’t tasty anymore.

I looked around the restaurant. Everybody was staring with disbelief at the

radio. Overthrow Sihanouk? Impossible! I took the radio from its stand and

brought  it  to  my  table  and  turned  up  the  volume.  We  waited.  Then  the

announcement  was  repeated,  and  the  hope  that  we  had  heard  wrong

disappeared.

Sirik Matak and Lon Nol were behind the coup. They had the support of

only a tiny minority, the Phnom Penh elite, which couldn’t become as rich as

it wanted because Sihanouk and his family controlled all the top jobs. My

journalist friend Sam Kwil, who was very well informed, told me that Sirik

Matak and Lon Nol probably had help from the CIA. He said that Lon Nol

wasn’t  smart  enough  to  use  racism  against  the  Vietnamese  as  a  way  to

destabilize the country, and then use the instability as the excuse for a coup. I

agreed. But nobody has ever proved that the CIA was involved.

In a short time a new government emerged, with Lon Nol as its chief of

state.  Soon  the  government-owned  television  and  radio  station  and  the

newspapers that were friendly to it accused Sihanouk of corruption and other

crimes.  But  the  attempt  to  discredit  Sihanouk  didn’t  stop  there.  Back  in

Samrong Yong, my sister Chhay Thao’s husband, a teacher, took me to see a

pigsty. There, partially buried under manure, was a statue of Sihanouk, its

head severed from its body.

My  brother-in-law  said  the  same  thing  had  happened  to  the  statue  of

Sihanouk in the neighbouring town of Chambak. He had helped topple it

himself.

‘We got orders to destroy it,’ he explained. ‘I didn’t want to, but the orders

came from high up. From very high up. We had to obey.’

Next, the regime gave an order to all the teachers in the country. Huoy

heard about it in her teacher training and became very upset. The teachers

were supposed to tell their pupils that Sihanouk was a corrupt traitor. The

pupils were supposed to repeat this to their parents. And this was where the

backlash began.

All across Cambodia that week, parents scolded and beat their children. Itwas not just because the parents were loyal to Sihanouk, though they were. It

was because Cambodian society was like a family on a big scale. Just like a

father who was the head of the family, Sihanouk was the head of Cambodia,

the Royal Father. For little children to say that he was bad was disrespectful.

Indirectly, it criticized their own fathers.

  Anti-Lon Nol demonstrations began. This time the demonstrators were not

students but dark-skinned, tattooed farmers and villagers, wearing shorts and

kramas and Buddha charms. Sihanouk was their god-king. Even if he could

not be restored to power, they wanted his statues restored. They held signs,

and some of them had knives and hatchets and machetes, but they didn’t have

guns. They marched from Samrong Yong to Chambak, and in Chambak Lon

Nol’s army opened fire on them with machine guns. The dead were carried

away in hammocks tied at either end to thick bamboo poles. It was the same

in the rest of the country. Near Phnom Penh, the soldiers opened fire on other

demonstrators who were waiting next to a bridge. Up the Mekong River in

the town of Kompong Cham, an angry mob seized one of Lon Nol’s brothers.

They killed him, cut his liver out and forced a restaurant owner to fry the

liver and feed the slices to the crowd.

  Surely the country had run amok. Surely peaceful, sleepy Cambodia was

being overwhelmed by the forces of kum. But in a few weeks a kind of peace

returned. Most Cambodians didn’t dislike the new regime enough to fight it.

And practically speaking, there was little to be done. Lon Nol, the former

commander of the armed forces, used his military to enforce his rule.

Unlike Sihanouk, Lon Nol was on friendly terms with the US government.

He let it do whatever it wanted. In late April 1970, without even notifying

Lon Nol first, American and the South Vietnamese forces invaded an area

along  the  Cambodian-South  Vietnamese  border  to  try  to  destroy  the

communist sanctuaries.

At first the invasion was tremendously popular in Phnom Penh; we thought

the Americans were strong enough to kick the North Vietnamese out. But we

were wrong. After the Americans and South Vietnamese pulled back to South

Vietnam, the North Vietnamese remained. A few tall, red-faced, long-nosed

American  advisers  became  a  daily  sight  around  the  central  government

buildings and in the major hotels, and American equipment began arriving

for the Cambodian military in larger and larger quantities.


For  me,  not  knowing  what  was  to  come,  the  greatest  worry  was  not  mycountry but my family. I wanted my parents to accept Huoy. In the past few

years my father had built up his business so much that he bought a second

lumber mill. He was exporting lumber to Japan by the shipload. With the new

American money in Cambodia there was a huge surge in construction, and

that meant more orders too. He started a gasoline-delivery service and bought

a fleet of trucks. My father was rich. He chose a girl from another rich Phnom

Penh family to marry me.

I told my father that I had already met a girl I liked. Afraid what he might

think, I brought photographs of Huoy to my sister Chhay Thao and asked her

to show the pictures to my parents, to test their reactions.

My parents glanced at the pictures, but they really didn’t care what Huoy

looked like or what kind of person she was. They questioned Chhay Thao

closely and forced her to admit that Huoy’s family was poor. After that, their

minds  were  closed.  They  felt  they  would  lose  ground  socially  if  I  didn’t

marry someone from another wealthy family.

My parents didn’t forbid me to marry Huoy. Then again, they didn’t give

their  consent,  which  was  necessary  by  tradition.  And  even  though  I  was

unhappy I didn’t want to argue with them, any more than they wanted to

argue  with  me.  This  was  too  important  for  losing  our  tempers.  The

government had left the middle way for the extremes of war, but we would

keep the peace in my family. I would negotiate patiently, like Sihanouk used

to do before he was deposed.


By the time of the coup I was fairly sure I wanted to marry Huoy. That my

parents didn’t approve of her made me want her even more. Only I didn’t

know which was worse: not being married to her already, which would have

taken care of some of my frustrations, or that small, nagging doubt. I didn’t

know what to do. So I devised another test.

  Huoy and I were alone in her apartment. We hadn’t argued in months.

Everything was fine. I told her to sit down. She sat. I paced brusquely back

and forth, the way I used to when I was her tutor.

  ‘Today is the last day of our relationship,’ I told her. ‘Today we cut things

off.  But  please’  –  Huoy  looked  startled  and  scared  –  ‘just  answer  my

questions carefully. This time you must tell me the truth. Just sit there, stay

calm and answer my questions.’

I was hurting her; I knew that. I loved her very much but didn’t know how

to say it. Somehow it was easier to pretend to be angry at her for somethingshe hadn’t done than to come out with the truth.

  ‘Today you were sitting on the lap of a man in a cyclo,’ I said. A cyclo was

a bicycle-driven taxi, with the driver pedalling in back and the passengers on

a seat in front. ‘He had his hand on your shoulder, and you were talking with

him sweetly and laughing. I saw you with my own eyes. It was the same guy

you were with before.’

  Huoy’s shoulders were already shaking, and her hand had risen to wipe her

eyes.

I persisted. ‘So now you must tell me the truth. Do you have a boyfriend or

not? I don’t care one way or the other. I just want to know the truth. After all,

I never said I loved you. And you never said you loved me. If you love

someone else, no problem. You are free to love whoever you want.’

  Huoy got up without saying anything and went to the bathroom. When she

came back, her head was bowed and she was dabbing at her eyes with tissues.

She said, ‘I don’t know how to tell you that I have no boyfriend! Why do you

have to keep doing this to me?’

I kept my face set and my voice angry. ‘You’re playing games! You have

somebody else, and you want me to be number two!’

‘I don’t want to hear any more! It’s too painful.’

I paced the room back and forth. Then I took a deep breath and let it out.

The time had come.

I moved close to her until my face was next to hers.

  ‘Sweet, I’m sorry,’ I said in a soft voice. ‘Really I am. I promise. I just

want to ask you one thing. Just tell me yes or no.’ I moved even closer and

murmured in her ear, ‘I’ll tell my parents we want to get married. What do

you say, yes or no? Just one word, yes or no.’

For a few seconds she disbelieved me. Then when I told her I loved her,

she took my ear and twisted it, fiercely. And hugged me. She didn’t say yes

with  words,  but  she  meant  yes,  and  she  was  laughing  even  as  the  tears

streamed down her cheeks.

We embraced. Now I was 100 per cent sure that this was the woman I

wanted to marry. If she could stand up to my tricks, she would stay with me

through any troubles that might come our way.

We heard her mother’s footsteps in the hallway. I gave Huoy a last hug and

told her to go take a shower so her mother wouldn’t suspect. When Huoy’s

mother  came  in  she  and  I  had  a  polite  conversation  about  unimportant

matters. I asked her to accompany Huoy and me to a restaurant, but as alwaysshe decided to stay at home.

At the restaurant I asked Huoy what we were going to do about her mother.

Huoy put her glass down and tried not to smile.

‘I already told her that you love me,’ said Huoy.

‘But . . . I hadn’t told you yet.’

‘I just knew,’ said Huoy lightly. ‘And she knew even before I told her.’

How embarrassing. How very embarrassing. They understood how I felt

even before I did.

  What a fool I had been!

I slapped my forehead with my palm.

  Huoy and I went for a walk along the river. It was the dry season, and the

water had dropped far down the sloping concrete embankment. We could see

big cargo boats and ferries and the huge modern span of the bridge built with

Japanese foreign aid, and dozens of sampans plying the water. We saw all

those things, but we didn’t really see them. They existed as a backdrop for

our conversation.

  ‘You  and  I,’  I  said  as  we  strolled  along,  ‘we  must  build honneur  and

bonheur together. We have a big responsibility, to take care of each another

and create happiness in our families. We have a responsibility for tomorrow.’

Huoy didn’t say yes to this but she was smiling. In Khmer, ‘tomorrow’ also

means ‘the future.’ We walked on thinking about our tomorrows together.

  ‘Please  understand  about  my  family,’  I  went  on.  ‘I  have  always  had

problems with them. It is like a war that never stops. They are rich now. They

are upset because you are not rich. Tomorrow, someday, we will be married,

but at least we already know what is in our hearts.’

  Huoy nodded, smiling again.

‘I know my parents very well,’ I said. ‘We must work on them gradually to

earn their trust. So if I ask you to do something for my parents, whatever it is,

please do it. Do it for us.’

  ‘Yes,’  Huoy  said.  ‘Yes,  I  will.’  She  understood  this,  that  we  could  be

happy only if we made our families happy. In our culture, the family as a

whole is more important than the individual family member.

We walked along the promenade, not noticing anyone else. I had my hand

around her shoulders and then on her waist and then her shoulders again. Her

long hair blew across my chest in the breeze. The moon reflected off the

river, and boats shuttled here and there, dark shapes on the surface of the

water.We walked to the Royal Palace and sat on a bench, looking at the river. We

talked in low, contented voices about our happy years ahead.                                            4



                                      Civil War


 




After the coup, Sihanouk could have chosen to live the rest of his life in his

villa in France. It would have been better for Cambodia if he had. But he

didn’t.  The  campaign  to  denounce  him  and  events  like  the  burial  of  his

statues in pig manure injured his public image, or face.

  Face is the mask of status and dignity that Asians show to others, who are

all wearing masks of their own. It is what makes Cambodia such a polite

society in normal times: I respect your face, you respect mine, and we keep

our real feelings about each other hidden. In our language, to insult someone

publicly is, in the literal meaning, to ‘break his face’. Sihanouk was very

proud. He refused to be ‘broken’.

So, not long after the coup, a familiar, high-pitched voice came out of the

radio. It was the Royal Father, speaking over Radio Peking. He explained that

he had been a victim of a group of ‘arch-reactionaries’. After receiving power

and favours from him, he said, they had showed their gratitude by insulting

and humiliating him, overthrowing and condemning him as a man who sold

out his country. His voice rose even higher as he warmed to his subject.

‘Such  accusations  by  these  ungrateful,  ambitious,  power-hungry,  money-

hungry  cowards,  who  didn’t  hesitate  to  stab  me  in  the  back,’  Sihanouk

shouted, ‘are unimportant! My personal indignation cannot be compared with

the magnitude of my concern for the sad fate of our country!

‘These traitors have thrown the country – which had a good reputation as

an island of peace – into the furnace of the Americans’ war! The freedom and

solidarity  of  the  nation  have  been  completely  destroyed.  Millions  of  ourfellow countrymen will rise up to liquidate the reactionary group of Lon Nol

and Sirik Matak and their American masters!’ he shouted. ‘And they will

build, after their final victory, a new Cambodia with the power vested in the

people’s hands!’

  Sihanouk announced he was setting up a government-in-exile:

‘I call on all my children, both military and civilian, who cannot stand to

remain under the traitors’ power, and who are courageous and determined to

liberate  the  fatherland,  to  fight  our  enemy.  If  the  children  already  have

weapons, I will bring the ammunition and even new weapons to strengthen

them. If the children have no weapons and want to undergo training, I will

take measures to help them leave for the military school, deep in the jungle to

avoid enemy detection. For those children who are in Europe and wish to

serve, come to Moscow or Peking to see me. Long live Cambodia!’

  Sihanouk had always called the citizens of Cambodia his ‘children’. He

had been saying it for so many years that I took it for granted. But the jargon

he used now, like ‘reactionary’ and ‘liberate’, rang new and strange to my

ears. Sihanouk had always leaned to the left. Now he had joined the left, and

not just the powers of Moscow and Peking. Far more remarkable, he had

joined forces with his former enemies, the Cambodian communists. For years

he  had  persecuted  them  relentlessly,  throwing  them  in  jail,  having  them

tortured, driving them out into the forests. He had shown them no mercy. He

had given them their nickname, the ‘red Khmers’, or in French, les Khmers

Rouges.

Like the coup itself, Sihanouk’s announcement was a sudden about-face

and one that could bring no possible good to the country. For him to go over

to  the  communists,  even  as  a  figurehead,  would  give  the  Khmer  Rouge

instant credibility. If he said to go to the jungle and join the communists,

many  Cambodians  would  obey,  particularly  the  rural  people  who  had

worshipped him. They would do anything he asked. Perhaps even more than

the  coup  itself,  the  date  that  Sihanouk  joined  his  old  enemies  marked  a

turning point for Cambodia. It was the day when the country began its long,

ruinous slide into civil war.

But there were at most a few thousand Khmer Rouge in early 1970. They

were nowhere near Phnom Penh, and there weren’t enough of them to be a

serious threat to the new Lon Nol regime. The threat came from the North

Vietnamese, whose soldiers were as tough as any in the world.

  Until the coup, the North Vietnamese had about forty thousand troops inCambodia, mostly in the eastern part of the country, near the border. Usually

they stayed away from the forces of the Cambodian government, so as not to

cause  trouble.  The  overthrow  and  the  brief  American  invasion  along  the

border changed everything. Pushed back from their border sanctuaries by the

Americans, the North Vietnamese spread into territory where they had never

been before. When they met units of the Phnom Penh government’s military,

they  attacked.  And  they  almost  always  won.  Within  a  few  months  they

controlled half the nation.

  Until the coup, Lon Nol had been Sihanouk’s commander-in-chief. Sam

Kwil,  the  newspaper  reporter,  told  me,  ‘The  only  reason  Lon  Nol  was

promoted was that Sihanouk knew he was stupid. Sihanouk didn’t see him as

a rival. And it really is true that Lon Nol is incompetent. He takes civilians

off the streets, gives them twenty-four hours of training, personally sees to it

that they’re given Buddha amulets to wear and sends them off to fight the

North Vietnamese.’

  ‘What’s  wrong  with  Buddha  amulets?’  I  said.  ‘You’re  Buddhist.  I’m

Buddhist.’

  ‘You work in the hospitals,’ he said sarcastically. ‘Do you see any proof

that Buddha amulets can stop bullets from an AK-47?’ Under his fierce glare

I dropped my eyes and admitted that badly wounded soldiers with religious

tattoos and charms came into the hospital all the time. ‘Lon Nol’s crazy,’

Kwil said earnestly. ‘I know. I’ve followed him around. He’s going to get a

lot of innocent people killed, and then he’s going to rely on the Americans for

weapons and air strikes to keep the regime from falling. Take my word for it,

my friend – he’s stupid. Stupid, I tell you! Stupid! Stupid! He started a war

but he will not be able to defend the country!’

Sam Kwil got carried away sometimes – compared to him, I was as calm

and reasonable as a monk – but his observations were almost always right. In

Phnom Penh during the first years of the war we saw American planes every

day, flying in from their bases in South Vietnam and Thailand. Transports

landed  at  the  airport  with  supplies  and  advisers.  Tactical  fighters  and

bombers roared off toward the horizon. If you didn’t know what the fighters

were  used  for,  you  would  think  them  beautiful,  like  little  silver  darts

travelling incredibly fast and making a loud noise out of proportion to their

size. At night, sometimes, in Huoy’s apartment, the teacups rattled on the

shelves and a sound came from far away like the ocean’s roar, only much

lower  in  pitch  and  barely  audible  –  bombs  from  B-52s,  exploding  in  thecountryside. There were other planes. The Americans gave the Cambodians

propeller-driven T-28 fighter-bombers and some transports. In January 1971,

the North Vietnamese blew up three quarters of the Cambodian air force’s

planes at the airport, but the Americans sent in replacements.

  Though  the  North  Vietnamese  mounted  occasional  rocket  and  mortar

attacks on the outskirts of Phnom Penh, the war became immediate and real

for  me  on  Pchum  Ben,  the  Buddhist  day  of  prayer  for  the  souls  of  our

ancestors, in 1972. Huoy and I were sitting on the floor of a temple, praying

with hundreds of people around us, when the explosion came. Everybody ran

from the temple in a panic. Out in the street someone told us that the Chhruoy

Changwa Bridge had been blown up. This was a huge, ultramodern bridge

across the Tonle Sap River at the northern end of the city, built with Japanese

aid. We usually called it the Japanese bridge. When we got near the river we

could see that the middle spans had fallen down. There was nothing left but

immense standing columns and a long stretch of empty water between. Then

automatic-rifle fire broke out in another direction, inside Phnom Penh, where

guerrillas were attacking a government military position. The government

soldiers counterattacked, and the shooting went on for hours.

The following day, the Lon Nol soldiers laid out the corpses of the North

Vietnamese and stood over them like hunting trophies. The soldiers grinned

proudly, as if they had successfully defended Phnom Penh from the enemy.

And when I saw their false pride I felt I finally understood what war is about.

Men fight for glory or ideals, but the result is not glorious or idealistic. The

main result, besides the suffering, is that civilization is set back many years.

Take the Japanese bridge as a practical example: when it was built, travel

between Phnom Penh and north-central Cambodia became much faster and

easier than before. It was a great improvement. People like me could drive to

the ruins of Angkor within hours instead of days. Merchants prospered from

the new commerce. So did farmers, who began to grow new crops for the

Phnom Penh markets. Relatives visited one another more often. Everyone

benefited. The bridge brought the country closer together. Now the largest

bridge in the country had been destroyed. We would have to cross the river

slowly, on boats, if we crossed at all. Wars do that – they bring societies back

into much more primitive ways of living.


In the early war years I belonged to a student group that collected donations

from private companies for victims of the war. As a representative of thegroup, I flew to Kampot, where Huoy was from, and to other provinces. On

most of the trips it was necessary to fly because the roads had been cut by the

communists. The planes passed over vast stretches of apparently empty forest

and uncultivated fields. Once at my destination I distributed blankets, kramas,

sarongs, candles, canned foods and other goods to soldiers and their families,

and also to refugees.

  Some of the refugees lived in camps run by the Red Cross and CARE and

World Vision. But most came to the traditional places of refuge in Cambodia,

which  were  the  temples.  They  lived  next  to  the  walls  of  the  temple

compounds in tents or covered oxcarts or else out in the open on mats woven

from palm leaves. Dark-skinned women and children, they were away from

their  land  and  they  could  not  farm,  though  some  of  them  planted  garden

vegetables.  Their  husbands  and  sons  were  off  fighting  for  one  army  or

another, for Lon Nol or the communists, and to them it really didn’t matter

which.

If a government official walked among them the women fell silent; but as

soon as he left they started complaining about the government’s corruption

and the incompetence of Lon Nol, and why Lon Nol allowed the war to

continue. They all wanted Sihanouk back, because they remembered peaceful

times under him. They knew nothing of politics, of the foreign powers behind

the  war,  the  Americans  backing  Lon  Nol  and  China  backing  the  North

Vietnamese and the Khmer Rouge. All they knew was they wanted the war

over with, so they could go home and live in peace.

  Besides  bringing  gifts  to  the  refugees  and  to  the  soldiers’  wives,  who

followed the soldiers from one place to the next without adequate food or

supplies,  I  worked  in  nearby  hospitals  and  clinics.  There  were  always

bandages to change and battlefield wounds to clean and suture. There were

never enough doctors to give the soldiers sufficient medical care. But the

refugee women and the soldiers’ wives needed medical care just as much as

the soldiers did, and got even less of it.

In rural Cambodia, traditional health care is provided by spirit doctors,

who interpret dreams, cast spells and use magic, and by herbalists, who make

their own medicines from plants. Sometimes the spirit doctors are able to

help their patients, because the patients believe in the treatments; and some of

the herbal medicines are good. (The herbal cure for syphilis, for example, a

strong, nasty-smelling tea boiled from bamboo joints, black pepper and about

a dozen other ingredients, is reasonably effective, though why it works ishard to say.) But traditional medicine has no concept of infection and no real

method of surgery. It is helpless against many of the diseases that are easily

treated by Western techniques.

The field of women’s health is particularly backward in Cambodia because

of  all  the  taboos  about  the  reproductive  organs  of  the  body.  The  refugee

women and the soldiers’ wives bathed in their sarongs, either in the nearest

river or else simply by pouring basins of water over their heads. They were

out in the open. Everyone could see them. So they washed their exposed skin,

but out of modesty and ignorance, they didn’t wash anywhere else. As a

result they had a high rate of vaginal infection. When they got pregnant –

some of them didn’t know exactly what it was that got them pregnant – local

midwives  attended  the  births.  Between  uncleanliness,  unskilled  midwives,

superstition, malnutrition, and lack of medicines, the infant mortality rate for

Cambodia was well over 50 per cent.

In the hospitals I saw numerous cases of leucorrhea, or white discharges,

which seemed to be linked to a high rate of cervical cancer. There were many

cases of damage done by rural midwives – primitive Caesarean deliveries that

didn’t heal right and became infected from herbs placed on the wound, cases

of acute shock resulting from placental debris left inside the mothers after

childbirth and so on. It was terrible to see the suffering of those women,

because most of it was unnecessary. And it was gratifying to help deliver a

child and to see that both mother and baby were healthy.

  Back in medical school in Phnom Penh, I began specialized training in

obstetrics and gynaecology. Besides the need for doctors of this sort, I had

personal reasons for my choice that went all the way back to the beating my

father gave me as a boy. My mother was always kinder to me than my father.

My sister Chhay Thao was always nicer to me than my brothers. In Samrong

Yong and Phnom Penh and other places I had many good male friends, but

none of them meant as much to me as Huoy and her mother. I am a man with

an affinity for women. A rock with a liking for paper.

The government required all doctors to work for it but allowed us to take

other part-time jobs even before we got our degrees. I took one part-time job

in the government’s military hospital, a position that made me technically an

army officer and gave me the use of a military driver, and another part-time

job with a private clinic that did mainly obstetrical and gynaecological work.

I stayed busy. From seven to nine o’clock in the morning I worked at the

private clinic, near Tuol Toumpoung market, in the southern part of PhnomPenh. From nine to twelve noon I was on rounds at the teaching hospital

connected to the medical school. In the afternoon I attended medical school

lectures. From six to seven in the evening I worked again at the clinic. After

that I saw Huoy if possible, but I was also on call at the military hospital.

Sometimes I worked all night sewing up wounded soldiers at the military

hospital, then went over to the private clinic to begin the next day.

The war went on.

One Saturday I got a telephone call from an army general ordering me to

go to a battlefield outside Phnom Penh to pick up wounded soldiers. The site

was ‘Bridge 13,’ across the Tonle Sap River and thirteen kilometres out along

a  road  to  the  east.  Because  the  Japanese  bridge  had  been  destroyed,  the

ambulance had to cross the river by ferry, and that was slow. On the road on

the far side, a motorcycle drove past us from the opposite direction, the rider

wearing a green paratrooper shirt and carrying a camera bag. It was Sam

Kwil, returning from a newspaper assignment.

  Eventually we got to Bridge 13, a small wooden structure over a dry gully.

We turned down a bumpy oxcart trail leading to a cornfield. The wounded

were lying on the ground, moaning, bloody and messy. The medics and I put

them  on  stretchers  and  carried  them  to  the  ambulance.  Then  the  North

Vietnamese opened fire.

  Brup!  Brup-brup-brup!  Brup-up-up-up-up!  They  were  hidden  in  the

cornfield ahead of us. Brup-brup-up! Then the sound of automatic-rifle fire

came from behind us, from a grove of trees. Brup-up-up-up brup brup! This

time it came from the gully, near the bridge. They had us surrounded on three

sides.  The  Cambodian  commander  was  lying  on  the  ground  near  the

ambulance. He had allowed himself to get outflanked and now he was pinned

down in the cross fire.

‘Hey, motherfucker! Get us out of here, will you?’ I shouted. ‘We’ve got

wounded to take care of. Call in the air strikes, man! Hurry up! Get the planes

here!’

The commander rolled over and looked at me with wide, frightened eyes.

He saw I had a lieutenant’s uniform on, the same rank as his. Obediently, he

lifted the handset of his radio and began talking into it. Around him were his

troops, hilltribesmen from northeastern Cambodia, waiting for orders.

I worked my way over to the lieutenant. He was about my age, a light-

skinned city boy, probably from the Phnom Penh elite. He was still in shock,

holding the radio. It was my first time under fire too, but my gang fights as aboy had been good training. I pointed to the side of the cornfield nearest the

bridge. ‘Have your men attack there, to clear the road. That’s the only way

we’re going to get the ambulance out. Now do it! Don’t wait any longer! Do

it now!’

  When I got inside the back of the ambulance the hill-tribesmen, dressed in

motley combinations of army fatigues and baggy trousers, had gotten up from

the ground. They were firing their assault rifles as they ran forward barefoot

into enemy fire. The driver turned the ambulance around to face the main

road and lurched forward. As the North Vietnamese retreated, we bounced

along  the  oxcart  trail.  Then  there  was  an  explosion,  and  the  back  of  the

ambulance lifted up. It settled down and kept on moving. I felt a pain in my

stomach, on the left side. The hole in my shirt was only a quarter-inch wide,

but there was blood around it and the stain was growing. I yelled at the driver

to hurry. Whatever hit us, probably a rocket-propelled grenade, had also torn

a hole two feet wide through the metal side of the ambulance, next to the

floor. I could see the dirt road surface through it. Then I could see the gravel

of the main road, and the ride was smoother. The medics were raising my

shirt and wrapping gauze around my stomach and I was yelling for the driver

to hurry.

  Then there was a loud roaring sound coming toward us, getting louder fast.

The medics were looking for shrapnel punctures on other parts of my body.

By bending over I could see, out the front windshield, the propeller-driven T-

28 fighter-bombers coming in fast and low over the treetops. They roared

overhead and toward Bridge 13.

  When we got to the flat expanse of the Tonle Sap River we had to wait by

the remains of the Japanese bridge. I was furious. There was a long line of

cars and trucks and only one ferry. I cursed the Vietnamese for blowing the

bridge up, cursed the Lon Nol military for not protecting it, and most of all

cursed the inept field commander back at Bridge 13. No leadership at all. I

knew the type. He probably felt ‘above’ his dark-skinned hilltribe troops.

What brave, wonderful soldiers those hilltribesmen were, charging directly

into enemy fire to open up the escape lane! They had saved our lives. They

deserved a much better commander than the one they got.

We finally got onto a ferry and made it back to Phnom Penh that afternoon.

At the military hospital, my colleagues operated on me. There wasn’t much

damage, just the small puncture in my abdomen and minor cuts around my

waist and left arm. Only four stitches. It was nothing compared to the woundson the soldiers coming into the hospital every day. Still, Huoy cried when she

saw me, and I couldn’t help feeling the pride of the veteran soldier bravely

hiding his wounds. My driver, Sok, took me back to her apartment and she

made a big fuss.


By this time Huoy was mine. Busy as we both were, we managed to see each

other  three  times  a  day.  First,  in  the  early  mornings,  I  drove  from  my

bachelor place over to her apartment for breakfast, which we usually took in a

little restaurant on the ground floor of her building. After breakfast I took her

to school on my scooter, a white 150 cc. Vespa, a gentleman’s version of a

motorcycle and a popular model at that time. If I couldn’t drive her myself,

Sok took her to work in a car. Sok was friendly and respectful, a man who

enjoyed his undemanding role.

The second visit was lunch. At noon, when Phnom Penh was drowsy with

heat,  everyone  who  could  went  home.  Huoy  and  I  met  at  her  apartment.

There we changed from our Western clothes into comfortable cotton sarongs,

which  we  wrapped  about  our  bodies,  sighing  with  content.  We  relaxed,

enjoyed each other’s company, showered and then ate lunch before returning

to work at about two. Finally, after work, unless the hospital called me in, I

came over to Huoy’s for the third time. I ate dinner and stayed until it was

time for me to go home to my apartment. We had to follow the outward rules

of Cambodian society, like staying in different places overnight, but we were

together as much as we could.

And yet I was not truly hers. Not yet. I was not so easy to tame. There had

always been a rascally streak in my nature, and my new medical specialty,

obstetrics and gynaecology, gave me plenty of opportunities. Put it this way:

once  my  female  patients  visited  me  professionally,  some  of  them  began

thinking about me personally. I had a lot of offers. I didn’t always refuse.

One morning I was in my small office in the hospital. Sitting with me was

a certain woman patient. We weren’t doing anything. Not yet, anyway. We

had just been talking. There was a knock on the door. I opened it and found

Huoy standing there. I wondered how long she had been listening. Huoy

smiled sweetly and said she had no classes that day. She thought she would

just drop in to say hello. I introduced Huoy to my lady patient. A sweet

feminine  conversation  ensued.  After  what  seemed  to  me  hours,  my  lady

patient excused herself and left.

‘When are you coming home?’ Huoy asked me, still sweetly.‘At noon, same as usual.’

I went back to Huoy’s, memorizing my excuses. But when I got there,

Huoy  didn’t  behave  as  if  anything  out  of  the  ordinary  had  happened.  If

anything, she was even more affectionate than usual. When we changed out

of our city clothes she brought me a silk sarong, treating me like an honoured

guest. We relaxed and had a wonderful time. We showered and eventually we

ate. We had the place to ourselves. Huoy’s mother was a tactful old soul, and

as usual she was out.

That evening after lectures and work at the clinic I went back to Huoy’s

again. She was kinder than ever. Instead of sitting across the table from me at

dinner as she normally did, she put her chair next to me. She had cooked

fresh fish, garnishing it with lemon, coriander and other spices. Her mother

was off in the kitchen. When my appetite was satisfied I sat back contentedly.

That was then she dug her thumb and forefinger into my thigh. She pulled

on the flesh as hard as she could and twisted it. Her frowning face was dark

with  anger.  ‘What  were  you  talking  about  with  that  lady  patient  this

morning?’ she demanded.

I had to laugh. She was far cleverer than I’d thought. ‘Ma!’ I called out to

Huoy’s mother, for we were now on familiar terms. ‘Ma, help me!’

  Huoy  hissed,  ‘Quiet!  Be  quiet!’  She  twisted  the  flesh  on  my  leg  even

farther.

  ‘How can I be quiet?’ I said. ‘Look what you’re doing to my leg.’ I was

laughing and in pain at the same time.

Ma came in and asked what was happening. Huoy said, ‘Please go away,

Mother. It’s none of your business.’

I said, ‘No, Ma, you have to help me. Huoy is hurting me.’

Ma said reproachfully, ‘Huoy, don’t make trouble,’ and went back into the

kitchen.

  Huoy put her mouth next to my ear and hissed, ‘Tell me about the woman

patient this morning. Tell me the truth! Who is she? What is the relationship

between the two of you?’

  ‘Don’t be jealous.’

‘Oh? With ‘treatment’ in your office like that? The two of you in one small

room with no nurses around? How were you going to ‘treat’ her?’

  ‘She’s just a patient. Nothing more.’

  ‘You were lucky this time. I was good to you. I was going to hit her, but I

didn’t, to keep your face.’  ‘No, no, Huoy, don’t hit my patients. Don’t do that. It’s not good for my

practice.’

‘I wanted to ask her, “Why did you come here? Why are you trying to take

my man away from me? One woman for one man. Not two for one.” You

were just lucky I didn’t start a fight with her. You were lucky I didn’t kill

her!’

‘Yes, Huoy, I was lucky. Now please let go of my leg.’

  ‘No!’ she shouted. ‘Tell me the truth! Now!’

  ‘Huoy, she was a normal patient. You’re the only one I care about.’

  ‘Don’t avoid the question!’

  ‘Ma!’ I yelled.

Her mother’s voice came from the other room, in a tone of warning:

  ‘Huoy!’

  Huoy tried to clap her free hand over my mouth but I turned my head and

she got me on the neck. I yelled out jokingly, ‘Hey, you’re choking me! I’ve

got no room to breathe!’

‘I’m going to call for Sok,’ Huoy said in a quiet, furious whisper. ‘He

knows about your girlfriends. Maybe I’m not the only one he drives around

for you. Why do I have to wait until I see your girlfriends with my own eyes?

Sok, come here!’

Ma walked across the living room and toward the front door. ‘Huoy, Sok

has already gone,’ she said firmly. She went out into the hall for a second. I

could hear her tell Sok to leave.

I got up from the table and walked over to the couch. Huoy came after me,

picked up a cushion and began hitting me with it. ‘I’m going to punish you,’

she said. ‘You and Sok both. He knows your secrets. You and he conspire

together.’

  ‘Ma, help!’ I had my hands over my head for protection, laughing as she

hit me again and again.

‘It’s me or nothing! Either me and me only or I’ll fix you so you never

have another woman again. I’ll get a knife from the kitchen and fix you right

here!’

  ‘Help!’

  ‘Huoy, Huoy,’ her mother was saying sadly, shaking her head.

  ‘Save my life!’

  ‘Next time I will kill the woman if I find her with you again. So I ask you

now: Are you going to see her again, or not?’‘I’ve stopped. Never again. I’m sorry. Now don’t hit me anymore.’

  Finally Huoy got tired of hitting me with the cushion. She sat on the sofa,

stamping her feet on the floor in frustration, tears in her eyes. She turned to

her mother. ‘See! See! He admitted! Sometimes he doesn’t come back here

for lunch because he’s seeing his girlfriends outside.’

I moved next to her on the couch. ‘No, Huoy. I agree with you. I’m a bad

boy. I confess. I did wrong. I promise not to do it again.’ I put my arm around

her shoulder, trying to calm her down.

  ‘That’s  enough,  Huoy,  enough,’  her  mother  said.  But  her  mother  was

smiling, just as I was.

  Huoy pouted. ‘My own mother, protecting you! She should be protecting

me.’

  ‘Hush, Huoy,’ I said. ‘You’ll disturb the neighbours. We’ll lose face. I

confess I did wrong. I’m sorry.’

But inside I was glad. Glad that she was smart enough to wait until evening

to accuse me, when I didn’t expect it. Glad that she cared about me so much

and that she had such a strong character.

  From that point on, I was hers.                                            5



                              The City of Bonjour


 




As the Khmer Rouge grew in strength, they began to take the place of the

North Vietnamese communists in fighting the right-wing Lon Nol regime. In

late 1972 a Khmer Rouge force captured the area south of Samrong Yong.

The guerrillas spent the day in nearby forests and at night came into the

village itself.

I drove to Samrong Yong one morning to get my parents out. My parents

packed  their  suitcases.  In  the  early  afternoon,  before  the  Khmer  Rouge

emerged from the woods, we drove out of there fast and didn’t stop until we

got to my father’s other house, near his lumber mill in the town of Takhmau.

This was nearer to Phnom Penh and within the area that the government

troops still controlled.

But my father was still attached to the house in Samrong Yong. He had

built it with his hard-earned money and he really didn’t want to leave. For

several weeks he made daytime trips from the lumber mill to the village and

back again, emptying the house of furniture and possessions. Then his luck

ran out. The guerrillas moved into the village during the daytime and he was

trapped.

My father was determined to leave on his own terms. He packed two big

suitcases with the rest of the valuables and waited for his chance. Then the

Lon Nol army counterattacked. An artillery shell fell out of the sky, hit a big

tree right outside the house and blew it into splinters. My father grabbed a

mosquito net, a blanket and a pillow, climbed on a bicycle and went out the

back  door.  He  pedalled  south,  away  from  the  artillery,  farther  intocommunist-controlled territory, leaving the suitcases behind.

The next day, when I was at school, villagers from Samrong Yong arriving

in Phnom Penh told my brother Pheng Huor what had happened. Without

waiting for me, my brother got on a motorcycle and drove to the village,

which had become a temporary no-man’s-land, belonging neither to one army

nor the other. He heard that my father had gone to Chambak, and when he got

to Chambak he heard my father had gone farther south.

My brother finally found my father, and they began the trip back. They

stayed off the paved roads to avoid enemy patrols. They pushed the bike

along sandy trails through the woods and drove it on oxcart trails through the

rice fields. When they got back to Phnom Penh four days later, we heard the

news  that  a  government  T-28  plane  had  dropped  a  bomb  on  our  house,

destroying it totally. But we didn’t go back to see.

Papa had already suffered losses in one civil war, in the early 1950s, when

the guerrillas and government soldiers took turns kidnapping him. Now in the

early 1970s, in the second civil war, which was being fought on a much

larger  scale  because  of  the  outside  powers  sending  in  weapons  to  help

Cambodians kill each other, he lost his house and nearly lost his life. He still

had the lumber mill, but the end of his business career was in sight. A trip

from the mill to Phnom Penh that used to take half an hour now took half a

day because of all the soldiers collecting bribes at checkpoints. When he

shipped lumber to important politicians or military officers, he did not dare

ask  for  payment.  He  bribed  the  local  mayor,  chief  of  police  and  army

commander just so they wouldn’t shut him down.

  Bonjour had always been part of doing business in Cambodia, but it had

never existed on this level before. It had grown with the war. Part of the

reason was the man at the top, Lon Nol himself. Unlike Sihanouk, who had

involved himself in the daily life of the nation, Lon Nol stayed in his office.

He seemed to have very little idea what was happening in the countryside or

even  nearby  in  Phnom  Penh.  In  1971  a  stroke  paralysed  his  right  side,

confining him even more. When he walked, his right arm shook spastically

and his right leg shot out stiffly in a goose step. His speech was slurred, and

those who watched him closely, like my journalist friend Sam Kwil, believed

his thinking was impaired too.

  Lon Nol did nothing to stop the corruption. He didn’t seem to realize that

the bonjour and the war were connected – that officers who were interested

only  in  bribes  wouldn’t  fight.  He  had  no  real  strategy  for  fighting  thecommunists. He just stayed in his office, making vague, mystical plans for

restoring  Cambodia  to  the  greatness  of  its  times  in  the  ancient  empire  at

Angkor. He consulted astrologers. He sponsored an organization called the

Khmer-Mon Institute, which tried to prove that the dark-skinned Khmer race

was superior to the light-skinned peoples like the Chinese and Vietnamese. In

Phnom Penh, which was racially mixed and Western-oriented, his ideas were

treated like an embarrassing joke. We didn’t realize how dangerous he was.

Under his regime, racial prejudice against Chinese-Cambodians flared up,

and his troops massacred thousands of ethnic-Vietnamese Cambodians.

  Even after his fellow coup leaders deserted him and he lost the confidence

of  the  people,  the  United  States  continued  to  support  Lon  Nol.  The

Americans gave him the money and weapons to fight with, and since they

didn’t seem to care what he did with them, Lon Nol cared even less. His

generals sold weapons to the enemy. They put extra names, or ‘phantom

soldiers’, on their payrolls, and kept the extra pay. They built huge villas for

their own use, while their men in the field went hungry for lack of rice. The

generals didn’t really want to win the war, just keep it going, so they could

make as much money as possible before taking the last plane out.

  Cambodia was no longer an island of peace. It was a nation at war with

itself.

I told my father that he should sell the mill and leave Cambodia. He and

my mother could live anywhere they wanted, with enough money to last them

the rest of their lives.

My father said no. He liked living in Cambodia. Instead, he suggested I

leave. He even offered to send me to France to finish my medical education,

at his expense.

This was a change – my father offering to support me through school. But I

said  no  thanks.  I  told  them  that  even  if  the  communists  took  over,  they

wouldn’t harm doctors. Not a chance. The Khmer Rouge were communists,

but  they  were  also  Cambodians.  Cambodians  wouldn’t  hurt  each  other

without  reason.  That’s  what  I  believed,  and  that’s  what  my  friends  were

saying too.

For my father and me and people like us, Cambodia was home, the only

place we had ever lived in. We didn’t want to leave. The outside world was

unknown. It seemed a greater risk to go abroad than to stay and wait for the

war to end. And even though we didn’t like the Lon Nol regime, we were

doing well under it. For it was one of the strange things about the war that theworse things got out in the countryside, the better life became in Phnom

Penh. Not for the refugees, living on the outskirts of the city in shantytowns

that grew by the week. Not for the common soldiers, going barefoot because

their officers sold their boots on the black market. Not for the rural people,

conscripted into one army or the other. But for the nouveaux riches and the

elite, life was luxurious. The war brought a bubble of prosperity to Phnom

Penh  the  likes  of  which  we  had  never  seen.  We  had  never  had  so  many

parties, nightclubs, Mercedes, and servants before.


I myself became rich during the Lon Nol regime. My wealth grew out of an

argument in my family – out of another battle, so to speak, in my family’s

ongoing civil war.

  After Samrong Yong fell to the Khmer Rouge, my father decided to live in

Phnom Penh. At first he and my mother stayed with my brother Pheng Huor,

who had married a businesswoman named Lon Nay Chhun. Pheng Huor and

Nay Chhun had three children, including a little boy whom my father loved

more than anyone in the world. My father had always dreamed of having

grandsons to keep him company in his old age.

My father, in fact, seemed to care more about his grandson than the boy’s

mother did. She liked going to the lumber mill with my brother, counting the

money and bossing the employees more than she liked staying home and

raising her children.

One  day  when  my  father  asked  her  to  stay  home  to  take  care  of  her

children, Nay Chhun did an extraordinary thing: she pushed him with her

hand. My father, who was unsteady on his feet, fell over backward and cut

himself on a barbed-wire fence.

In Cambodian society, it is bad manners to talk back to a father or father-

in-law.  To  push  him  physically  is  almost  unthinkable.  It  was  as  bad-

mannered, in its way, as it was for Lon Nol to overthrow Sihanouk several

years earlier. And like the coup against Sihanouk, my sister-in-law’s pushing

of my father set a long chain of events into motion.

I took Papa to the hospital and then brought him back to my bachelor

apartment.  Nay  Chhun’s  parents  showed  up  to  apologize  and  later  Nay

Chhun herself. I shut the door in their faces. In the evening, my brother came.

He stood in the doorway with the same wide face and calm, grave manner as

my father.

I told my brother that if he wanted to help Papa he could come in. But hewould have to make a choice: he could be loyal to his father or his wife, but

not both.

My brother was silent for a moment, listening. I thought he was at least

going to apologize for what Nay Chhun had done.

But all he said was, ‘I have come to bring Papa back.’

‘So your wife can finish killing him?’ I said. ‘I just came back from putting

fifteen stitches in him at the hospital.’

My brother turned quietly and went away.

  Inside, my father was lying on the couch, pale and old and tired. I could no

longer hold back my jealousy and dislike of my brother. ‘Which of your sons

is treating you well, now, Father?’ I said. ‘After all these years, do you know

which son really tries to help you and which son has the heart of stone?’

‘I know, I know,’ my father muttered. ‘But it is best not to speak about

such things.’

  ‘You know now, Father, but it is too late. Do you remember when you beat

me as a small child, when you thought I stole the box of playing cards? Do

you know who really stole them? Do you know who has been stealing from

you ever since you bought the lumber mill?’

My father turned his face to the wall. He knew.

  Pheng Huor’s and Nay Chhun’s fall from grace gave me an opportunity to

do  something  I  had  long  wanted,  and  that  was  to  expose  my  brother’s

embezzling from the lumber mill.

I  called  a  meeting  of  the  senior  family  members,  including  uncles  and

cousins. They were all in Phnom Penh because of the war. They all showed

up for the meeting and my father and my brother did too. I read them the list

of my father’s properties that my brother had put in his own name: five big

gasoline delivery trucks, two buses, a Land-Rover and another house near the

lumber mill that my father rented to tenants. As I spoke I held the deeds for

these properties right in my hand. How much cash my brother skimmed from

the lumber mill wasn’t clear, I said, because my brother still had the books.

Next I raised the subject of my father’s estate. The inheritance was going

to be large. Because I was making a living as a doctor, I didn’t need a share

of it. Those who did, I said, were our younger brothers and sisters. If their

shares were guaranteed, Pheng Huor could have my share. He had done more

for the mill’s success than anybody except than my father himself. He could

have my share if he signed all the stolen assets back to Father.

I looked around the room at my relatives. They were nodding their headsin approval. I was betting on my brother’s greed to get him to admit that he

had done wrong. But I underestimated Pheng Huor.

  Asked why he had put the assets in his own name, he replied calmly, ‘I

worked hard. I deserved them. And I needed to have something for my sons

and daughters in case anything happened to me.’

‘Did you think about other people who have sons and daughters?’ I said

sarcastically.

My  brother  folded  his  hands  and  shrugged.  ‘Another  reason  was  the

government  laws,’  he  said.  ‘Papa  is  Chinese,  but  he  refused  to  carry  a

Chinese identity card. There were certain kinds of contracts that it was easier

for me to sign.’

  ‘That’s not true and you know it,’ I said. ‘I helped you do the paperwork.

There are very few businesses the government does not allow Chinese to go

into, with or without an identity card. We may have racial problems in this

country, but they have not gone that far.’

  ‘This is not a good time to talk about business affairs,’ said my brother. ‘I

think  we  should  just  be  glad  that  I  was  able  to  rescue  Papa  from  the

communists. Maybe he would not be alive today if not for me.’

Try as we could, none of us could get my brother to admit that he had done

anything wrong. Each time he managed to turn the questions aside. He would

not agree to sign the ownership of the gasoline trucks and the other assets

back over to Papa. He ignored my suggestion that he get my part of the

inheritance.

The meeting ended unresolved. My father didn’t say a word. He didn’t

know what to do. His daughter-in-law had insulted him by pushing him over.

His son had stolen from him. But perhaps he felt it was better to have a son

steal from him than anyone else.

A month later my father called his own meeting. All his children were

there, except for Pheng Huor, who was his number-two son, and the number-

one son, the slow-minded one, who had argued with my father and left the

family. There were six of his sons and daughters in the room, all grown, and

all married except for me. On a plate were twelve crumpled pieces of paper.

We each chose two. Written on the inside of each piece of paper was the

licence number for a twenty-five-hundred-gallon gasoline delivery truck. The

trucks  were  ours  now.  So  were  the  delivery  contracts,  the  business

connections  and  the  employees.  My  father  had  begun  giving  out  the

inheritance.  Delivering gasoline turned out to be an easy way of making money. We

ran our trucks in cooperation with each other, Pheng Huor included. Before

long, I took my profits from fuel, added them to my savings from the part-

time medical jobs and bought into the ownership of the obstetrical clinic

where I worked. Tacitly, Pheng Huor and I made our peace. I respected him

for his ability as a businessman. He respected me for speaking out against

him. He never cheated me and we never quarrelled again.

I  was  able  to  run  the  fuel  business,  work  two  medical  jobs  and  go  to

medical school because of Huoy. She had her own job, as a schoolteacher,

but she kept my accounts and watched over my employees. We both worked

very hard. She had to overcome her shyness to give orders to employees. She

got frustrated adding long columns of numbers together when she was tired.

But  all  in  all  she  was  better  at  business  than  me.  I  continued  to  be  the

hotheaded one, losing my temper when government officials asked for bribes.

She calmed me down and told me when we had to pay and when we could

get out of it.

  Together, Huoy and I made far more money than we had ever dreamed of.

We began eating in restaurants every night. I bought a Mercedes. I bought

Huoy French dresses, gold bracelets, diamond earrings. I paid the rent for her

apartment, which was only right, since we were going to get married. Our

only worry was that we didn’t know when the wedding was going to be.

Papa had nothing against Huoy, but according to his beliefs a prospective

daughter-in-law had to prove her worth. So Huoy and I sacrificed our long

lunch hours together to try to change Papa’s mind. At noon every day Huoy

went over to my parents’ house to make desserts for their lunch. If my father

wasn’t feeling well, Huoy rubbed his neck or the small of his back.

My father just ate the pastries, accepted the back rubs and ignored Huoy.

He had many servants. Huoy was just one more. He also had many relatives

who had come to Phnom Penh and were trying to ingratiate themselves. Papa

was a rich man, and everyone wanted something from him.


From all over Cambodia, from the towns and the far countryside, people were

flooding into Phnom Penh. The original population of six or seven hundred

thousand  had  doubled,  and  it  was  on  its  way  to  doubling  again.  The

newcomers built huts of corrugated sheet metal or cardboard or thatch. They

begged on the streets or took work as servants or labourers at absurdly low

wages. If they had relatives in Phnom Penh they moved in, five or ten to aroom, or else borrowed money. My father had dozens of relatives show up at

the door. His brothers and sisters came from the town where they were born,

Tonle Batí, not far from Samrong Yong.

The most persistent visitor was his half sister Kim. She asked my father for

a loan so she could set up a new business. My father gave her the money

readily. It was the duty of family members to support one another, especially

in these times. It also gave my father face to be the one the others relied on.

  Aunt Kim could smell money – she was friendlier to my mother than to my

sisters, and friendlier to my sisters than to Huoy, all in a neat gradation. But

she couldn’t be too rude to Huoy because she wanted medical help from me.

I obliged Aunt Kim as much as I could, for the same reasons as my father.

I treated her husband for tuberculosis. I also treated their son Haing Seng for

minor illnesses. Haing Seng looked up to me. He called me ‘brother’. He told

me over and over again how much he appreciated what I was doing.

  With the money from my father, Aunt Kim bought military fatigues and T-

shirts and sold them in the market. There were hundreds of market stalls like

hers with US-made supplies openly for sale: canned food rations, mosquito

repellent,  mosquito  nets,  hammocks,  cots,  knives,  ammunition  pouches,

ammunition clips for M-16 rifles, knapsacks, helmets and fatigues. The olive-

green colour was everywhere. Barefoot soldiers looked wistfully at the new

boots for sale but didn’t have the money to buy them. The only thing not for

sale in the open-air markets was weapons, because the officers had already

sold them to the communists.

  Aunt Kim was not satisfied with the living she made from her market stall.

She  asked  me  to  supply  her  with  government  rice.  With  most  of  the

countryside  in  the  hands  of  the  communists,  rice  was  scarce,  so  the  US

government  shipped  in  rice  from  Korea.  Employees  of  the  government,

including part-time military doctors like me, could get two twenty-five-kilo

bags a month at a price far below its market value. I had never used my

ration, because I didn’t think it was honest to take rice at a cheap price when I

could afford to buy it at a full price from merchants. But Kim pressured me.

She  pointed  out  that  everybody  else  was  selling  government  rice  in  the

market. Reluctantly, I gave in. I got two bags for seven thousand riels each

and sold them to her at cost. She sold them for fifteen thousand riels each,

more than doubling her money.

In Phnom Penh, prices had risen astronomically because of shortages and

because  of  the  cost  of  paying  bribes  to  officials.  People  used  everyimaginable angle to make money. When my gasoline trucks made deliveries

there was always a shallow puddle of gas left in the bottom of the tank. The

drivers  siphoned  it  into  wine  bottles,  mixed  it  with  kerosene,  which  was

cheaper than gas but made engines sputter, and sold it on the street. Fuel

vendors like them were on the streets at all hours, waving their bottles, trying

to make a living. Teachers became taxi drivers. Doctors, nurses and orderlies

were absent from their jobs, working for private clinics or selling medicines

stolen from pharmacies. Military officers who needed real, live men instead

of ‘phantom soldiers’ sent trucks and troops to wait outside movie theatres in

the evening. When the films were over, young men leaving the theatres were

thrown into the trucks and driven away, unless they had the money to bribe

their way out.

  Phnom Penh had become a city of bonjour. Nobody was immune to it. One

day in 1974 my father went for a walk outside his house with his grandson,

Chy Kveng. My father was wearing a faded olive-green military T-shirt, the

kind Aunt Kim sold openly in the market. A military policeman drove up in a

truck, leaned out the window and said, ‘Hey, you goddamn Chinese! Stop

right there! How did you get that shirt? That’s for military use only!’

My father blinked his puffy eyes and said, ‘No, it’s an old shirt. I bought it

in the market a long time ago. I’m entitled to wear it.’

‘No you’re not, you fucking Chinese,’ the military policeman said.

  ‘Then you’ll have to close down the market. Don’t let people sell military

goods. As long as the markets sell the stuff, people will buy it.’

  ‘You’re breaking the law. Get into the truck.’

My father and his two-year-old grandson got into the truck. The military

policeman drove around Phnom Penh, threatening to arrest them and throw

them in jail. Eventually my father gave him eight thousand riels and was set

free.

  Kim’s son Haing Seng located me at the hospital and told me the news

about my father.

My patience for the regime was at an end. After losing Samrong Yong to

the communists, after bombing my family’s home, after allowing corruption

to spread like an infection throughout society.

I changed into my military uniform, which I hardly ever wore. By then I

had been promoted to the rank of captain, with three bars on the shoulders. I

went  to  the  military  police  headquarters.  The  man  at  the  desk  was  a

lieutenant, two bars on the shoulders. He saluted and stood at attention.I said in a deadly calm voice, ‘I want to know who controls the area my

parents live in. Someone in a truck just bonjoured my father for wearing an

army T-shirt. And he insulted him for his Chinese ancestry.’

‘I’ll look into it, sir.’

  ‘You’re goddamn right you’ll look into it. And I’ll tell you something else.

Why don’t you people stop bonjouring innocent civilians on the street? What

the hell’s wrong with you? Don’t you steal enough money as it is? Why don’t

you just bonjour the merchants in the market? Better yet, why don’t you stop

the stealing from military warehouses and fight the communists like you’re

supposed to?’

‘I’m sorry your father was bothered, sir.’

  ‘Listen to me, asshole!’ I shouted. ‘I don’t care about the money. But I care

about the discrimination. Look at your own skin. It’s the same colour as mine.

You’ve got Chinese blood too. You’re mixed-race! So why do you allow

discrimination? You motherfucking idiot! How stupid can you be?’

The lieutenant begged me with the palms of his hands together. He said he

realized that his subordinate did wrong. He apologized over and over. He said

he would find out who did it.

  Finally I left.

Of  course,  I  never  learned  who  the  driver  was.  Nobody  was  punished.

Phnom Penh was like that. Lon Nol was a leader only in name. Under him,

incompetence and bonjour flourished. The guilty went free and the powerless

suffered. Our society had lost its moral direction. And that’s why we lost the

war.                                            6



                                      The Fall


 




During  the  years  of  the  civil  war  I  didn’t  know  much  about  the  Khmer

Rouge. I wasn’t even curious. Like a typical Cambodian, I didn’t go to great

lengths to learn about things that were beyond my horizons. There wasn’t

much  information  available  anyway,  except  for  propaganda.  The  Khmer

Rouge had a clandestine radio station, but its broadcasts didn’t tell us what

the guerrillas were really like or what they really wanted. In Phnom Penh, the

Lon Nol regime controlled most of the rest of the media – it owned the TV

station and the two radio stations, and through censorship and repression it

kept  most  of  the  independently  owned  newspapers  tame  and  obedient.

Luckily, there were still a few journalists around who would say what they

thought, even though they couldn’t always write it.

One of those journalists was my friend Sam Kwil. He was always going

off to the battlefields on his motorcycle, so he had learned something about

the Khmer Rouge firsthand. He told me the guerrillas were full of tricks. For

example, when Khmer Rouge units were defeated, sometimes the guerrillas

changed into ordinary civilian clothes, buried their uniforms and weapons

and pretended to be innocent farmers. When they lost men in battles, the

survivors carried the corpses away so the Lon Nol soldiers wouldn’t find any

dead. The communists were masters of psychological warfare, Sam Kwil told

me.  Lon  Nol  soldiers  advancing  toward  huge,  noisy,  enthusiastic  Khmer

Rouge meetings in the countryside would find only loudspeakers and a tape

player – and land mines buried around the tree that the sound equipment hung

from. Later the Lon Nol corpses would be found eviscerated, their stomachcavities  stuffed  with  grass  and  leaves.  Sometimes  innocent  civilians  were

killed and mutilated too, to frighten the survivors.

  What Sam Kwil told me about grisly Khmer Rouge practices agreed with

rumours that began to circulate around Phnom Penh in 1974. In the markets,

it was said that the guerrillas killed people by sawing back and forth across

their  necks  with  the  spiny  edges  of  sugar  palm  leaf  stems.  But  this  was

exactly the sort of gossip that I expected to hear in the markets, repeated and

exaggerated from one credulous person to the next.

If I didn’t worry about the Khmer Rouge, it was because I didn’t believe

they could be any worse than the Lon Nol regime. Even Sam Kwil agreed

with that. For every story we heard about Khmer Rouge atrocities there were

several about the Lon Nol regime – mostly massacres of ethnic Vietnamese

civilians, whom the Lon Nol soldiers seemed to hate even more than they did

the  ethnic  Chinese.  Every  day  we  heard  accounts  of  government  soldiers

stealing chickens and livestock from civilians in the countryside, or setting up

roadblocks  to  collect bonjour.  But  we  never  heard  of  the  Khmer  Rouge

stealing anything, even a piece of paper or a grain of rice. It was said that the

guerrillas kept to a strict and honourable code of behaviour – no gambling, no

abuse of peasants and, above all, no corruption. After the stench of the Lon

Nol regime, the communists seemed like a fresh, clean breeze.

  Besides, I knew people in the Khmer Rouge, even if I didn’t know them

well: my secondary-school teacher Chea Huon, who after being released from

prison vanished into the jungle; Aunt Kim’s son Haing Meng (Haing Seng’s

older  brother),  who  had  gone  off  into  the  jungle  in  1967;  a  few  medical

colleagues who had vanished after the coup. Huoy had a cousin from Kampot

who was an officer in the Khmer Rouge, though she hadn’t seen him in years.

Almost everybody in Phnom Penh had a friend or relative on the other side.

And then there was Sihanouk. Compared to Lon Nol, who was despised

even by those who worked for him, Sihanouk was highly respected. Even if

Sihanouk was only a figurehead for the Khmer Rouge, it was hard to believe

that  the  cause  he  represented  was  cruel  or  bad.  Sihanouk  returned  to  the

‘liberated’ zones in Cambodia in 1973. He still talked to us over the radio,

from Peking. The prime minister in his government-in-exile was Penn Nouth,

the  lawyer  who  had  obtained  my  brother’s  release  after  the  lumber  mill

incident. Admittedly, there were reports that Sihanouk, Penn Nouth and their

entire circle were losing influence in the Khmer Rouge. The real leader was

supposed to be a man named Khieu Samphan. That didn’t bother me. KhieuSamphan had been a newspaper editor, a member of the legislature and for a

time a cabinet minister. He lived a simple life and hated corruption. In the old

days I had seen him riding around Phnom Penh on his bicycle.

In 1973 the United States stopped its bombing flights over Cambodia, and

after that supplied only weapons and money. By 1974 the Khmer Rouge had

almost completely taken over the communist side of the fighting from the

North Vietnamese. Most of the Khmer Rouge attacks were small-scale, a

dozen killed here, two dozen there, but as they encircled Phnom Penh they

ran into entire Lon Nol divisions and attacked in human waves. There were

enormous casualties on both sides.

  More and more frequently, as part of their psychological war, the Khmer

Rouge attacked Phnom Penh itself. They used Chinese or US-made artillery.

We could hear the artillery firing in the distance and then the explosions as

the shells landed. They also used rockets, which were even more frightening

because of the sound they made in the air, a c/ukclukcluk-c/uk-cluk c/uk c/uk,

c/uk, c/uk, slowing down as it made its descent, and then pakkum! When the

shells and rockets landed we ran outside to see what was hit; sometimes it

would be a house in the next block, the neighbours already struggling to

rescue the victims from the wreckage. Then, typically, the air force sent up its

T-28s to stop the shelling, and we would see the little planes across the river

diving toward treetop level and releasing bombs, then pulling up sharply and

the string of explosions and the palm trees and houses highlighted in the

flames and the black smoke billowing up. The government fought back, and

its lower-level troops fought well, but each time the Khmer Rouge squeezed

in a little closer. Takhmau, the town where my father had his lumber mill, fell

to the guerrillas, and my father’s business closed forever.

As the roads were cut off for the last time, as the last armed convoy made

its way up the river, as the merchants sent their gold and their daughters out

of the country and as the planes made tight, spiralling takeoffs and landings

at the airport, those of us who stayed tried to adjust. It surprises me now, but

most of us pretended that life was almost normal. We made ourselves believe

that Phnom Penh was a little island of peace and that it was going to stay that

way.  Even  in  March  and  early  April  1975  there  were  afternoons  when

barefoot soldiers drank rice wine and fell asleep in the shade. Almost every

night, Huoy and I went out to restaurants in the Mercedes. The food was still

excellent. There was plenty of cognac. I fully believed that there would be

negotiations, that at the last minute the two opposing sides would somehowsoften and compromise. Compromise, avoiding conflict, the sompeah with

the palms together – that gentleness had always dominated the Cambodian

way  of  life.  The  nasty,  violent  underside  of  our  culture  was  something  I

didn’t like to think about.

  ‘Sweet,’ Huoy said to me over dinner, ‘why don’t you just sell the gasoline

trucks and leave now, while you still have a chance? You can buy an airline

ticket and go anywhere in the world.’

I gave her an exasperated glance. ‘Because Phnom Penh isn’t going to

fall,’ I told her crossly. I had stayed up every night for a week, operating on

wounded soldiers in the military hospital. ‘Look, I’m tired. Do you mind not

talking about it? Let’s just enjoy the meal, all right?’

  Even  when  the  Khmer  Rouge  ringed  the  outskirts  of  the  city  and  the

shelling  was  daily,  some  mental  barrier  kept  me  from  accepting  the

inevitable.  On  April  12,  1975,  the  Americans  evacuated  the  city  in

helicopters. A friend of mine, a pilot in the Lon Nol air force, offered to

arrange for me, Huoy and Ma to leave on the American helicopters, but I said

no.  I  watched  the  helicopters  take  off  in  the  distance,  like  oversized

dragonflies, hovering and then speeding off with their loud, clattering roar.

On the evening of April 16 I went to the house of an old friend for dinner.

He told me, ‘Tonight is the last night for all of us, and for happiness in our

families. It may be the last time we are ever together.’ We could hear artillery

outside, but I still didn’t believe him. It was my old stubbornness. Somebody

told me one thing and I had to believe that the opposite was true.

  After dinner I drove to Huoy’s house, arriving around ten o’clock. Huoy

was upset. There was heavy shelling in all directions, explosions lighting up

the night sky. She begged me over and over again to stay the night. Her

mother asked me to stay too. I told them I had some visits to make and said

not to worry.

I  drove  my  white  150  cc.  Vespa  from  Huoy’s  house,  near  the  central

market, westward toward my parents’ house, near the Olympic Stadium. Ever

since the big feud in my family in 1972 I had been on good terms with my

parents. I drove them wherever they wanted to go in my Mercedes. I treated

them for their high blood pressure and their other health problems. They had

gained face by having a son who was a doctor and who looked after them as

well as I did. Yes, I was a full doctor now. In February 1975 I had finally

been awarded my medical degree. With the new professional status came a

softening in my father’s attitudes. I had reason to think he was going to letme marry Huoy.

  ‘Stay here tonight,’ Papa said when I came in, ‘so we don’t get separated.’

I told him I had to go to the clinic to check on my patients. I repeated what I

had said a thousand times, that if the Khmer Rouge got in the city they would

never harm doctors. There was nothing to worry about. I had even taped a red

cross on the back of my Vespa. Everybody would know I was in the medical

profession. Nobody would hurt me.

My older brother Pheng Huor came in from his house next door. ‘Well, if

you have to go,’ he said, ‘at least be careful. The rest of us will wait for you

here. If something happens, my advice is to get rid of the Vespa. In situations

like this, it’s safer to make your way on foot.’

In situations like what? I wondered irritatedly as I drove to my bachelor

apartment  to  get  fresh  clothes.  Some  friends  of  mine  were  staying  at  the

apartment, sleeping on the floor.

‘It doesn’t look good,’ one of my friends said, leaning up on one elbow.

‘The government cannot last.’

‘Of course it can. Go back to sleep. Everything’s going to be fine.’

I changed clothes and drove toward the clinic. In the streets, quiet except

for occasional gunfire, my Vespa engine sputtered but kept on going. Bad

fuel,  contaminated  with  kerosene.  The  entire  staff  was  at  the  clinic,  four

nurses and four midwives and the guard, but none of the other doctors had

showed. ‘Maybe they were scared of the shelling,’ said the smallest nurse,

whose name was Srei. ‘I’m scared too, Doctor. If you go someplace, let me

go with you.’

  ‘Don’t say that!’ I said angrily. ‘Nobody’s going anyplace! We’re all going

to go on working here as always.’

A half-dozen wounded and a few women in labour were waiting for me in

the clinic that night. I got to work. As I examined and probed, cut and sewed,

my hands seemed to be working automatically. I began thinking. Why was it

that everyone I had talked to said the same thing? What instinct did they have

that I lacked? What did they know that I didn’t? Maybe the city would fall

tomorrow. But no. That was impossible.

I spent the night on a cot in the clinic. A little after sunrise on April 17,

1975, I drove my Vespa to my parents’ house, where I paid brief respects.

Then I drove to Huoy’s.

  Huoy had dressed for work in a neat white blouse and sampot. Her face

was pale and tense. We went to the little cafe on the ground floor of herbuilding. We had our normal breakfast, tea and a bowl of Chinese noodles

with slices of beef and savoury vegetables. ‘Don’t leave school today,’ I told

her,  ‘except  to  go  home.  We  don’t  want  to  be  separated.  If  something

happens,  come  back  early  so  your  mother  won’t  worry.  But  don’t  worry

about me. They won’t kill doctors, either side. I’m safe.’

By now even I didn’t fully believe what I was saying about being safe.

I started my Vespa. Huoy sat sidesaddle on the back seat, the hem of her

sampot  decorously  below  her  knees,  her  ankles  crossed,  one  foot  on  the

footrest. I drove her to Lycée Sisowath and dropped her off. Then I drove

toward my clinic. On the way, artillery shells exploded at random in the

residential blocks. All but a few Westerners had already evacuated Phnom

Penh. The Cambodian population of the city was up to three or four million.

Some were getting ready to welcome the Khmer Rouge; others were afraid;

the rest, like me, still hoped to go on living normally.

  Because  of  the  rubble  spilling  into  the  streets  from  the  shelling  it  was

necessary to make detours, but I got to my clinic at about 7.30 a.m. A crowd

of  people  milled  around  nearby,  watching  the  market  stalls  burn  and  the

smoke filling the air. Some of the women with vegetables or meat stalls in the

market carried wounded relatives and neighbours into my clinic. I had about

a dozen to treat in all, few of them seriously injured.

I had taken care of the worst cases when there was an urgent phone call

from a doctor with the rank of army general. He told me to get to the hospital

to operate on some soldiers who had been injured in fighting near the airport.

Quickly I finished the rest of my patients, and then a military driver came to

the front of the clinic with a low, wide, all-terrain-model B-1 jeep. At the

military hospital I asked a secretary to telephone the guard at my clinic to ask

him to bring the Vespa to the hospital. Then I went to Block A, for major

surgery,  and  glanced  through  the  window  into  the  operating  room.  The

patient was already on the table.

I went to the scrub room and began washing my hands at the sink. An

orderly whose name I could never remember helped me into the operating

gown and tied the strings for me at the back of the blouse. I went back to

washing. ‘Boss?’ he said. ‘What do you think? The situation isn’t too good, is

it? Have you heard about the government negotiations with the communists?’

  ‘No, I haven’t heard anything about it. I just came in from my clinic.’

  ‘Well, the situation isn’t good,’ said the orderly. As if that was news.

I put on gloves. We went together to the operating room. The patient wason the table, unconscious, with intravenous tubes running into his arm, one

for blood and another for glucose. The operating staff had already assembled:

the anaesthesiologist, the nurses and another doctor, whose name was Pok

Saradath. The X-ray film was already clipped into place on the translucent

glass above the operating table. I went over to look at the film. The patient

had been hit by a grenade. There were burns on his face and shoulder and

puncture holes as big around as a finger on his abdomen where the shrapnel

had  entered.  His  belly  was  distended  from  the  wounds  and  the  internal

bleeding. He was groaning in a low voice. I ordered some more anaesthetic

injected in the rubber valve in the IV tube.

The orderly left by the front door.

The operating room was quiet. We heard the sounds of gunfire coming

from the outside in several directions. Pok Saradath, a longtime friend and

colleague, worked beside me, dressed as I was in gown and mask. He made

the long incision for the laparotomy and we began talking in the cheerfully

obscene language that had always been part of the operating room protocol.

‘. . . son-of-a-bitch Lon Nol government,’ Saradath said. ‘If Lon Nol is

incapable, why doesn’t he just step down to make life easier for us . . ?’

I glanced up from cleaning the exterior puncture wounds. I raised my right

arm and shook it uncontrollably in my imitation of Lon Nol, and Saradath

understood, his eyes glinting with humour above his gauze mask. ‘Because if

he steps anyplace he falls,’ I said.

  ‘And why do you think he is going to fall, medically speaking? You know,

I heard he has tertiary syphilis,’ said Saradath.

  ‘No, he fucks too much. Damaged his spinal cord.’

  ‘That corrupt son-of-a-bitch. He holds on to power and everybody else

suffers. All the families separated because of the war and nobody making a

living.’

‘Not true. It is very easy to make a living if you don’t mind threatening

innocent people and demanding their money. There are some very good jobs

to be had around Phnom Penh. If you are a policeman or an army officer you

can get rich very quickly.’

The orderly poked his head between the swinging doors. ‘I have news: the

soldiers near the bridge have surrendered. Everybody is waving white flags.

On the streets, on the buildings, everywhere,’ he said. He withdrew.

We kept on working. The room was quiet. Through the walls we could still

hear the boom of artillery.The orderly stuck his head in the room again. ‘The Khmer Rouge are now

in Phnom Penh!’

I had removed the shrapnel from the patient, and Saradath and I sewed up

the wounds in the intestinal walls. I tied off a suture and got a different-size

needle from the nurse and then bent back over the patient.

  ‘Well,’ said Saradath, ‘let the Khmer Rouge come in and get it over with,

so we can reunite with our families.’

  ‘Anything would be better than this,’ I said. ‘Anything at all.’

The orderly came in and said he had seen two young Khmer Rouge jump

over the fence and run into the hospital compound, one with an M-16, the

other with an AK-47.

  There were perhaps a dozen people in the operating room. I told them, ‘If

the Khmer Rouge come in, just be quiet and be careful. We don’t know what

they’re going to do.’

  Footsteps sounded out in the hall and the doors slammed open.

  ‘Don’t move!’ an angry, high-pitched voice yelled. ‘Don’t move! Raise

your hands!’

I was facing the wall, standing over the patient. I put my needle down and

slowly turned around with my hands raised. There was blood on my gloves,

but everyone else had their hands above their heads and there was blood on

some of their gloves too.

The guerrilla wore a ragged black shirt, black trousers and black rubber

sandals made from automobile tyres. He was dark-skinned, a racially pure

Khmer holding a US-made M-16 rifle. The doors slammed open again and

another guerrilla came in dressed the same but with a Chinese-made AK-47.

He pressed the barrel of the AK-47 to my temple.

  ‘You the doctor?’ he demanded. ‘You the doctor?’

  ‘No,  the  doctor  left  by  the  back  door  a  minute  ago,’  I  said.  ‘You  just

missed him.’

‘Liar!’ He had fiercely bulging eyes and a high voice.

He was, at most, twelve years old.

I didn’t move a muscle.

He pushed the string of my green operating cap with the barrel of his rifle.

The words came out in a burst. ‘You liar! If I don’t find the doctor I’ll come

back and kill you!’

I stayed calm on the outside. All my instincts told me that this was a time

to stay absolutely still and show no fear.The fierce look in his eyes changed to something like uncertainty.

  ‘Let’s go,’ he said to the other guerrilla. The two of them left by the back

door.

We lowered our hands. The nurses were crying.

  ‘Boss, we have to leave,’ one of the nurses said to me. ‘If they don’t find a

doctor outside they’ll kill us.’

I  thought  for  a  second.  The  patient  was  lying  on  the  table  behind  me,

unconscious. His intestines were back in place, but we hadn’t finished sewing

him up.

‘Be quiet,’ I told them. ‘Nobody move.’

We heard the slapping of the guerrillas’ sandals recede along the hallway.

Thoughts occurred to me faster than I could put them into words. It was like

being surrounded in a gang fight as a boy. All of my illusions were gone.

They  had  broken  into  the  sanctuary  of  the  operating  room.  They  were

stronger, and we could only try to outwit them. Or evade them.

Half a minute passed. No more footsteps.

  ‘Okay,’ I told the room, ‘everybody has to leave right now. Go now and

don’t wait. The patient stays.’

  Saradath whirled on me. ‘You son-of-a-bitch!’ he said. ‘We have to finish

the patient first!’

  ‘Finish what, mother-fuck? We have to leave now. Get out of here!’ And

though Saradath and I had the same rank, he gave in because I sounded as

though I knew what I was doing. Everybody scurried out of the room except

for Saradath and me. We took a last look at the poor young soldier on the

table with pale, waxen skin and the long, open incision in his belly. He was

going to die. Saradath and I left the room by the front doors and walked

rapidly down the corridor together. The corridor was the same as always, yet

it looked different, and I couldn’t believe what had just happened. I had my

arm around my friend’s shoulder and I slapped the back of his head and he

slapped mine. We got back to the scrub room and my trousers were hanging

there  but  my  shirt  was  missing.  Somebody  had  stolen  it.  Pok  Saradath’s

clothes were there. There was a woman’s blouse on another hook with short

tails and three-quarter-length sleeves.

  ‘You don’t want this, do you?’ I said. He shook his head and I put it on.

We dressed quickly.

I went to my office in another wing of the hospital. Everybody there had

gone. I grabbed my briefcase and went outside. My Vespa was parked thereon its kickstand with the red cross taped on the back of the seat. I put my key

in the ignition.

  Guerrillas in ragged black uniforms swarmed over the hospital grounds.

Most of them held AK-47s, the communist assault rifle with its ammunition

clip unmistakably curving out from the underside of the stock in the shape of

a banana. They had the same fierce, angry expressions as the two in the

operating room. I paused to look at them. There was something excessive

about their anger. Something had happened to these people in their years in

the forests. They had been transformed. They were not like the Cambodians I

had known, shy and a bit lazy and polite.

‘Get out!’ they shouted. ‘Get out! Everybody has to move! Now!’

I  started  the  Vespa  and  rode  it  several  hundred  yards  to  the  gate.  The

security guard was gone and the gate was closed. I turned off the engine,

opened the gate myself and walked through.                                            7



                              The Wheel of History


 




Thousands and thousands and thousands of people filled the street, plodding

south, where the Khmer Rouge told them to go. Thousands more stood in

windows  and  doorways,  unwilling  to  leave,  or  else  came  out  from  their

houses  offering  flowers  or  bowls  of  rice,  which  some  of  the  guerrillas

accepted with shy country smiles and others coldly ignored. Car horns blared.

From distant parts of the city came the chattering of assault rifles and the

occasional boom of artillery. The fighting wasn’t over, but white bedsheets

hung from the buildings as signs of truce and surrender.

The Khmer Rouge strode through the boulevard, tired and bad-tempered,

armed with AK-47 rifles and clusters of round, Chinese-made grenades on

their  belts.  Their  black  uniforms  were  dusty  and  muddy.  They  had  been

fighting all night; some had waded through ditches. A few specialists carried

the  big  tubular  rocket-propelled  grenade  launchers  on  their  shoulders,

accompanied by soldiers carrying the elongated grenades in backpacks. Here

and there were mit neary, the female comrades, firing pistols in the air and

shouting harshly at the civilians to hurry up and leave. They were young, the

Khmer  Rouge,  most  of  them  in  their  teens.  Their  skins  were  very  dark.

Racially they were pure Khmers, children of the countryside. To them Phnom

Penh was a strange, foreign place.

  Directly in front of me a guerrilla, with the wide-eyed smile of a boy with a

new plaything, tried to take a motorcycle for a joyride. He revved the throttle

to maximum rpm. As he released the clutch, the front wheel skitted left and

right and then the machine lurched forward from under him and into thecrowd. He picked himself up from the pavement and walked off scowling,

leaving the bike on its side and pedestrians holding their legs in pain.

I put my Vespa in neutral and walked it into the street. No sense starting

the engine and wasting gasoline. The crowd was shoulder to shoulder. There

was no chance of getting through.

A Khmer Rouge shouted, ‘You have to leave the city for at least three

hours. You must leave for three hours. You must leave for your own safety,

because we cannot trust the Americans. The Americans will drop bombs on

us very soon. Go now, and do not bother to bring anything with you!’

Was I supposed to believe him? I wondered. After what had happened in

the hospital? My instincts told me no. The guerrillas on the street had the

same fierce expressions as those who had burst into the operating room. They

looked totally unlike normal Cambodians, except for their dark, round faces.

And yet a part of me wanted to believe that they were telling the truth.

The  harsh  voice  yelled  again,  ‘If  you  have  weapons,  put  them  on  the

sidewalk. Let Angka collect them. The war is over now and there is no more

need for weapons. The weapons are the property of Angka!’

I glanced to the side of the street. Sure enough, a few trusting civilians

came out of their houses and put their AK-47s, their M-16s, their pistols on

the sidewalk. I wondered: Who is Angka? Or what is Angka?

In  the  Khmer  language, angka  means  ‘organization’.  Angka  was  the

Organization-logically, I supposed, the Khmer Rouge command group. What

did  that  imply?  That  the  guerrillas  were  going  to  try  to  organize  the

Cambodians? That wasn’t likely. If there was ever a disorganized people, it

was us. Peasants who farmed when and where they wanted, employees who

were casual about showing up for work, a society so laissez-faire that nothing

ever got done. Even Sihanouk hadn’t been able to organize us when he was

our ruler, and he had tried. Where was Sihanouk now? I wondered. Was he

part of Angka? Wasn’t he the leader of the Khmer Rouge? When was he

going to come back to Phnom Penh? Why hadn’t they mentioned his name?

All around, people muttered, ‘Why evacuate the city? We don’t want to go.

The war is over. The Americans are not going to bomb us. We don’t want to

leave.’ They walked and stopped, took two steps and stopped again. Those

with motorcycles pushed them by the handlebars, as I did. Those with cars

pushed  them  with  the  help  of  friends  or  relatives.  Nobody  started  their

engines. There was no room on the road to drive. There was no gasoline to

spare.  When  could  we  buy  gasoline  again?  What  would  become  of  mygasoline delivery company?

I trudged south with the flow of the traffic, in the general direction of my

clinic. A contingent of Khmer Rouge approached from the opposite direction.

In front of them walked a frightened-looking man whose hands were tied

behind his back. Shoving him forward was a mit neary with a pistol. She was

a  large-breasted  woman  who  had  done  everything  possible  to  appear

unfeminine. She wore her blouse buttoned to her neck and her sleeves rolled

up to the forearms and a checkered krama wrapped around her head. She was

as dusty and angry as any of her male comrades. As she neared me, she

waved the pistol in the air and addressed the crowd:

  ‘The wheel of history is turning,’ she declared. ‘The wheel of history rolls

on. If you use your hands to try to stop the wheel, they will be caught in the

spokes. If you use your feet to try to stop it, you will lose them too. There is

no turning back. World history will not wait. The revolution is here. You

must make your choice, to follow Angka or not. If you choose not to follow

Angka, we will not be responsible for your safety.’

  She  gave  the  man  in  front  of  her  another  contemptuous  shove.  He

staggered, the whites of his eyes showing his fear. As they went past me, she

waved her pistol again and shouted, ‘Everybody is equal now! Everybody is

the same! No more sompeahing! No more masters and no more servants! The

wheel of history is turning! You must follow Angka’s rules!’

I pushed on with the Vespa. Whatever hopes I had for the Khmer Rouge

were fading fast. They were supposed to liberate us, not tie us up and make

threats about obeying Angka’s rules. Whoever Angka was.

The air was stifling. The streets were filled from one side to the other. We

were  no  longer  residents  of  Phnom  Penh.  We  were  refugees,  carrying

whatever we could. The wealthy pushed cars or flatbottomed handcarts, with

sacks of rice, suitcases, pots and pans, televisions and electric fans. The poor

carried  nothing  but  their  rice  pots.  Grocers  carried  groceries,  booksellers

pulled carts with piles of books. It was strange, I thought, the things people

treasured.  Televisions  and  fans  wouldn’t  be  much  use  outside  of  Phnom

Penh, where there was no electricity.

A few blocks from the hospital I came to a private medical clinic similar to

mine. An exodus of the sick and crippled had begun. All the patients were

leaving  by  order  of  the  Khmer  Rouge.  A  one-legged  soldier  hobbled  on

crutches, holding his spoon and mess kit in his fingers. Behind him another

man with a bandage over his eyes and amputated legs was being wheeledalong the sidewalk on a hospital bed, the IV bag still hanging from the bed

rack. Slowest of all was an elderly woman who clutched the front of her

sarong with one hand, to keep it from becoming unfastened, and kept her

other  hand  on  the  shoulder  of  a  female  companion  for  support.  The  old

woman was saying in a feeble voice, ‘I’m very tired. Please stay here, I’m

very tired. I can’t go on.’ Her companion, who was holding the old woman’s

IV bag, said, ‘Try your best, dear. Keep walking. Come on now, walk as best

as you can. I know you’re tired, but you can make it.’

I asked the old woman what kind of illness she had. She said she didn’t

know, she hadn’t brought her medical papers with her. Her friend explained

that she had a pain in her stomach.

‘Let her rest first,’ I said to the second woman. ‘Don’t rush her. Let her

take a few steps at a time, if that’s all she can do. But if you can, take her to

the Sokchea clinic, next to Tuol Tumpoung market. I’ll be there.’

  Standing in a doorway, I reached for the woman’s wrist, to take her pulse.

It was faint and slow. Then I pulled her eyelid down to check on her blood

supply. The tissue was pale and anaemic; if she had been healthy it would

have been red. A short young Khmer Rouge with fierce eyes and muddy

black clothes came up to us. He shouted, ‘Go! Don’t stay here!’ in a high-

pitched child’s voice. He was not much taller than his rifle.

I said politely, ‘Yes, we’re leaving.’ The child-soldier walked on, yelling,

‘You have to leave! Go now!’ in his high voice to people in other doorways.

He was a few steps away when he raised his AK-47 and fired a burst of

ammunition in the air. The old woman trembled and I had to steady her. He

walked farther down the sidewalk, yelling and firing in the air.

I gave the two women the directions to my clinic and wished them luck.

When I walked on, I was in a terrible mood. Why were the Khmer Rouge

making patients leave the hospitals and clinics? What was the advantage of

that? Maybe the Khmer Rouge had some reason for emptying the city, but

they didn’t have to hurry the weak and sick. A picture flashed into my mind

of the operating room in the hospital. Of a patient on the table, with a long

incision in his abdomen. Of the young soldier I had left to die.

I turned west and then south onto Monivong Boulevard, one of the main

avenues  of  the  city.  Here  traffic  was  even  slower.  The  mass  of  people

shuffled onward, but it was difficult to move. Around me on all sides were

feet and shoulders and heads. Khmer Rouge stood on every street corner,

urging us on, and more Khmer Rouge rode scowling past in jeeps and opentrucks,  waving  pieces  of  red  cloth  and  red  handkerchiefs  tied  to  their

bayonets. The civilians in the street wore white armbands and headbands and

white towels around their waists. There were white handkerchiefs tied to the

radio antennas of their cars, and white sheets hung from the windows of the

houses. But already the earlier joy, that the war was over, had disappeared,

and its place was taken by the smell of fear. On the sidewalk, a man changed

from his Lon Nol army uniform into black pajamas.

  Something beyond understanding was happening. Between our hopes of

liberation and the scowls on the guerrillas’ faces, between their order to leave

the city ‘for three hours’ and knowing that it took three hours to move three

blocks was a chasm that our minds could not cross. We could only sense that

some enormous event was unfolding and that we were part of it, and our fates

were no longer ours to choose.

I saw an opening in the crowd, ducked into a side street and parked the

Vespa, locking both the steering and the ignition. The clinic could wait. I had

to look for Huoy and my parents.

I walked on side streets, then north on Monivong. Without the scooter it

was  easier  to  manoeuvre,  walking  against  the  flow,  dodging  the  Khmer

Rouge, staying out of their sight. But the same bobbing heads and shoulders

that  hid  me  made  it  harder  to  see.  I  kept  scanning  the  thousands  and

thousands of faces. No Huoy. No father and mother either.

I saw families going around blocks on all four sides, walking around and

around to give the appearance of moving, hoping that the ‘three hours’ of

evacuation would soon end. The women wept, searching for lost children.

The men darted back into their houses, remembering another pile of clothing,

another sack of rice, another hidden cache of gold. They piled suitcases in the

trunks of their cars, ran from their cars back to their houses and back to the

cars again and shouted at each other to hurry along.

  Toward  sundown  I  returned  to  the  scooter  and  pushed  it  south  on

Monivong  to  Wat  Tuol  Tumpoung,  near  my  clinic.  The  wat  compound,

surrounded by a high whitewashed wall with a crenellated top, took up an

entire  block.  Worried-looking  monks  emerged  from  its  ornate  gateway,

pushing their scanty possessions on a handcart – saffron robes, a few cooking

utensils, a rice pot. The Khmer Rouge were making the monks leave too.

  Beyond the wat stood a Khmer Rouge cadre who was laughing deliriously

as he tried to start a Vespa motor scooter like mine. I glanced at him, then

stared. Under the muddy black uniform, surely, was a boy from SamrongYong. I did not know his name but remembered him from the market and the

soccer fields.

He laughed and laughed at the incongruity of having a motor scooter after

all those years of hardship in the jungle. The Vespa was a toy for him, a

temporary plaything from the city life he had rejected. His smile vanished as

he recognized me. I said, ‘Hello, comrade.’ He didn’t answer. Pumping and

pumping the starter pedal, he finally got the engine to start. He got on and

drove off without giving me another glance. Perhaps he felt that the people of

his village made no difference to him now that the wheel of history had

turned.

It was dusk by the time I got to my clinic. From the outside it looked

closed and empty, but when I unlocked the sliding grille doors and slipped in,

dozens  of  patients  were  there.  They sompeahed  me,  raising  their  palms

imploringly to their foreheads. ‘Please see me first, luk doctor.’ ‘Please save

my  life,’  they  said.  I sompeahed  to  each  of  them  in  turn,  telling  them

everybody would be seen but that the worst cases would be first. Scanning

their faces I felt a stab of disappointment. The old lady whose pulse I had

taken on the street was not among them. Well, there was nothing to be done

about it.

At the nurses’ station I asked Srei, who was my favourite nurse, whether

Huoy had left a message. Srei was small and cute and like a little sister to me.

She said, with a sort of pouting smile, ‘Why don’t you stop worrying about

your girlfriend and take care of the patients? Hurry, we’ve got a woman in

labour inside.’

  ‘How far along?’

‘Her cervix is dilated to eight centimetres,’ said Srei. So there wasn’t much

time.

First we had to get the clinic organized. It was almost dark outside. The

electrical system had stopped working and the water system too. The staff

was all there but not the other doctor who was supposed to be on duty. I told

Srei  to  find  candles  and  water.  She  should  sterilize  the  gynaecological

instruments by putting them in a tray, pouring alcohol over them and setting

the alcohol on fire. Srei scurried off, and by the time I needed the instruments

she had them ready.

I changed, scrubbed and delivered the child. When it was done, the nurses

reminded me about the water situation, which had not been solved. I went out

to the waiting room and told the patients that those who were able should slipout of the clinic to collect water and then come back again. Thoeun, the

guard, would supervise their comings and goings.

  Then I went back to work. My next patient, a civilian, was moaning from a

shrapnel wound. The shell fragments had entered his back, and under the

dirty krama he had used as a bandage for several days the wound had grown

infected. There was no X ray to help locate the fragments, only candles and

lanterns.  I  cleaned  the  outside  of  the  wound  with  alcohol  and  tincture  of

iodine and injected the periphery with Xylocain to stop the pain locally. Then

I explored the interior of the wound as delicately as possible with round-

tipped scissors while the man groaned. Eventually I found a couple of large

pieces of shrapnel near the spine and removed them.

  There were twenty patients that night, many of them women in labour. By

some  cruel  irony  they  were  delivering  their  infants  on  one  of  the  least

auspicious dates of Cambodian history. The nurses and the midwives and I

went from one to the next. We kept the doors locked and didn’t allow light

from our candles and lanterns to give away our presence inside. Every few

hours Khmer Rouge pounded on the metal grille anyway, shouting, ‘Anyone

in  here?  You  have  to  leave!’  None  of  us  answered,  not  the  staff  or  the

patients and their families. After what seemed like a long time we heard the

Khmer Rouge walking away again, ordering others on the sidewalk to keep

on  moving.  Then  we  peered  from  behind  the  shutters  at  the  unending

procession of evacuees outside.

  After finishing with my patients, before dawn, I slipped out the clinic door

and walked northward, toward Huoy’s apartment and my parents’ house. In

the  dark  it  should  have  been  easy  to  go  against  the  direction  the  Khmer

Rouge wanted us to take. But others had had the same idea. Ahead of me, a

man walked into an intersection lit by a streetlight. A Khmer Rouge called

out for him to stop and, when the man hesitated, lifted his rifle, aimed and

fired. The man fell on the pavement, jerked like someone having a spastic fit

and then lay still.

I ducked behind a parked car. Others froze where they were, afraid to

move.

  ‘You didn’t listen to Angka!’ the soldier shouted in the silence to those

near him. ‘You have to obey. The wheel of history will not wait for you.

When you move, you have to move in the right direction. You must go to the

countryside.’

I took a deep breath and walked up to the soldier. ‘Please, luk,’ I said,using the word that shows respect for a social superior, ‘I lost my wife and

children. I just need to get them. They’re close to here, just up the street.’

  ‘Stop begging,’ the soldier replied roughly. ‘No more begging. And no

more luk. We’re all equal now. We’re all the same level. Why do you keep

the old ways of society? There is no more old society! Get out of here.’

The lie came easily: ‘Please, comrade, my wife and children will be lost

without me.’

  ‘No!’ he shouted. ‘Angka doesn’t allow it! If you try to cross the street I

will not be responsible for your safety. Now go!’

I dropped back into the shadows, shaken.

  Somewhere, Huoy and my parents were wondering and worrying about

me. Just as I was wondering and worrying about them.

No use looking for them now, though. Not while this fanatic had a clear

field  of  fire.  His  target  lay  on  the  pavement  in  a  puddle  of  blood  that

glistened  in  the  streetlight.  Civilians  trudging  southward  across  the

intersection detoured far around the body. Nobody dared approach to make

sure he was dead or to carry the body away. Staring at the body, my mind’s

eye kept seeing a patient who had been left to die on the operating table.

By the time I got back to the clinic all the patients had left. Thoeun, the

guard, had supervised the packing. Thoeun had been a soldier in the Lon Nol

military until a battle wound brought him under my care in the hospital. He

had irreparable nerve damage – his eyelids were half closed and his head

twitched from side to side in a permanent tic – but he was very resourceful.

Since he couldn’t go back to the army, I had hired him, and never regretted it.

  Thoeun  had  removed  a  fifty-five-gallon  drum  from  a  water  cart  and

attached it as a trailer behind a Yamaha motorcycle that a patient had left in

the clinic. He had piled the handcart with baskets of food and medicine, with

candles and lanterns, with a stack of sarongs he had found somewhere. He

had piled more on the luggage rack of my Vespa. The nurses had prepared

baskets  and  bundles.  They  had  wrapped  their  kramas  around  their  heads,

country style, to carry loads on top of their heads. They gathered around me

in  the  hallway.  ‘Are  you  ready  to  go  yet, luk doctor?’ ‘Should we bring

anything else with us, doctor?’

  There were nine of them altogether, eight young and middle-aged women

and Thoeun, standing somberly beside the Yamaha.

I told them, ‘From now on, be careful. If you want me to stay with you,

don’t call me luk and don’t call me ‘doctor.’ Just call me ‘brother.’ Do youunderstand?’ They nodded their heads, wiping away the tears. ‘If anyone asks

why you’re with me, don’t say I’m your boss. Just say we’re friends. But

don’t worry, we’re going to be all right. We’re not going to die. Stop crying,

and then we’ll go.’

We left as the sky was turning grey, locking the door behind us. I wore the

woman’s blouse from the hospital and had added a krama around my head, to

make me harder to recognize. Srei stayed close to me, holding on to the rack

on the back of my scooter. We walked south on a small street parallel to

Monivong Boulevard.

  Again  the  streets  were  thronged.  Over  a  loudspeaker,  the  new  rulers

repeated their message: ‘You must leave the city. Allow Angka to take care

of the hidden enemies and wipe them out. You must leave the city for three

hours. You must leave the city immediately. . .’

But other Khmer Rouge began to shout to us that we had to leave for three

days,  without  seeming  to  be  aware  that  they  were  contradicting  the

loudspeakers.

We had been up all night and we felt numbed. Like walking through a bad

dream. We all knew the Khmer Rouge were lying, yet a part of us still hoped

they might be telling the truth. If we could return, whether in three hours or

three days, there was no sense in hurrying. We would only have to cover the

same distance coming back. So we walked slowly. Everybody else in the

street walked slowly too.

The sky grew light. Around us the shapes of people took on colour and

detail. Alongside me a woman balanced a large bag on her head, steadying it

with one hand; behind her walked her young children. I glanced at her and

knew her. She had been a nurse in the military hospital. We had worked

together for many years.

  ‘Doctor Ngor – ’ she began.

‘I am not a doctor anymore,’ I said. ‘Don’t call me that. Call me ‘brother.’

  ‘Doctor  Ngor,’  she  repeated,  with  her  lower  lip  trembling.  Maybe  she

hadn’t heard me. Or maybe her emotions had taken hold of her mind. And

who could blame her? Phnom Penh had fallen. We were all leaving on a

journey, destination unknown. She needed to talk with someone she knew.

Her  face  contorted.  ‘We  don’t  know  when  we  will  meet  together  again.

Perhaps never,’ she said. ‘Maybe we will never see each other again.’ And

she walked off rapidly with her children so I wouldn’t see her crying.

  ‘Don’t lose hope!’ I called out after her. ‘As long as the sun rises in theeast, there is hope!’

Our group of ten came to an intersection and turned east. And just then the

sun, huge and red, rose through the smoke on the horizon. We would hope.

We would always hope. But the woman was right: I never saw her again. Nor

have I seen more than a fraction of the people I knew in the old days in

Phnom Penh.                                            8



                          Exodus from Phnom Penh


 




On that second day of the revolution, and on the following days, the weather

was hot and dusty. The sky was clear, but from far above came faint sounds

like thunder, the sonic booms of jets flying so high we couldn’t even see

them.

As we stood in the hot sun, shuffling forward with one foot and then the

other, the Khmer Rouge fired shots over our heads to get us to hurry, and

loudspeakers played radio broadcasts of the government station, which was

now under the guerrillas’ control:

  ‘April  17,  1975,  is  a  day  of  great  victory  of  tremendous  historical

significance for our Cambodian nation and people!’ a man’s voice declared.

‘It  is  the  day  when  our  people  completely  and  definitely  liberated  the

capital city of Phnom Penh and our beloved Cambodia!’ a woman’s voice

responded.

  ‘Long live the Cambodian people!’ said the man.

  ‘Long live the most wonderful Cambodian revolution!’ said the woman.

  ‘Long  live  the  independent,  peaceful,  neutral,  nonaligned,  sovereign,

democratic and prosperous Cambodia with genuine territorial integrity!’ It

sounded to me as if the man was determined not to be outdone.

  ‘Long live the line of absolute struggle, independence, self-reliance and

overcoming  all  obstacles  of  the  correct  and  clearsighted  Cambodian

revolutionary  organization!’  answered  the  woman,  equally  determined  to

have the last word.

  ‘Resolutely  maintain  high  revolutionary  vigilance  to  defend  theCambodian nation and people at all times!’ the man shouted.

  ‘Resolutely maintain the position of struggle to defend the country and

people without hesitation!’ the woman shrieked.

  They went on and on in this strange communist shouting match.

  Then marching music began playing out of the loudspeakers. It reminded

me of music I had heard on Radio Peking, very stylized and Chinese, with a

heavy regular beat and cymbal-and-gong flourishes finishing out the phrases,

but the words sung to it were the same jargon the man and woman had been

shouting moments before. It was the ugliest music I had ever heard. Imagine,

if you can, what it was like for us to trudge along the crowded boulevard

under the hot sun while a piercing nasal voice sang ‘The Red Flag of the

Revolution Is Flying Over Liberated Phnom Penh’:


    The  liberation  forces  have  moved  forward  from  all  directions  like  a

    powerful  and  stormy  fire,  killing  the  abject  Phnom  Penh  traitorous

    clique and completely liberating Phnom Penh!

 

(Cymbals and gongs banged away. I asked myself, ‘Is this music?’)


    The resounding victory cries of our people and army have put an end to

    the  existence  of  the  enemy,  liberated  the  beloved  motherland,  and

    definitely ended the war of aggression of the cruel US imperialists, who

    have all been expelled from Cambodia!

 

(More banging of cymbals and gongs.)


    The red flag of the revolution is flying high over Phnom Penh, the land
                4
    of Angkor.

 

(One step, then another. One step, then another. I wish we had some water to

drink. I wish we could lie down in the shade.)


    The country’s destiny is in the hands of the workers and farmers. This is

    the reward won by millions of drops of blood shed in the struggle for

    final victory. . .

 

It was all very discouraging. Forced to leave our homes, rifles firing over

our heads and terrible music too.  When the music ended, a speech began. ‘For the past five years,’ began the

speaker, an anonymous man, ‘our revolutionary army of male and female

combatants  and  cadre  fought  most  bravely  and  valiantly,  crushing  the

extremely barbarous, cruel aggression of US imperialism and its stooges!’

Like the man and woman who had gone before him, shouting the slogans,

and like the singer accompanying the marching music, this man didn’t seem

to be able to use normal words to say what he thought. Everything was in a

special  vocabulary  of  exaggerated  praise  or  hatred,  almost  like  a  foreign

language. His main point, when he eventually got to it, was that we were now

under a new regime, called Democratic Kampuchea. (’Kampuchea’ is just the

word for ‘Cambodia’ in Khmer.) Under this democratic regime there would

be no rich and no poor. We would all be equal. And we would all have to go

work  in  the  countryside.  ‘The  nation  must  still  pursue  the  struggle,’  the

speaker said, ‘with arms in one hand and with tools in the other to launch an

offensive of building dams and dykes and digging canals!’ He went on and

on, telling us that we were going to build the nation into a major power and

that we were ‘gladly going to make sacrifices for Angka.’ He didn’t explain

who Angka was.

We walked about five blocks that day.

At nightfall we camped in the shape of a square, with Thoeun and I and the

two motorbikes on the outer sides and the nurses on the inside for protection.

The nurses took a small ceramic charcoal stove from the handcart and started

a fire, and before long they were all squatting around it with pots and spoons,

cooking a meal.

I sat with my back against a kapok tree. Around us was a sea of tired

people.  In  the  street,  on  the  sidewalks,  in  the  yards  of  houses,  people

everywhere. The stately boulevard had been turned into a camping ground,

smoky  from  the  cooking  fires,  yet  somehow  the  change  didn’t  seem

remarkable. If this was what revolution was like we were too tired to care.

Women and children wept, car horns honked, the Khmer Rouge tried to keep

us moving with loudspeaker announcements, but we just sat there.

The  nurses  served  dinner.  We  talked  in  low,  discouraged  voices  about

finding our families. If we could not remain in the city, our only choice was

returning to the safety of places where we were known – to our families and

our ancestral villages, for we all came from villages, though most of us had

family members lost somewhere in the crowds of Phnom Penh.

I told Thoeun and the nurses that they could go into the streets to search fortheir families anytime they liked, provided one or two people always stayed

with the supplies. Then, after eating, I got up to continue my own search.

I walked through the thick crowd and the smoke of cooking fires, up the

boulevard, back, zigzagging across. I stepped over people sprawled asleep on

the pavement. The streetlights were still working, perhaps because the Khmer

Rouge had not managed to turn them off. Insects flew in swarms under the

bright bulbs. To the northeast, an orange glow appeared on the horizon, and

later a glow from another direction. Cinders drifted overhead. The Khmer

Rouge, it was said, were burning markets, the centre of the system they called

capitalist and evil; though to us markets had been the centre of daily life, the

place where we went to buy fresh food and gossip with our neighbours.


By sunrise the crowd was on its feet but at a standstill. From the north came

the sound of combat, the high-pitched chatter of US-made M-16s answering

the  slower  repetitive  bursts  of  Chinese-made  AK-47s.  Somewhere  to  the

north, a Lon Nol commander was still holding out against the Khmer Rouge.

In  the  south  of  Phnom  Penh,  where  we  were,  there  was  no  outward

resistance. We did not refuse the guerrillas’ orders. Yet we moved forward as

slowly as possible, obeying without really obeying. It was passive resistance,

Buddhist-style.  Why  should  we  go?  We  had  homes  from  which  we  had

forgotten to take gold and precious possessions. Who would take care of our

houses? Why were these dark-skinned peasant boys still pushing us to leave?

What was this nonsense about farming? We were city people! The war was

over! It was time to reunite, time to find our families.

  With  my  Vespa  and  Thoeun’s  Yamaha  with  the  supply  cart,  it  was

impossible to move. Impatient as always, I put the scooter on its kickstand,

told Thoeun and the nurses to take care of it and took off, slipping through

the crowd, working to one side of the boulevard and then the other, climbing

up fences and trees to get a better view.

I didn’t find Huoy or my parents. What I found was rice. A sudden pushing

and shouting developed in the crowd, and by following the surge of running

men I found myself in a side street, at a warehouse with wide-open doors.

Hundreds of men were already inside, grabbing whatever they could. It was a

scene of wild greed. Rice bags stacked high on a wooden pallet had fallen

over on one man, killing him outright. His feet were sticking out from the

bottom of the jumbled pile, and nobody paid any mind.

I  threw  a  sack  of  rice  on  my  shoulder  with  ‘Donated  by  the  USGovernment  printed  on  the  label  and  staggered  back  to  the  nurses.  Then

Thoeun and I went to the warehouse to get more.

In the warehouse and on the streets a new code of behaviour had evolved.

The new ‘law’ was that it was forgivable to steal as long as we didn’t take

anything by force or hurt anyone physically. Property left unguarded was

property  for  the  taking.  At  night  Thoeun  went  off  and  came  back  to  us,

grinning, with two live chickens in his hands. We promptly killed, plucked

and cooked them and didn’t ask him where he had gotten them.

By the fourth day, April 20, the soldiers had given up on telling us to leave

for three hours or three days, and now they were ordering us to go into the

countryside.  ‘Angka  will  provide  everything  for  you,’  they  announced

through their bullhorns. ‘Angka will see to it that the people have everything

they need.’

If we had to leave the city, National Route 2 was the road for us to take.

Route 2 would take us to my father’s sawmill, where my family and Huoy

had  probably  gathered.  If  they  weren’t  there,  we  could  follow  the  road

farther, into Takeo Province and right to Samrong Yong. Surely Huoy and

my family would go to Samrong Yong if all else failed, I reasoned. And

whether or not they did, Route 2 was also the right road for my nurses, who

were all from Takeo Province too, from villages farther south of Samrong

Yong.

I  made  my  way  on  foot  to  the  traffic  circle  at  the  southern  end  of

Monivong Boulevard, where several roads led out of Phnom Penh in different

directions. At the circle, the Khmer Rouge were waving people onto a road

that led onto a bridge across the river and onto National Route 1, which was

the wrong direction for us. But the other turnoff to National Route 2 was still

open and a few people were still taking it.

So we waited. Took a step forward and waited some more. Listened to the

sonic booms overhead. Stood in the hot sun and wished we could bathe and

change into clean clothes.

The  next  morning,  when  we  got  to  the  traffic  circle  at  the  foot  of

Monivong Boulevard, there was a barricade across the road to National Route

2. We were too late. ‘Keep moving,’ said the bullhorns. ‘Angka will provide

for you on the other side of the bridge.’ Armed soldiers were watching. There

was nothing to do but move on with the sluggish flow of the crowd, even

though it took us in the wrong direction.

At the base of the bridge were several sprawling corpses; most, by theiruniforms, were Lon Nol soldiers; one, by his shoulder-length hair, a well-

known Phuom Penh nightclub singer who had displeased the new authorities.

We tried to ignore the bodies and stepped onto the bridge, which formed a

shallow arc, sloping upward from the riverbank to a high point in the middle

and then back down to the other side.

At the top of the bridge, a bit out of breath from the exertion of pushing the

Vespa up the grade, I heard a sudden murmur from the crowd and glanced

over  their  heads.  It  was  one  of  those  events  that  happens  faster  than  its

meaning can be absorbed: a shiny new Peugeot on the far side of the river,

driving down the riverbank. It drove into the water with a splash and floated

forward  slowly,  until  the  river  current  spun  it  around  and  took  it  slowly

downstream.

  There were people inside the car. A man in the driver’s seat, a woman

beside him and children looking out the back with their hands pressed against

the windows. All the doors and windows stayed closed. Nobody got out.

  Gradually the car sank lower and lower until only the roof was above the

water. We just stared, as the car settled lower and the waters closed over the

roof.

A rich family committing suicide.


On the other side of the bridge there were, of course, no supplies. Just more

Khmer Rouge in black uniforms, shouting at us to keep hurrying. It was

noon, the hottest part of the day. Thousands had quietly disobeyed them and

had sat down to rest. I led my group under the awning of a locked storefront,

in the shade.

  Thoeun and I went off to explore. Upriver, out of sight of the soldiers,

boats were carrying passengers back across the river to Phnom Penh. In the

dry season the river had shrunk to a narrow channel of water between the

banks. A few who couldn’t afford to pay the boatmen were swimming to the

other side. We looked around for soldiers, didn’t see any and decided to join

them. If we could find more food it would be good, but in any case a plunge

into the water was exactly what we needed. It had been days since we had

bathed.

  When  we  got  to  the  Phnom  Penh  side,  we  walked  back  to  the  rice

warehouses in our dripping clothes. Most of them had been cleaned out. But

in one we found a fifty-kilogram sack of dried beans, too heavy for a single

person to carry. We swam back across the river with it.At the top of the riverbank, other city exiles rushed toward us, offering to

buy the beans with bundles of Lon Nol regime rids. I turned them down. We

didn’t want money from a regime that no longer existed. But when someone

offered a bag of sugar in trade for half the beans, I agreed. The nurses cooked

rice and green beans that night, and it tasted especially good. Stolen food

always does, as I was to discover.

The  next  morning  we  left  along  National  Route  1,  walking  faster  than

before  but  not  hurrying.  The  road  led  eastward  across  a  triangle  of  land

bordered by the Bassac and Mekong rivers. In the crowd, grocers travelled

with  grocers,  jewellers  with  jewellers,  peasants  from  one  province  with

peasants of the same province. Our group stopped whenever we met medical

colleagues  from  Phnom  Penh.  We  greeted  other  doctors  with  traditional

courtesy, palms together in the sompeah, and exchanged news. I warned them

not to tell anyone they were doctors and explained what had happened in the

operating room of the hospital. Some of the doctors agreed with me about the

danger and others thought I was exaggerating, though they didn’t tell me so

directly, because they didn’t want me to lose face.

The next morning we continued walking. Soon we came to Boeng Snor,

Phnom Penh’s red-light district, on the banks of the Mekong. The road was

up above the level of the land, on a broad dyke, but the main brothels and

nightclubs were on stilts, to keep even with the road. Lower than the road, on

what was land in the dry season, were the floating houses, built on rafts of

fifty-five-gallon drums, or sometimes on bamboo. Before the revolution men

used to spend time here with their mistresses or prostitutes. They gambled

and  drank  with  their  friends.  It  had  been  a  place  where  everything  was

permitted for those who had money, a place where the sensuous side of the

normally prudish Cambodian character was free to emerge. But not anymore.

No painted ladies. Only squatters, and landlords trying to keep squatters out.

As a red-light district, Boeng Snor had ceased to exist. Whoring, drinking,

gambling, bribery – for better or worse, all these were forbidden under the

new regime.

  Beyond Boeng Snor, both lanes of the road were still filled with city exiles,

pushing their cars or carrying their possessions on springy shoulderboards, all

of them headed in the same direction. Yet for the first time there was room

enough to move freely among them.

Here and there beside the road lay corpses of Lon Nol soldiers. By now we

hardly noticed them. A more surprising sight were the roadside merchants,who were doing a busy trade. From makeshift stalls and from tarps spread on

the  ground,  they  were  selling  cakes,  cigarettes,  chicken  barbecued  on

skewers,  eggs,  live  poultry,  fresh  and  dried  fish,  meats,  fruits  and  fresh

vegetables of all kinds, books and tape cassettes. The Khmer Rouge might

have destroyed the markets but not the market sellers, and it was encouraging

to see the merchants making the best of their new situation.

By the end of the afternoon we had travelled three or four more miles, to

the  edge  of  a  large,  crowded  settlement  of  Phnom  Penh  refugees.  It  was

called Wat Kien Svay Krao, after an enormous walled temple compound of

the same name, which sat on the riverbank overlooking the Mekong. Farther

inland  was  a  second,  smaller  wat.  There  were  monks  in  these  temples,

picking their way through courtyards packed with people, cars, makeshift

tents and canopies. People had camped everywhere – in the village between

the temples, under every tree, in the fields nearby, and even on the islands

and sandbars of the shrunken river. We decided to stay there too. It was a

major node of relocation, outside the city but not too far away for those who

hoped to return.

We parked the motorbikes off the road in the shade of a large mango tree.

Above our heads were green mangoes, hanging by their stems. In Cambodia

we eat green mangoes as a sort of crunchy vegetable (though they do not

taste as good as ripe mangoes, which develop later in the year). So if we

wanted green mangoes we could just pick them. There were coconut palms

and a grove of banana trees nearby. Farther off there were farmers’ fields to

forage. If we wanted fish, Thoeun and I could make fishing poles and try our

luck in the Mekong. We could also use our beans and rice for bartering. So

food and shelter didn’t worry us.

  What worried us was finding our families. I had met some distant cousins

on the road, and some of Huoy’s cousins, but none of them knew where

Huoy and my family were.

In roaming around every day looking for Huoy and my family I ran into

many  people  I  knew.  One  of  them  was  my  old  friend  Sam  Kwil,  the

newspaper reporter and photographer. Like a lot of journalists, Kwil basically

disliked  authority.  He  had  never  been  happy  with  the  Lon  Nol  regime

because of the corruption and the heavy-handed censorship. He was even

unhappier with the Khmer Rouge regime, which didn’t allow any newspapers

at all. Kwil’s greatest pleasure had always been finding out what was going

on and telling other people. He told me what I had already suspected, that thedull thunder-like sounds from the sky came from US reconnaissance planes

flying at incredible altitudes. And he told me what I hadn’t known, that next

door  in  South  Vietnam  province  after  province  was  falling  to  the  North

Vietnamese. ‘Soon everywhere will be communist,’ he told me glumly.

  Kwil still had the habits of a journalist even though he didn’t have a paper

to work for. Wherever he went in Wat Kien Svay Krao he took his duffel bag

of cameras, film and notebooks. When he and I walked together to the grove

of banana trees by Route I, he strapped the duffel bag to the luggage rack of

his motorcycle and pushed the bike along.

As we were picking bunches of ripe bananas, a convoy of covered trucks

came out of the distance on the highway, from the direction of Phnom Penh. I

had seen convoys like that before, and I had always wondered where they

were going. Sam Kwil had wondered about that too. Along Route 1 there

were few settlements of any importance from here to the Vietnamese border.

  Between the torn fronds of the banana trees we could make out the front

escort jeep and then the long line of Chinese-made trucks behind it. Kwil got

his cameras out and stepped forward to get a better view, although he was

still hidden.

‘Be careful, will you?’ I told him, but he didn’t answer.

The escort jeep went past us and then the first trucks. As the trucks passed

we noticed that some of the tarps covering the cargo on the back were untied

and  flapping  in  the  wind.  When  they  flapped  open  we  saw  what  was

underneath – chairs, refrigerators, air conditioners, fans, television sets and

various sacks and bags. More trucks went past and their cargo was the same.

Obviously the Khmer Rouge had taken the furniture and appliances from

Phnom Penh. The only question was whether they were giving it or selling it

to the Vietnamese.

  Kwil moved farther forward among the trees. He had raised his camera to

take pictures of the backs of the trucks, and as he turned he didn’t see the jeep

bringing up the rear, until it stopped suddenly on the pavement beside him.

I ran far back into the banana grove. Sam Kwil was slower to react. Three

Khmer Rouge jumped out of the jeep and ran toward him, one to his left, one

right at him and one to his right. In a few seconds they had him surrounded.

I  could  hear  their  voices  through  the  trees.  ‘Who  ordered  you  to  take

pictures?’ they demanded. ‘Anyone who takes pictures without permission is

the enemy! You are CIA!’ Before he could argue, they wrenched his arms

behind him in a hammerlock and one of them swung his rifle stock and hitKwil in the ribs. Kwil collapsed. They half-marched, half-dragged him to the

jeep, tied his hands behind him and began beating him with their rifle butts

and kicking him. Then the jeep drove off with Sam Kwil inside, accelerating

to catch up with the rest of the convoy.

It was quiet when they had gone, except for the chirping of crickets and the

loud, irrelevant chittering of birds.

It had been so quick. One minute he had been talking with me, the next he

was gone. I stood in the grove of banana trees, trying not to believe my eyes.

There was nothing I could have done. Or was there? The jeep got smaller and

smaller in the distance until it vanished down National Route 1.                                            9



                              Wat Kien Svay Krao


 




I do not know how many miles I walked that day. My fret had taken control

of my body. My body had taken over my brain.

It was better to walk than think. Better to do almost anything than think.

Poor Kwil. How they had grabbed him and dragged him away. I had done

nothing. Don’t think about it, I told myself. Just stay on the move and keep

scanning faces of the crowd. If he is not dead now he will be soon. Stay

detached, I told myself. Save the emotions for later. Concentrate on staying

alive and finding the family. They took him and I did nothing. Nothing to do.

Just keep walking and scan the faces. Clubbing him with their rifles. Before

him, the suicide of the family in their Peugeot. Before the suicide, the man

shot dead for trying to cross the intersection in Phnom Penh. The patient I left

on  the  operating  table.  We  are  helpless,  helpless,  helpless.  We  cannot

struggle against them. We can only evade them and hope someone else dies

in  our  place.  Don’t  think  about  it.  Hide  the  emotions  inside,  and  keep

walking. To survive.

I went back to the mango tree and counted: everyone in my group was

there, nine people stretched out on their mats in the shade, relaxed. No sense

upsetting  them.  They  are  my  responsibility.  Back  to  wandering.  National

Route 1 was choked with traffic again. Thousands and thousands of faces.

Too many on the road and too many in Wat Kien Svay Krao. Too many faces

to see.

I walked and walked. In the back lanes of the village late that afternoon, a

family was leaving from its camping place, on the ground level between thestilts of a house. Quickly I moved my group there from the mango tree, for

better protection from the rains. The nurses chose benches to sleep on and

rigged their mosquito nets on strings. I chose an oxcart as a bed, its narrow

platform wedged between the pair of tall wooden-spoked wheels. And went

back to walking.

I wandered among the barbers who had set up shop with a chair and a

mirror  nailed  to  a  tree,  with  the  vendors  of  fish  and  pork  with  the  flies

swarming around, with the fruit sellers. Restaurateurs offered Chinese noodle

soup, one bowl for 5,000 riels. The price of the soup was a gauge of the

merchants’ faith in the currency of the Lon Nol regime: a few months before,

a bowl of that same soup would have cost 500 to 600 riels, and a few years

before, in 1972, it would have cost 150 riels. But the Khmer Rouge hadn’t

introduced any currency to take its place.

On the side of the wat, the Khmer Rouge had put up a military recruitment

centre. They had written a message in chalk, reading: ‘If you were a Lon Nol

soldier  before,  register  your  name  here  and  go  back  to  work  for  Angka.

Angka  needs  soldiers  on  all  levels.  Also  register  if  you  were  a  military

administrator. Angka will put you back to work. Professors, teachers and

students will register later.’ Lon Nol soldiers in civilian clothing lined up to

be interviewed. They looked glad. They hadn’t liked leaving the city without

their  possessions,  not  knowing  where  they  were  going.  Now  they  had  a

purpose, a direction. Once more they would be serving their country and

making a living. When they reached the head of the line, they gave their

histories to interviewers holding clipboards. Former lieutenants pretended to

be captains, and captains pretended to be majors, to get higher-ranking jobs

with  the  Khmer  Rouge.  As  the  trucks  arrived  to  take  them  off,  the  men

climbed in, happy and smiling. They shouted, ‘Give the news to my parents!

I go back to work for Angka!’

I watched the trucks drive away and it made me suspicious. Why didn’t the

Khmer Rouge want teachers or students? Or doctors or engineers? Surely

they needed all those professions if they were going to rebuild the country.

Though I was technically a Lon Nol officer myself, I hung back at the edge

of the crowd. So did another former soldier whose friends saw him from the

trucks and beckoned him to come on. The Khmer Rouge recruiters quickly

closed in on this man and took him by the arm. He insisted he was merely a

friend of the soldiers in the truck, but it did him no good. The Khmer Rouge

placed him in the line, to be interviewed. He stood there with the expression                                                                5
of a man who was trapped and had no hope of escaping.

I walked away from the recruitment centre, stopping when a Khmer Rouge

soldier came up to me. ‘Let me have a look at your glasses,’ he said.

I handed him my glasses.

He held them in his palm. ‘Can you give them to me?’ It was as much a

statement as a question.

  ‘Comrade, the glasses are not fitted to your eyes,’ I said. ‘I am nearsighted.

If you take them I won’t be able to see anything.’

He tried them on, and opened and shut his eyes several times in surprise.

‘They hurt me!’ he said. ‘Why can’t I see?’

  ‘Comrade, they don’t fit your eyes,’ I said. ‘If they did I would give them

to you. Believe me.’

As he gave me back my glasses he glanced at my wrist, but I had already

removed my watch and put it in hiding. For that matter I had also removed

the spark plug from my Vespa, to be able to prove that the Vespa wasn’t

working, in case someone tried to take that too. The Khmer Rouge code

forbade the guerrillas from taking private property, but the guerrillas didn’t

always obey it, just like they didn’t obey the provision of the code against

harming the people.

I got away from the soldier as fast as possible and walked to a small dirt

road along the riverbank. Below in the river, exiles from the city cooled off,

bathing decorously in their sarongs. Large motorized cargo boats pulled out

from  shore,  bringing  passengers  back  to  their  home  provinces  in  a

programme organized by the Khmer Rouge. Thousands of boat passengers

left each day, without diminishing the number of people living in Wat Kien

Svay Krao.

  Somehow, without a real turning point, life had become a succession of

days spent wandering along the highway and hanging around the village.

Phnom  Penh  was  in  the  past.  The  news  about  the  future  was  vague  and

conflicting. First we would hear that Angka was going to give us land to clear

and farm. Then we would hear that Angka was going to push us on to some

other location and deal with us later. We never knew what was going to

happen. Every day, Thoeun and I went out foraging for food. With foraging,

fishing  and  bartering,  I  had  reverted  to  a  way  of  life  I  had  known  in

childhood. It was not hard for us. Under other circumstances being in Wat

Kien Svay Krao might have been enjoyable. But there was always an edge of

anxiety to the waiting.  Then toward the end of April I found a distant cousin who said he had seen

my family. I went at once where he directed, to a section of the crowded wat

courtyard I had not explored before. I spotted two of the family’s gasoline

trucks, piled with luggage and crates of live chickens. How could I have

missed them before? As I pushed through the crowd Pheng Huor came up to

me. Where were you?’ he said with a hint of annoyance, as if I had kept him

waiting for a meeting. Then his smile showed through. ‘Everybody’s been

looking for you. Did you see Huoy?’

  ‘No, I lost her. Where’s Papa?’

  Pheng Huor pointed to a makeshift tent made from a tarpaulin suspended

beneath a tree. I went inside. My father was sitting at a table. Same old Papa,

bags under his eyes and big protruding belly. He was dressed in a faded T-

shirt and shorts. His face was spread in a broad smile.

  ‘Why didn’t you come home?’ he said. ‘Everyone was looking for you.

We waited for you until almost three in the afternoon. We couldn’t wait any

longer. The Khmer Rouge pushed us to leave home. Are you alone?’

  ‘No,  Father,  I  brought  eight  nurses  and  a  guard  from  my  clinic,  but  I

haven’t found Huoy yet.’ My brothers and their wives crowded into the tent.

My mother came up next to me. Her hair was in a bun and she seemed to

have more white hairs than before.

‘Yes, we didn’t know what would happen to your nurses,’ my mother was

saying in her kindly fashion. ‘I was worried about them. They don’t have any

other men to take care of them.’

‘Do you have enough rice?’ my father was saying at the same time. I said

we did. He reached in his pocket and counted off fifty thousand riels. I took

the money to please him and then asked him if he would like to come live in

a house instead of a tent. The family in the house above the nurses and me

was planning to leave soon. He said he would like that very much.

In a few days, my parents, three of my four brothers and their wives and

children  moved  into  the  house  above.  They  were  all  that  was  left  of  the

immediate family – my number-one brother had been estranged from my

father for several years, and my sisters were all with their husbands’ families.

  Their new house had a normal rural Cambodian design. It was eight or

nine  feet  off  the  ground  on  its  stilts.  The  interior  had  springy  wooden

floorboards; a long, low, elevated sleeping platform where they could spread

their mats and hang their mosquito nets; and a kitchen in back whose floor

and walls had generous-size cracks to allow air ventilation. My brothers andthe drivers pushed the vehicles over from the wat and parked them in front of

the house – the two gasoline trucks with the empty tanks on the back, plus a

Land-Rover, a jeep and a Mercedes. The drivers, their wives and children and

most of the servants remained in the wat courtyard, where there was more

space.

Now that I was reunited with my family I was nearly content. Family is the

glue that holds society together. Life makes more sense for being connected

to the past through parents, and to the future through children. Being together

also had its practical benefits. For one, more people to rely on in case of

emergencies. For another, more food, because my family had stockpiled food

and  taken  it  with  them  from  the  city.  And  finally,  I  had  gained  face  for

bringing the family into the house, because I had done my duty as a son; and

my father had gained face because I had put him literally above me.

And yet I was not truly content. Huoy was alive. Or at least probably alive,

because she was not the troublemaking kind, and the Khmer Rouge would

have left people like her and her mother alone. But how could anyone like

me, who had seen Sam Kwil hauled away, feel sure of this? And if Huoy

were alive, where was she now? What if she had gotten to the Route 2 turnoff

before it was closed? Then she would have gone to my father’s sawmill, or to

my village. She would be waiting for me there. What if she hadn’t been

swept up in the southern evacuation at all? She and her mother lived along

the road to the west, which led to the airport. She could have gone that way.

Or she might have gone to the south after all. I might have missed her, just as

I had missed spotting my family for more than a week in Wat Kien Svay

Krao.

Wat Kien Svay Krao was becoming a less and less attractive place. The

weather was still hot, and most people camped on mats in the shade. At every

campfire, people waved vigorously above their plates to keep the flies away.

From  radios  came  reports  that  the  North  Vietnamese  communists  were

closing in on the capital of South Vietnam, Saigon. The news made us feel

more isolated from the outside world than ever. High overhead, the sonic

boom of the US reconnaissance planes could still be heard. We had hoped

that the United States would come to our aid, but if it let South Vietnam fall,

it certainly wouldn’t help us in Cambodia.

My father was more stoic than most. ‘Yes,’ he said in his deep voice, ‘it’s

the end of the old life. Now everyone will be the same class. Just like in

China.’He turned to me accusingly. ‘You should have left the country earlier,

when you had a chance. I told you to go to medical school in France, but you

wouldn’t listen to me.’

  ‘Father,’ I said, exasperated, ‘when Samrong Yong fell, I told you to sell

all  your  property  and  leave  the  country.  You  could  have  lived  abroad

comfortably  for  the  rest  of  your  life.  But  now  it’s  too  late.  And  it’s  all

because you didn’t listen to me.’

Before long, my father and I were back into our usual arguments. And if

the bickering in my family and the tedium of the long days weren’t enough,

my group of ten from the clinic began to split up. They had become like a

second family to me. Srei, who had found her real family, was the first to go.

I  gave  her  medicine  and  rice.  I  gave  her  money.  Somehow  nothing  was

enough. I was upset when she left, and the rest of the nurses were crying.

They had worked together for years in harmony and bonheur. And soon after

that a second nurse left.

I went back to walking around without a destination and without real hope.

Out of habit, I trudged through the dirt lanes of the village to the wat, and

from the wat again over to Route 1. By then the crowds coming from Phnom

Penh  had  thinned.  I  was  outside  the  village,  wearing  a  checkered  krama

around my head, when a familiar-sounding voice reached my ears. ‘Sweet!’

the woman’s voice said. ‘Sweet! Mother, I’ve found him!’

How she could have recognized me I do not know. She was on the other

side of the road, with her left hand steadying a bamboo basket on her head

with two water bottles inside, and with her right hand carrying a plastic-

covered pail. ‘Mother, I’ve found him. Sweet, sweet!’ She was wearing an

old  green  T-shirt  and  white  trousers  with  a  floral  print.  Her  mother  was

carrying  a  basket  on  her  head  and  steadying  it  with  her  left  hand  while

carrying a rice pot in her right hand. They looked tired and dusty. Huoy put

her basket down and ran to me. We wrapped our arms around each other. She

didn’t say anything and her chest heaved uncontrollably; she couldn’t get any

words out. Her mother came up to us with her eyes glistening and said in a

choked voice, ‘We were looking for you.’

I said, ‘I was looking for you too. Where were you? Are you okay?’ Huoy

nodded but didn’t let go.

We moved to the edge of the road. Ma brought the luggage over and then

squatted next to us, using the edge of her krama to wipe away her tears, while

Huoy and I embraced.‘We looked for you everywhere,’ said Ma. ‘We didn’t know where you

were. We were scared you had been killed by the Khmer Rouge. We saw a

lot of bodies with their hands tied behind their backs.’

  Huoy and I wanted to hug forever, but our culture does not allow such

things  in  public.  A  crowd  had  collected  around  us,  curious  about  the

emotional outburst. Someone asked if everything was okay. Another voice

commented, ‘How lucky they are! They met each other again, and I’m still

separated from my family!’

I picked up the luggage and we walked through the village to the house. As

soon as we got to the house I walked up the steps, kicked off my sandals and

stepped inside. My father was resting.

  ‘Huoy is here,’ I told him.

My mother’s aged face creased into a smile. ‘Prepare lunch for them,’ she

called back to the women in the kitchen.

My  father  sat  up  with  an  unmistakable  look  of  gladness  in  his  face.

‘Prepare a feast!’ he shouted. And he rose to go outside.

  Huoy waited at the bottom of the stairs. ‘How are you?’ my father asked,

smiling, as he and my mother went down to meet her. Huoy had brought her

palms together and raised them to her kneel. Her right knee was about to

touch the ground when my father got to her and raised her by gently putting

his hand under her elbow.

My brothers, their wives and the nurses had all seen Huoy try to kneel in

front of my father and it touched their hearts. Everybody was crying. My

mother said to Huoy’s mother, ‘You are coming here to live with us. Don’t

worry. We are safe here.’ The servants were hurrying out of the house with

water and food.

At last I was whole. Huoy was with me. And my family had taken her in.                                          10



                              Medicine for Angka


 




This is what happened to Huoy during the Khmer Rouge takeover:

  After I left her at her school on that fateful morning of April 17, Huoy

discovered that the school was closed. The other teachers hadn’t shown up,

the doors were locked and the sounds of gunfire were coming from several

directions. By good luck she found a telephone that was still working, and

she called Sok, my driver. Sok picked her up in the car and brought her back

to her mother’s apartment. By then it was about eight-thirty and everybody

knew that the city was about to fall. People were waving white cloth from the

windows. The guerrillas had entered the streets in their muddy black clothing.

Huoy  told  Sok  to  go  to  his  own  home  and  bring  his  family  back  to  her

apartment so that everybody could be together, for protection. He agreed and

drove off.

  While Huoy was waiting upstairs with her mother, the Khmer Rouge on

the street started shouting for everyone to leave the city. Huoy didn’t want to

go,  of  course.  But  an  hour  passed  and  then  another  and  still  Sok  hadn’t

returned. Finally about noon two heavily armed guerrillas entered the house

on the ground floor, walked up the stairs banging on the landings and finally

knocked on the door of their apartment on the third floor. So Huoy and her

mother had only a few minutes to grab some possessions while the guerrillas

stood there waiting and yelling at them.

  Huoy went into the kitchen and collected all the food she could find, plus a

rice pot and two bottles of boiled drinking water. Then she gathered every

photograph she had of me, even some ID cards I had left there with mypicture on them, and put them in her bag. Last she grabbed a small, soft

pillow  that  she  always  slept  with.  Her  mother  packed  a  few  clothes  in  a

basket. They left and locked the door, the soldiers following them downstairs.

Huoy wanted to go to my parents’ house, but the street traffic was one way in

the wrong direction and they had to go south.

  Huoy was determined to find me. With the streets in chaos, her instinct

was to go someplace where I would be likely to show up sooner or later.

Since she couldn’t get to my parents’ house she decided to try my clinic. If

that didn’t work she would go to the sawmill and then to my village. She

brought the photos of me so she could show them to people and ask them if

they had seen me. That was how her mind worked. It was only later that she

realized that she had left her gold and jewellery behind in the apartment. She

had completely forgotten about her valuables.

  She and her mother got near my clinic but were unable to reach it because

of the roadblocks. Like me, Huoy walked back and forth, with and against the

flow  of  people  trudging  on  foot  with  their  belongings,  pushing  their

motorcycles and cars. But when she tried to cut across the flow and dodge

into a side street a Khmer Rouge cadre came up to her and waved his pistol in

her face: ‘Do you want to sleep here? I’ll give you an appointment to sleep

here!’ he shouted. Huoy’s bravery melted on the spot. To ‘sleep’ meant to

die. She allowed her mother and herself to be swept along with the traffic.

They were just two more pieces of human wreckage floating out of the city

with the tide, and nothing more. They found the turnoff to National Route 2

blocked  off,  and  they  were  swept  over  the  Monivong  bridge  and  down

National Route 1. They were a few days behind me on the same evacuation

route out of Phnom Penh.

I listened to her story and sighed inwardly. We were together again – that

was the most important thing. Looking at her, dressed in the same grimy

trousers and blouse she had worn since the day of the evacuation, I wished

that she had remembered to bring more of her possessions. But that’s how

she was, losing her composure when anybody started shouting. There was no

point in being angry with her. And how could I be angry with her when one

of the few things she had remembered to bring were photographs of me?

  Huoy and her mother moved in – with me, Thoeun my guard from the

clinic,  and  the  remaining  nurses,  under  the  house  on  stilts  that  I  had

commandeered for my family. We had no privacy. I continued to sleep alone

on top of the oxcart. But there was a change. Tacitly, without announcement,it became understood that Huoy and I were the same as husband and wife.

Without any formal ceremony, we had become a married couple. The nurses

treated Huoy with respect and consideration. My parents, my brothers and

their wives all were very kind to Huoy, at least for the time being.

But now that my personal worries were over – finding my family, finding

Huoy and finally getting my parents to accept Huoy – I was able to take a

larger view of our situation, and I didn’t like it. True, we were lucky to be

alive and together. Around us in the village of Wat Kien Svay Krao were

thousands of Cambodians separated from the people they loved, wandering

around lost and unhappy, not knowing what the next hour held or where they

would find their next meal. My family was very lucky in comparison to other

families  nearby.  On  the  other  hand,  all  our  efforts  to  make  a  place  for

ourselves over the preceding years had been for nothing. All our hard work at

the lumber mill, all my studying at school. We had not been in favour of the

revolution. We had not been against it. We didn’t even care about politics

much. But now that the revolution had come, we had been bulldozed by it,

reduced to the same level as the other exiles around us. And there was no

new society building. Just the rubble of the old one.

A few months before the takeover I had finally been awarded my degree

from the government medical school, the culmination of seven years’ effort.

Outside of my work for the government, I was the main practitioner in and

part owner of a prosperous gynaecological clinic. What good was my medical

training now, when the Khmer Rouge wanted to kill doctors?

I had also been a businessman, owner of a gasoline delivery service. I had

seventeen million riels in the bank in savings, enough at prerevolutionary

prices to buy a couple more gasoline delivery trucks for my fleet. What was

that worth now, if it was worth anything at all? The Khmer Rouge did not

seem to use any currency at all. Would they let me return to my bank to claim

my savings? With every day it seemed less likely. Every day they announced

through loudspeakers that we would have to go to the countryside.

Our only usable assets were those we had with us: two gasoline trucks, the

Mercedes, the Land-Rover and the jeep. They were all worthless now, unless

the situation changed. My little Vespa too. There was no more gasoline to be

bought or bartered for. And then it hit me. Barter – that was the key. In an

uncertain future, we needed things to barter with. But what did we have to

offer?

  Gold  and  jewellery  would  be  useful,  gold  especially,  for  everyonerecognized its value. Medicine would be valuable too. We needed medicine

for ourselves, to protect against infections, malaria and all the other ills of a

tropical climate. The medicine we did not use we could barter with. I had

brought the medicine from the clinic, but we needed more.

We needed clothes too. Not just for barter but for wearing. I still had on the

black trousers I had worn on April 17, along with the woman’s blouse I had

taken after somebody in the hospital had stolen my shirt. Huoy didn’t have

fresh clothes either. Already we looked like the rest of the refugees. I had

brought a pile of sarongs from the clinic but those wouldn’t help much. What

could we do? The cars and trucks in front of the house looked more and more

like useless sculpture, like monuments to the past. But it was a past I was

unwilling to abandon. We had worked too hard to become rich to leave all

our wealth behind.

  Sitting on the oxcart under the house I realized that, somehow, I was going

to have to get back to Phnom Penh.


  Every morning the local Khmer Rouge soldiers assembled to recite their

code of behaviour, which went like this:


    1.  Thou shalt love, honour and serve the workers and peasants.

    2.  Thou shalt serve the people wherever thou goest, with all thy heart

      and with all thy mind.

    3.  Thou shalt respect the people without injury to their interests, without

        touching  their  goods  or  plantations,  forbidding  thyself  to  steal  so

      much as one pepper, and taking care never to utter a single offensive

      word against them.

    4.  Thou shalt beg the people’s pardon if thou hast committed some error

        respecting them. If thou hast injured the interests of the people, to the

      people shalt thou make reparation.

    5.  Thou shalt observe the rules of the people when speaking, sleeping,

        walking, standing or seated, in amusement or in laughter.

    6.  Thou shalt do nothing improper respecting women.

    7.  In food and drink thou shalt take nothing but revolutionary products.

    8.  Thou shalt never gamble in any way.

    9.  Thou shalt not touch the people’s money. Thou shalt never put out

      thy  hand  to  touch  so  much  as  one  tin  of  rice  or  pill  of  medicine

        belonging to the collective goods of the state or the ministry.    10.  Thou shalt behave with great meekness toward the workers and

        peasants, and the entire population. Toward the enemy, however, the

        American imperialists and their lackeys, thou shalt feed thy hatred

      with force and vigilance.

    11.  Thou shalt continually join the people’s production and love thy

      work.

    12.  Against any foe and against every obstacle thou shalt struggle with

        determination and courage, ready to make every sacrifice, including

      thy life, for the people, the workers and peasants, for the revolution

      and for Angka, without hesitation and without rest.

 

Every morning, when the recitation was over, the same young Khmer Rouge

soldier shuffled out of the line and walked to our vicinity of the village, to

keep watch over us. He slept each night in a hammock slung from the poles

of an open-sided shed behind our house. He wore an old green Chinese-made

uniform with a Mao-style hat. His trousers had a hole in the seat. There were

rips along the cuffs and more rips at his elbows and collar. There was no pen

in his pocket, meaning he was the lowest grade of soldier, like a private.

In spite of his shabby appearance he was full of revolutionary fervour.

Several times a day when the mood struck him he fired his AK-47 into the air

and  began  yelling  slogans:  ‘Long  live  our  victory!  Down  with  US

imperialism!  Long  live  the  independent,  peaceful,  neutral,  nonaligned,

sovereign, uh, peace, uh, peaceful, neutral Cambodia!’ He usually stumbled

over the longer slogans because he wasn’t very bright and he didn’t know

what some of the words meant. His rifle fire made us nervous, but gradually

we realized that he didn’t mean us any harm. He had a wide, round, smiling

Cambodian face. Beneath the tattered uniform and the political indoctrination

was an uneducated country boy.

I never learned his name, so I just called him mit, meaning comrade. He

began  to  hang  around  the  house,  attracted  to  the  sight  of  all  the  young

women.  He  was  never  rude  or  suggestive  to  them  –  the  Khmer  Rouge

soldiers usually obeyed that part of their code.

  Still, to be on the safe side, I instructed Huoy and the nurses to be careful.

They  were  to  do  nothing  to  suggest  that  I  had  ever  been  a  doctor.  They

weren’t to talk to him at all, unless he said something to them first. When

they cooked food they were to eat immediately, to avoid having to invite him

to join. Instead, they were to set food aside for him. When I returned fromwherever I had gone, I took the food out to the mit and he and I ate together.

If there was going to be any trouble for my house, I was going to be the

lightning rod.

The strategy worked. If the mit had something to say to the household, he

said it to me, as the spokesman. We never had problems. And on several

occasions he brought us vegetables and pork, in the spirit of ‘serving the

people.’  The  nurses  prepared  the  food,  and  I  made  sure  he  got  generous

portions.

I tried to get closer and closer to the mit. I reasoned that if the Khmer

Rouge sent us out into the country to live, he might become our supervisor. If

that happened, perhaps he would give us easy work assignments. I tailored

the way I spoke with him – polite but friendly, in an accent that closely

matched his. Though I never asked him personal questions, I guessed he was

from Svay Rieng Province, on the Vietnamese border. Many of the villages

in Svay Rieng had been levelled in the fighting and bombing, just as my

village  had  been.  He  had  been  swept  into  the  war,  like  me.  The  only

difference was that he had been swept into the other side.

‘What about Angka’s plan for the nation?’ I asked him one evening as we

settled down to eat. He took out his spoon, wiped it on his torn trousers and

reached for the rice. Next to his rifle, his spoon was his favourite possession.

It  was  US-military  issue,  made  of  stainless  steel  that  would  last  forever

without rusting. Khmer Rouge soldiers, who never used forks or knives for

eating, always valued the US spoons highly, which was strange considering

how much they hated the United States.

  ‘There were too many people in the city,’ the mit said with his mouth full.

‘Maybe Angka will have to push them to work as farmers. Angka has a new

doctrine, for building a new society.’

He wasn’t telling me anything I hadn’t heard before. I decided to prod him

gently.

  ‘Who is Angka, comrade brother?’ I said.

‘I don’t know,’ said the mit. The question didn’t bother him. He didn’t

seem to have thought of it before.

‘Did you see Angka during the years of fighting against the capitalists?’

  ‘No, I’ve never seen Angka. But I hear about Angka all the time.’ He piled

more rice and pork on his spoon and put it in his mouth.

That was as much as I ever learned from him about the leadership of the

Khmer Rouge.A few days later the mit came around and saw us sitting underneath the

house in the shade. Two more of my nurses had found their families. In

preparing to leave, they had spread the medicine from the clinic on top of the

oxcart and were helping themselves to their share.

‘So much medicine, eh?’ said the mit. ‘What sickness can you use it for?’

The nurses told him the medicines could treat many kinds of illness. I was

sitting nearby, pretending I knew nothing about the matter. The mit picked up

some glass ampules with clear liquids inside – for vitamin injections, as I

could tell at a glance – and asked me what they were for. With a vague wave

of  my  hand  I  answered  that  the  medicines  on  the  oxcart  could  treat  any

disease he could think of.

He sat down next to me. ‘Do you have any serum for transfusions?’ he

asked. Serum was the general term for liquids to be injected intravenously

into  patients,  everything  from  glucose  and  saline  solutions  to  vitamins  to

blood products. A picture flashed through my mind of liquids travelling down

IV tubes into the arms of unconscious patients. In the hospitals I had hooked

up IV tubes countless times.

‘We have all kinds of medicines here,’ I said, as carelessly as I could.

‘Can I have some?’ the mit said. ‘Angka doesn’t have any. When we give

transfusions we have to use coconut juice.’

I tried to ignore what he said about coconut juice. I told him evenly, ‘Sure,

you can have serum. I’ve got a lot of it. But I didn’t bring it here. If you come

to my house in Phnom Penh I will give you as much as you want. If you have

some way to get back to town I’ll give you any kind of medicine you need.

No problem at all.’

A thoughtful expression crossed the mit’s face. He asked me if I were

really serious. ‘Sure,’ I said. ‘Friends of mine gave me lots of medicine.

Plenty of it. We kept it at home for our family use. If I had a way to get back

to Phnom Penh I’d give you as much as you want.’

The mit  said  he  would  find  out  about  the  matter  and  walked  off.  I

wondered if he actually had a way to get back to Phnom Penh. It was worth

trying, anyway.

  Then my mind turned to thinking about coconut juice. Flowing into human

veins?  Coconut  juice!  Like  something  monkeys  would  use  if  they  were

playing at being doctors!

Then, as I thought about it more, I realized that coconut juice might work

under certain emergency conditions.  When a green coconut is still growing on its tree, and a boy shinnies up the

trunk  and  knocks  it  down,  and  then  cuts  off  the  end  of  its  husk  with  a

machete, he finds a watery liquid inside, a bit sweet, almost clear. This is

coconut juice (as opposed to coconut milk, which comes from grinding and

then straining the nut’s white flesh). Rural Cambodians drink the juice all the

time. It’s a wholesome natural product and perfectly clean, except for the

germs that come from the machete. If the juice were sweet and sterile there

was no real reason why it couldn’t be used as a battlefield substitute for

glucose solution, to give energy to a patient too weak to feed himself. But –

and it was a big ‘but’ – I couldn’t imagine the Khmer Rouge sterilizing their

machetes. Drinking contaminated juice is not necessarily harmful, because

the stomach can cope with many kinds of bacteria. Injecting contaminated

juice into the bloodstream is another matter – it could easily be lethal to a

patient who was already weakened.

And that wasn’t all. The sugar content of the juice varies from one coconut

to another. I knew from childhood that coconuts two months old aren’t ripe,

that coconuts five months old are generally sweet and that at seven months

the  juice  begins  to  sour,  with  white  strands  from  the  coconut  flesh

coagulating in it. Would Khmer Rouge medics test the juice before pouring it

into the IV bags? Probably not. From what I’d seen, and from the way they’d

been looking for doctors to kill in the hospital, they didn’t have much respect

for  standard  medical  practices.  If  they  wanted  Western-style  transfusion

serum now, it was because they envied it, just as they envied American-made

spoons.  Not  to  mention  because  their  wounded  soldiers  were  dying  from

coconut juice transfusions.

In my mind I saw a lingering, awful image of medics in bloody black

pajamas chopping open coconuts and pouring dirty juice down IV tubes.

The next day the mit returned. He asked me again if I was sure that I had a

lot of serum in Phnom Penh. I answered again that I had plenty and that he

could take as much as he wanted if we could get back to Phnom Penh.

He asked me how we would get there.

I  looked  at  him  and  shrugged  nonchalantly.  ‘Comrade,  we  could  go

together on my motor scooter, if you like,’ I said, as if it were the last thing

that either of us wanted to do. My old white Vespa was parked under the

house by the oxcart, with the red cross on the back of the seat carefully

removed. ‘But I don’t have any gas. I’d need four or five litres, at least.’

In truth, I did have gas, but I had drained it from the tank and kept ithidden, in case of emergencies, along with my spark plug. Huoy and I had

talked  it  over  the  night  before.  We  had  decided  that  it  was  even  more

important to be able to drive away on a few minutes’ notice – if, say, the

local Khmer Rouge started slaughtering civilians – than to go into Phnom

Penh for medicine and gold. Besides, I didn’t want to seem too eager to go

back to Phnom Penh.

‘We will go to the city tomorrow,’ the mit said flatly. Then he walked off,

presumably to report to his superiors.

  When he left, I took the spark plug out of hiding, cleaned it and screwed

into the Vespa’s cylinder. I examined the bike from one end to the other to

make sure everything was in good working condition.

In the morning, the mit showed up with ten litres of gasoline, twice as

much as we needed. What a huge amount that seemed – to me, the former

owner of gasoline delivery trucks! I poured the precious fuel into the tank

before he could change his mind. With him was another cadre with a torn but

neatly mended Chinese-made uniform, a belt holster with pistol and a blue-

and-white checkered krama knotted around his neck like a scarf. He also

wore one pen in his breast pocket, meaning that he was an officer. One-Pen

looked  like  an  ordinary  Cambodian,  with  a  face  that  seemed  normal  and

happy rather than cruel.

  Without more talk I pushed the Vespa out from under the house and started

the motor. I already felt good: for the first time since the communist takeover

I would be riding the bike instead of pushing it. The nurses and my entire

family looked on from a polite distance. By the pillars of the house, Huoy

gave me a wide-eyed look that implored me to be careful. I winked at her,

signalling not to worry. I tied my krama around my neck the way One-Pen

did, hoping it would make me look a bit more like a Khmer Rouge. Then I

got on and One-Pen behind me and then the mit on the back, all three of us

jammed  together.  We  drove  off,  up  the  dirt  embankment  and  onto  the

elevated national road. As I accelerated, my krama flapped in the breeze.


A few pedestrians were still walking toward us along the highway. Transients

still camped out by the thousands on either side of the road. A truck convoy

appeared in the distance, grew larger and passed us, heading toward Vietnam

with its mysterious hidden cargo.

I  drove  on  through  the  morning  heat.  In  half  an  hour  we  covered  the

distance that had taken me days to walk. Near the Monivong bridge, peoplestill milled around, though fewer of them than before. At the edge of the

bridge  there  stood  a  new  checkpoint,  a  sandbagged  machine-gun

emplacement with a canvas top for a roof. Beyond it lay a double row of

concertina-wire barricades, with space to pass first on one side and then the

other.

I stopped at the checkpoint and cut the engine. One-Pen got off. He walked

into the tent, promptly returned and got back on the Vespa.

  ‘Comrade brother, they accepted our pass?’ I asked as I started the motor

again.

‘No problem,’ he said with satisfaction. ‘When you come with me, it’s

never a problem.’

We drove past the barricades and over the arching bridge. There were no

civilians on it. At the highest point there was another sandbagged machine-

gun emplacement, with clear lines of fire over the bridge in both directions

and over the river below. At the far end of the bridge we passed through

another set of barricades and another checkpoint.

We had entered Phnom Penh.

We  drove  up  Norodom  Boulevard,  where  Phnom  Penh’s  wealthiest

families once lived. In a few of the houses, Khmer Rouge soldiers relaxed on

upper-floor balconies. Others strolled on the streets, sidestepping the piles of

trash and rubble. Debris was everywhere – bottles, books, discarded clothing,

mounds of garbage, broken glass, everything imaginable. Motorcycles had

been overturned and abandoned for lack of gasoline, or because nobody knew

how to use them. In nearly every block we saw burned car bodies and trucks

with flat tyres and smashed windshields.

I  reminded  myself  to  concentrate  on  the  mission.  But  the  sight  of  the

ruined boulevard made me ache with sadness. For all its faults, for all its

corruption, Phnom Penh had been a lovely city. And now to empty it, to leave

it to the flies – I downshifted to steer around an overturned truck, and tried

again not to think about it.

The city was very quiet.

We  came  to  another  pair  of  concertina-wire  barricades  in  front  of  Lon

Nol’s former residence. I slowed down, manoeuvred through the gap in the

first barricade and headed for the second. As I did, the mit on the back of the

bike merrily shouted ‘Hello, comrade!’ at a soldier on the sidewalk. The next

thing I knew, the soldier had pulled his pistol out and was firing it in the air

and shouting for me to stop. I braked to a halt by the second barricade.The new soldier stalked angrily to us. I stood there facing straight ahead,

my feet on the ground, my hands on the handlebars. I was only the driver.

‘What unit do you belong to?’ he demanded.

  ‘The 207th,’ One-Pen answered.

  ‘You do, huh? Well, next time don’t call out to me,’ the soldier said to the

mit. ‘This area is under my control. I don’t want any yelling from the 207th

or any other unit. Do you understand?’

The mit said he understood. I took a deep breath and drove off. Behind me,

I could hear One-Pen cursing about the units occupying Phnom Penh and

how stupid and backward they were compared to his own.

  One-Pen ordered me to turn down another street and I did. In the middle of

the  street,  near  the  abandoned  US  embassy,  a  half-dozen  civilians  were

pushing an old car. One-Pen told me to drive up to them and I did. He got off.

While the civilians stood there with their heads bowed, he yelled at them to

get  out  of  the  city,  that  they  were  late,  that  they  had  to  go  out  into  the

countryside,  and  so  on.  When  he  finished  taking  out  his  anger  on  these

innocent  people  he  got  back  on  the  bike.  ‘That’s  better,’  he  said  with

satisfaction. ‘Now go back the way we were going before and show me the

city.’

So began our tour of Phnom Penh, with me as chauffeur and guide. It was

like a ghost city, with its buildings in place but its people missing. In the

empty streets my Vespa’s engine reverberated like the buzzing of a fly in a

closed and empty room. There were no other vehicles on the streets except

for  the  burned  and  overturned  cars.  There  were  no  other  people  on  the

sidewalks except for the occasional Khmer Rouge walking silently in rubber-

tyre sandals.

I drove back up Norodom Boulevard, past the Royal Palace and then the

old stadium. We came to the French embassy. Here was an unexpected sight

– white-skinned Westerners on the embassy grounds, a lot of them. But there

were guards outside, and I didn’t dare stop to find out what was going on.

I drove past the medical school, to the Central Market and up Charles De

Gaulle Boulevard. Finally I stopped the Vespa in front of Huoy’s house and

turned off the motor.

The street was deserted except for the three of us.

In the ground-floor cafe the tables and chairs were still neatly arranged.

Nobody there either.

The  city  was  silent  except  for  the  faint  sound  of  gunshots  in  the  fardistance.

I locked the Vespa and beckoned the others to come along. To my surprise,

I  wanted  them  along,  for  protection.  I  unlocked  the  front  door  and  we

climbed the stairs, talking quietly.

As  I  arrived  on  the  third  floor  ahead  of  the  others,  the  door  of  the

apartment across from Huoy’s opened a crack. The wrinkled face of an old

woman peered through. I knew her. She was the mother of a commercial pilot

who had lived there.

  She shut the door suddenly when she saw the two soldiers behind me. The

old lady must have been hiding there since the takeover.

The Khmer Rouge heard the door shut, but they didn’t investigate. They

were probably as scared as I was. I unlocked Huoy’s apartment, showed them

inside and brought them to the glass-fronted display case I had given to Huoy

long ago. ‘The medicine’s in here,’ I said. ‘I’ll get you something to carry it

in.’

Like someone in a light trance, who acts capably but at the same time

watches his own actions with detachment, I found a zippered flight bag for

them and a big duffel bag for myself. They squinted at the bottles’ labels,

which were in French. Meanwhile I reached down to the bottom shelf among

the cleaning rags and found a rolled-up black cloth. It was heavy. Inside was

the gold.

‘What are in all these bottles?’ One-Pen said to me.

I palmed the gold and crossed the room to Huoy’s dresser with the duffel

bag. ‘I’m not exactly sure, comrade. Why don’t we just take what we can

now and figure out what it is later?’ I wrapped the black cloth in one of

Huoy’s blouses and stuffed it in the bottom of the bag. Then I found her

jewellery box and put that in the bag. I put as many of her clothes as would

fit on top of that. I fastened the duffel bag shut. It had taken only a minute.

The Khmer Rouge were still taking medicine from the shelves and putting it

in the flight bag, but they were hurrying. They didn’t want to stay in the

apartment longer than necessary either.

On the way out I took a tin of cookies from the table and gave it to the

soldiers, as a gift. They wanted to know what it was. I explained that cookies

were a kind of Western cake. Poisonous? they wanted to know. I ate a cookie

to show them. Then they each had a cookie and smiles spread across their

faces. I don’t think they’d ever had any kind of sugared pastry before.

We clattered down the steps to the street, ignoring the old lady in the otherthird-floor apartment. I started the Vespa, put the duffel bag on the floor of

the scooter between my feet, and we drove off toward my bachelor apartment

while I mentally rehearsed what I was going to do.

  When we got there I locked my scooter again, an irrational act considering

that nobody was around to steal it. We went inside. Arriving at the medicine

cabinet ahead of the others, I reached on top of it and closed my fingers

around a heavy gold ring. I put it in my pocket. Then I started shovelling the

medicine out onto the floor and suggested that they just take it now and sort it

back in the village.

  When they were busy once again, I went across to my clothes bureau. In

the top drawer were several sets of handworked Cambodian betel boxes, each

box with an animal, like a tiger or elephant or crocodile, in raised relief. More

barter objects. I wrapped them in clothes and put them in the duffel bag. In

another  drawer  was  an  envelope  with  twenty-six  hundred  dollars  in  US

currency. That too. Then I opened the bureau drawers and stuffed the clothes

into  the  bag  –  all  except  for  the  bottom  drawer,  which  held  my  military

uniforms. Finally I grabbed both sides of the bag, pushed the load down with

my foot so everything would fit, and fastened the snap. One-Pen held up a

plastic IV bag with liquid inside and asked me if it was serum. I told him

maybe, but we could find out for sure back at Wat Kien Svay Krao.

  They were squatting in front of a pile of pills, ointments, solutions and

lotions, the mit’s AK-47 beside him on the floor. They didn’t have much

room left in their flight bag. I took a towel and selected what I wanted most:

antibiotics  for  infections,  chloroquine  for  malaria,  antidysentery  and

antidiarrhoea pills, vitamins, Mercurochrome for cuts, Xylocain and syringes

for pain-killing injections. I worked fast, tying the towel into a bundle. One-

Pen was picking up one medicine bottle after another uncomprehendingly,

puzzling over the letters of the Roman alphabet, trying to figure out what

pills did by their shape or colour. The mit had already given up.

  ‘Have you got water here?’ the mit asked.

‘Yes, comrade. Help yourself,’ I said absently.

I helped One-Pen finish packing while the mit went off to find a drink.

Then from the bathroom came a sound of gushing water and the mit cursing

in a loud voice. I went into the bathroom to look. Sure enough, the mit’s chest

and shoulders were drenched. He hadn’t known that if he turned the faucet

underneath the shower head, water would come out. He looked at the sink but

decided not to risk it, because the sink had faucets too. Then he spotted waterin plain sight and bent down and cupped his hands to drink it. He lifted water

from the toilet bowl to his lips and slurped it gratefully. ‘Tastes just like

water from a well,’ he remarked. Then he bent down with his hands cupped

and got some more. When he stood up he was licking his lips, a contented

man. He had figured out how to use a Western-style bathroom.

I wanted to laugh. I wanted to laugh out loud, to break the tension. But I

kept my jaws clamped shut and said nothing. And at the same time I felt

sorry and disgusted that this poor rural boy didn’t know what toilets were for.

We left my apartment. I took my medicines from the towel and repacked

them in the luggage compartment on the left side of my Vespa. I put the

duffel bag between my feet again. We drove off, the engine echoing through

the silent streets.

We were on our way back.

In a few blocks we came to an abandoned school. Before the takeover it

had been called Lycée Tuol Svay Prey. Now there was nobody in it. Weeds

grew knee-high in the schoolyard. We didn’t stop there, nor did I give it a

close look at the time. But later that year the Khmer Rouge security police

took it over and turned it into a prison. They called it S-21, and later it was

also called Tuol Sleng. It became a symbol of Khmer Rouge atrocities, just as

Auschwitz was a symbol of the Nazi regime.

We drove south on Monivong, the noise of the engine unnaturally loud in

the empty boulevard. We came to the Faculty of Law, which the Khmer

Rouge had taken over as a barracks. Soldiers were eating meals, squatting in

front of cooking fires with their mess kits. They stopped us out in the street.

But One-Pen told them, ‘It’s just medicine for Angka.’ And I nodded my

head vigorously and said, ‘Yes, medicine for Angka.’

  American-made trucks captured from the Lon Nol regime were pulling up

to the Faculty of Law compound just then. Khmer Rouge soldiers stood in

back of the trucks, waving to their comrades inside the compound, glad to

come into Phnom Penh from the dull countryside. ‘Bravo! Bravo!’ they were

shouting. ‘Long live our splendid victory over the imperialists! Long live the

Kampuchean revolution!’ This time, I noticed, the mit kept his mouth grimly

shut, even though he shouted the same slogans in Wat Kien Svay Krao. There

was rivalry between his unit and others.

I drove the Vespa down the boulevard, over the Monivong bridge, and

onto National Route 1. It was late afternoon. I had accomplished much. I had

gotten clothes for Huoy and myself. Gold and silver and medicine for trading.In a subtle way I had even struck back at the Khmer Rouge for what they

were doing to my family and to our society. The tension I had felt since

morning was giving way to elation.

We  ran  into  checkpoints  along  the  road,  but  at  each  of  them  I  yelled,

‘Medicine for Angka!’ and we passed easily.                                          11



                              Return to the Village


 




After I came back from Phnom Penh, Thoeun and the four remaining nurses

asked me whether they could return to their villages. To them I was still the

boss, the luk doctor, which was why they asked permission. The revolution

had not yet ‘liberated’ their minds.

I told them to go ahead. And why not? The war was over. The country was

at peace. It was time for them to reunite with their families and return to their

ancestral villages. Thoeun left first. I saw him off at the riverbank, grinning,

his head still twitching from side to side. He pushed his motorcycle down the

gangplank and onto a cargo boat and vanished in the crowd of passengers.

The boat, with a red flag flying from its cabin, chugged into the Mekong’s

main current and slowly upstream.

  Then the nurses left, on foot, with their bundles balanced on their heads. I

wasn’t worried about their safety. The Khmer Rouge didn’t rape or rob, and

everyone else was so afraid of the Khmer Rouge that there was little crime.

But I was sad. Their departure tore a little more of the past away, and I

preferred the past to the present.

The nurses were taking a roundabout route to Takeo Province: first north

on National Route 1 toward Phnom Penh, then west on a dirt road to the

Bassac River, across the Bassac by boat and finally south on National Route

2. Many others from Takeo were going the same way, and Wat Kien Svay

Krao was gradually emptying.

Now the rest of us had to decide what to do. We had our gold and our

medicine. There were no more reasons for staying. It was time for us to leave,to choose a destination before the Khmer Rouge chose one for us.

  Huoy, her mother and I decided to go to the Changs’ home province of

Kampot, southwest of Takeo along the Gulf of Siam. A cousin of Huoy’s

made regular trips to Thailand by boat, or used to before the revolution. She

thought  we  could  go  with  him.  That  was  our  final  destination,  Thailand,

Cambodia’s neighbour to the west. It was a Buddhist country, with a culture

much like our own. It was also an American ally, in no danger of going

communist. If we could only get there, we would be free. We didn’t want to

live under Khmer Rouge rule, or under any communist regime. We had heard

that  Saigon,  the  capital  of  South  Vietnam,  had  fallen  to  the  communists.

South Vietnam, Cambodia, even Laos – one after another, all the countries

nearby were falling to communism, except for Thailand.

My father had another plan. He wanted the whole family to go back with

him to the lumber mill. He said that the Khmer Rouge would need someone

like him, the former owner, to run it. If he couldn’t run the mill we would all

follow  him  to  the  town  of  his  birth,  called  Tonle  Batí,  which  was  near

Samrong Yong but had better soil and more water for farming.

I didn’t like his plan. Whether we went with him to the lumber mill or to

Tonle Batí, it would leave us under Khmer Rouge control. I told him we

would go with him to the mill and then decide what to do from there. After

all,  if  we  could  get  to  the  lumber  mill,  we  were  also  going  in  the  right

direction for Kampot.

The compromise didn’t please him. It didn’t please me much either. But in

truth I was of two minds about staying with my family. The good feelings

when Huoy returned had given way to the usual quarrelling. My brother’s

wife, Nay Chhun, barely spoke to me, and she was always being nasty to

Huoy because Huoy and I weren’t officially married. The whole family was

on edge, and the reason was uncertainty. We did not know what life under the

Khmer Rouge was going to be. It was just as well that we were leaving.

We left in the morning – the entire Ngor family, the two Chang women

and I, plus the entourage of servants and drivers and their children. We were

thirty-odd people in all, with two trucks, two fourwheel-drive vehicles, a car

and a motor scooter. Behind my motor scooter was the cart that Thoeun and I

had taken from the clinic.

Each  vehicle  had  half  a  tank  of  fuel.  We  pushed  them  along  National

Route 1, to save gas. Later, we turned onto the dirt road and the wheels got

stuck in sand, we started the motors. The men pushed harder, the motorsroared, and the wheels spun around, sending plumes of sand to the rear. Once

the vehicles were free, we turned the engines off and pushed again. I pushed

the Vespa by the handlebars, and Huoy pushed it from the back of the trailer,

which carried our luggage. It seemed like a dream, that I had actually ridden

the Vespa to and from Phnom Penh.

It  was  hard  work,  pushing.  The  weather  had  that  almost  unbearable

humidity that comes in the last months before the rainy season, when the sky

turns hazy white and the sun is like an oven. Slowly we passed blown-up

houses  and  decapitated  palm  trees.  The  landscape  was  empty  of  people

except for city exiles like ourselves, walking or pushing cars along the dusty

road.

On the third day we reached the Bassac River, a lazy, muddy channel sunk

far down in its banks. We camped by the riverbank next to a house belonging

to my aunt on my father’s side. The roof and the upper storey of her house

had been destroyed in the war and she was living on the ground floor in a tent

supported by the concrete columns. My aunt was glad to see us. She prepared

the best meal she could under the circumstances, using fish from the river and

fresh fruit picked from trees.

Next we had to find out how to cross the river. Pheng Huor went out on a

bicycle to explore, and he found four pirogues, about the size of canoes,

whose owners were willing to work for us. But the boatmen wouldn’t accept

Lon Nol currency in payment, no matter how much he offered. They wanted

fifteen cans of rice per boat trip, using cans from Nestle’s evaporated milk as

a measure. It was the first time I had heard of using rice as money, but it

made sense. Everyone needed and used rice. It was the perfect medium of

exchange.

  Because the boats were small, we could take only the lightest vehicles

across the river. Papa decided to leave everything but the jeep behind with his

sister. Pushing them had been exhausting anyway. He also decided it was

time to let the drivers and their families go off on their own. He gave them

money and food and they went off after saying their farewells. And it was a

sad,  scaled-down  expedition  that  travelled  across  the  river:  the  jeep,  with

each wheel riding in a separate small boat, the boatmen poling their way

across; the Ngors and the Changs and all the extra gasoline and the supplies;

and finally my Vespa and its trailer.

By the time we unloaded everything on the other bank we were tired and

short-tempered. We camped and made a fire. When Pheng Huor’s daughterNgim upset a cooking pot, I cuffed her on the head. The girl’s mother, Nay

Chhun, shook her finger in my face, which is very rude in our culture, and

told me never to touch her children again. I said that if her children needed

lessons in behaviour I had the right to teach them. I lost my temper, she lost

hers and soon we were shouting at each other at the top of our lungs. A

Khmer Rouge soldier came over to stop us.

‘No yelling!’ he said. ‘Angka doesn’t allow people fighting each other! If

you don’t stop I will bring both of you to Angka Leu.’

I had never heard of Angka Leu. It means ‘higher organization’ in our

language, and nothing more. But the way the soldier said it suggested that

Angka  Leu  was  something  to  fear.  Nay  Chhun  retreated,  muttering  and

flashing  nasty  glances.  When  I  had  calmed  down,  Huoy  told  me  not  to

discipline Nay Chhun’s children even if they needed it. Whatever Angka Leu

was, Huoy said, it was best to avoid it.


We never did get to my father’s sawmill. There was a bridge between it and

National Route 2, and the soldiers wouldn’t let us cross. Papa tried telling

them that he wanted to get the mill working to help the regime, but they

wouldn’t even listen.

  Even before we reached the bridge, however, I had decided to leave. I had

no problem with respecting the family hierarchy, in theory. Life means being

part  of  a  family.  The  older  members  are  in  charge,  and  every  individual

works together harmoniously to benefit the whole. But in practice it was one

problem after another. If I wasn’t quarrelling with Papa it was with my older

brother,  and  if  it  wasn’t  with  him  it  was  with  his  wife.  Much  of  the

quarrelling was my own fault, but that didn’t make it any easier. For all my

maturing as an adult, inside I was still the hyperactive, hot-tempered boy with

the short fuse. My instincts told me to get away from my family, just as my

instincts told me to get away from the Khmer Rouge. I had to live on my own

terms.

As Papa sat glumly by the roadblock, I explained to him that we had to go.

Reluctantly he gave his permission. When the good-byes were over, Huoy,

her mother and I found ourselves walking down National Route 2.

We had walked for an hour when three Khmer Rouge with rifles stopped

us. They were children, maybe ten years old. They didn’t search our bodies –

that was against their code – but they went through the luggage in the cart

behind the Vespa. They didn’t find the medicine, which I had hidden insidethe rice supply, but they did find my camera, some medical equipment and

my medical textbooks.

One of the child-soldiers opened a textbook and saw the type printed in the

Roman alphabet. My medical books were all in French.

  ‘You are CIA,’ he remarked in his high-pitched voice.

It took me a second to follow his train of thought: since I had a book in a

foreign language, I was working for foreigners. This made me an agent of the

CIA.

  ‘Eh?’ I said. ‘What does it mean, “CIA,” comrade? I have never heard of it

before.’

  ‘Where did you get the books?’ he demanded suspiciously. He picked up a

speculum and some surgical clamps. ‘And what are these for?’

I said, ‘I don’t know. People were throwing them away on the street, so I

picked them up and kept them. The same with the books. If you want any of

them, keep them. I don’t know how to read anyway. I was just going to use

the paper from the books to wrap things in.’

One of the other soldiers said to the first one, ‘Ah, yes, good idea. We can

use the paper for rolling cigarettes.’

The first one tossed my pharmacology textbook and two pathology books

to his comrade, who ripped out a page, tore it into quarters, sprinkled tobacco

on the paper, rolled a cigarette and lit it with a gold lighter.

  ‘Angka  needs  these  too,’  said  the  first  soldier,  grabbing  a  handful  of

medical instruments.

  Then they let us go and began to search people who had arrived after us.

We walked on. We came to other checkpoints and were told to turn off the

highway, to begin farming nearby. Fortunately I knew the names of all the

villages, and at each checkpoint managed to convince the soldiers that we

were going to the next village farther on.

The next afternoon we reached Samrong Yong. At the north end of the

village, a few houses still had parts of their roofs intact and others had walls

or concrete supporting columns, but none of them was whole. The market in

the centre of the village was gone, except for a few smashed wooden benches

among the knee-high weeds. The old French-built blockhouse wasn’t there

and neither were the trees. Everything had been flattened. All the landmarks

had vanished. I couldn’t even find my family’s home.

  Then I saw it: concrete walls that had toppled over and lay flat, like giant

playing cards. Grass grew in the cracks of the walls, and the garden wasburied in weeds.

We camped that night on the fallen-over walls. There were no other people

nearby. No dogs to bark, no roosters to crow. The village was as quiet as if it

had been abandoned a hundred years before. A lone Khmer Rouge, a child,

sat at the road intersection with his rifle.


Before the revolution, most Cambodians felt a strong loyalty to their home

villages.  Even  those  who  moved  away  to  a  big  city  like  Phnom  Penh

continued to identify with the place of their birth, which inevitably had an

accent all its own, different even from the accent of the next village over.

Samrong  Yong  was  home.  It  was  an  extension  of  my  family.  To  see  it

destroyed was almost like seeing my own family dead. I tried to keep my

grief hidden from Huoy and her mother so they wouldn’t be saddened, but

they must have known what I felt.

  From  Samrong  Yong  we  went  to  Chambak,  the  next  town.  There  was

nothing left of it except staircases rising into empty air.

An hour’s walk beyond Chambak we came to another checkpoint, manned

by  young,  barefoot  Khmer  Rouge.  For  the  first  time  they  asked  me  my

profession. I said I had been a taxicab driver in Phnom Penh. Then they asked

Huoy if she had worked for the Lon Nol government. Huoy lost her presence

of mind and I broke in, saying that she used to sell vegetables in the market

and that her mother used to take care of our baby. Huoy, hesitating, added in

a small voice, ‘Yes, I was a vegetable seller. My husband was a taxi driver.

What he says is true.’

The  soldiers  searched  the  cart  again.  They  didn’t  find  the  rest  of  the

medical instruments, which I had hidden underneath the cart by the axle, but

they did find some of the other reference books. They took the books and

threw them violently on the road. ‘No more capitalistic books now!’ they

shouted.  ‘Capitalistic  books  are  Lon  Nol-style,  and  Lon  Nol  betrayed  the

nation! Why do you have foreign books? Are you CIA? No more foreign

books under Angka!’

I gave them the usual story about finding the books on the road, but they

didn’t listen.

  ‘Angka says no more travelling!’ the soldiers said crossly. ‘Wherever you

think you’re going, whatever village you are trying to reach, it will be the

same as the villages around here. They are all destroyed. So you have to stop

here and go to work.’  ‘No, please,’ I begged. ‘We have a newborn child. We got separated from

it in Phnom Penh, and my sister took it to Kampot. Please, comrade, the baby

has no milk! She needs her mother!’

  ‘Angka only says once!’ the soldier thundered. ‘No more travelling! No is

no! If I chose to let you go, I would let you go, but no is no!’

We  sat  sadly  by  the  side  of  the  road  as  the  soldiers  checked  families

arriving  at  the  checkpoint  after  us.  The  soldiers  gave  them  the  same

treatment, the interrogations, the confiscation of their goods, the raised voices

and the angry, suspicious glares. It was depressing. It was a mentality I had

seen many times before, and not just under the Khmer Rouge. It was typical

of uneducated Asians who were used to obeying orders from those above and

giving orders to those below. There was no place in their minds for reasoning

with equals. For them, even listening to us would mean deferring to us, and

they could not do this without losing face.

  They  sent  us  off  on  a  side  road  with  the  other  families  and  with  two

soldiers as escorts. The dirt road quickly degenerated into a sandy oxcart

path, uneven and twisting. I strained to push the cycle and the trailer through

the sand and then it became easier and I looked back and saw Huoy pushing

too. She was tired and sweaty, and there was a wild look in her eyes that told

me she had taken a psychological beating and was on the edge of breaking

down. I asked her to let me push by myself, but she said no, she wanted to

help. I told her again in a firm voice not to worry, to let me push alone.

Eventually she let go of the Vespa and walked with her mother, who was

tired and afraid too.

The soldiers led us to a small village on the edge of the jungle. The houses

were on stilts in the rural style and had not been damaged in the war. The

inhabitants were moultan chah – ‘old’ people or ‘base’ people – meaning that

they had consented to Khmer Rouge rule while the civil war was still being

fought. Their early decision not to oppose the Khmer Rouge put them in a

middle  category  of  revolutionary  society,  below  the  Khmer  Rouge

themselves but above people like Huoy and me, who were moultan thmai, or

‘new’  people,  and  at  the  bottom.  The  midlevel  status  of  the  ‘old’  people

enabled them to stay in their homes, without having to evacuate. The ‘old’

people of this village showed us traditional Cambodian hospitality and were

very  kind  to  us.  They  brought  us  palm-tree  sugar  cakes  to  eat,  and  they

listened with sympathy to my tale of wanting to get to Kampot to reunite with

our baby. But they didn’t have enough influence with the Khmer Rouge toenable us to leave.

In the morning Huoy and I were ordered to go to work, along with the

other ‘new’ people. Leaving Ma behind in our camping spot, under another

house on stilts, we walked for about an hour to a mountain called Phnom

Chiso. It was a place of boulders, bare rock outcroppings, scrubby brush and

trees whose leaves had fallen off in the heat of the dry season. One part of the

mountain was a rock quarry. I knew it well, for my father had often driven

there to get loads of gravel for his truck when I was a child, and sometimes I

had gone along for the ride.

The supervisor issued us ordinary-size hammers, took us to piles of fist-

size rocks and told us to break the rocks down into gravel size. The gravel

was going to be used as ballast on railroad tracks, he said.

We began. Chips flew off the rock when we hit it, and I told Huoy to wrap

her krama around her face so it covered everything but her eyes. I did the

same, and I had the additional protection of my glasses. We found that the

rocks had a grain running in one direction and there was a knack to hitting

them to make them split. We hammered rocks all morning and tried to avoid

hitting our free hands or our faces with flying chips. There was no shade on

the mountain and it was very hot.

In the early afternoon they gave us our first meal of the day, a bowl of

salted rice porridge, or rice that has been boiled into a sort of mushy cereal.

There was nothing else in it, no meat or vegetables to give it flavour. ‘Angka

is  poor,  so  you  must  sacrifice  for  your  nation,’  the  supervisor  explained

apologetically. ‘We are starting to rebuild the nation, to make it rich. We just

got free from the hands of the capitalist oppressors.’

I looked at my hands. At my capitalist hands. Blisters had erupted across

my  palms  and  on  my  fingers.  Huoy’s  blisters  were  even  worse.  As  a

schoolteacher, she had never held a heavier tool than a piece of chalk. She

was not used to physical labour. All morning long while she broke rocks she

had been crying quietly, not just because of the hard work but because our

entire universe had been turned upside down. She was a soft, shy, maternal

woman, and she wanted nothing more than to have babies and stay home and

run a clean, well-ordered household. And that’s what I wanted for her.

We went back to work, squatting on the mountainside in the afternoon

heat, hitting the rocks with our hammers. When we built up a pile of gravel I

hauled it in a basket to a nearby truck. As a boy I had waited in trucks just

like that while other men broke the rocks and brought them over. Back then Ihad  taken  those  men  for  granted,  but  now  that  I  was  in  their  place  I

remembered them with new respect. I knew now how hard it was to break

rocks for a living.

At the end of the afternoon we walked back to the village of the ‘old’

people. Dinner was a bowl of rice and some soup with vegetables and bits of

fish, not enough to replace the energy we had used, but better than lunch. We

settled back to massage our blisters and rest our tired bodies, thinking that the

day was over. Then a soldier came up and told us, ‘Angka invites you to a

bonn.’

  Bonn is an ancient religious word meaning a celebration or ceremony at a

temple. I asked the soldier for time to bathe and change clothes and prepare

food to bring to the monks. He told us to come as we were. Huoy and I

obeyed rather reluctantly, because we were dusty and dirty. He led us to a

clearing in the forest and turned us over to a mit neary, a female comrade,

who was about eighteen years old. She took us down a path farther into the

forest to another clearing where about twenty other ‘new’ people were sitting.

We sat down with them in front of a big clump of bamboo.

Like the others of her kind, the mit neary made no attempt to look feminine

or attractive. As she faced us in the fading light I saw a young woman who

aspired to conform. If she had ambition, it was to obey Angka with perfect

zeal. Her appearance was standard, her tunic buttoned to her neck, her hair

cut short and parted in the middle with the sides tucked behind her ears. She

had that same contemptuous expression toward us ‘new’ people as most of

her comrades.

  She  addressed  us  in  a  harsh  voice,  without  any  opening  remarks  or

pleasantries:

  ‘Angka won the war,’ she began. ‘Not by negotiation. Not by sompeah’ –

she  gestured  scornfully  with  her  palms  together  –  ‘to  the  Lon  Nol

government, or to the US government, or to the other capitalists. We won by

fighting!

‘At the beginning we had only empty hands,’ she declared. ‘We had no

rifles, no ammunition. Then we got slingshots. Bows and arrows. Crossbows.

Wooden traps. Knives and hatchets. We used hoes and sticks. And we fought

until we won against the capitalists! We were not afraid of the American

government or the other big powers!’

  What kind of folk tale is this? I wondered. They had AK-47s. They bought

heavy weapons from corrupt generals of the Lon Nol regime.The mit neary raised her fists and shouted, ‘We were like an ant that bit an

elephant! The US government looked down on the small ant and laughed!

But then the big elephant died from our poisonous bite! We are not afraid of

elephants! Or anyone else!’

A mosquito whined in my ear and settled on my cheek. I slapped it.

I had never heard anything as ridiculous as an elephant dying from an ant

bite.

‘We have won the revolution but the war still goes on!’ she said. ‘Now we

are in a new phase of struggle. We warn you that it will not be easy. We must

maintain a mentality of struggling against all obstacles. If Angka says to

break rocks, break rocks. If Angka says to dig canals, you must dig canals. If

Angka says to farm, you must farm. Struggle against the elements! When

there are obstacles, smash them. Only in this way can we liberate the country

and liberate the people!’

In the brief silence that followed, I nudged Huoy and she leaned close. I

whispered to her, ‘When do we go to the bonn?’

  Huoy whispered back, ‘Be quiet.’

The mit neary went on:

  ‘Don’t think back. Don’t think about houses, or big cars, or eating noodles,

or watching television, or ordering servants around. That age is over. The

capitalists destroyed the country. Right now, our economy is underdeveloped

and we must build it up. You must maintain a revolutionary attitude, and you

must keep your mind on the guiding principles, the ‘Three Mountains.’ They

are:

‘ “Attain independence-sovereignty.” That is the first principle.

‘ “Rely on our own strength.” That is the second.

  ‘And “Take destiny in our hands.” Those are the “Three Mountains.” ’

By then it was totally dark and mosquitoes were everywhere. I rubbed my

hands over my ankles and arms and neck to protect myself. The mit neary

talked on and on about the development of the economy and how we would

all have to sacrifice. She used the same jargon over and over again about

starting with an empty hand and struggling with the elements, and about the

ant that killed the elephant, in case we didn’t understand the first time.

It was a long evening.

  When we got back to the village, at about midnight, there was no water to

wash with. I felt unclean.

  ‘Sweet,’ I said to Huoy, half-jokingly, ‘we have just taken the first step onthe road to hell. We have gone to a bonn where all they talk about is war and

economics.’


For another few days, Huoy and I went off to break rocks in the mornings

and we went to the so-called bonns at night. But I had already begun to plan

our  escape.  From  the  beams  of  the  house  above  us  hung  a  bamboo

shoulderboard. I found some braided cord in a neighbour’s yard and stole it. I

made friends with the one dog of the village, patting him on the head and

stroking his fur. On the fifth day, when the supervisor told us that Huoy’s

mother  would  have  to  begin  working,  I  made  the  decision  to  leave.  Ma

wasn’t strong enough to work with us in the quarry. And if she went off to

work with us someone would be certain to search our luggage and discover

the truth about our pasts.

That night, long after everyone else in the village was asleep, we packed

our essential belongings into two giant bundles to hang from the ends of the

shoulderboard and into smaller bundles for the women to carry. With regret, I

decided to leave the Vespa and the trailer behind.

We crept out of the house in total darkness. I went off to calm the dog,

who growled but didn’t bark, while Huoy and her mother went on ahead.

When they were out of hearing I shouldered the heavy load and hurried after

them. I came to a fork in the road but didn’t see them. I whispered, ‘Sweet!

Sweet! Where are you?’ The two women, who had taken the wrong fork,

reappeared and we set off in the right direction. When we walked beyond the

trees of the village and into the open rice fields we found ourselves in bright

moonlight.  The  moon,  which  was  nearly  full,  was  over  our  shoulders,

distinctly illuminating the chequerboard pattern of the dykes in the rice fields.

We cut across the fields. In the distance, at an angle, the headlights of truck

convoys bobbed along National Route 2. Directly in front of us was a dark

island of trees: another village. We detoured far around it. The dogs of the

village  heard  us,  and  barked  in  the  stillness  of  the  night,  and  continued

barking until we were on the other side of the village and far away.

Near  National  Route  2  we  took  a  break,  resting  in  the  tall  grass.  The

muscles on top of my shoulders were sore from carrying the heavy loads.

Still, I was encouraged. I knew where we were and where the checkpoints

were likely to be. The women were tired but did not complain. They trusted

me  to  lead  them.  And  they  cared  about  me.  Huoy’s  mother  wrapped  my

shoulder-board in cloth, to cushion it, and we went on.We  walked  through  Chambak  on  the  road,  and  then  through  the  flat

wasteland of Samrong Yong. The young Khmer Rouge who had stood sentry

at the main intersection was nowhere in sight. As dawn approached we hid in

the ruins of a temple outside the village. Huoy rubbed my shoulders, which

were red and badly swollen on both sides.

We  rested  only  an  hour,  then  began  walking  again,  up  the  deserted

highway and then across the fields and through the forest. My shoulders hurt

so much that I had to stop every few hundred yards to rest and shift the load

to the other shoulder. Huoy gave me cold water compresses with her krama

to soothe the pain. She was upset and it worried me that she was upset, but

she kept herself under control.

We walked on and off and rested in the fields. The next morning we got to

Tonle Batí, and who should we see by the ornate village gate but my father

and the rest of my family and the jeep. Much had happened since I had seen

them last. We had camped on the ruins of the old family home. We had tried

and then abandoned our plan to leave the country by ship, because of all the

checkpoints. We had begun forced labour, attended bonns and escaped from

the village of the ‘old’ people. It seemed like a lifetime, but we had only been

apart from my family for a little over a week.                                          12



                        The Crocodile Loses Its Lake


 




The ancient town of Tonle Batí lies alongside a long, thin lake of the same

name.  Within  Cambodia,  the  town  is  famous  for  its  temple  or  wat,  a

marvellous  example  of  its  kind.  A  reflecting  pond  with  lotus  plants  and

goldfish surrounds the wat on three sides, and on the fourth a grand stairway

leads up to the entrance, with railings in the curving shape of nagas, or holy

seven-headed serpents; the nagas have their hoods spread and mouths open

wide to frighten off evildoers and protect those who worship inside. Next to

the  wat  is  the sala  or  hall,  open  on  the  sides,  with  pillars  supporting  a

multilevel roof. Nearby stand temple outbuildings, some of them dating back

to the ancient empire at Angkor seven centuries ago and made of reddish

stone blocks with sculptures carved in deep relief. In one of those Angkorian

buildings sits a huge, bronze Buddha figure, recently but exquisitely made. It

was the statue my father brought back from Thailand on his truck when I was

a boy.

The temple had the same importance to us that a large cathedral or abbey

would have had in the Middle Ages in France. Parents sent their sons to the

temple to learn to read and write, and to become monks temporarily in the

rite of passage to manhood. The monks in turn went out in the community

every  morning  collecting  alms.  In  both  religious  and  secular  matters,  the

temple had been the centre of Tonle Batí for more generations than anyone

could remember. But by the time my family and I arrived there, in mid-May

1975, the Khmer Rouge had forced the monks out of the wat, stripped them

of their saffron robes and made them change into black pajamas. They saidthat  by  accepting  alms  the  monks  were  parasites  living  off  the  labour  of

others. Or, as a mit neary explained to us, ‘The monks use other people’s

noses to breathe. It is Angka’s rule: Breathe by your own nose.

  Buddhism was the old religion we were supposed to discard, and Angka

was  the  new  ‘religion’  we  were  supposed  to  accept.  As  the  rainy  season

began – normally the time when youths from the surrounding villages would

shave their heads and join the monkhood – soldiers entered the empty wat

and began removing the Buddha statues. Rolling the larger statues end over

end, they threw them over the side, dumped them on the ground with heads

and hands severed from the bodies, or threw them into the reflecting pond.

But they could destroy only the outward signs of our religion, not the beliefs

within. And even then, as I noticed with bitter satisfaction, there was one

statue they did not destroy. It was the bronze Buddha, still gleaming inside

the small Angkorian outbuilding. It had taken all my father’s ingenuity to

manoeuvre the heavy statue inside the narrow stone entrance. The Khmer

Rouge couldn’t figure how to get it out, much less smash it. They didn’t have

the intelligence, or the tools.

In Tonle Batí the Khmer Rouge made us go to bonns, or brainwashing

sessions, the same as in the village Huoy and I had just come from. They

were always at night and usually in some mosquito-infested clearing in the

forest. One evening, however, the Khmer Rouge leaders held a special bonn

in the sala or hall next to the temple itself. We in the audience sat on the cool,

smooth wooden floor. Soldiers had rigged a loudspeaker system powered by

truck batteries. Standing near the microphone were cadre with the usual black

cotton trousers and shirts, plus red headbands and red kramas tied like sashes

around  their  waists.  Outside,  a  light  rain  fell.  One  of  the  costumed  men

stepped to the microphone and spoke.

‘In Democratic Kampuchea, under the glorious rule of Angka,’ he said,

‘we need to think about the future. We don’t need to think about the past.

You “new” people must forget about the prerevolutionary times. Forget about

cognac,  forget  about  fashionable  clothes  and  hairstyles.  Forget  about

Mercedes. Those things are useless now. What can you do with a Mercedes

now?  You  cannot  barter  for  anything  with  it!  You  cannot  keep  rice  in  a

Mercedes, but you can keep rice in a box you make yourself out of palm tree

leaf!

‘We don’t need the technology of the capitalists,’ he went on. ‘We don’t

need any of it at all. Under our new system, we don’t need to send our youngpeople to school. Our school is the farm. The land is our paper. The plough is

our  pen.  We  will  ‘write’  by  ploughing.  We  don’t  need  to  give  exams  or

award certificates. Knowing how to farm and knowing how to dig canals –

those are our certificates,’ he said.

‘We  don’t  need  doctors  anymore.  They  are  not  necessary.  If  someone

needs  to  have  their  intestines  removed,  I  will  do  it.’  He  made  a  cutting

motion with an imaginary knife across his stomach. ‘It is easy. There is no

need to learn how to do it by going to school.

‘We don’t need any of the capitalist professions! We don’t need doctors or

engineers. We don’t need professors telling us what to do. They were all

corrupted. We just need people who want to work hard on the farm!

  ‘And yet, comrades,’ he said, looking around at our faces, ‘there are some

naysayers and troublemakers who do not show the proper willingness to work

hard  and  sacrifice!  Such  people  do  not  have  the  proper  revolutionary

mentality! Such people are our enemies! And comrades, some of them are

right here in our midst!’

  There was an uneasy shifting in the audience. Each of us hoped the speaker

was talking about somebody else.

‘These people cling to the old capitalist ways of thinking,’ he said. ‘They

cling to the old capitalist fashions! We have some people among us who still

wear eyeglasses. And why do they use eyeglasses? Can’t they see me? If I

move to slap your face’ – he swung his open hand – ‘and you flinch, then you

can see well enough. So you don’t need glasses. People wear them to be

handsome in the capitalistic style. They wear them because they are vain. We

don’t need people like that anymore! People who think they are handsome

are lazy! They are leeches sucking energy from others!’

I took off my glasses and put them in my pocket. Around me, others with

glasses did the same. My eyesight wasn’t too bad, just a little nearsighted and

astigmatic. I could still recognize people at a distance, but missed some of the

details.

The speaker retreated from the microphone and stepped back into the line

of cadre dressed like him, with the red kramas around their waists and the red

headbands.  A  hiss  in  the  loudspeaker  system  gave  way  to  tape-recorded

music, a strange march with chimes and gongs finishing out the phrases, the

same kind of music I had heard in the exodus from Phnom Penh. Definitely

music from Peking, I decided. The cadre began a stylized dance to it, raising

their hands and dropping them in unison, as if using hoes. When the secondstanza of the music began they changed position and mimed pulling on the

handles of giant wrenches, as if tightening bolts on industrial machinery.

I watched in surprise. I had never seen a dance that glorified farm work

and factory labour.

  Another speech began, about the development of the economy and how we

were all going to have to work hard for Angka and how laziness was our

enemy. ‘Angka says, if you work you eat. If you cannot work you cannot eat.

No one can help you.’ The country was going to be self-sufficient in filling

all its needs. It was not going to rely on the outside world for anything.

  Then the second dance began, with the same sort of alien music. This time

the female comrades danced in unison, moving with masculine vigour instead

of feminine grace, mimicking rice harvesters slashing rice stalks with their

knives. Then came another propaganda speech, and after that came another

dance, one after the next.

At  the  end  of  the  last  dance  all  the  costumed  cadre,  male  and  female,

formed a single line and shouted ‘BLOOD AVENGES BLOOD!’ at the top

of their lungs. Both times when they said the word ‘blood’ they pounded their

chests  with  their  clenched  fists,  and  when  they  shouted  ‘avenges’  they

brought their arms out straight like a Nazi salute, except with a closed fist

instead of an open hand.

  ‘BLOOD AVENGES BLOOD! BLOOD AVENGES BLOOD! BLOOD

AVENGES  BLOOD!’  the  cadre  repeated  with  fierce,  determined  faces,

thumping their fists on their hearts and raising their fists. They shouted other

revolutionary slogans and gave the salutes and finally ended with ‘Long live

the Cambodian revolution!’

It  was  a  dramatic  performance,  and  it  left  us  scared.  In  our  language,

‘blood’ has its ordinary meaning, the red liquid in the body, and another

meaning of kinship or family. Blood avenges blood. You kill us, we kill you.

We ‘new’ people had been on the other side of the Khmer Rouge in the civil

war. Soldiers of the Lon Nol regime, with the help of American weapons and

planes,  had  killed  many  tens  of  thousands  of  Khmer  Rouge  in  battle.

Symbolically, the Khmer Rouge had just announced that they were going to

take revenge.


Tonle  Batí  was  my  father’s  birthplace,  and  the  place  where  five  of  his

brothers and sisters returned after the fall of Phnom Penh. Papa had been very

generous to them during the Lon Nol years, loaning them large amounts ofmoney that they weren’t really expected to repay. He had given the most to

his  younger  half  sister  Ngor  Pheck  Kim,  the  one  who  had  opened  the

business of selling American military supplies. I had helped Aunt Kim too,

by giving her children and her tubercular husband free medical treatment and

by allowing her to take my government-subsidized rice supply and sell it for

a much higher price on the black market. I had regretted giving her the rice

ever since, because I had come to think of her as a grasping, greedy and

unpleasant woman.

In Phnom Penh, Aunt Kim had played up to us and flattered us. In Tonle

Batí she played up to a man named Neang, an ‘old’ person who acted as

village chief for the Khmer Rouge regime. True, her friendship with him

helped us at first. She got him to give my family a house to stay in until we

could build houses of our own.

But Kim made me uneasy. The extended Ngor clan held a meeting with all

my uncles, aunts and cousins present, many of whom I didn’t really know.

Kim’s  husband  sat  apart  from  the  rest,  sickly  and  skinny,  with  his  long,

drawn-out tubercular cough, the phlegm never clearing from his throat. One

of my cousins asked the question that was on all our minds, whether it was

possible to escape from Khmer Rouge rule and go to another country. Almost

all of us wanted to leave Cambodia. ‘Oh no, you can’t go,’ Aunt Kim said,

pointing right at me. ‘Ngor Haing here tried to escape, and they caught him.

He wanted to sail to Thailand, but he never even got to the seacoast. If they

caught him, it is impossible for us.’

  Curious faces turned to me. I kept my own expression blank, but inside I

was angry. Foolish woman! I didn’t want anyone but my parents and my

brothers to know that I had tried to leave the country. Now all of Tonle Batí

would know. And if I couldn’t trust Aunt Kim to keep quiet about my escape

attempt, I certainly couldn’t trust her to keep quiet about my being a doctor.

If the Khmer Rouge found out about that, it was the end.

  Thinking back on it, it seems likely that Aunt Kim resented the favours my

father and I had done for her, because accepting the favours put her in a

lower position. In her mind she thought she had repaid the favours, or more

than repaid them, by arranging for us to stay in a house on stilts. The new

house was similar to our house in Wat Kien Svay Krao, airy and large, with

springy floorboards. My family crowded into it and under it as we had before.

Next to it, in a neat row, were plots of empty land that had been assigned to

each married couple to build on. Aunt Kim and her sons had plots in the samerow as my father, my brothers and me. A few days a week, we all got time

off from our regular work for the Khmer Rouge to build our own houses. We

went off into the forests, my brothers and some of Aunt Kim’s sons and I,

chopping down trees and carrying the poles back to Tonle Batí. Each of us

made piles of the poles we had cut.

One morning Aunt Kim’s pile of poles was missing. Her son Haing Seng,

whom I had befriended in Phnom Penh, came up to the house on stilts and

pointed his finger rudely at me. Haing Seng was furious. He asked if I knew

where the poles were. His tone made his question seem like an accusation.

  ‘Haing Seng,’ I said quietly, ‘do you know who I am? I am the man you

used to call “brother.” ’

‘No more “brother” business now,’ said Haing Seng. ‘I want to find out

who stole the fucking wood.’

  ‘Okay,’ I said, ‘no more “brother” business. No problem. But Haing Seng,

don’t cuss at me. Go look at my woodpile if you like.’

We walked to my woodpile about fifty yards away. My pile was bigger

than the others because I had cut more trees. He looked at my pile and shoved

it over with his foot.

‘What did you do that for?’ I demanded.

  ‘Ingrate. Stealing after all we’ve done for you.’

  Tonle Batí was Haing Seng’s home territory. He thought we should behave

as if we were obligated to him, because his mother had found us the house.

He thought I should show him special respect. But it was too late for that. I

shouted that he had no ‘race,’ which means that he didn’t know who his

mother and father were – that he was a bastard. In Cambodia this is a deadly

accusation.

He stalked back angrily to tell his mother.

I restacked the woodpile. My father had heard the argument from the upper

storey  of  the  house  and  was  coming  down  the  steps  to  see  what  had

happened. But my father was old and slow, and my aunt got to me first.

  She slapped my face twice, hard. ‘Why do you tell my child he has no

race? I have race! And I am related to you! So why do you say that?’

I turned to call out to my father, who was huffing and puffing toward us.

‘Papa, you see by your own eyes that she slapped me. I forgive her the first

slap because she is your sister. I forgive her the second slap because she is

older than me. So I’ll let her get away with it. But’ – I turned to Aunt Kim –

‘don’t do it again.’  She pointed her finger at me. ‘You came as a stranger to this village!’ she

screamed shrilly. ‘If it weren’t for me you wouldn’t have land here. You have

totally  forgotten  the  good  things  I  did  for  you.’  She  spat  at  my  feet  and

quoted an old Cambodian proverb: ‘ “The crocodile has lost its lake!” ’

  She meant that I had forgotten the place that had nourished me, and now I

was in trouble, like a crocodile far away from the water.

‘Are you finished?’ I said. ‘Are you finished cussing me?’

‘What is it to you if I’m finished or not?’

  ‘You filthy cunt!’ I roared. ‘What is this about a crocodile that has lost its

lake? When you came to Phnom Penh my family fed you. We gave you

money. I treated your children. I gave medicine to that miserable husband of

yours. I know which crocodile lost her lake!’

My father finally came up to us, breathing hard. ‘Kim, Kim, my whole

family is in your hands,’ he pleaded. ‘We are in your world. If you feel you

must do something against my son or my family, we cannot stop you. We are

powerless. But do not forget all the good things we did for you.’

  Haing Seng returned with three or four of his brothers, and they were all

holding sticks and knives. ‘Come on, motherfucker,’ he said, motioning me

toward him, ‘let’s fight.’ I told him to go away. He stood a few yards away,

biting his lower lip, his eyes flashing, waving a stick in his hand.

  Where were my own brothers when I needed them? They were nowhere in

sight.

  There was a tug on my arm. It was Huoy. ‘Come on, sweet, come on,’ she

said, trying to pull me away.

Her mother took me by the other arm. ‘Don’t fight them,’ she said. ‘If your

cousins want the wood, let them take it. No fighting, please.’

  Aunt Kim looked contemptuously at Huoy and said something about a

‘taxi girl.’ I lunged forward, but my father blocked my way, and Huoy and

her  mother  grabbed  my  arms  more  tightly  and  I  allowed  myself  to  be

restrained. There was a long standoff by my woodpile, trading insults back

and forth, until finally Aunt Kim and her sons went away.

By the time the anger had drained out of me, the sun had risen high. It was

another hot, humid day, and I was late for work.

  ‘That’s your sister for you, Papa,’ I said. ‘Feed her, give her money and

what does she do? This is her repayment for all your good deeds.’

My father heaved a deep sigh and said, ‘Son, let it pass. Forget about it.’

But there was worry written on his heavy, intelligent face. He was upset athis sister for being two-faced. Upset at me for endangering the safety of the

family. It was bad enough that the Khmer Rouge were threatening to avenge

blood with blood. Here were relatives, members of the same clan, on the edge

of shedding each other’s blood.

My father turned away and walked slowly back to the house.


The local Khmer Rouge administration divided Tonle Batí into sections of

‘old’ and ‘new’ people. They put us in a subsection of two hundred ‘new’

people who were ethnic Chinese, even though my family was a mixture of

Chinese and Khmer.

Our neighbours were former shopkeepers from Phnom Penh. They had

pale  skins  and  straight  hair,  and  like  most  Chinese  they  privately  looked

down on those with darker skins, including the Khmer Rouge. Twice a day,

at lunch and dinner, we stood in line at a common kitchen built near the

temple. We each got a bowl full of salted rice porridge, sometimes with bits

of vegetables inside. After eating the meals with a bowl and spoon in Khmer

Rouge style, our neighbours went back to their houses and discreetly cooked

meals of their own with supplies they had brought from Phnom Penh. They

had real rice – steamed rice – and sometimes salted pork or salted fish. They

ate with chopsticks, lifting the bowls to their mouths and shovelling the rice

in  while  making  a  sucking  noise,  and  burping  afterward  to  show  their

appreciation, in traditional Chinese style.

The two hundred of us made up one large work crew. Sometimes we went

out in the fields, planting a rice crop, but most days we worked on a canal

that was supposed to bring irrigation water to the fields. We began digging

near the lake, hacking rather lazily at the reddish clay with our hoes, filling

baskets with dirt and passing them leisurely from the bottom of the canal to

the top. We didn’t work very hard. When there were no soldiers in sight, we

didn’t work at all. We just sat down, in the shade if possible, and talked. Our

civilian overseer, an ‘old’ person whose way of thinking hadn’t changed with

the revolution, sat down and talked with us. He saw no reason why we should

work hard in the hot sun, and neither did we. Nobody had, in traditional

Cambodia. During break time, which sometimes lasted half the morning, the

Chinese shopkeepers complained, ‘Why should we exert ourselves? There is

no reason. They give us the same amount of food every day, whether we

work hard or relax.’ Our foreman shrugged and said he didn’t understand

what was going on any more than we did.The regime’s controls were very loose in this period, when the Khmer

Rouge were still consolidating their rule and making their plans for reshaping

society. In Tonle Batí, only one person of each household had to report for

work each day. Huoy could work in my place if I needed to do something

else, like cut poles for our house. Furthermore, it was easy to fake being sick.

On some days nobody from our household went to work at all.

I used part of my free time to barter in nearby villages of ‘old’ people. It

was exactly what I had done as a child. I walked through the same paths

through the forest and found that many of the villagers remembered me, even

though it was my first visit to them in almost twenty years. I brought them

odds and ends to trade, like the stack of cotton sarongs from my clinic in

Phnom Penh, and the silver betel boxes I had taken later from my apartment.

The villagers had rice, vegetables and other goods. In the village where I had

gotten drunk on palm beer as a child, I traded for a sturdy white plastic tarp,

knowing that it would be especially useful during the rains.

  When I wasn’t trading or gathering wild foods, I worked on building my

house. I nailed the poles together for a clumsy frame. My father, the ex-

lumber tycoon, made rectangular panels for the roof and walls by folding

palm  tree  leaf  pieces  over  long  slivers  of  bamboo  and  sewing  the  sides

together. Papa’s craftsmanship was so much better than mine that it made me

feel ashamed. For all my education in the city, for all my training to be a

doctor, there were many practical skills I had never learned.

The  finished  house  was  no  more  than  a  one-room  hut.  I  made  a  low

platform with a top surface of split bamboo, and laid the white plastic mat on

the bamboo for Huoy, her mother and I to sleep on. The three of us got along

very well. Huoy and I treated her mother with respect because she was old,

and Ma made herself useful around the house with small chores. Once a week

or so, Ma went to the evening bonn in my place, so Huoy and I could have

privacy. It was the only good thing about these bonns, that because of them

Huoy and I could occasionally behave like husband and wife.

One night when we were all under our large mosquito net together, Huoy

between her mother and me, a faint creaking noise came from the pathway

outside. Immediately I was wide awake. It was a bicycle, I decided. Then the

creaking stopped and there was a soft knock at the door. I got up to peer

through the cracks. It was Neang, the chief of the village.

‘Yes, what do you want?’ I said.

  ‘Ngor Haing, I know you are a doctor,’ he said. ‘Please help me save mychild.’

I was silent. And afraid.

‘I am not a doctor,’ I said at last.

  ‘Your aunt told me you were a doctor. She said you were a doctor in the

military, with the rank of captain. I don’t care what you did before, but now

my child has a fever. He’s very sick. So come save my baby boy. He’s only

eleven months old.’

I thought, that bigmouth Kim told the village chief.

‘I was only a student,’ I said through the door. ‘Never a doctor.’

  Neang was losing his patience. ‘Everybody here knows you were a doctor.

Now come on, and don’t be scared. Angka doesn’t know about your past and

I will never tell. Come on. I’m the leader here. I’ll take care of you.’

  ‘Please give me a minute.’

I did some quick thinking. Neang had come alone, without soldiers. He had

a reputation as a good-natured man. Earlier that day he had asked our work

group at the canal site whether any of us had fever medicines, but nobody had

answered. He knew I was a doctor even then, but he hadn’t singled me out in

public. He had waited for dark instead.

  Huoy sat up in the mosquito net. ‘What’s wrong?’ she whispered. ‘Are

they going to take you away?’

  ‘Don’t worry,’ I whispered back, changing from my sarong into trousers.

‘Everything’s going to be all right.’

I followed Neang to his home, which was lit with lanterns inside, the light

showing through the cracks.

  Neang had called on some other medical practitioners before me, and they

were standing around the baby. Two of them were traditional rural healers.

They were dark-skinned, heavily tattooed and wore only shorts. They had

prepared  a  green  liquid  medicine,  grinding  palm  sugar,  black  pepper  and

various leaves together in a mixture with unboiled water. They had fed it to

the baby with a spoon. They had also sprinkled what was supposed to be holy

water on the baby’s forehead. When I came in they were chanting to drive

away the evil spirits.

Two young female Khmer Rouge doctors were also there, in the usual

black uniforms and short haircuts. One of them was drawing a white liquid

from an ampule marked ‘Thiamine’ into a syringe.

Oh no, I thought. Please don’t.

The baby was lying on a table, wrapped tightly in blankets. I pulled thecovers  back  to  look.  A  swollen  belly.  Skin  hot  to  the  touch.  Occasional

tremors in the body. Without lab tests it was hard to be sure, but my guess

was meningitis as a secondary condition brought on by the fever.

  ‘How can I save my son?’ Neang asked me.

  ‘Take the blankets away,’ I said. ‘Your son is too hot. You need to cool

him down. Moisten a cloth with cold water and pat him with it.’

‘No,’ commanded the mit neary with the syringe. ‘The baby has a fever

because it is cold. Don’t take the blankets away.’

  She was wrong, but I did not want to assert myself. She and her comrade

were  in  charge.  The  one  with  the  syringe  wiped  the  needle  between  her

fingers and approached the child. I winced. It was not just a matter of an

unsterile  needle.  Thiamine,  or  vitamin  B,  is  sometimes  used  in  Western
                                                  1

medicine  as  an  ingredient  in  multivitamin  treatments  but  only  in  tiny

quantities. It is never injected alone. The mit neary had drawn five cc’s into

the syringe. I doubted that she could read the label on the ampule, which was

in French, or that she knew that she was administering an overdose.

  She jabbed the needle into the unconscious child and pushed the chamber

until all the liquid was inside the little boy’s body.

The traditional healers chanted in a monotone. The Khmer Rouge women

waited, sullen and bored. Neang looked at me anxiously, but I kept silent and

stayed in the background. The oil lamps cast our shadows on the wall.

  Outside, the crickets chirped and the bullfrogs on the lake made their deep

croaking noise.

The child began shaking, not with light tremors but with deep, terrible

convulsions. It fell into a coma with its unseeing eyes wide open. It twitched

for another five or ten minutes and then it was dead.

I excused myself and went outside.

I took a deep breath. The chorus of crickets and frogs was louder here.

Their sounds came from all directions, filling the night air.

I wanted to scream.

How I hated it all! If I had told Neang that the child shouldn’t get the

injection, the Khmer Rouge medics probably would have ignored me. If I

insisted, they would have reported me for interfering, and then I would have

been taken to Angka Leu. To them, anything in an ampule was medicine. If a

patient died after getting an injection, it was the patient’s fault. What was the

purpose of a revolution like that? I wondered. What was the gain, what was

the progress, when a society went from ignorant herbal healers to monkeyslike the Khmer Rouge? What about the kind of knowledge that was taught in

medical school? Wasn’t it worth anything? Were we supposed to forget that

it existed?

  Maybe,  I  thought,  just  maybe,  if  I  had  been  more  forceful  the  child

wouldn’t  have  died.  If  I  had  told  the  medics  to  stand  back,  if  I  had  put

confidence and authority into my bearing, they might have obeyed me. Then

I could have removed the blankets, cooled the baby down and prevented them

from giving the injection. In doing so I would have risked my own life, but I

would have saved the child’s.

I hadn’t done it. I had protected my own life instead.

How I hated it. The country was ruled by the ignorant. Already there were

unnecessary deaths. To avoid our own deaths people like me were doing

things we knew were wrong. And as we scrambled to protect ourselves, or

sought to gain favour with the new powers, the old relationships were torn

apart. Doctors broke their professional oaths. Families argued. People like my

aunt became collaborators, and used their influence with the leaders to satisfy

old grudges.

I stood in the dark thinking about the new regime. I had already seen more

of  it  than  I  wanted.  What  I  did  not  know  was  that  everything  that  had

happened so far was mild and harmless, compared with what was still to

come.                                          13



                                  New Directions


 




A  week  after  the  death  of  the  village  chief’s  child,  at  one  of  the  nightly

bonns,  we  were  told  that  Angka  had  a  ‘new  direction’  for  us.  ‘We  have

almost finished our projects here,’ a mit neary declared, though in fact the

canal was barely begun, ‘and soon we will have to begin other projects. You

will still be struggling against the elements to help develop the country, but

someplace else.’

This news, that we were going to leave Tonle Batí, was unpopular at first

with the ‘new’ people. We had planted crops but not yet harvested them. But

later  it  was  announced  that  we  would  be  allowed  to  return  to  our  native

villages. We would walk to a collection point, and then trucks would take us

to our destinations.

  With that the idea of leaving looked much better. What an opportunity!

Except for a few families, like Aunt Kim’s, who had been longtime residents

of Tonle Batí and who would be staying, the Khmer Rouge didn’t know

where we were from. I revived my plans for going to the seacoast, and from

there to Thailand by boat. My parents planned to go to Battambang Province,

in western Cambodia, and from there to Thailand by land. Everybody in my

immediate family was ready to leave except for my number-four brother,

Hong Srun. I had just helped his wife deliver a baby, and it was too soon for

them to travel.

  Huoy, Ma and I left our little hut with few regrets. We carried a smaller

number of possessions than before, in two big baskets suspended from my

shoulderboard and the rest in bundles the women balanced on their heads. Myfather left his jeep behind, the last vehicle of his fleet. We were all travelling

lighter.

The trip was supposed to take half a day. We set out on foot through the

extensive sandflats next to Tonle Batí. With the weight of the load on the

shoulderboard, my feet sunk into the sand. I took off my shoes, but the sand

was hot on my soles. Huoy trudged on in her leather sandals, looking as

urban  and  fashionable  as  a  woman  could  under  the  circumstances.  Her

mother,  plump  and  unpretentious,  wore  rubber  shower  sandals,  the  most

sensible of us all.

  Soon the trail led out of the sandflats and into the forest, up and around and

down and up again. Thousands of us walked on it in single file, heading

generally  northwest.  We  were  not  just  from  Tonle  Batí  but  from  many

villages around. In the early afternoon, long after we were supposed to arrive

at the central collection point, we turned onto another trail leading south.

‘This is what the communists mean by “new direction,” ’ I thought. ‘Taking

the long way around for no apparent reason.’

By evening we had reached a small valley with a railroad station. A crowd

of other ‘new’ people was already there with bundles, bags and suitcases.

Wood-burning steam locomotives came chuffing along the track but kept on

going without stopping. Behind the locomotives were old wooden boxcars

full of passengers, who were standing in the boxcar doorways, peering out

from the slats along the sides, or sitting on the boxcar roofs. They didn’t

wave to us and they didn’t look happy.

By now everybody knew that we weren’t going to be allowed to go back to

our home villages. The Khmer Rouge had told us that just to get us to leave

the places where we had been.

We waited by the railroad station for four days while trains went by, each

one with a cargo of thousands of human beings, shipped like farm animals

out  of  eastern  Cambodia.  It  looked  as  though  the  Khmer  Rouge  were

evacuating the entire region.

  There had been a mix-up with our shipment, however. We never did get on

a train at that station. Instead, we were led on foot to another village nearby,

and the next day a convoy of empty Chinese-built military trucks drove in.

Now  the  ‘new’  people  nervously  called  out  the  name  of  the  places  they

wanted to go. The soldiers said to shut up and get in the trucks. So we got in

feeling both afraid and stupid. It was amazing that we had believed even at

first that Khmer Rouge would really let us return to our home villages. Wehad been naïve to think they might be telling the truth, after the lies they had

told us to get us to leave Phnom Penh.

  Packed into the back of the trucks, we bounced down the rutted road and

then onto National Route 3, heading north. It was the same kind of war-

wrecked  landscape  we  had  seen  elsewhere.  Houses  flattened  except  for

occasional  walls.  Coconut  trees  with  their  tops  blown  off.  Mango  trees

blackened by fire. Lon Nol military bases with overturned trucks and jeeps,

and tanks with metal treads hanging loose and broken.

Our truck was in the middle of the convoy. As we neared Phnom Penh

along  the  airport  road  a  murmur  of  hope  swelled  and  we  could  hear  the

yelling  of  enthusiasm  from  the  other  trucks.  We  entered  Phnom  Penh  at

twilight and drove through the streets at top speed. There were no people and

no lights anywhere; it was the same city of ghosts that it had been in April

after the evacuation. As we drove to the northern edge of Phnom Penh all

hope died and then the trucks were speeding along north on National Route 5

in the countryside again. The road ran parallel to the Tonle Sap River, visible

from time to time as a flat, silvery surface in the gaps between the trees.

  After a stop to camp overnight we got on again the next morning and

reached  the  town  of  Pursat  around  noon.  At  Pursat,  a  provincial  capital,

National Route 5 and the railroad line came together, then ran parallel for

some  distance  to  the  northwest  before  separating  again  at  another  town,

called  Muong.  Pursat  was  empty  of  regular  inhabitants  –  nobody  in  the

market, sliding metal doors pulled shut across the storefronts – but a crowd of

travellers like us filled the streets nearest the railroad station. Loudspeakers

announced that Angka was giving away food, and the crowd surged forward

to get supplies. I stood in line and eventually got rice and salt and some dried

fish.

By then it was late afternoon. A few blocks from the railroad station there

was a pond with water lilies and other aquatic plants. My family chose a quiet

spot on the far side of the pond, back in a grove of banana trees, where there

were no other people. Here we built our fires. Huoy cooked rice. Her mother

was tired but did not complain. We were windburned from the long journey

in the open truck, and all of us were tired.

  When Ma had eaten her fill she stood up, rewrapped her sarong around her

waist and went off to the pond to get water. Huoy and I picked at our food.

My father and mother and my two remaining brothers, Pheng Huor and Hok,

ate with their families close by.  ‘Where’s my mother?’ Huoy asked after a few minutes had passed.

  ‘She’s probably talking to somebody. I’ll go look for her if you like.’ I

stood up and walked through the trees to the pond. There was nobody along

the shore of the pond except for a few people on the far side. I squinted to see

if I could make out a plump figure in a sarong.

  Where was Ma?

  Then I looked lower and my eyes caught a bit of bright colour on the bank.

I walked closer and even before I was sure it was Ma’s rubber shower sandals

my heart was beating fast.

I checked again, but there was nobody wading or swimming in the pond.

I shouted to Huoy that her mother had fallen into the water, and then I

dove into it and began thrashing around to try to find her. The pond was cold

and full of slippery plants and there were leeches on my arms though I barely

noticed them. My father heard and he waded into the water too, old and slow

but doing his best. I dove farther out from the bank and then felt something

soft under the water lilies, and I pulled Ma out of the water and up on the

bank. She wasn’t breathing. I lifted her up so her belly was on my shoulder

and I jumped up and down. Water came out of her mouth and some rice too,

but she still wasn’t breathing. Her limbs were soft and pliable but she had no

pulse. I tried artificial respiration with my mouth over hers, then thumped her

chest hard with my two fists together to start her heart, and then went back to

artificial respiration.

I kept trying.

  There was a ring of faces around me but it was no good.

  ‘Attention, comrades!’ said a voice echoing out of the loudspeakers by the

station.  ‘You  will  now  board  the  train.  Angka  wants  you  to  collect  your

belongings and get on board!’

Ma was dead. Huoy was frantic. I was numb. If there was anything more to

do, I didn’t know it. My brother Pheng Huor took over. He carried the limp

body to a shed and put it up on two boards. He built a fire underneath. It is a

Cambodian folk belief that the spark of life continues as long as the body is

soft, and the heat from a fire can bring it back. The part of me that had been

trained in Western medicine was not strong enough to object, and I waited

there like the rest, hoping for a miraculous recovery.

Two soldiers with rifles were watching.

  Pheng Huor added wood to the fire and built up a blaze and massaged

Ma’s arms and legs. But Ma didn’t respond.  ‘You have to leave. Time to leave now,’ the soldiers were saying behind

us. ‘No crying. Angka does not allow it.’

We  could  either  bury  Ma  in  the  Chinese  tradition,  or  else  cremate  her

according to the Cambodian Buddhist tradition. We could do it either way,

but it didn’t seem possible that we had to make the choice and that she was

dead. I had my arms around Huoy, but Huoy was beyond consolation.

  Nearby, in the banana grove, a large hole had already been dug for planting

trees.

My brothers carried the body on planks and placed it next to the hole.

Huoy smoothed her mother’s hair and began kissing and hugging her as if she

were still alive. Huoy wouldn’t release her mother until my father patted her

gently on the back and told her to let go, and then Huoy began beating the

ground with her fists and her feet and her elbows and knees.

We had no candles, so we set a couple of sticks from the fire in the ground.

Huoy and I prayed out loud on our knees in front of her mother with the rest

of my family behind.

  ‘Mother, you left me! You left me all alone!’ Huoy bawled. ‘Were you

angry at me, Mother? Tell me how I can serve you. You can ask me for

anything you want. Just wait for me in paradise so I can be with you in the

next life. Mother, oh Mother, I want to be with you. Please, please, take me

with you!’ And Huoy fell sobbing with her head on her mother’s breasts.

‘If she is dead it doesn’t matter anymore,’ the soldiers said crossly. ‘You

must hurry.’

  Weeping  without  restraint,  we  prayed  with  our  palms  together  in  the

sompeah, and then placed our palms on the ground in front of us and rocked

forward,  touching  our  foreheads  to  the  backs  of  our  hands.  ‘And  if  you

cannot wait for me in heaven,’ Huoy wailed, ‘come back into our family. I

want you to be reborn as my daughter, so I can treat you well again.’

  ‘You have to go now,’ said the soldiers. ‘You will be punished if you miss

the train.’

We put Ma in the ground and covered her with earth. We left the site and

walked toward the railroad station, not believing that it had happened and that

we were leaving her behind. It was unreal. She had been with us around the

cooking fire and then two minutes later she was gone. Nobody had seen her.

She must have stepped into the pond to get water and then slipped on the

steep bank and drowned. But she was such a smart old lady that it couldn’t

have happened to her by accident. Perhaps, I told myself, Ma had her reasons.The train was at the station and the wooden boxcars were full. The last few

passengers were climbing up to the roof, and some people helped push us up

with our luggage and Ma’s too. Huoy sat next to me and it was all I could do

to keep her from jumping off the train and running back to her mother’s

grave.

The locomotive let out a piercing whistle and began slowly pulling out of

the station, CHUFchufchufchuf CHUFchufchufchuf CHUFchufchufchuf with

the wheels making a rhythmic clicking on the track. We drew out of Pursat. I

sat with my arm around Huoy, protecting her from the wind, holding her

together.  Huoy  had  never  outgrown  the  need  for  her  mother’s  love  and

advice. She had depended on Ma, even more than she depended on me. Now

I was all she had.

The train chuffed along in a straight line. The landscape was utterly flat,

rice fields reaching right to the bluish hills rising out of the plains near the

horizon.  The  earth  was  dry  and  bare,  the  dykes  war-damaged,  the  fields

unplanted. Maybe that’s why they had sent us here, I thought, to grow rice in

western Cambodia.

The late-afternoon light turned a rich yellow and then orange and then the

sun set. A full moon rose behind us. There was no comforting Huoy.


The  train  took  us  beyond  Muong  and  finally  stopped  at  a  station  called

Phnom  Tippeday,  at  the  base  of  a  mountain  rising  out  of  the  plains  of

Battambang Province. Huoy and I walked away from the crowd to be alone.

Next to the ruins of a rice mill destroyed in the war, we found a pile of rice

hulls, and there we spread our white plastic mat. We improvised an altar with

bowls of rice and water and with candles given to us by kindly strangers on

the train.

We lit the candles, kneeled and prayed to Ma’s soul.                                          14



                                    The Plough


 




We Cambodians believe in kama, or karma – a religious concept meaning

something like destiny, or fortune. A person’s kama depends on what he has

done in this life and in previous lives. If he has done bad deeds he will suffer,

sooner or later, in this life or the next. Similarly, if he has done good deeds he

will have better fortune, sooner or later, in this life or the next. The cycle of

births and rebirths goes on and on, and souls carry their kama forward with

them.

  Ma’s kama was excellent. She had always been kind. She had made much

merit for herself through religious devotion. Her next life would be better.

We missed her and we wanted to be with her again, but we weren’t worried

about her soul.

It was our own lives, Huoy’s and mine, that we were more worried about.

We  couldn’t  help  wondering:  was  there  something  in  our  past  existence,

some terrible deeds we had committed, that caused us to be punished by this

regime? Plenty of Cambodians thought so, but they tended to be people who

belonged  to  rather  mystical  and  superstitious  sects  of  Buddhism.  They

believed that old prophecies were coming true and that Cambodia was being

punished for sins committed long ago. They submitted to the Khmer Rouge

sadly but without objection, as if surrendering to their fates. I didn’t agree. To

me, whether we had good kama or bad kama, it was important to fight the

Khmer  Rouge.  If  we  couldn’t  fight  them  openly  and  physically  then  we

would fight on the inside, on the battlefields of our minds. As Huoy and I

walked along the railroad track the next morning, two doctor acquaintancesof mine joined us. We began a conversation.

‘Yes, we are religious,’ one of the doctors, an ophthalmologist, was saying,

‘but we are university-educated too. Our minds have the power to observe

and draw conclusions. It is easy to blame it all on kama, but the fact is that

real world events made this new regime. When he was in power, Sihanouk

kept us on a neutral path, but after him we went from one extreme to the

other. First we went to a corrupt rightist like Lon Nol, and now we have gone

to crazy leftists. If we are being punished for anything, it is that we have

abandoned the middle way.’

‘I agree with you,’ said Huoy. ‘We are educated and we must always use

our minds. But in all the history I have read, about Europe and about Asia, I

have never heard of a regime like this one. The last place we lived in, they

said our projects were finished, but the canal we were working on was barely

begun. Then they told us we could leave to return to our villages, but instead

they sent us here. They are always lying. When was there ever a regime like

this before?’

We continued walking down a path along the railroad tracks.

‘Ngor,  your  wife  is  right,’  the  other  doctor,  a  paediatrician,  said

thoughtfully. ‘Even the other communist regimes don’t lie as much as the

Khmer Rouge. Look at China. The communists there seized private property

and sent city people out into the country, but the Chinese are always talking

about  having  the  support  of  the  people.  You  don’t  get  the  sense  that  the

Chinese government turned against the people the way the regime has here.’

  ‘Without China the Khmer Rouge could not survive,’ the ophthalmologist,

himself  a  light-skinned  ethnic  Chinese,  said  gloomily.  ‘Peking  gives  the

Khmer Rouge all their weapons and uniforms, so it should expect something

in  return.  At  the  very  least,  Peking  could  put  Sihanouk  in  charge  of  the

regime here.’

‘But my good friend,’ said the paediatrician, ‘you make a mistake if you

think China has any control over the Khmer Rouge. The Khmer Rouge are

always  talking  about  independence.  They  want  to  control  their  own

revolution.’

I said, ‘But you make a mistake if you think the communists control their

own  revolution.  Look  at  all  the  confusion  when  everybody  had  to  leave

Phnom Penh. All the unnecessary suffering, like the patients having to leave

the hospitals. That costs the Khmer Rouge popular support. So does the lying.

I tell you, the people at the top of the Khmer Rouge, like Khieu Samphan, arehighly educated, but the people under them cannot even read and write. They

don’t know where their revolution is going. They don’t even know they are

communists.’

‘Of course they do.’

‘No they don’t,’ I said flatly. ‘When have you ever heard them mention the

word “communist”?’

  ‘That’s true,’ said the paediatrician after a moment’s thought. ‘But then

what are they?’

  ‘Kum-monuss,’ I said, and they all laughed. It was a play on words: kum, a

long-standing grudge that finally explodes in disproportionate revenge, and

monuss, meaning people. ‘That’s what they are at the lower level,’ I said, ‘

“revenge-people.” ’ All they know is that city people like us used to lord it

over  them  and  this  is  their  chance  to  get  back.  That’s  what  they  are,

communist at the top and kum-monuss at the bottom.’

We  continued  to  walk  slowly  down  the  railroad  track  in  the  morning

sunlight,  talking  about  communists  and kum-monuss  and  the  fate  of  the

country.  It  was  the  central  question  in  our  lives,  what  the  Khmer  Rouge

would do now that they were in power; it was the mystery we could not

solve.  We  crossed  over  railroad  trestles  with  brown,  muddy  puddles

underneath.  Several  times  we  stopped  to  help  sick  people  resting  by  the

tracks. Most of them had intestinal ailments from drinking dirty water. But

even though we were doctors, there wasn’t much we could do for them. Not

without medicines.

By  noon  we  came  to  our  destination,  Phum  Chhleav.  Thousands  had

arrived ahead of us, and more were on the way – a census later showed

seventy-eight  hundred  in  all.  Phum  Chhleav  had  a  railroad  siding  but  no

railroad  station.  About  a  hundred  yards  from  the  siding,  where  a  bridge

crossed a dry irrigation canal, stood three houses on stilts. The Khmer Rouge

soldiers and administrators lived in those three houses. The area assigned to

us ‘new’ people, on the other side of the tracks, had a double line of mango

trees but no buildings at all.

We were told to choose land and build our houses. I borrowed a knife and

went off and cut some spindly bamboo and some reeds and lengths of vine,

and brought them back to a shady spot under a mango tree. Huoy and I stood

the bamboo and the reeds on end and tied them with the vines to make our

walls. We traded one of Ma’s silk sampots for some panels of thatch, and the

thatch and our white piece of plastic made our roof.  When we finished and stood back to look at the hut there was little to

admire. Our new hut was even worse than our first one back in Tonle Batí.

This one was a tiny, low-ceilinged, one-room hovel that looked as though it

would blow over in the first strong wind. You could see though the reed walls

to the inside of the hut, so of course the water could get through too. The

‘kitchen’ inside the hut was a triangle of three rocks to put the pot on. We

made a mattress out of reeds and put tufts of grass on top to make it softer.

Nearby, my father and brothers made huts that were a little better, but not

much.

  After  a  few  days,  when  flimsy  structures  had  risen  throughout  Phum

Chhleav, turning farmland into a crowded slum, the Khmer Rouge called a

meeting. All the heads of families were supposed to attend.

  About a thousand of us showed up and sat on the ground near the railroad

tracks, waiting for the speaker to arrive. It was early morning but the day was

already hot. The land was brown and dry and the sky was milky white. Far

off to the south rose the Cardamom Mountains, remote and wild. To the west,

behind  the  Phnom  Tippeday  train  station,  dominating  the  skyline,  rose  a

mountain with a long, uneven ridge. On a plateau below the ridgeline were

two white spots, the smaller one a stupa or funeral monument, the larger one

a Buddhist temple. Below the mountain in the flat, uncultivated rice fields, a

man was riding a horse in our direction. He rode bareback, without saddle or

stirrups. His lean, swaybacked horse picked its way over the low earthen

dykes, without hurrying.

  Gradually the horse and rider approached. The horse’s hooves clip-clopped

on the hard soil. The man drew up, slid off the bare back of the horse and

stood in front of us, a skinny, dark-skinned old fellow with no shirt or shoes.

He looked around and smiled at us. There were a few teeth in his lower

jaw, but his upper jaw was as bare of teeth as a newborn child’s.

  ‘Welcome to Phum Chhleav,’ he said. ‘Angka has let you come here to

help build a new society. You must work hard, but you must be patient. At

the present time, Angka is poor. Angka will provide food, but sometimes it

will not be enough. And sometimes the food will be late.’

We listened with sinking hopes. The Khmer Rouge hardly ever admitted

their faults. If they said there would not be enough food, it could even mean

starvation.

  ‘You must understand,’ he said, ‘that we only got free recently from our

capitalist oppressors. Sihanouk’ – there was a sudden rustle in the crowd atthe mention of the name – ‘helped liberate us from Lon Nol and his lackeys.

We  are  free  now,  but  the  economic  situation  of  the  country  has  not  yet

improved. So we must sacrifice. We will follow the principles of ‘The Three

Mountains.’  We  will  attain  independence-sovereignty,  rely  on  our  own

strengths and take destiny in hand. What this means to every one of you is

that if you work hard, you will eat. If you cannot work, you will go hungry.’

I waited to see whether he would say anything else about Sihanouk. Like

everybody else, I hoped that Sihanouk would reappear and take control of the

government  from  the  Khmer  Rouge.  But  the  old  man  only  mentioned

Sihanouk that once in passing. To him, Sihanouk was no more than a minor

figure from history. He talked instead about how important it was that we city

people learn from the peasants, that we build our own houses and grow rice.

We were going to start with empty hands and build up the country. I sat still

and pretended to pay attention. But I had heard it all before.

The old man, whose name was Comrade Ik, had the bearing of a man who

was used to being obeyed. For a guess, he had been the headman of a rural

village before becoming a civilian administrator for the Khmer Rouge. He

wore a faded krama around his waist, black culottes, or shorts, and over his

shorts a sarong doubled up above knee level. It was a peasant style of dress

except for his sarong, which was made of silk. Before the revolution few

could afford silk unless they grew the silkworms themselves. But now, those

who had joined the Khmer Rouge could get silk kramas and sarongs free

from  frightened  ‘new’  people.  For  the  Khmer  Rouge,  silk  was  a  status

symbol, and a lot of them in Battambang Province wore it.

The old man had a Battambang accent. Within Cambodia, Battambang was

well known for its rice crop. With its flat land and rich soil the province

produced enough rice to feed the whole country. Or it used to, before the war.

  Surely, I thought, that’s why they brought us to Phum Chhleav, to grow

rice for the regime. To restore Battambang to its position as rice bowl of

Cambodia. We were near the railroad, which made it easy to send the rice

out, but far away from the temptations of any city or town. Yes, they were

going to isolate us here. I had only to look at the wrinkled old man, with his

bare chest and bare feet, to be sure: from now on, our lives would be more

rural than ever.


Work began the next day. We went out into the long-neglected rice fields

with hoes and began breaking up the hard soil surface. It was a long day andat the end of it there was no food. If the Khmer Rouge didn’t give us enough

to eat, I reasoned – their rations averaged about a can of uncooked rice per

person every two days – there was no sense in working at all. This was easy

in the confusion of a big new settlement like Phum Chhleav.

The following morning, shortly after sunrise, my wife and I and another

couple walked away from Phum Chhleav and into rice fields that were not

being cultivated, keeping a careful eye out for soldiers. Once we were in the

fields  we  were  essentially  out  of  sight.  Rising  from  the  bottoms  of  the

paddies  like  islands  in  the  sea  were  hillocks  topped  by  brush  or  trees  or

sprays of bamboo. The hillocks were actually termite mounds, a common

feature of tropical landscapes. They were as high as our waists or our heads,

and anywhere from a few yards to tens of yards long. It was impossible to see

through the vegetation growing out of the hillocks, and there were so many of

them  scattered  around  the  fields  that  the  view  was  limited  to  the  middle

distance,  usually  from  fifty  to  a  couple  of  hundred  yards.  However,  the

mountain ridge with the temple was in clear sight above the hillocks, giving

me a reference point to steer by.

The purpose of our outing was to gather wild foods. In Cambodia we have

a humorous saying about food: ‘Eat anything with two legs except a ladder,

anything  with  four  legs  except  a  table,  and  anything  that  flies  except  an

airplane.’  The  point  is  that  when  you  live  off  the  land  you  cannot  be

particular. The Cambodian peasants, who are geniuses at living off the land,

sometimes eat termites for protein, though there are many other foods they

prefer. Until the rains came – the rains arrived later in Battambang than in

eastern Cambodia – there were no termites above ground anyway.

We began by looking for field mice. We hovered near the mouse holes in

the dykes in the rice fields and tried to trap them with a piece of fishnet. The

problem, as I realized after several hours without catching any, was that mice

always have a second entrance to their burrows. I had acquired some skills at

hunting and gathering in childhood, but mice-hunting was not among them.

Next we went looking for red ants, which live in sandy forests, weaving

fibrous nests in the branches of trees. Rural Cambodians put red ants in soups

to add crunchy texture and protein. They also cook the ants’ eggs, which are

soft  and  white  and  sour,  a  kind  of  poor  man’s  caviar.  The  challenge  is

collecting the ants without being bitten. When you approach, the ants rise up

with their forelegs waving in the air and their mouthparts scissoring back and

forth in their eagerness to bite you. When you move left, they move the sameway. When you move right, they follow. For their size they are the fiercest

creatures I have ever seen. Unlike the stories we heard in the bonns, ants

cannot kill elephants, or even humans – their bite isn’t poisonous – but their

sting  leaves  a  mark  like  a  needle  puncture.  Fortunately,  after  my

embarrassing attempts to trap mice, I knew how to hunt red ants. I held a

plastic pail with some water in it and tipped the nest in with a stick. A few of

the ants crawled onto the stick and onto my arm to bite me, but I had rubbed

ashes  onto  my  hands  and  arms.  The  ants  fell  off  harmlessly  when  they

reached my skin.

  While collecting ants in the forest we heard a sound from nearby – to-kay,

to-kay – the first syllable higher-pitched than the second.

  Tokays, as they are commonly called, are lizards about a foot long. When

cooked, their flesh tastes a bit like chicken. We followed the to-kay sound to

a tree not far away. When we got close there was a flash of tail as the tokay

darted into a hole in the tree trunk. I climbed up after it and put the scrap of

fishnet over the hole. The four of us shook the tree until the lizard fell out.

At the end of the afternoon we wandered back toward Phum Chhleav with

red  ant  nests,  several  tokays  and  quantities  of  bamboo  shoots,  water

convolvulus  and  other  edible  plants.  We  had  foraged  off  the  land  like

peasants  and  we  looked  like  peasants  ourselves.  I  was  barefoot,  with  no

glasses or wristwatch, carrying a bundle of food tied up in my krama. Huoy

wore her krama wrapped around her head like a turban. The other couple

looked  about  the  same.  We  were  nearing  the  railroad  track  when  Huoy

suddenly  whispered  to  me,  ‘Sweet,  sweet!  Get  down!  Soldiers  ahead!’  I

dropped to the ground ahead of her, crawled to a hillock and peered through

the bushes on top. ‘Stay down!’ Huoy commanded behind me.

  ‘Don’t worry,’ I whispered back.

On the path beside the railroad track two civilians were walking with two

soldiers behind them, all in a line. The soldiers wore black uniforms with

green Chinese hats and Ho Chi Minh-style black rubber sandals, and they

carried their rifles slung over their shoulders by the straps. The two civilians

had their elbows tied tightly behind their backs. A rope travelled from the

first civilian to the second civilian and from there to one of the soldiers’

hands. The two civilian prisoners walked slowly, with their heads hanging

low.

I recognized them with a shock.

‘My two doctor friends,’ I whispered back to Huoy.  Huoy  crawled  forward  and  onto  the  hillock  next  to  me.  We  watched

together. There was something so irrevocable, so final about the sight that we

felt our own ends had come as well. ‘These two friends of mine weren’t

troublemakers,’  I  whispered  to  her.  ‘The  soldiers  are  taking  them  away

because they were doctors. Tomorrow it will be my turn. Everybody knows I

am a doctor.’

The  two  doctors  walked  along  very  slowly,  weighed  down  by  the

knowledge of their approaching deaths. We watched them walk farther and

farther away along the railroad track until we couldn’t see them anymore.

Then we still waited, expecting to hear rifle shots, but the shots never came.

  ‘Maybe  you’re  wrong,’  Huoy  said  at  last.  ‘Maybe  they’re  being  taken

away because they didn’t work in the rice fields.’

I thought this over. She had a point. Maybe the two other doctors had

avoided work so they could go gather food, just as we did. Maybe they had

been caught at it.

We never knew for sure, because we never saw the two doctors again, or

heard anything about their arrest. But after that Huoy always insisted that I

show up for work, and I did. As she pointed out, if we worked we didn’t have

enough food, but it was better to be hungry than dead.

I was sent off to repair roads. About thirty of us from our section of Phum

Chhleav left together, walking with hoes over our shoulders down a winding

path through the rice fields and the jungle. In previous years a series of floods

had cut huge gullies through an old dirt road. We set to work with our hoes,

filling up baskets with dirt and carrying the baskets on shoulderboards. There

were no other people around, and no villages. We worked eight days without

much food. When we trudged back to Phum Chhleav at last, Huoy was sitting

on the ground outside our hut, waiting for me.

  ‘You lost weight,’ she said.

‘A lot, sweet.’

  She rose and hugged me tenderly, and hung on without letting me go. She

had been alone when I was away. Alone and worried about me and grieving

for her mother. And even after I came back it would take her a day or two to

recover.

‘Did Angka beat you or punish you?’

‘No,’ I said. ‘We just worked a lot.’

‘I have food for you,’ she said.

‘What kind?’  ‘Guess,’ she said, and it had to be something special.

‘I don’t know.’

‘I have cooked mice for you. Field mice. I knew you were coming today.’

It was as if I were returning from a business trip and she had fixed me a

steak or an especially nice fish as a wifely gesture. She had traded for the

mice with some more of her mother’s clothes. She was taking care of me as

best  she  could,  and  it  made  no  difference  that  we  would  never  have

considered eating mice when we were living in Phnom Penh. Here in the

countryside mice were a treat.

We ate the meal, and what little there was of the mouse meat was tasty,

and I was touched by what she had done and worried to see that her sadness

still lingered.

The next day I went to work in a rice field near the railroad track. Huoy

and I were assigned to the same group of about a hundred ‘new’ people. The

Khmer Rouge gave hoes to Huoy and the rest of the women and told them to

break up the topsoil where it hadn’t been broken before. Two teenage soldiers

with rifles took us men to paddies that had been hoed already. There were

about eight wooden ploughs and three or four oxen by a hillock. ‘We don’t

have enough oxen now,’ one of the soldiers told us, ‘but we have to plough

the fields. If we don’t plough and plant rice, we won’t have anything to eat.’

‘Oh no,’ I said to myself. ‘Are we going to use human beings to plough? Is

this what we have to do to build this advanced society they’re talking about –

go back to prehistoric times?’

The soldier’s face combined the dull gaze of limited intelligence with an

obvious contempt for us city people. He held a long whip of plaited leather in

his hand. ‘You,’ he said, pointing at one man. ‘Go to the plough. You too,

and you.’ I hoped he wasn’t going to point at me. The ethnic Chinese in the

group were cursing in Teochiew dialect, saying they just wouldn’t do it.

He pointed at me.

I walked over to the ploughs.

‘You,’ said the soldier. ‘Take this plough and get on the right side.’

I stood on the right side in back of the crosspiece and all I could think

about  was kum-monuss.  On  my  left  an  old  female  ox  stood,  making  a

sideways chewing motion with her mouth and swishing her tail to keep the

flies away.

  ‘Now go,’ said the soldier, cracking his whip overhead.

I began to push forward against the crosspiece. The ox walked forward inits harness. The soldier walked behind the plough, guiding it. My bare feet

passed over clumps of clay with weeds growing out of them. The first light

rains had softened the clay but only on top, and the ground was still cracked

from the long, hot dry season.

  When we got to the edge of the field, the soldier sunk the tip into the earth

below the depth the hoes had reached. The plough nearly came to a halt. By

pushing harder I could still make it move forward, but the ox was stronger

and the plough swerved off to the right. I had to push with all my strength to

keep it going in a straight line.

We ploughed down one side of the field, the early-morning sun shining

into my eyes. It took a long time to reach the end of the field. Finally we

turned the corner and began down another side.

A rhythmic clicking noise came over my shoulder and then to one side. I

turned my head and glimpsed a miniature flatcar travelling down the railroad

track.  Four  men  stood  on  it  using  long  bamboo  sticks  in  unison  to  pole

themselves along, two of them on each side. They sped effortlessly along and

soon they they were out of hearing.

I leaned forward again and kept pushing but the wooden cross-piece was

too high, about the level of my neck. I wished it were lower. Reaching up to

it strained my shoulders and the small of my back. Blisters had formed on my

hands from the road repair work and I could feel them pop open and the fluid

running out.

I looked around at the other paddies and saw other men ploughing with

oxen and farther off the crews of women with their hoes rising and falling. I

could not see far into the fields because of the hillocks, but in every direction

men and women were working. Above us all, above the treetops to the west,

rose the mountain with the two white dots. Lord Buddha help me, I thought.

Help us all. Give us the strength to make it through the day.

The plough had veered to the right and it was heading toward the dyke at

the edge of the field.

  ‘Faster, faster!’ came the soldier’s voice behind me. ‘If you can’t go faster

I will whip you!’ He cracked the whip above the ox and me, in the air.

I bent forward to the work again. The neck and head of the ox filled the left

side of my field of vision. The ox was making its sideways chewing motion,

and spittle was drooling from its whiskered chin. It twitched its ears to keep

insects from landing nearby, but when insects bit its foreleg the ox lowered

its  head  and  licked  the  spot  with  its  enormously  long,  thick,  sandpaperytongue. I heard its slow, regular breathing and the swishing of its tail on its

back. How could anything that stupid be so strong? I wondered.

The sweat rolled down my armpits and chest. I took my hand from the

crosspiece and dabbed with my krama to keep the sweat out of my eyes, then

went back to pushing.

Why are the gods so blind? I thought. Did I do something wrong in a

previous life that I have to do this now? Is there something terrible in my

kama?

Life had been so good back in Phnom Penh. So relaxed and prosperous.

My patients sompeahed me and spoke to me politely. Huoy and I were happy.

We had no worries. We ate in restaurants nearly every night and always ate

enough. But not anymore. Now we have no fried noodles. No fish cooked

with  lemon  and  coriander.  Every  evening  Huoy  talks  about  her  favourite

recipes. She remembers the sweet desserts she used to make for my parents

and  says  she  wishes  we  had  more  food.  Huoy’s  cheeks  have  lost  their

roundness. She is losing weight.

I struggled to keep up with the ox, but my breath was laboured. I heard my

breathing and my footsteps and the ox’s footsteps and the twittering of the

birds.

  Listen to the birds singing like that! Whenever they want they fly from one

tree to another. They go wherever they want. When they find food they can

eat it. It’s harder for people. We are draft animals like the oxen. So maybe

our kama is very, very bad.

Ma must have known that life was going to be like this. She was always

intuitive. So she chose to drown herself in the pond. That’s why she died.

What a wise old lady she was. I hope in her next life she –

SNAP! A searing pain across my back.

  ‘Hey!’ I yelled angrily. ‘How can I push if you’re whipping me? Let me

rest first and then I can go back to working.’

  ‘Finish the field and then rest,’ the soldier replied. But after a few more

lengths of the field he stopped to roll and smoke a cigarette and I took a break

too. I looked around. A woman in the next field was holding a hoe in one

hand and looking at me. She was standing absolutely still and her other hand

was  clasped  across  her  mouth  as  if  she  were  trying  to  stop  herself  from

screaming.  It  was  Huoy,  but  without  my  glasses  I  could  not  see  the

expression on her face.

  When the soldier finished his cigarette we went back to ploughing. The sunwas still low in the morning sky and the day was humid and hot. I could not

imagine why the sun was taking so long to move across the sky. The soldier

whipped me a few more times and after what seemed like days somebody far

away rang a gong. Lunchtime. The soldiers went back to their kitchen in the

row of three houses by the old canal, and some mit neary in black brought us

out our meal, a cloudy broth with some grains of rice at the bottom.

I had blisters on my palms, on the first and second joints of my fingers and

between  my  thumbs  and  forefingers.  My  shoulders  and  my  back  and  my

calves ached, and my Achilles tendons were sore. But the whip marks hurt

the most.

  ‘You eat my portion, sweet,’ Huoy said.

  ‘No, I’m okay. I don’t really have an appetite.’

  ‘Please. You eat it for me. You need the strength. I cannot eat it.’

  After lunch the soldier and I took the plough off the rig and put a wide rake

or harrow in its place, to break up the clods turned up by the plough and to

smooth the furrows. The soldier didn’t especially want to talk.

‘Not even one field ploughed,’ was all he said to me.

All afternoon he stood on the harrow to drive the points in, and with his

weight  it  was  even  harder  to  drag  the  harrow  than  the  plough.  We  went

around and around the field. Along one side there was a view of the mountain

with the white dots but it meant nothing to me now. I kept looking at the sun,

which stayed motionless in the sky.

Late in the afternoon, the railroad maintenance crew came back along the

track,  poling  vigorously  toward  the  Phnom  Tippeday  railroad  station,

travelling faster than the breeze.

Near sundown, the gong rang again and we quit. We had not ploughed or

harrowed a single rice paddy.

In our flimsy hut, Huoy heated water and made a hot compress with strips

of cloth and put them on the whip welts, which curved over my shoulders and

neck to the top of my chest. She was crying. She felt my pain more than I did.

I was too tired to feel much of anything. ‘Today I prayed to my mother to

take us with her,’ Huoy said. ‘I don’t know why we should go on, being

treated like this. The Khmer Rouge should just kill us now and get it over

with.’

I didn’t know what to say. To myself I thought, Ma was smart to commit

suicide.

It rained that night, a long, drenching rain with flashes of lightning androlling thunder and water leaking inside the hut. In the morning I went back

to ploughing, but the ground was softer than before. And even the soldiers

had admitted their mistake. Now they paired two men against each ox, or four

men if there were no oxen.

The rainy season had finally arrived in Battambang. The rain was cold and

nearly  continuous.  After  a  few  hours  in  it  my  fingers  were  white  and

wrinkled, like staying in bath water too long. We ploughed in the rain. Snails

appeared on the ground, and when I picked one up the soldier whipped me

across the back. ‘If you have time to pick up snails like that, how can we

finish the fields?’ he shouted. ‘Don’t you like the food Angka is giving you?

Isn’t it satisfying enough?’

  There was nothing to say to that without insulting Angka. I kept quiet. But

I didn’t see why we shouldn’t pick up snails.

At night I used a tiny oil lamp inside a can with reflective sides to look for

food. But there were only tiny frogs and snails to be found nearby. Bursts of

rifle fire came from near the soldiers’ houses, and I was afraid to go out into

the rice fields and to the canals and ponds, where the fish and the frogs would

be large and plentiful.

  From my normal weight of 135 to 140 pounds I dropped to 110 to 115

pounds. Then I began having to excuse myself while ploughing to go to the

bushes. At first I thought it was a case of ordinary diarrhoea. Then I noticed

white mucus on the ground and later yellow mucus and dark, purplish blood.

And then I knew I was very, very sick.                                          15



                                        Sickness


 




I wasn’t the only sick person. Not at all. In Phum Chhleav more people were

sick  than  healthy.  The  hard  work,  the  food  shortages,  the  unsanitary

conditions and the near-absence of medicine combined to cause illness on a

scale I had never seen before in all my medical training. In the rice fields the

remaining ‘new’ people worked in slow motion; in the huts they lay down

with  fevers  or  swollen  limbs  or  uncontrollable  bowels.  Every  day,

processions wound through the pathways of the village on the way to the

burial grounds.

The greatest single factor in this public-health disaster was malnutrition.

The Khmer Rouge fed us a bowl of salty broth with a few spoonsful of rice at

the bottom for lunch, and the same for dinner. That was all. They didn’t allow

us  to  gather  wild  foods  for  our  private  meals,  though  sometimes  we  did

anyway. Without proper nutrition, we weakened.

  There were other factors. We were city people, unused to hard labour.

Chronic fatigue – the kind of tiredness that comes from pulling a plough

twelve hours a day – lowered our resistance to disease just as malnutrition

did. We had hardly any resistance at all. Because we were from places like

Phnom Penh, we hadn’t built up natural immunities to the microorganisms of

Battambang – to the bacteria in contaminated drinking water, for instance. To

make things worse, we didn’t have proper latrines or bathing facilities. We

didn’t have much medicine, and the Khmer Rouge didn’t let doctors like me

practise openly.

  Until I got sick, I practised anyway. So did my two doctor friends, beforethe Khmer Rouge took them away, and so did a clever little fellow named

Pen Tip, whom I will tell you about later. I visited my patients’ huts at dawn

or  dusk  with  my  stethoscope  and  blood  pressure  cuff  concealed  in  my

clothing. Without laboratory tests I could only base my diagnoses on their

symptoms and tell them what medicines I thought they needed. They had to

buy the medicines themselves on the black market, either with rice or with

gold.

The most common symptom of illness was oedema or swelling. It was

related to the lack of proteins in our diet and possibly to the high proportion

of salts in the broth we drank at meals. Instead of getting thinner as they

starved, the people with oedema became bloated with fluid, usually first in

their legs. In the most extreme cases, the victims were unable to close their

legs together; the men got huge, distended scrotal sacs. The cure was very

simple – food – but anybody who had extra food was hoarding it.

The range of infectious illnesses was amazing. Cuts filled with pus and

wouldn’t  heal  properly.  Skin  lesions  were  common,  especially  fungal

infections; we ‘new’ people were always outdoors in the rain, and our skins

didn’t have a chance to dry. There were cases of malaria, pneumonia and

tuberculosis. Almost everyone in the settlement got common diarrhoea, and

many  got  amoebic  dysentery,  a  much  more  dangerous  infection  of  the

intestinal  tract.  That’s  what  I  got,  dysentery,  presumably  from  drinking

contaminated water when my resistance was low.

By the time I got sick, I had used up all my antibiotics and dysentery

medicines treating my father and my brothers, who had been sick before me.

Huoy went out to get medicine from people I knew. She looked and asked,

but there was nothing available. Finally she traded a damleung of gold, or 1.2

ounces, for fifteen 250-mg. tablets of tetracycline, a standard antibiotic.

I took one capsule of tetracycline twice a day as long as the supply lasted.

In normal times I would have prescribed double the dosage, for a total of

1,000 mg a day, plus an antidiarrhoea medicine such as Tifomycin.

To  supplement  the  tetracycline  I  tried  folk  remedies.  When  rural

Cambodians get diarrhoea or dysentery they eat the tender, bitter leaves at the

branch tips of guava trees. There were guava trees nearby. Huoy collected the

leaves  and  made  me  a  tea  out  of  boiled  guava  leaves  and  bark.  Nothing

happened. I stayed home and shuttled back and forth from the reed mattress

to a latrine she had dug for me near our tiny garden. I couldn’t think clearly

without an effort, and then only for moments at a time.As my dysentery grew worse, my world shrunk to the hut and the garden. I

was too weak to go anywhere else. Whatever I knew of the outside world

came to me: the sound of the steam whistle of the railroad trains hooting far

away and then the metal wheels rocking and clicking on the metal tracks and

the driver wheels going round and round CHUFchufchufchuf as freight trains

went by. I heard the rapid, rhythmic clicking of the maintenance crew as it

poled its way along, twice a day. And every morning through the cracks in

the hut I saw the burial processions. The dead were wrapped in plastic tarps

or cloth and carried on wooden boards suspended at either end from a long

piece of bamboo, which rested on the mourners’ shoulders.

  Sometime after the first week with dysentery I had just come in from the

garden when Huoy came back from work. All the tetracycline was gone.

‘Please, sweet,’ I begged her. ‘Sell some more things. Ask around again.’

In my confused, weakened state I didn’t even trust her. I wasn’t sure she

was doing all she could.

  ‘Don’t you believe me?’ Huoy said, standing over me and looking down

with her sorrowful eyes. ‘Trust me. I am trying my best to get the medicine.’

She went out again but still she didn’t find any.

  There was one other remedy to try: eating carbon from burned food. It

works  by  trapping  gases,  like  the  activated  charcoal  in  certain  kinds  of

cigarette filters. For the most part, the carbon only reduces the symptoms of

diarrhoea  or  dysentery,  but  sometimes  it  has  a  marginal  effect  on  the

infectious agent itself.

The problem with burned food was that we had hardly any food to eat, or

burn.  My  father  brought  some  strips  of  pork  to  the  hut.  He  and  Huoy

carefully trimmed off the fat, then grilled the pork in the fire until it was

black on the outside. I ate it but vomited it up.

I was long past feeling any shame about my dysentery, even though it is an

ugly and humiliating disease. I was simply too weak to care about modesty.

Day and night, several times an hour, I shuttled between my pallet in the hut

and the hole in the yard, where I lifted the edges of my sarong and squatted.

When I got up I glanced at the pus and blood and liquids I had left behind to

see whether I had gotten any better, but by the end of the second week I

hadn’t.  When  I  lay  down  there  was  a  sloshing,  gurgling  noise  inside  my

intestines.  Sometimes  I  even  saw  my  intestines  moving  from  the  gas

expanding inside. There was a war going on, with amoebas on one side and

my bodily defences on the other. My body was pouring its resources into thebattle, getting used up, wasting away.

By the seventeenth or eighteenth day I felt nothing. Lying on my side I had

diarrhoea and didn’t even know it until I reached around with my hand and

discovered the wetness.

I had eight sarongs left from the stack I had taken from my clinic. I used

them like diapers. By the twentieth day I couldn’t walk. I had to crawl out to

the garden on all fours. Huoy went to the authorities to get permission to stay

away from work to take care of me.

  She was a perfect nurse. She bathed me day and night. She cooked the

little bit of rice we had and fed it to me a spoonful at a time, with my head in

her lap. After feeding me she kissed me and stroked my hair. A wondering,

sorrowful expression came over her, and I knew her thoughts: if I died, a part

of her would die too.

  With my head in her lap I saw only her face. The large, round, dark eyes.

The lush, thick eyebrows that had never needed makeup. The hollow cheeks.

When I lay down my eyes saw the woven reeds of the wall and the light

filtering through.

The  other  huts  nearby,  my  parents’  and  my  brothers’,  now  seemed

incredibly far away. It was impossible even to think about going there. My

brothers visited me once but they didn’t come back, and this made me angry.

I had given them medicine, but they wouldn’t use their gold to buy medicine

for me. Family ties meant nothing to them now. Everybody was looking out

for himself. And then I stopped resenting my brothers. I was too weak to

care.

Day by day, as the invaders and the protectors fought their battle in my

intestines, I lost more and more weight. My clavicles protruded. Every rib

showed. My legs were like matchsticks, except for my knees and ankles,

which bulged out, big and knobby. My weight was down to about seventy

pounds.

I lay on my side and a fly landed on my face and I did not move. I felt the

fly walking on my cheek, felt the little legs as it moved around, and I knew it

would head for the moisture at the corner of my eyes. And then I sensed

Huoy’s presence as she moved close and then felt the air as she fanned the fly

away. Huoy lowered the mosquito net around me. I focused on the gauze of

the mosquito net and then on the light coming through the cracks in the reed

wall.

I heard the grumbling of the thunder and the freshening of the wind as thestorms came in. Raindrops fell on me and I didn’t move. Huoy went out in

the rain and tied a krama to the outside of the walls to stop the rain from

coming in.

I was very detached. If I wanted to lift my leg I thought about it and then

my mind wandered and later I remembered and watched myself do it. My leg

seemed very far away and I looked at it objectively, as if it were somebody

else’s. It didn’t look like my leg. It was too thin.

I dozed but didn’t sleep. My intestines were bubbling with liquids and gas

and every few minutes some more spurted out the back end. Nothing could

stop it from happening. The poisons kept coming out and coming out but

inside  the  bubbling  and  the  gurgling  and  mixing  went  on  and  it  always

produced more. Food only made it worse. Maybe if I had a huge amount of

pure bland rice I could have quieted my stomach, but Huoy and I were down

to one can of rice. That was all the food we had. Huoy ate nothing but the

salty broth from the Khmer Rouge. The rest she fed to me.

Up through the thirtieth day, some deep intuition told me that I was going

to outlast the infection.

Then, on the morning of the thirty-first day, something changed. I decided

to take my pulse, but before I could do it my mind wandered. Where was

Huoy? I couldn’t hear her in the hut. I turned my head and then twisted it

farther and then through the cracks in the hut saw her outside, taking the

clean sarongs from the drying line. What was I thinking about? Oh yes, my

pulse. I’ll have to move my right hand to my left wrist. If I tell my hand to

move, it will obey. If I do it now, I won’t forget. Better do it while she can’t

see.

I watched my right arm swing over and the fingertips of my right hand

probe for the pulse in my left wrist. Not there. There. Yes. The beat is very

slow.

My heart is slowing down.

In a few more hours it will stop.

  Huoy came in with the folded sarongs and put them away. Then she knelt

by me and smoothed the hair back from my forehead and wiped my face with

a damp cloth.

‘I don’t feel well,’ I said. ‘I think I am going to die. Please, bring my father

here.’

  ‘You aren’t going to die,’ she said firmly. ‘We’re going to live together a

long time, you and I.’ But she herself didn’t believe what she was saying.Huoy went to get my father and they both came back and sat beside me, Papa

looking down at me with his wrinkled face. I could remember when he was

much younger and fatter.

I told my father that I was going to die in the next few hours. I asked him

to take care of my wife. Huoy, I said, had taken good care of me but just

didn’t have the means to save my life. ‘If anybody says anything bad about

her, don’t believe it. I want you and Mama to take her in. Don’t let her live

with anyone else in the family. So take care of yourself and take care of Huoy

and the gods will bless you.’

My father told me not to worry, that I wasn’t going to die. But when he

went outside he set candles and incense on the ground under the mango tree

and got ready to pray.

  Huoy sat next to me. ‘Keep being strong in your mind,’ she said, over and

over. ‘Keep being strong and you will never die.’ She stroked my face and

cleaned my face and body with a damp towel. The tears rolled down her

cheeks and she didn’t hide them.

‘Be happy if I pass away,’ I answered.

  Outside my father was saying in a loud voice, ‘Let him go to a wonderful

paradise! Let life be good, the next place he goes. Let there be enough food

and enough medicine.’

I said to Huoy, ‘Even if I die I will still protect you. I will take care of you

all your life.’

My mother joined my father and they knelt and prayed together. Then

Mama came into the hut and sat next to me, massaging my limbs. She looked

truly old now, old and grey. Together my mother and my wife stripped me of

my sarong and tried to dress me in a new shirt and a new pair of trousers to

die in.

  ‘Please don’t,’ I said. ‘It’s a waste to put me in new trousers. You can trade

them for something after I die.’

‘I don’t care about trading,’ Huoy said as they put my feet in the trousers

and pulled them up. ‘There’s nothing to trade for. If you die, I die.’

I lay on my side and waited.


In the early afternoon there was a sound of footsteps and a big loud voice.

‘Come get your yams! One person from every family, come to my house!

We’ve got yams! Come get your rations! Get your yams!’ It was the civilian

leader of Phum Chhleav, a burly man who reported to the man on horseback.With him were the section leaders of Phum Chhleav and a crowd of excited

followers, talking and waving. It was the first food the Khmer Rouge had

distributed for private use in three days.

I sent Huoy to get our ration. My father had already disappeared to get his.

I lay back and began thinking about yams. They are long, crooked tubers,

quick to grow in a tropical climate. They contain minerals and vitamins, but

they  are  basically  carbohydrate.  Put  in  a  fire,  they  burn.  They  turn  into

charcoal.

  Huoy  had  left  the  fire  going  beside  me,  with  a  tea  kettle  on  the  three

stones. When the water boiled I pulled the ends of the wood away from the

fire, but I didn’t have the energy to make tea.

  After a period of time had passed, how long I do not know, Huoy returned.

She showed me the ration: one small yam the size of her fist.

  Huoy was looking at the yam with a glazed, intent expression. How long

had it been since she had eaten a real meal? Two weeks? Three weeks? Had

she eaten well since the dinner with the field mice?

I said, ‘Sweet, please give me the food to eat. I think if I eat it, it will help

my stomach. I know you are hungry like me, but we still have rice. You eat

the rice.’

We still had not touched our one last can of rice. We were saving it, though

I do not know why. Our hunger could not have gotten worse.

  Huoy looked at me with a sad smile and nodded. ‘Whatever you want, I

will do it. I want you to stay alive. As long as we both are alive we will be

happy.’

I told her to burn the yam without cooking it first. She put it in the fire.

When it was completely burned, she took it out to cool, trimmed off the wood

ashes, and cut it into small pieces. The yam was black all the way through

except for some small soft yellow specks. She put my head in her lap and she

fed it to me with a spoon, one piece at a time, until it was gone.

I felt stronger.

My trips to the garden diminished from five times an hour to three. The

next day they decreased to two an hour, and the day after that to once an

hour.  The  burned  yam  had  helped  turn  the  tide.  It  enabled  my  natural

resistance to grow.

  Within a few more days, I could eat solid foods.

  After another week had passed, Huoy picked me up, draped my arm over

her shoulder and gave me a long stick to use as a cane. She helped me walk. Ihad to reteach my legs to obey.

We only took a few steps. But the next day we walked around the hut.

It was fifty yards to the railroad track. It became my goal. Every day I

walked nearer, and when I finally made it I had to stop to rest three or four

times along the way.

  Huoy and I sat on the railroad tracks, near a trestle with water underneath. I

was tired but triumphant. Huoy was happy and smiling. We talked as we

always had in the old days, calling each other ‘sweet.’

A  healthy  young  woman  from  another  village  came  walking  down  the

railroad tracks, carrying a sack over her shoulder. She walked past us, then

turned around in surprise. In those times, even husbands and wives were

supposed to call each other ‘comrade.’

‘Is  that  your  husband?’  the  young  woman  asked  Huoy.  Her  tone  was

pleasant and courteous, her accent from Phnom Penh.

‘Yes, he is,’ Huoy answered with a smile. ‘He was very sick, but he’s

better now.’

The young woman put her sack down. She reached in it and pulled out a

piece of fruit. I knew the fruit, though I have never discovered its English

name. It has a very thick rind, and like guava leaves it is a folk remedy

against stomach ailments. ‘Older sister,’ she said to Huoy, ‘give him some of

this. It will be good for his health.’ She broke it open on the railroad track

and gave us half.

I put my palms together and raised them to the middle of my forehead.

  She asked whether we were from Phnom Penh. I said yes, told her my real

name and said I used to be a doctor. She asked me whether I knew her uncle

so-and-so. I said yes, he was my professor in medical school. We began a

conversation, using all the terms of politeness in the Khmer language, talking

about old times in Phnom Penh.

Before she left, she dug in her sack again and gave us an ear of corn. It

lifted our spirits, meeting this courteous young woman who, incidentally, we

never  saw  again.  It  reassured  us  that  in  spite  of  the  Khmer  Rouge,

compassion still existed and Cambodian high culture still lived. We watched

her walking down the tracks and disappearing in the distance.

I said, ‘Sweet, I’m going to live.’

The  sun  sent  low  rays  across  the  landscape.  The  air  was  cool.  I  ate  a

portion of the outer fruit as medicine and gave the rest to Huoy. We went

underneath the trestle to bathe, and Huoy scrubbed the dust and dirt off me.That evening we cooked the ear of corn. I made Huoy eat every kernel, as

a small gesture of repayment for the yam she had given me. I loved and

respected Huoy more than ever. I put her above me. She had saved my life.                                          16



                The Parade of the Selfish and the Dying


 




When my weight rose to about a hundred pounds I was sent back to work in

the rice fields. I didn’t mind. Just being out in the fertile fields of Battambang

made me feel better. The rice plants were large and bushy, higher than my

waist. From the middle of the paddies the dykes were invisible, except as

gaps in the thick carpet of green. When a breeze came through the rice, the

smell was so sweet and clean that it made my stomach rumble with hunger.

So much rice! In a few more months, in the harvest, we could eat bowl after

bowl of steaming white rice, as much as we wanted. That’s what we had been

promised.

By now, toward the end of the rainy season, the hard work – ploughing the

fields  and  transplanting  the  seedlings  –  was  over.  Only  light  tasks  were

needed, like regulating the water levels. It was easy. A few other men and I

walked  around  on  the  tops  of  the  dykes  with  our  hoes.  The  dykes  were

eighteen inches to two feet high. Wherever the rainwater was in danger of

flooding over the dykes we began chopping holes, letting the water spill from

one paddy into the next and then the next, until the extra water reached the

edge of the field. Then we rebuilt the dykes with the hoes and our hands.

We were wet and muddy all day long, but the job was a good one. We had

little supervision. No Khmer Rouge soldiers standing over us with whips. The

soldiers hardly came into the fields at all. Even better, we were able to collect

food while working.

  Whenever there is water in rice paddies there is life – frogs, snails, tiny

shrimp, small fish or crabs. In Phum Chhleav the crabs were the easiest tocatch for those who knew the trick. It was no use trying in the early mornings

or the late afternoons, when the water was cool. Then the crabs were out

among the rice plants, holding on to the stalks with their claws. If they heard

you coming they dropped to the bottom and swam sidelong away. But in the

middle of the day, when the water was warm, the crabs retreated to their

burrows in the dykes. You could catch them by reaching into the burrows

with your hand – the quicker the better, because they bit with their pincers,

sometimes hard enough to draw blood. I put the crabs in my shirt pockets.

They couldn’t climb out. I always wore the same shirt in the fields, a Lon

Nol-era camouflage-coloured parachutist’s shirt with big pockets and extra

pockets that Huoy sewed on the inside. I worked in the fields with my shirt

tails out and my pockets bulging with live crabs.

We cooked the crabs in our hut in the evening, after the regular dinner of

thin rice gruel and the political meeting that usually followed. Sometimes

Huoy and I ate fifteen or twenty crabs each. Every family in Phum Chhleav

had someone working in the rice fields, and everybody ate crabs in secret.

The few times that Huoy and I managed to get meat or fish, we cooked and

ate the flesh first, then put the bones back in the pot, waited until the bones

were soft and ate them too for the calcium and the proteins and the nutrients

in the marrow. We wasted nothing.

  Food was power. For all the talk about a revolutionary society in which

everyone was equal, those at the top ate reasonably well and those of us at the

bottom were chronically malnourished. Every day, when the gong rang for

lunch, mit neary brought a vat of watery rice to a hillock in the fields and

ladled watery rice into bowls for the ‘new’ people. Meanwhile, the soldiers

went off to the Khmer Rouge headquarters, the row of three houses near the

railroad tracks. The rest of us had seen oxcarts laden with supplies pull up to

those three houses. We saw the smoke from the cooking fires every day. We

didn’t need to be told what was happening inside. But when the soldiers came

back to the rice fields, licking their lips, looking well fed and content, they

pretended  not  to  have  eaten  anything  at  all.  They  took  up  bowls  and  ate

watery gruel the same as we did. They spooned the liquid into their mouths

with loud slurping noises and said, ‘Look. We eat like you. Exactly the same

food. It’s enough for us, so it should be enough for you. You people really

are lazy. You must work harder, to show your gratitude to Angka.’

  With or without their rifles, the soldiers had an aura of power about them,

like big, muscular village bullies. We were weaker and afraid of them. Weweren’t strong enough to fight back, so we kept quiet and ate our crabs in

secret and waited for the rice harvest to come so we could eat all we wanted.

But the Khmer Rouge had other ideas for the rice crop.

One morning I straightened up from opening a dyke in the rice fields to see

a lone figure in the distance. It was the old man on horseback. He rode slowly

along the trail by the railroad tracks, coming toward us from the railroad

station at Phnom Tippeday. He looked the same as before, his silk sarong

doubled  up  to  his  waist  and  the  edge  of  his  black  culottes  showing

underneath, his krama around his middle. He rode leisurely along the path

until he got to the three houses, then dismounted and went inside.

  Comrade Ik didn’t come to Phum Chhleav unless he had a reason.

A few hours later, after lunch, he led his horse out on the dykes of the rice

fields. He walked this way and that, inspecting the rice plants and the water

levels in the paddies. Whichever way he moved, I unobtrusively moved in the

opposite direction, so the two of us wouldn’t meet. Finally he reached the

edge of the fields, mounted and slowly rode off.

  There goes bad news, I thought.

  Comrade  Ik’s  orders  filtered  down  the  Phum  Chhleav  hierarchy  and

eventually to the leader of my work group, who was, a ‘new’ person. He told

us the news the next day while I was standing in a paddy in water up to my

knees, leaning on my hoe. ‘We will move from Phum Chhleav fairly soon,’

he announced pompously. ‘We don’t know precisely when, but Angka will

tell us the date later on.’

I didn’t allow emotion to show on my face. I didn’t trust the group leader,

even though he was from Phnom Penh like the rest of us. He was heavier and

stronger than we were, with clear, healthy skin. I wondered where he was

getting  his  food.  My  coworkers  didn’t  trust  him  either.  He  had  scarcely

turned his back when they began to complain.

  ‘See? See? They’re doing it again!’ said a man I had known in Tonle Batí.

‘They always say, ‘If you work hard, you can eat.’ Now that we’ve worked

hard and planted the crop, they want us to move away! Where will we go

now? Whose crop can we eat now, if we cannot eat our own?’

  ‘Yes,’ said another one bitterly. ‘Some armies kill with bullets. The Khmer

Rouge kill with rice! I cannot believe it: we have rice all around us, but we

cannot eat it! I have never seen so much rice in my whole life, and I have

never been so hungry.’

I said nothing, though I agreed with them. With so much rice, with somany people sick, it was the cruelest of crimes to take us away before the

harvest. But it didn’t surprise me that they were doing it. To me, the only

question was whether they were doing it to kill us intentionally, or whether

they were doing it by mistake. For if there was one thing sure about the

Khmer  Rouge,  it  was  that  they  knew  nothing  about  planning.  They  were

always starting projects but not finishing them, then going on to the next.

  Discouraged, we slowed our pace in the fields. If we could not eat the rice

around us, we were not going to work hard to produce it.

As things turned out, the Khmer Rouge didn’t trust our group leader either.

A couple of days later we saw soldiers lead him away with his arms tied

behind his back – caught for running a business after work, trading gold to

‘old’ people for meat.

The following morning the exodus began. Huoy and I removed the white

tarp from the roof of our hut. We packed the tarp, the mosquito net, the mats

and  the  clothes  into  bundles  once  again  and  attached  them  to  the

shoulderboard. Another journey. We had been on the move ever since the

communists took over. From Phnom Penh to Wat Kien Svay Krao. From

there, the failed attempt to escape the country, which brought us to Tonle

Batí. From Tonle Batí by truck and train to Phum Chhleav, with Ma’s death

on the way. And now this. The Khmer Rouge said we were going to the

‘front lines’ but didn’t explain what or where the front lines were. For all we

knew we were going to the moon.

  With a groan, I hoisted the bamboo stick to my shoulder. The load was

heavy.  My  weight  and  strength  were  still  below  normal  because  of  the

dysentery,  and  I  had  stubbornly  packed  the  rest  of  my  medical  reference

books in our luggage, even though Huoy had asked me to throw them away.

Huoy carried the teapot in her right hand, and with her left hand she steadied

a  bundle  on  her  head.  We  entered  the  muddy  pathways  of  the  crowded

settlement. In many places the paths were six inches deep in water. Garbage

and human wastes flowed downhill over the paths and in and out of houses.

Phum Chhleav was on low ground, and when the rains came it caught the

runoff water from higher land nearby.

  Around us, the other inhabitants emerged from the huts they had built of

thatch and reeds and pieces of plastic, and started down the paths. It was a

cold morning. The ‘new’ people wrapped their kramas around their shoulders

to stay warm. Those who didn’t have kramas or extra shirts shivered and

rubbed themselves with their hands. We walked down the paths toward therailroad tracks, but not everybody in Phum Chhleav was lucky enough to

leave. Through the open door of a hut, we saw an old lady lying unconscious

against a wall. Her legs were grossly swollen with oedema. She stank with

wastes and was covered with flies. Unable to walk and too heavy to carry,

she had been left behind.

As  we  climbed  onto  the  railroad  track,  which  was  elevated  a  few  feet

above the nearby ground and was the only dry place in the landscape, we

looked around at the pitiful spectacle. And then I understood why the rice

fields had been so empty of workers. It was as if all the patients I had visited

in their huts had been multiplied many times over and put in a parade before

our eyes. People with shrunken faces and haunted, vacant eyes, with legs and

arms as thin as sticks or else puffy and bloated with oedema. Leaning on

canes  or  on  relatives’  shoulders,  or  alone,  they  walked  with  that  terrible

economy of movement that signals the approach of starvation. As Huoy and I

watched,  a  thin,  scrawny,  middle-aged  woman  put  down  the  end  of  the

hammock she had been carrying, slung under a bamboo pole. The man inside

the hammock called out weakly, ‘Sweet, sweet, bring me with you! Don’t

leave me behind!’ But the woman shook her head and trudged off down the

railroad track. After a moment of indecision the man carrying the other end of

the hammock abandoned it too and hobbled off after her. No one went to the

hammock to help the man. I didn’t. Even if I could have helped him, there

was no way that Huoy and I could have carried him. If we tried to carry him

we probably wouldn’t make it ourselves. So we walked on.

The sun cast our shadows in front of us, onto the railroad track. I put the

shoulderboard down, shifted it to the other shoulder and went on. To me,

every hundred yards seemed like a mile. To other people, every ten yards was

a mile. Around us the malnourished, the sick and the near-dead shuffled on in

groups of two and three, dressed in whatever rags they owned. Everyone was

muddy. Some had wet their crotches or soiled the seats of their pants. They

stopped to rest, covered with flies, and some who rested just stayed there,

giving in to gravity. A teenage boy ahead of us tried to get up from a sitting

position.  He  put  his  palms  on  the  ground  and  pushed  but  wasn’t  strong

enough. He tried again, pushing as hard as he could with his matchstick arms.

With a great effort he got his buttocks off the ground and then brought his

legs underneath and shakily rose to his feet. He took a step, almost fell and

then took another faltering step as we passed him.

  What made it worse, what made it more appalling was that somehow itwas ordinary. You put one foot in front of the other and you kept on walking.

You heard the cries of the weak but you didn’t pay much attention, because

you were concentrating on yourself and your own survival. We had all seen

death before. In the exodus from Phum Chhleav, the atrocious had become

normal.

No one took count, but my guess is that of the seventy-eight hundred who

walked in to Phum Chhleav, a little over half walked out, and some of those

were dying on the way. Those who lay down and didn’t get up had plenty of

company,  for  scattered  along  the  railroad  track  were  corpses  from  the

previous  days  and  weeks.  What  happened  to  the  corpses  is  what  always

happens in a tropical climate. Their skin had swollen, turned purple-black and

burst through their clothes. Most of them had one leg or one arm raised stiffly

in the air. They stank badly. Their eyes were half open. Flies clustered around

the mouths and anuses and eyes. For them I felt sorrow more than revulsion.

It  was  not  the  dead’s  fault  that  they  were  lying  there.  It  was  the  Khmer

Rouge’s fault for causing the deaths, and the relatives’ fault for not burying

the dead. And that made me angry.

How fast man changes! How fast he sheds his outer humanity and becomes

the  animal  inside!  In  the  old  days  –  only  six  months  before  –  nobody

abandoned the dead. It was part of our religious tradition that if we didn’t

cremate or bury the bodies, and if we didn’t pray, the souls would wander

around lost. They would be unable to go to heaven, or to be reborn. Now

everything had changed – not just our burial customs but also all our beliefs

and behaviour. We had no more monks and no religious services. We had no

more family obligations. Children left their parents to die, wives abandoned

their husbands and the strongest kept on moving. The Khmer Rouge had

taken away everything that held our culture together, and this was the result:

a parade of the selfish and the dying. Society was falling apart.

My own family was falling apart too. Of my father’s eight children, only

three of his sons were still with him, and I was barely on speaking terms with

the other two and their wives. My brothers had done nothing for me when I

was sick. They had been willing to abandon me to die. Huoy and I kept my

parents in sight as we trudged along the railroad track, but we didn’t walk

together.

In  the  late  afternoon  we  all  made  it  to  the  railroad  station  at  Phnom

Tippeday. There the Khmer Rouge gave us two cans of rice apiece, enough

for a couple of undersized meals. We trudged on, following the crowd alongthe road to the south.

We  went  through  a  village  called  Phum  Phnom  –  literally  translated,

‘village  of  the  mountain.’  It  lay  at  the  base  of  the  mountain  ridge  that

dominated the western skyline. It was empty except for some Khmer Rouge

soldiers and those of us ‘new’ people who were passing through. Near the old

town hall, which the Khmer Rouge had taken for their regional headquarters,

the road split in three directions. We took the left fork, following the other

stragglers from Phum Chhleav.

That night we camped on a hillock in the rice fields – my parents, my

brothers and Huoy and I. A Chinese family shared the hillock with us. The

night was noisy with frogs and crickets and the treetops stirring in the wind. I

couldn’t sleep. I got up several times to sit in front of the fire, feeling its

warmth, rubbing my hands, watching the flames. Huoy, who was worried

about my health, kept asking me to come back next to her and sleep. Finally I

did. In the morning we discovered that the Chinese man on the other side of

me had died. In the dark nobody had noticed.

  With this, something inside me snapped. It was too much to accept – the

death  march,  the  hunger,  the  uncertainty  of  going  to  another  unknown

destination. I brought Huoy and the rest of my family to a shady spot on the

side of the road and asked them to stay there. Then I went off, exploring,

without any clear idea of what I was going to do.


The first person I ran into was Pen Tip. Pen Tip had practised medicine in

Phum  Chhleav,  though  he  was  not  a  doctor.  Even  then  there  had  been

something familiar about him, and I had searched my brain for the reason.

Finally I placed him: around 1972, at the hospital in Phnom Penh where I had

gone for my radiology rotation as a medical student, Pen Tip had been a

radiological assistant, positioning patients for the X-ray camera. He was a

tiny man, less than five feet tall, sure of himself and quite clever. We knew

each other by sight, but this was our first conversation.

  Pen Tip told me in a self-satisfied way that he had gotten permission to

stay  in  a  hamlet  nearby.  He  said  it  was  better  to  stay  there,  close  to  the

railroad, than to move even farther into the countryside. Anything was better,

he declared, than going to the front lines.

‘I was thinking the same thing,’ I said. Whatever the front lines were, I

didn’t want to go to them. ‘Besides, in the mountains to the south there is

sure to be more malaria.’‘I agree, Doctor,’ he said.

  ‘Don’t call me “Doctor,” ’ I said. ‘But thank you for the advice.’

I left Pen Tip and wandered off. The next person I talked to was an ‘old’

person who turned out to be originally from Chambak, just down the road

from my home village, Samrong Yong. Because I came from a village near

hers, she was very kind to me. She took me to see a man whom she thought

might take me in. His name was Youen. He was an ‘old’ person and section

leader of another hamlet nearby.

  Youen was a dark-skinned man with short, wavy hair and broken teeth. He

wore only black culottes cinched around his waist with a cracked leather belt.

As  we  talked,  he  took  out  a  pouch  with  locally  grown  tobacco  and  soft,

brown  flexible  pieces  of  banana  leaf  inside.  He  sprinkled  tobacco  on  a

rectangular piece of banana leaf and rolled it into a cigarette, with one end

slightly larger than the other. He flattened it between his fingers and lit the

larger end with a lighter.

I told him my name was ‘Samnang’ (a common nickname whose literal

meaning is ‘lucky’). My wife was ‘Bopha’ (which means ‘flower’ in Khmer,

just as ‘Huoy’ means ‘flower’ in Teochiew Chinese). I said I had been a

taxicab driver in Phnom Penh. I came from a humble background. ‘Bopha’

and I wanted to work for him. We would do anything he asked if we could

stay there. We wanted to serve him and in this way serve Angka. If he let us

stay there it would save our lives.

‘Tell me more about your background,’ he said.

I explained how I had lived in Samrong Yong all my life, just a simple

man of the countryside, until the war drove me into Phnom Penh. My wife

and I had been poor under the Lon Nol regime, barely able to find enough to

eat. ‘Bopha’ had sold vegetables in the market, but corrupt officials took

everything she earned.

  Apparently  he  believed  that  Huoy  and  I  came  from  a  proper  class

background, because he agreed to let us stay under his care. I thanked him

effusively and went back to find Huoy and my parents.

I was happy. Here was a little backwater, outside of the main current of

hunger and revolution. Here we could stay and get enough to eat. Youen

would protect us. I told my parents they probably could get a place with him

too, if they came along.

My father and my brothers exchanged knowing glances.

I  had  pointedly  invited  my  parents  to  join  Huoy  and  me,  but  not  mybrothers  and  their  wives  and  children.  On  the  surface,  my  reason  was

practical: we could not all hide with Youen; as a group we would be too

conspicuous. But the underlying reason was my anger at my brothers. Had

they helped me? Only my father had visited when I was sick. We were all

family,  but  my  strongest  obligation  was  to  my  parents,  to  the  top  of  the

hierarchy. Toward my brothers I felt little; toward my sisters-in-law, nothing.

Neither of them had been nice to me or to Huoy.

We talked it over, my father and my brothers and I. Papa agreed that he

and my mother would go with Huoy and me.

But fate had not finished playing its hand. The Khmer Rouge had finally

realized that they were losing too many workers on the exodus. They sent

oxcarts to help the survivors along. My brother Pheng Huor got one of the

oxcarts and put his family inside.

My parents were standing beside me with their luggage. Pheng Huor and

his wife, two daughters and son drew slowly away with a great creaking of

the  oxcart’s  wooden  axle.  Then  Pheng  Huor’s  three-year-old  son  looked

back, saw his grandfather there and began to cry.

It was too much for my old father. The little boy was his favourite in the

entire family, the only son of his favourite son.

  ‘Wait!  Wait!’  Papa  shouted.  Pheng  Huor  stopped  the  oxcart.  Without

another word, my father and mother ran to the oxcart with their luggage,

leaving Huoy and me behind.                                          17



                                    Reorganization


 




Youen, the chief of the hamlet outside Phum Phnom, was not a man of much

ability. He knew how to farm, he knew how to obey orders, but he was not

particularly clever or strong. Still, he had agreed to protect Huoy and me, and

as long as he did that he would have our loyalty.

His hamlet was full of ‘old’ people. Not much had changed there since

prewar times, though the chaos of the revolution was all around. A short walk

away,  in  Phum  Phnom,  was  the  Khmer  Rouge  regional  headquarters.  In

another direction lay Phum Chhleav, a place we were glad to leave behind;

and  somewhere  off  in  a  third  direction  were  the  mysterious  ‘front  lines,’

which Huoy and I were trying hard to avoid.

In exchange for Youen’s patronage, Huoy and I became his servants. We

worked at his house, and at the houses of his sister and his daughter nearby.

Huoy helped with the cooking and housework. I swept the yards, filled the

water jars and took the oxen out to graze on the stubble of the harvested rice

fields. Whenever I walked past anyone in Youen’s family I bent over to keep

my head lower than theirs. Even if they were sitting down, I tried to stay

lower than them. In Cambodia this is the normal deference shown by servants

to their masters.

It was amazing, really, what had happened to us. In Phnom Penh, as a

doctor, I never would have stooped before an illiterate farmer like Youen. He

would have lowered himself in front of me. Now everything was reversed. I

offered him water with my eyes downcast, the cup held in both hands. I

called him puk, which means ‘father’. As far as Youen and his family wereconcerned, I was Samnang, the ex-taxi driver. Bopha was my wife. Those

were our identities. Huoy and I kept to our roles night and day, except when

we  were  alone  together,  and  even  then  we  whispered,  so  nobody  would

discover our true backgrounds.

The strange thing was that Huoy and I were happy. We were like people

who had fallen from a cliff and landed on a ledge halfway down. We got used

to the ledge and didn’t complain about being lower than before – we were

glad enough that we hadn’t fallen all the way to the bottom. Life wasn’t too

bad. We didn’t have to work very hard. And our health had gotten better,

because we had enough rice.

  When we first moved in with Youen, he gave us a few cans of rice from

his personal supply. Soon he put our names on the ration list, the first step in

making us permanent members of his community.

He sent me to a Khmer Rouge depot to get a rice ration. I came staggering

back with a 25-kilogram bag of paddy rice on my shoulder and a jubilant

smile on my face. Imagine getting so much food from the Khmer Rouge!

Imagine knowing that we had enough food for weeks ahead!

Each grain of paddy rice is covered by a tough brown husk with raised

ridges. The husks are inedible, so they have to be removed. Youen’s sister,

whose name was Yin, lent me a hand-operated rice mill. I poured the paddy

rice into the mill and turned the crank around and around, grinding the rice

between the two flat stones. Out came a mixture of white rice and empty

husks, plus some broken bits and pieces.

Next, Huoy poured the mixture of rice and husks on a large flat basket and

began tossing the grain up in the air and catching it again. She had never tried

it before, but it was really quite easy. The white rice landed back in the basket

but the lighter husks or chaff floated away in the breeze.

The rice was edible now, but some of the grains were still covered with a

brown layer of bran. Yin showed us how to polish the rice in an old wooden

device in Youen’s yard. The polisher was like a large-scale mortar and pestle,

except  that  the  pestle  that  struck  the  rice  grains  was  attached  to  a  foot-

operated lever.

This  was  the  old-fashioned  way  of  processing  rice  in  the  countryside,

milling it, winnowing it and finally polishing it. It was all new to Huoy, who

like most city people always bought white rice in the market. But once we

had polished the rice she was in her element. She put rice and water in a pot

and rubbed the rice between her palms to release the dust and the impurities.She  reached  in  with  her  fingers  to  pick  out  the  bits  of  husk  and  other

impurities that floated to the top. Then she drained the water from the pot,

added fresh water to the level of the rice and a little higher, checked the level

with her forefinger to make sure, covered the pot and put it on the fire to boil.

Once the water had reached a full boil, she pulled wood from the fire to

reduce the heat until the water was simmering quietly. Then she let it cook

covered and without stirring until all the water had boiled off and evenly

spaced steam holes appeared in the surface of the rice.

It was perfect – the grains separate and fragrant-smelling, not too wet or

dry. Before eating, Huoy took three sticks of incense from our luggage and lit

them, to honour her mother. She prayed aloud, waving the incense in her

palms three times in Chinese fashion. ‘Mother, we have good food now,’ she

said. ‘We are thinking of you, and we miss you. You eat first.’

  After the offering we began our meal. We had nothing to serve with our

rice and didn’t care. We just ate and ate and ate. We ate so much it hurt, and

we were still happy.


After we were on the ration list, Youen’s sister Yin suggested that we take

the next step toward permanent residence, which was building a house. She,

Youen and I were standing in Youen’s yard, next to the tree that Huoy and I

had been sleeping under at night. I didn’t say anything, because it wasn’t my

place  to,  and  studied  Yin  discreetly.  She  was  a  remarkable  woman  –

divorced, in her forties, a gruff-voiced cigarette smoker with thick, muscular

arms like a man’s. She was physically stronger than Youen, smarter than him

and more of a natural leader. Her brother scratched his head as the idea of my

building a house slowly sank in.

  Yin  said  impatiently,  ‘If  Samnang  doesn’t  know  how  to  build  a  good

house, I will show him.’ With that, she picked up an axe, handed me another

axe  and  took  off  at  a  fast  stride.  I  glanced  at  Youen,  who  nodded  his

permission, and followed her.

I followed her on a path through some rice fields and into the forest. She

had enormous, muscular calves and wide, splayed-out feet, and it was all I

could do to keep up with her. Finally we reached a dense grove of trees on a

hillside and stopped. To give herself maximum freedom of movement, she

stood with her legs apart, took the hem at the front of her sarong and twisted

it around and around, brought the twisted cloth through her legs and up, and

then tucked it into her beltline at the back of her waist. This way her sarongwas like a pair of shorts, revealing her stocky thighs. Yin swung her axe. She

felled a tree and I felled another one, but it took me longer. She watched me

critically as I finished chopping the tree down and then we carried the tree

trunks back to the village. Every few minutes I had to stop to put my log

down, but Yin strolled on without changing pace, her log on her shoulder, a

half-smoked cigarette tucked behind her ear.

We went again the next day, collecting timber to use for the house. She

began to talk in her gruff voice as she walked ahead on the pathway. ‘You eat

and eat until there’s nothing left,’ she said. ‘You will have no seed to plant

next year.’ I kept quiet, afraid that Huoy and I had offended her by eating our

rice so greedily. Then I realized that she was talking about ‘new’ people in

general and indirectly criticizing the regime.

  Yin had watched the relocation march from Phum Chhleav. ‘I saw you

people walking past here to the front lines. Never seen so many sick people

before.  Never,’  she  grumbled.  ‘Don’t  know  what  things  are  coming  to.

Before, when you worked you got money. You could take your money to the

market and buy medicines. Cure yourself. But not now. No markets. Can’t

buy anything. No money either. New government doesn’t even have money.’

  She  turned  around  as  if  with  an  afterthought,  swinging  the  log  on  her

shoulder as if it were weightless, and looked at me with narrowed eyes. I was

panting hard.

  ‘Never seen anything like this watery rice they feed you people. Hardly

any rice in it at all. People like you get weak and skinny. You’re not good for

much when you’re weak. Not good for much at all.’ I looked down at my

body and had to agree with her. My shirt was open in front and all my ribs

were showing.

  ‘Yes,’ I said humbly, ‘it is true that there has not always been enough to

eat. But Angka says we have to sacrifice until we build up the nation.’

  Yin looked at me as if I were a fool, and spat vigorously to the side. ‘Used

to grow more rice around here,’ she said. ‘Much more. Now, people living

here don’t work as hard as they used to. No reason why they should. Can’t

plant what they want. Can’t eat when they want. So they grow less. Problem

is, there’s a lot more people to eat it now. Like you and your wife.’

  ‘Auntie Yin,’ I said, using the polite prerevolutionary form of address, ‘I

apologize for the food my wife and I eat. We do not mean to be a burden.’

‘Not your fault, son. Angka runs things around here. Angka owns all the

fields. Owns everything. I planted mango trees – I’ve got to ask Angka forpermission to pick the mangoes. Never seen a government like this one.’

  Yin continued down the path, shaking her head. ‘Never seen a government

like this one,’ she repeated, and spat again.

I  hurried  after,  smiling  to  myself.  Her  sceptical  grumbling  was  full  of

common sense. Yin could live in her house without going to the front lines.

She didn’t go hungry. But she still didn’t like the revolution, and I found

comfort in that.

  When Yin and I had cut enough wood for the house frame, we gathered

reeds that had been growing on the edges of the rice fields and made thatch

by  sewing  bundles  of  reeds  together.  Soon  we  had  the  house  finished,  a

sturdy, waterproof, one-room affair. It wasn’t beautiful, but it was far better

than the hut in Phum Chhleav and better than my first hut in Tonle Batí.

Huoy and I moved in, buried my medical books and other secret possessions

under the dirt floor and spread the white plastic mat on top.

  With the house, we became members of Youen’s community. But I sensed

that our situation was not permanent. From time to time emaciated stragglers

from the mass relocation marches came wandering through the landscape, as

sick as anybody who had been in Phum Chhleav. And all around Youen’s

hamlet the Khmer Rouge were busy. Every day, messengers on bicycles and

motorcycles drove by, coming from or going to the headquarters in Phum

Phnom. The leaders went past us on horseback and jeep, on their inspection

tours. The Khmer Rouge had big plans. They were mobilizing the whole

countryside.

All too soon, the day came that I had dreaded. Youen assembled everyone

from the nearby houses, and announced, ‘Angka needs all childless couples

to go to the front lines.’

The  news  was  like  a  body  blow.  Huoy  and  I  thought  we  had  an

understanding with Youen. We had become his servants. We had worked for

him. He was supposed to protect us.

  Youen said the two of us and another couple would be going. ‘Better get

ready,’ Youen told me. ‘They say you should have a hammock, a hoe, some

rope and some baskets for hauling dirt. You won’t need anything else.’

I felt betrayed. ‘How can I go to the front lines?’ I told him. ‘I don’t have

any of the equipment. It’s ridiculous. I won’t go.’

  Youen hadn’t expected me to talk back to him, and he was slow to react.

‘Well, maybe Angka can supply you with what you need at the front lines,’

he said.  ‘No. I need the equipment here,’ I said. Indirectly, I was both resisting the

order and challenging his authority. Besides, I knew that Youen had a son

who was married but childless. He hadn’t made his son go. He had protected

Huoy and me for a short while, but when the pressure was on, he got rid of

us.

  Youen raised his voice and spoke to everyone. ‘This is Angka’s rule, not

my rule. Everyone who must go, must go!’

  Yin came up to me and stood with her back to her brother so he couldn’t

hear. ‘Son, we have no choice,’ she whispered. ‘I don’t want to push you out.

I wish you could stay. You and your wife are nice people. But really, you

must obey. If you don’t obey, it will mean trouble for everyone.

I knew that she was right. Yin was a smart, good-hearted woman, and my

respect for her was great. But I argued until Youen gave me two old hemp

rice sacks to make a hammock with, and one hoe and a rope. Then I asked

him for another hoe and the baskets, not because I thought he was going to

agree but because I was stalling for time. Huoy was in our house getting our

secret possessions from the hole in the dirt floor. By the time she came out of

the house with our luggage, the bonheur between Youen and me was gone. I

didn’t care.

  Huoy and I and the other couple got ready to walk. An escort of soldiers

with rifles had come in to show us the way. The soldiers motioned to us to

start. We began to walk slowly down a path to the south, to rejoin Angka’s

experiment of social reorganization.


We walked for less than an hour. We were still in sight of the big mountain

ridge behind the Phnom Tippeday train station, but on its back side, out of

sight of the wat on the plateau. Though I had no way of knowing it, this was

the area where we would remain for the next three years. None of the places

we had already been in this part of the country – from the railway station at

Phnom Tippeday, to Phum Chhleav where I had pulled the plough, to Phum

Phnom where the Khmer Rouge had their headquarters – or where we would

go, among the transient labour camps of the front lines, was more than a few

hours’ walk apart. Our new universe was about ten miles square.

The soldiers took us to a hillock where the front lines ‘cooperative’, as it

was called, had its field kitchen, warehouses and administrative quarters. We

were given the rest of the tools we needed and sent off to another wooded

hillock, where we would sleep.  With her quick, expert fingers Huoy sewed a double hammock out of the

rice  sacks.  We  rigged  the  hammock  between  two  trees  and  strung  the

mosquito net overhead to protect us from the mosquitoes, gnats and flies. We

were part of a section of about two hundred young married ‘new’ people,

some with children, most without. Between two and three thousand other

‘new’ people camped out on neighbouring hillocks in the dry rice fields.

The main task of our cooperative was digging canals for irrigation and

water  control.  Every  week  or  so,  as  work  on  the  canals  progressed,  the

location of the cooperative was moved. Every day we dug as long as there

was light to see by, and usually long after. At night we attended political

meetings. I had never worked so hard in my life, nor slept and eaten so little.

We had no days off, no holidays, no celebrations.

It was here on the front lines that I truly understood, for the first time, the

Khmer  Rouge’s  far-reaching  plan  for  the  reorganization  of  Cambodian

society. They had led us to it in stages, first with the evacuation of the cities,

then with the gradual tightening of their rules, then with the second and third

exoduses where necessary. In February 1976, on the front lines, they were

trying out their revolutionary theories in purest form.

The  key  concept  for  the  new  society,  as  we  were  told  all  the  time  in

propaganda sessions, was ‘independence-sovereignty’. One word made out of

two,  independence-sovereignty.  For  Democratic  Kampuchea,  this  meant

being absolutely free of other countries – free of their aid and even of their

cultural influence. We Khmers would make it on our own. By reorganizing

and harnessing the energy of our people and by eliminating everything that

distracted from our work, we would become an advanced, developed nation

almost overnight. And that rapid development, or ‘great leap forward’, as it

was called, required our ‘correct revolutionary understanding’ of many other

concepts and terms. For us it was almost like learning a new language.

For example, there was the concept of ‘struggle’. I had been hearing about

‘struggle’ ever since the takeover in Phnom Penh, but it was only on the front

lines  that  I  fully  understood  how  it  fit  in  with  the  rest  of  the  ideology.

‘Struggle’ was military talk, like ‘front lines’. It reflected the idea that the

nation was still at war. On the front lines we didn’t just work, we ‘struggled’,

or else ‘launched offensives’. We were to ‘struggle to cultivate rice fields

vigorously’, ‘struggle to dig canals with great courage’, ‘struggle to clear the

forest’, and even ‘struggle to solve the manure problem’. We were to ‘launch

an offensive to plant strategic crop’, and ‘launch an offensive to perform dutywith revolutionary zeal’.

The goal of this struggling and launching of offensives was ‘victory’, or

‘mastery’. We were going to achieve ‘victory over the elements’. We would

become ‘master of the rice paddies and fields and forests’, ‘master of the

earth and water’, ‘master of the canals’, ‘master of the flood problem’.

To  become  masters,  to  achieve  the  ‘great  leap  forward’,  we  had  to

sacrifice. That meant working hard without complaining, no matter what the

obstacles. No complaining, even though we worked eighteen- or twenty-hour

days, with only thin rice gruel to eat. They wanted us to be single-minded

work fanatics, never slowing our pace. They wanted us to be revolutionary

zealots. As a song on the Khmer Rouge radio put it, ‘We are not afraid of the

night,  the  day,  the  winds,  the  storms  and  rain  and  sickness.  We  gladly

sacrifice for Angka to show support for the revolution.’

We had to sacrifice everything from the old regime, including material

possessions. ‘Get rid of all the Western goods you still have with you,’ a

cadre told us. ‘Because if you keep those things your minds will still be on

the old times and you will not be able to work hard. Discard the makeup, the

fancy clothing, the books, the gold. You do not need them. Get rid of your

cooking pots and utensils too. If you cannot discard these things, you are the

enemy. You will still be serving capitalism, and not serving the community.

You do not need any property now.’

  They  abolished  private  property.  Everything  belonged  to  Angka  now.

Luckily, the Khmer Rouge code kept the soldiers from searching our bodies

for property, because that was where Huoy and I kept our gold and where all

the ‘new’ people hid their valuables. And they never found my medical books

and instruments because I buried them underground. But they went through

our luggage. Missing, when we came back from work, were some of Huoy’s

silk blouses and sampots, some of her brassieres, her makeup kit, most of her

mother’s clothes and our cooking pots, except for the teapot, which we were

allowed to keep.

  They had already abolished religion – disrobed the monks, destroyed the

Buddha  statues.  On  the  front  lines  they  abolished  the  family  too.  They

wanted  us  to  renounce  personal  attachments  of  any  kind,  because  those

relationships interfered with our devotion to Angka. Children had to leave

their parents, the elderly had to leave their sons and daughters, and if work

assignments  required  it,  husbands  and  wives  had  to  split  up  too.  From

Angka’s point of view this was ‘liberation’, because it freed us from the timeof caring for others and gave us more time to work. To maximize working

time they abolished individual meals too. Everyone ate meals in the common

kitchen.

  ‘How lucky you are!’ Chev, the front lines leader, exclaimed to us in an

evening meeting. ‘You come back from work and the rice is already cooked

for you! You have no cares, no worries. Your children are taken care of. Your

parents are taken care of. Everybody is happy! Everything is provided to you

by Angka. The young people don’t even have to go to school! Under Angka,

the ‘school’ is the farm. The ‘fountain pen’ is the plough. The ‘paper’ is the

land. You can ‘write’ all you want. Anytime. Everything is free. No money

for tuition. You don’t need to pay for anything now.

  ‘How lucky you are!’ he said. ‘Under the regime of the arch-fascist, arch-

imperialist, arch-feudalist Lon Nol, you were oppressed! You never knew

any happiness! You were not masters of your country then! You were slaves!

Everywhere was corruption! The greedy merchants and the fascist military

took over the land! Now under the glorious reign of Angka you are masters

of your own destiny. You are masters of the water and the land. The entire

people, united in solidarity, join in building the country. Life is much better

now. There is no more corruption. No more gambling or prostitution. You are

learning from the peasants and workers, who are the source of all useful

knowledge.  Only  the  peasants  and  workers  possess  it.  The  monks  don’t

possess it. The only wise man is the one who knows how to grow rice.’

The  Khmer  Rouge  wanted  a  complete  change  of  society,  from  top  to

bottom. Gone was everything that had governed our lives in the old times.

Lon Nol was gone, airlifted to America before the fall; Sihanouk was gone,

his fate a mystery. The monks were gone. (‘The monks are bloodsucking

imperialists. If any worker secretly takes rice to the monks, we shall set him

to planting cabbages. If the cabbages are not full-grown in three days, he will

dig  his  own  grave.’)  The  families  were  broken  up,  the  children  and  the

elderly sent off to live in their own groups. There were no more cities. No

more markets, stores, restaurants or cafes. No privately owned buses, cars or

bicycles. No schools. No books or magazines. No money. No clocks. No

holidays and religious festivals. Just the sun that rose and set, the stars at

night and the rain that fell from the sky. And work. Everything was work, in

the empty, primitive countryside.

In place of the old regime there was a new government whose upper layers

could  only  be  guessed  at.  Angka  –  whoever  that  was  –  was  at  the  top.Logically, Angka had to be a person or group of people, but many found it

easier to believe that Angka was an all-powerful entity, something like a god.

‘Angka has eyes like a pineapple,’ Chev told us, repeating a common saying

of  the  regime.  ‘It  sees  everywhere.  So  you  must  behave  correctly.’  The

mystery of Angka’s identity added to its power, because ‘Angka’ also meant

the regime at all levels, from the topmost leader down to the lowest spy. In

fact, Chev sometimes told us that we were Angka too.

  Below the topmost officials was (I guessed) a layer of ‘zone’ leaders, with

the  ‘zones’  roughly  corresponding  to  the  old  provinces.  What  used  to  be

Battambang Province was now a part of the Northwest Zone. The identity of

our zone leader was unknown to me, but his top local official was a man who

sped around the dirt roads on inspection tours, always sitting in the passenger

seat of a jeep. I had seen this man several times, riding with his right arm

sticking out the window and his hand resting on the roof, though I had never

been close enough to see his face. Below him in the civil administration was

Comrade  Ik,  the  old  man  on  horseback,  who  had  addressed  us  in  Phum

Chhleav. Below Comrade Ik were the village leaders. The leader of Phum

Phnom, and overseer of Youen’s hamlet, was Chev; but Chev also had a

parallel role as leader of this cooperative on the front lines. Other village

leaders and a few military leaders reported to him on the front lines, and

below them were section leaders, who usually were not Khmer Rouge but

trusted ‘old’ people. Beneath the section leaders were group leaders, who

usually were ‘new’ people directing the work of about ten other ‘new’ people

like me.

  Sometimes, as I stood by the canal, hoe in hand, I had to admit: Angka, the

Organization, had indeed reorganized the countryside. Before the takeover,

nobody  could  have  thought  that  the  land  would  look  as  it  did  now,  with

thousands of people marching to work in orderly single-file lines. And Angka

did more than set the tasks. It had provided a complete philosophy, parts of

which were obviously true (the corruption under Lon Nol had indeed been

terrible),  and  other  parts  of  which  appealed  to  patriotism  (we  needed  to

rebuild the country after the civil war). With loudspeakers attached to poles

near the common kitchens, our new leaders blared a new music that carried

far across the rice fields. And when I listened to that marching music, with its

strong and vigorous beat, and when I saw the huge red flags flapping in the

breeze  and  didn’t  look  too  closely  at  the  lines  of  people,  I  found  myself

believing, for at least a few moments at a time, that the Khmer Rouge haddone it. They had succeeded in remaking the country to their bold plan. They

had erased the individual, except as a unit in a group. They had given us a

new religion to devote ourselves to, and that religion was Angka.

But when I looked more closely, the illusion fell apart. The people working

in the canal were tired and malnourished and their clothes were torn. Just like

me. Their hoes rose and fell slowly, without energy, and their faces expressed

a terrible futility and sorrow.

  That’s all it took, a moment’s glance, to know that the country had turned

in the wrong direction.

The Khmer Rouge pushed their own beliefs to extremes, and in doing so

turned them into lies. They wanted us to work – then they worked us so hard

that we produced less and less, because we were weak. They wanted to purify

the country of everything that was not Khmer. Buddha was an outsider, from

India, so they destroyed the Buddhist temples. The cities were too tainted

with  Western  imperialist  ways,  so  they  made  us  leave.  They  wanted  to

eliminate  everything  that  was  not  Cambodian.  But  they  were  hypocrites.

Except for their dark skins, everything about the Khmer Rouge was alien,

from  China.  They  borrowed  their  ideology  from  Mao  Tse-tung,  like  the

concept of the great leap forward. Sending the intellectuals to the countryside

to learn from the peasants was an idea of the Chinese Cultural Revolution.

Their AK-47s and their olive green caps and their trucks were Chinese. Even

the  music  they  played  from  the  loudspeakers  was  Chinese,  with  Khmer

words.

The Khmer Rouge’s greatest strength was propaganda. They knew that a

small lie can be caught and that a big lie is easier to get away with. Their

system  was  so  different  from  anything  we  had  known  before,  and  so

complete, that we gave in without really knowing how to resist. Even if we

had been allowed to speak out publicly, which we weren’t – and if we did,

they tied us up and marched us away – there was something inadequate about

trying to counter their words with arguments of our own. It just didn’t help.

For example, I could say to Huoy, in a whisper, that any government that

oppressed  as  many  of  its  people  as  the  Khmer  Rouge  would  eventually

weaken itself. I could say that to her, and believe it, and she could agree with

me,  but  it  wouldn’t  do  us  any  good.  When  the  whispering  was  over  the

regime was still there and we were still digging with hoes and feeling tired

and hungry and not even able to remember the last time we felt any different.

There was no way out of the situation. We were only left knowing in ourbones that we were being abused.

  There was a medical clinic on the front lines. The nurses there used dirty

needles and didn’t care one way or another if their patients died. At mealtime

during a visit there, I heard one nurse calling out to another, ‘Have you fed

the war slaves yet?’ It was a chance remark, but it stuck in my ears because it

explained  the  Khmer  Rouge  better  than  anything  else.  All  the  talk  about

being comrades in a classless society, building the nation with our bare hands

and struggling to achieve independence-sovereignty didn’t mean anything.

The Khmer Rouge had beaten us in the civil war. We were their war slaves.

That was all there was to it. They were taking revenge. And on the front

lines, day and night, they ran our lives with bells.                                          18



                                          Bells


 




They rang the first bell at four o’clock in the morning.

  Still exhausted from the day before, Huoy and I rose out of our hempen

hammock, got to our feet, rubbed our eyes, groped for the water jar and

washed our faces.

  Around us other couples, seen as silhouettes moving against the starry sky,

did the same, or else tried to steal another few minutes of sleep. But there was

no escaping the bell. It was a penetrating, relentless noise. A command to be

obeyed.

  After  the  bell  fell  silent,  a  hiss  came  out  of  the  loudspeakers  by  the

common kitchen, followed by the music of the national anthem. A chorus of

men’s, women’s and children’s voices sang:


    Bright red blood that covers towns and plains

    Of Kampuchea, our motherland,

    Sublime blood of workers and peasants,

    Sublime blood of revolutionary men and women fighters!

    The blood, changing into unrelenting hatred

    And resolute struggle

    On April Seventeenth, under the flag of the revolution,

    Frees us from slavery!


    Long live, long live, Glorious April Seventeenth!

    Glorious victory with greater significance    Than the age of Angkor Wat . . .

 

  Another day on the front lines had begun.

At four thirty they rang the bell again. Slow, separate beats to start with,

then gradually faster until the notes ran together: DING . . . DING . . . DING .

. . ding, ding, ding, ding, ding . . . ding-dingding-dingdingdingdingding!!!

Then a pause, and they rang it again. Another pause, and they rang it a third

time: DING . . . DING . . . DING . . . ding, ding, ding, ding . . . ding-ding-

  ding-ding-dingdingdingdingding!

  Always, they rang the bell in series of three. Before the revolution the

monks had beat their drums in the same pattern, dull, single booms at first

and then faster and faster into a drum roll, then a pause and then starting over

again, in threes. With that signal, the monks had called the faithful to prayer.

Unconsciously, perhaps, the cadre banging his stick against the metal car

wheel hanging near the common kitchen was replaying a rhythm of his youth.

Or  perhaps,  in  the  new  ‘religion’  of  Angka,  work  had  come  to  mean

something  like  prayer,  as  a  way  of  purifying  ourselves  and  showing  our

devotion.

By the second series of bells, Huoy and I had joined our separate groups,

ten people in each. Different groups joined together, depending on their work

sites, and set off across the landscape in long, single-file lines.

I carried a hoe on my right shoulder. From the right side of my belt hung

my hatchet; from the left side hung a small metal US-made field cooking pot,

curved to fit against my hip, with a tightly fitting lid on top and boiled water

inside. From a cord around my neck hung my spoon. Hidden in tiny pockets

inside my waistband were a Swiss watch, several pieces of gold and a worn

Zippo lighter with an extra supply of flints. I was barefoot. My long-sleeved

shirt was ripped and unbuttoned. I wore a brimmed palm-leaf hat to protect

against the sun, but the sun hadn’t risen yet. There was a greyish light above

the eastern horizon, just enough to see by.

  When we reached the canal my group split off and went to its site, marked

with wooden stakes. The canal was a dry trench deeper than I was tall and

twice as far across, with sloping sides. Along the top but set back from it

were dykes made from the clay we had dug, giving the canal a height of

several feet above the surrounding land, to contain floodwaters. I climbed

down to the bottom of the canal, sighed and swung my hoe. I didn’t swing it

hard;  my  muscles  were  stiff.  I  swung  again.  The  trick  was  to  warm  upgradually, then work at a steady pace without straining.

I swung again, putting fractionally more into it. With the edge of the hoe, I

scooped the loose earth into a mud basket; the others picked it up and handed

it in relays to the top of the canal.

In the grey light the canals stretched in a straight line as far as the eye

could see. Elsewhere, crews dug other canals to meet at right angles with

ours, plus smaller ditches or minicanals to tie the entire network together. The

canals, the Khmer Rouge assured us, would collect the runoff water in the

rainy season and hold it until the dry season, when the water would be used

to irrigate the fields. Yes, I thought bitterly, the Khmer Rouge had great faith

in their canals. ‘We will grow three rice crops a year!’ an enthusiastic cadre

told us at a political meeting. ‘Nobody will ever go hungry again! And if the

Americans attack us again we will dig a canal across the Pacific Ocean and

invade their territory!’

The band of orange above the horizon thickened and turned to pink as the

sun rose. Next to me in the bottom of the canal a skinny man gave off deep,

unconscious sighs as he worked. I knew what he was thinking. No days off,

no gaiety, no incentive to work hard except to stay alive. Or half alive, which

is what we were.

  Don’t think about it, I told myself. Just swing the hoe and let it fall. Don’t

wear yourself out but get the job done. Look at that wooden stake. When we

dig that far we will finish and they will send us somewhere else. But where

will they send us? To flat ground or to a hillock? Flat ground is easier to dig,

but hillocks are better. So much life in the hillocks’ soil. Last week that snake

slithering into its hole and all of us tearing the hillock apart and finally killing

it with our hoes. How Huoy smiled when I brought my share to her. First

time she’s smiled that I can remember.

Chop. Chop. In either direction, the sound of hoes chopping into clay.

Another hot, cloudless day. Working steadily, the sweat running down from

my armpits.

  When the sun shone across one wall of the canal and into the edge of the

bottom, a shout rang out: ‘Comrades, take a break!’ Everyone dropped tools

and climbed out of the canal. Huoy waited for me in the shade of a sdao tree

nearby. I reached above her and snapped off a branch, then stripped off the

leaves, putting them in my pockets, before sitting down. We shared water

from my canteen. She sat with her back against the tree trunk. I sat with my

back against her shins, rubbing the red, itchy sores that were spreading up myankles and onto my legs.

  Breaks were for smoking. The common kitchen distributed locally grown

tobacco to the group leaders, who distributed it to workers like us. I took a

wad of tobacco from my pocket and rolled a cigarette with a piece of banana

leaf, lighting it with the Zippo. I took a few puffs without inhaling, then let it

die out and put the rest in my pocket. There. Anybody watching would see I

had smoked, and I would continue getting the ration. And I would trade most

of my tobacco ration for food, because there were some tobacco addicts on

the front lines who would rather smoke than eat.

  There were also a few marijuana smokers. Next to us in the shade of a tree,

an old man sucked noisily on a bamboo water pipe and held the aromatic

smoke  in  his  lungs  as  long  as  he  could  before  exhaling  contentedly.

Marijuana smoking was an age-old tradition followed by a small percentage

of rural men, and by a few others who had started smoking in Lon Nol’s

army. The smokers themselves didn’t attach any particular meaning to the

drug and neither did the Khmer Rouge, who didn’t bother outlawing it. When

the marijuana smokers got up from their breaks they seemed to work even

harder than before. I tried smoking it once, hoping it would do the same for

me, but instead I felt an almost overpowering urge to lie down and sleep, so I

never smoked it again.

  ‘Back to work, comrades!’

I climbed down to the bottom of the ditch again and picked up the hoe.

And I sighed.

In the late morning, when there was no more shade in the bottom of the

canal, they turned on the loudspeaker system at the common kitchen. The

music  came  to  us  faintly  but  clearly  across  the  fields.  It  began  with  the

national anthem:


    Bright red blood that covers towns and plains

    Of Kampuchea, our motherland,

    Sublime blood of workers and peasants

    Sublime blood of revolutionary men and women fighters . . .

 

  ‘The blood,’ I sung grimly to myself, ‘. . .frees us from slavery!’ I knew

every word. The rise and fall of every phrase, the timing of every gong and

xylophone flourish.    . . . We are uniting to build

    Splendid Democratic Kampuchea

    A new society with equality and justice

    Firmly applying the line of independence-sovereignty and self-reliance

    Let us resolutely defend

    Our motherland, our sacred soil

    And our glorious revolution!

 

. . . And our terrible revolution, I sang in my mind.


    Long live, long live, long live

    Democratic, prosperous and new Kampuchea

    Let us resolutely raise high

    The red flag of the revolution

    Let us build our motherland!

    Let us advance her with a great leap forward

    So she will be more glorious and marvellous than ever!

 

  After the national anthem came a song called ‘Hooray for the Courageous,

Strong  and  Marvellous  Revolutionary  Soldiers’  Group’.  After  this  came

‘New  Safety  for  the  Small  Town  Under  the  Light  of  the  Glorious

Revolution’, and then ‘Our Splendid Fighting Comrades Struggle to Study

the Revolutionary Way of Living’. I knew them all, and hated them. They

were  all  so  un-Cambodian.  I  pictured  an  imaginary  loudspeaker  on  the

bottom  of  the  canal,  swung  the  hoe  and  smashed  it.  Swung  again  and

smashed it again. And then found that I was swinging the hoe to the rhythm

of the music. There was no way to avoid it. Not when I knew every phrase,

every beat.

  After ‘Revolutionary Soldiers’ Groups Protect the Safety of Democratic

Kampuchea’ the loudspeakers mercifully fell silent. Once again the sighs of

the  workers  and  the  chittering  of  birds  accompanied  the  sounds  of  hoes

chopping into clay.

  Then ‘The Glorious Seventeenth of April’ started out of the loudspeakers

again.


    Bright red blood that covers towns and plains

    Of Kampuchea . . .

 At lunchtime they rang the bell: DING . . . DING . . . DING . . . Before the

first bell had stopped, we fell into a line and trudged off, merging with other

lines that converged on the common kitchen.

This kitchen site, on a large hillock nearly cleared of trees, was only a few

days old. The kitchen crew had erected a framework of wood and bamboo

over the fire pits and had put the first thatch panels up on the roof. A few

soldiers had slung their hammocks between the poles at the far end of the

framework.  Outside,  mounted  on  top  of  a  bamboo  pole,  were  the

loudspeakers, facing four directions, with wires running down the pole to the

tape player and a truck battery near the soldiers’ hammocks. From a branch

of one of the remaining trees hung a metal car wheel: the bell.

Nine of us sat on the ground in a circle while the tenth, our group leader,

went to the kitchen to get our rations. Toward the others of my group I felt

little emotion. No hostility, but no real liking. People were always leaving the

group for other work assignments or coming in from the villages of the ‘back

lines.’ You never knew them long enough to trust them, to become friends.

Our group leader was a ‘new’ person like us, with torn trousers and sweat-

matted hair. He stood in a long line that edged slowly close to the ration

table. At the table was a mit neary with the blackened teeth of a betel chewer,

about forty years old. Her left arm steadied a baby riding on her hip. She had

been  nursing  the  baby,  and  as  she  moved,  the  nipples  on  her  enormous

breasts were covered and then uncovered again by her unfastened blouse.

With her right hand she served portions of watery rice with a coconut shell

ladle. As our group leader came near her in the line, she put the ladle down.

Using her thumb and forefinger, she wiped the thin red streams of betel nut

juice that had dripped from the corners of her mouth. Then she wiped her

hand on her buttock and took up the ladle again.

This particular mit neary was well known in the cooperative for stealing

from ‘new’ people’s luggage. At night in her hut, she and her fellow female

comrades tried on the mascara and rouge and lipstick and the Western-style

bras they had stolen and pranced around in front of mirrors, admiring their

looks. In the morning they reverted to the usual mit neary look, hair pulled

back  of  the  ears,  breasts  pushed  flat  against  the  body  by  traditional

Cambodian vests, and no makeup. All but this woman, who wore twin circles

of bright red lipstick on her cheeks.

  Finally she ladled the portion of watery rice into the pan that our group

leader held. By the time he returned to the circle with the pan and a stack ofrusted bowls, the rest of us were sitting expectantly on our haunches with our

spoons out.

‘Stir it well this time,’ growled the skinny man who worked next to me.

‘Be fair.’

The leader stirred it obediently. Ten pairs of eyes focused on the thin,

whitish gruel as he spooned it into the bowls. ‘All right, let’s eat,’ he said

when he had served the last drop.

  ‘No!’ barked the skinny man. He went on all fours to examine the bowls

from above. ‘You didn’t stir it right. Look! This bowl has much more rice in

the bottom than the others! Everybody can see!’

We all leaned forward, licking our lips. The broth was semi-opaque, with

long strands of mucus-like rice matter lying in it, but the white rice grains

were visible at the bottom, one layer deep. There was a bit more rice in the

bowl he was pointing to than in the rest.

‘Not true!’ complained the woman in front of whom the bowl had been

placed. She turned toward the skinny man. ‘You’re always saying I get more

rice, and I’m tired of it. The portions are fair, and I’m going to eat mine!’

  ‘Hold it! Hold it!’ the rest shouted, and somebody grabbed her wrist so she

wouldn’t eat. The woman and the skinny man began arguing, and it lasted

until the leader spooned broth and a few grains out of the woman’s bowl,

over her protests, and sprinkled the drops around the circle. Then the leader

put leaves on the ground next to the bowls and sprinkled salt as equally as he

could on top of the leaves, though not equally enough to stop the bickering.

  Without eating, I got up from the circle, carrying my bowl and salt, and

went over to Huoy, who rose from her group and joined me. We walked off

the common kitchen’s hillock and past other groups sitting in their circles

arguing over food and past other crowded hillocks. Finally we found a shady

spot where we could be alone.

I spooned some gruel into her bowl. ‘Eat,’ I told her. ‘Keep your strength

up.’ I took the sdao leaves out of my pocket, rinsed them with boiled water

from the canteen and put them between us. Huoy spooned gruel from her

bowl and put it back into mine.

  ‘Men need more food than women do,’ she said. ‘You work harder than

me.’

The work groups all argued over food. Husbands and wives quarrelled

over food, each trying to take more than the other. Huoy and I argued but we

were always trying to give each other food instead of taking it away. It was aspecial closeness in our relationship that began, I think, when she had nursed

me through my sickness in Phum Chhleav. I had never forgotten that she had

given me the yam, and I was always trying to make it up to her.

In  the  end  we  compromised,  as  usual,  and  spooned  equal  portions  of

watery rice into our mouths and munched the bitter sdao leaves. Sdao tastes

like quinine, which is probably not a coincidence, since sdao is at least a

semi-effective substitute for quinine as a malaria medicine. I didn’t mind

sdao,  but  it  was  the  rice  I  savoured.  I  swallowed  each  mouthful  slowly,

crushing the soft grains against the roof of my mouth. I could feel it giving

energy to my body. Even the watery broth was good, because rice had been

cooked in it. When I came to the last spoonful I paused, not wanting to eat it,

because when I did the meal would be over.

A cadre banged on the metal car wheel with a stick, and everyone rose to

their feet to bring the rusted bowls to the common kitchen and reform the

lines.

  DING . . . DING . . . DING . . . Everyone in the cooperative was standing

near the common kitchen. We could all hear him perfectly well. Why he

couldn’t just ring the bell once I do not know, unless it was to punish us.

  DING  .  .  .  DING  .  .  .  DING  .  .  .  DING  .  .  .  ding,  ding,  ding,  ding,

dingdingdingding . . .

The afternoon was the same as the morning, only longer. There was no

breeze in the bottom of the canal. I swung the hoe, but it seemed heavier than

before. The group didn’t make much progress. We hadn’t dug as far as the

wooden stake. They gave us a tobacco break, and then they played music

again to make us work faster. I would have done anything they asked if they

had only played different music. But they didn’t. The cooperative had only

one tape.


                                Bright red blood . . .

 

The worst part of the day was late afternoon. That was when the soldiers

came to take prisoners. We never knew ahead of time whether they would

come, or who they would choose, or how many. The uncertainty made the

waiting worse.

As one side of the canal fell into shadow, and then the bottom and part of

the other side, and I set down my hoe to carry a basket of clay to the top of

the dyke for the thousandth time that day – that was when I saw them. Threesoldiers, walking across the fields directly toward me. I climbed down to the

bottom of the canal with the empty basket, my heart pounding. Maybe it’s my

turn, I thought. Maybe the time has finally come. I came up with another

load, but by then the soldiers had veered off to a spot farther along. When

they walked away from the canal, there were two ‘new’ people in front of

them, with their heads bent in utter sorrow and their arms tied tightly behind

their backs.

  What had the prisoners done wrong? We knew not to ask. Asking wouldn’t

bring them back. It only endangered those who dared to question. There were

no laws under the Khmer Rouge except the law of silence. There were no

courts except Angka Leu. Maybe the prisoners hadn’t worked hard enough.

Or they stole food. Or a chhlop, a spy, overheard them making remarks about

Angka. People disappeared. That’s all we knew. And I knew that someday I

would be one of them.

It was after sunset, the orange light fading quickly from the western sky,

that  the  bell  rang  next.  I  climbed  out  of  the  canal,  walked  briskly  to  a

minicanal with water in the bottom, and jumped in fully clothed for my bath.

Dripping wet, I rejoined the line as we walked back to the common kitchen.

At dinner it was too dark to see the rice at the bottom of the bowls, and

there were fewer quarrels. The food was also better: in addition to the watery

rice and salt we were given water convolvulus, the Cambodian equivalent of

spinach, gathered from the wild by the kitchen’s food-foraging team. Huoy

and I ate together. We hoped to go back to our hillock, make a quick fire, put

the tea kettle on and cook some more sdao leaves and a few snails Huoy had

found during work. But we didn’t get the chance. The bell rang right after

dinner.

At that hour the bells were a summons to a political meeting. They were

like the bonns that we had been to earlier, but on the front lines they were

called by the English word ‘meeting,’ pronounced with the emphasis on the

second syllable: meeTING. We had three or four a week.

The entire collective assembled in a field next to the common kitchen. The

first speaker was Chev, the leader of the cooperative. He had a soft, mild

voice, and he paused often to smile at the audience. Everybody was afraid of

him. Chev said the digging of the canal was going much too slowly. We

would all have to sacrifice and work much harder to get it finished in time for

the rainy season.

  ‘Some  people  here  are  very  lazy,’  said  Chev.  ‘They  do  not  want  toparticipate in the revolutionary activities because their minds are in the past,

on capitalist times. They slow the project down. They would like to stop the

wheel of history. But we don’t need these people. We don’t want them. They

are counterrevolutionaries and CIA agents. Am I wrong or right?’

  ‘Right! Yes, right!’ we answered, and applauded to show our approval.

  Chev said that such people were our enemies and we must hunt them down

and eliminate them, and asked if this was wrong or right. We clapped and

said yes, he was right. He told us how lucky we were to be living under

Angka. The Cambodian people had been waiting thousands of years for such

an opportunity, and was this wrong or right?

  Huoy and I sat at the rear of the crowd with our backs against a tree trunk.

It was truly dark. I pulled the brim of my hat low over my forehead and shut

my eyes. The state of rest that I allowed myself was not sleep. It was more

like a controlled doze, since part of my mind stayed alert, like a soldier on

sentry duty.

‘. . . or right?’ Chev demanded.

‘Yes, right!’ I answered, clapping my hands together without opening my

eyes. I had been to enough meetings not to have to pay any more attention

than that.

  After Chev, lower-ranking cadre took turns speaking. Out of their mouths

came words that their brains didn’t understand: ‘. . . waging a continuous

offensive to launch a struggle to achieve a very spectacular great leap forward

for mastery of the elements. . . .’ Their real purpose was not to say anything

new but to demonstrate their orthodoxy. In a regime where individuality was

discouraged, they showed their enthusiasm by imitating their leaders. They

talked and Huoy and I leaned against the tree trunk, gathering strength for

what was still to come.

The bell rang again.

  Wearily, we lined up in the darkness and stumbled off again to the canal.

We worked by the light of the moon and the stars. Or a few of us worked,

in  slow  motion,  just  enough  to  keep  the  guards  away.  We  dug  a  few

basketsful of earth and no more. The rest napped on the ground. We could

have used the time better to sleep in our hammocks and then be refreshed for

the next day, but there was no telling this to the Khmer Rouge.

At midnight the bell rang for the last time, a welcome signal travelling

through the chirping of crickets and the hooting of owls far across the fields.

We trudged back to our hillocks, navigating by the silhouettes of trees. Huoyand I fell into our hammock. Four hours later, the bell woke us up again.


Food and sleep were all we cared about. If we could only get enough sleep, if

we could only fill our bellies, if the soldiers would only stop taking people

away – then we could have thought about other things. Like setting off along

the unknown routes toward Thailand. Or joining the freedom fighters, called

the Khmer Serei or Free Khmer, who were said to live along the Thai border.

But  escape  seemed  infinitely  unlikely.  The  Khmer  Rouge  posted  guards

around the cooperative at night, and no one that I knew tried it.

  Sleep was more important than escaping. I was so tired I wanted to sleep

for a week. Food was even more important than sleeping. All the weight I

had gained in Youen’s village had dropped off. Once again I was down to

about a hundred pounds.

The sdao leaves, the snails and the other food we found on the job helped

but weren’t enough. So in those evenings when no meetings were held, I

went out foraging again, in the rest period between dinner and night work on

the canal. I tried to gather the wild food in the evening and hide it in the

bushes of the hillock where we were staying. At lunch on the following day,

Huoy and I would get our usual bowls of watery rice, bring them back to the

hillock and start a quick fire with straw and twigs. We would put the rice and

our wild food in the teapot, so we could pretend to be making tea if the

authorities came around. Tea, particularly medicinal tea, was still permitted.

But it was hard to gather wild foods at night. I began foraging in the early

mornings, which was easier. By the time I returned to our hillock, after the

first bell, the sky was beginning to grow light. It didn’t seem like much of a

risk. There were other foragers too. One morning about a month after we got

to the front lines, I filled a broken mud basket with arrowroot, hid it in the

bushes  near  our  hammock  and  went  off  to  work  with  the  hoe  over  my

shoulder as usual. When Huoy and I came back to the hillock at lunch, the

basket was missing. We asked the other couples who were camped with us on

that hillock, but they knew nothing about it. So Huoy and I ate our watery

gruel and then lay down in our double hammock.

The next thing we knew, two boys were standing next to the hammock and

looking down at us. They were both smoking cigarettes rolled from banana

leaves. They twirled the cigarettes in their fingertips in an identical manner,

perhaps copying the style of some older smoker they admired.

  They frowned over the hammock at me.  ‘Comrade!’ they shouted in their high voices. ‘Angka wants to see you!

Hurry!’

I sat up.

Now I knew who they were. They weren’t just ordinary boys. They were

spies. Chh/op.                                          19



                                    Angka Leu


 




They were a little old for spies. About twelve, I guessed. They wore baggy

black culottes, nothing else. In our part of Battambang many boys their age

wore Khmer Rouge uniforms and carried rifles. Maybe the parents of these

two  were  cadre  nearby  and  had  used  their  influence  to  delay  their  sons’

departure from home. Yes, maybe that was what had happened.

It  was  strange,  I  thought,  in  that  long  moment  when  the chhlop  were

peering over the hammock at me and I had not yet gotten up: nowadays you

became a spy when you were a young boy, and then when you were half

grown you became a soldier. There was no such thing as childhood anymore.

Before the revolution these boys would have been learning rice farming from

their fathers, or going to school, or making themselves useful to the monks in

the temples. They would have learned to respect their elders.

‘Hurry up, comrade!’ That shrill, high, irritating voice. If they had been my

sons, I would have beaten them for their rudeness.

  ‘Please,’ I said, getting up out of the double hammock, ‘I’m just putting a

shirt on. I’ll be right there.’

‘My  husband  is going,’  said  Huoy  in  an  exasperated  voice.  As  a

schoolteacher  she  had  scolded  many  children  that  age.  ‘Why  are  you

accusing him? He’s just putting on a shirt. He is going now.’

‘I’ll be back,’ I told Huoy.

I walked off at a relaxed pace, the two boys behind me. I wasn’t worried. If

I had done anything seriously wrong, Angka would have sent soldiers to get

me,  in  the  late  afternoon.  The chhlop  were  too  young  to  be  trusted  withanything important.

The ‘Angka’ the chhlop were taking me to turned out to be Chev, the

cooperative’s  leader.  Chev  was  sitting  in  a  black  hammock  in  a  Khmer

Rouge-style house, which was just a thatched roof on poles, without sides,

near  the  common  kitchen.  He  sat  upright  with  his  feet  on  the  ground,

barechested, now and again puffing on a cigarette that he rotated slowly in

his fingers. He was a skinny, dark-skinned man with soft, straight hair, big

fleshy lips and a wide mouth. His eyes were not cruel. He was smiling.

  ‘Comrade . . . ?’ he said tentatively.

  ‘“Samnang,” ’ ‘I said, supplying him with the name I used.

  ‘Very  well.  Comrade  Samnang,  you  have  to  tell  Angka  the  truth.  This

morning our chhlop went to look at the hillocks to see who had food. They

checked. They found you had a big basket of arrowroot. My question is this:

if you had the food, why didn’t you bring it to Angka for the collective meal?

Why didn’t you give it to the community? Why did you plan to eat it by

yourself?’

So. The spies had stolen the food. I should have guessed.

  ‘Comrade Chev,’ I said, ‘last night I went to find some food, but it was

only a small quantity. It wasn’t enough for the community.’

  ‘You just wanted private property,’ he said in his gentle, chiding voice.

‘And that is forbidden.’

I didn’t answer. No point getting into an argument with him.

  ‘And another thing,’ Chev said, still smiling. ‘The chhlop say that you call

your wife “sweet”. We have no “sweethearts” here. That is forbidden.’

Two soldiers hurried toward us, as if late for a meeting they wanted to

attend. Chev sat calmly in his hammock, smiling at me with his big lips and

wide mouth. He had pointed out that I had broken some minor rules. I was

getting ready to tell him I wouldn’t break them again.

The soldiers’ voices rang out in a deep, authoritative baritone. ‘Who gave

the comrade permission to go out to find something to eat? Comrade, who

allowed you?’

  ‘Nobody allowed me, comrade,’ I answered. ‘I did it without permission. I

did wrong. I’m sorry.’

One of the soldiers said contemptuously to me, ‘You see? You have too

much liberty. You think you are as free as a bird, but you are a reactionary.’

  ‘Comrades, I had no such thoughts in my mind. I always respect Angka’s

rules. If Angka says that I am wrong I accept it, and I will not do those thingsagain.’

  From his hammock, Chev said mildly, ‘Yes, you recognize yourself that

you did something wrong, but this is not enough.’

  ‘Comrade Chev, send him to Angka Leu!’ urged the soldier who had been

doing the talking. ‘Send him to Angka Leu! To Chhleav!’

  Huoy had been watching from a distance. She ran up when she saw Chev

nod and the soldiers begin to tie my elbows tightly behind my back. Huoy

asked Chev what was happening, and Chev replied, ‘Your husband betrayed

Angka. Now we are sending him to higher authorities for judgement.’

  Reflexively, Huoy put her palms together and sompeahed to Chev. It was

the age-old gesture of respect, but it was out of place, a sure sign of her

unrevolutionary background. ‘Don’t kill my husband,’ she pleaded. ‘Please

let him come back. You decide what to do with him yourself, but don’t send

him to Angka Leu. He didn’t do anything to Angka Leu.’

‘No,’ said Chev with that unchanging smile he wore like a mask. ‘I cannot

decide. It is up to Angka Leu.’

  Huoy stood next to me. ‘Then if you send him to Angka Leu, send me too.

I will stay with him.’

  ‘No. Samnang did wrong, not you. “His hair is on his head. His hair is not

on your head.” Anyone who steals is responsible for himself. Nobody else is

responsible. You stay here.’

I had not struggled when they tied me up. I told Huoy to take care of

herself, and a tone in my voice caused Huoy to step back, with her hand to

her mouth in fear. She understood what I really meant, that there was no use

in her getting involved.

The soldiers led me away.

We walked on a path through the woods and over the fields in the direction

of Phum Chhleav. The soldiers walked behind, holding a long rope attached

to me. My arms grew numb from the tight cords around my elbows, which

restricted my circulation.

We neared Phum Chhleav but didn’t get as far as the railroad track, or the

cluster of flimsy huts where I had lived a few months before. Instead we

stopped at a collection of buildings I had never seen before, in a clearing back

in the woods. The prison itself was a long thin structure with a thatch roof

and  walls  made  out  of  split  bamboo  and  thatch  and  pieces  of  corrugated

metal. The soldiers told me to sit down and wait.

I sat.  They left.

Here I must interrupt my story for a warning: many people find the truth

about  Khmer  Rouge  prisons  extremely  upsetting.  Readers  with  sensitive

feelings might want to skip over the next few pages and begin reading again

toward the end of the chapter.


Muffled sounds of human activity came from the prison, and an unpleasant

smell drifted toward me in the breeze. Some wrinkled black objects hung

from the eaves of the roof but I was too far away to see what they were.

In about an hour a prison guard came out for me. He led me to a large

grove of mango trees. The trees were tall and well formed, spaced at regular

intervals. At the base of each tree sat a prisoner, tied to the trunk.

The guard and I walked down a row of trees. We walked past a middle-

aged woman lying face down on a wooden bench with her arms and legs

spread apart. Metal clamps secured her wrists and ankles to the corners of the

bench. Her sampot or dress was torn, revealing her indecently, and her blouse

was ripped with one of her breasts showing. As we went by she turned her

head and looked at us with an unfocused stare.

  ‘Please save my life,’ she moaned in a low voice.

  She hadn’t noticed that I had my arms tied behind my back, or that the

other man was a guard. Red ants were crawling on her hands and her arms,

and her fingertips were bloody.

The guard took me to the next tree, about thirty feet away. He loosened the

rope around my elbows and the circulation returned to my lower arms. He

tied a longer rope to my wrists and then around the tree trunk. I sat with my

back to the mango tree.

He left.

I said my prayers.

If I have to die, I thought, at least let me die with dignity and composure.

  Something crawled onto the skin on the back of my neck. Then it bit.

  Damn – red ants! I craned my head backward and twisted it from side to

side to try to crush the ant. Another ant crawled onto my shoulder. They were

coming down the tree. My wrists and elbows were tied behind me but I could

still move the rest of my body. A lot of them were on me now. They were on

my  wrists  –  I  crushed  them  with  my  fingers.  On  my  upper  chest  and

shoulders – I swept them aside with my chin. On my calves too – I rubbed

my calves together, then brought a foot up to help. They bit my scalp – Irubbed the back of my head against the tree trunk, but more ants came down

the trunk to get me. They were in a fighting mood, waving their forelegs in

the air and working the sideways pincers in front of their mouths, daring me

to attack.

The more I struggled, the more they swarmed over me. I strained against

the confinement of the ropes, scratching and moving my feet in a frenzy,

unable to move enough. I imagined them biting even when they hadn’t bitten

me.

This was torture enough.

  When the afternoon sun sank low enough to shine under the branches and

onto me, a sturdily built man with curly hair walked into the mango grove.

He wore new black clothes, black rubber-tyre sandals, a wristwatch. Under

his black shirt I glimpsed a flash of blue. A Montagut shirt, I guessed. In

Phnom Penh before the revolution Montagut shirts had been a status symbol,

like wearing an alligator shirt. They were French-made, cool and comfortable

in tropical weather. And now Montagut shirts were status symbols for the

Khmer  Rouge,  like  the  silk  kramas  they  stole  from  the  ‘new’  people.

Emblems of an old society that they hated but also envied.

The curly-haired man carried a hatchet and pair of pliers in his hands.

He walked down the row. He sat on the wooden bench by the spreadeagled

woman.

  ‘Where is your husband?’ he asked her, the sound of his voice carrying to

me. ‘You have to tell Angka the truth. What rank was he under Lon Nol? A

captain? A lieutenant? Tell the truth.’

The woman slurred her words together. ‘I still don’t know where he is,’

she  said.  ‘And  he  was  not  a  soldier.  He  wasn’t  a  captain.  He  wasn’t  a

lieutenant. He wasn’t anything like that.’

  ‘You still lie to Angka?’

The burly man stepped up on the bench, put a foot down on her hand, bent

down with the pliers, pulled hard and came up with something in the pliers’

jaws.

    ‘AAAEEEEIIIIIIIIII!!! AAEEIII!!! AAAAEEEIIIIIIIIIIIII!!!’ the woman

screamed, but he paid no attention.

‘If you don’t tell me the truth, I’ll take another fingernail tomorrow,’ he

said. ‘If you tell the truth now, Angka will release you.’

The  woman  writhed  on  the  bench,  her sampot  up  around  her  hips.

‘AAAAEEEIIIIIIIII!!! Kill me soon! Now! Why do you do this to me? I havenothing to say. I am telling the truth. Oh, Mother, Mother, Mother, save my

life!’

  When we Cambodians are in danger, we call out to our mothers to save our

lives. We believe their spirits watch over us protectively.

The burly man came over to me. I was right: it was a blue Montagut shirt

under his black tunic. In his tunic pocket two pens showed.

He stood over me and said, ‘Tell me the truth. Who gave you permission to

go out and find something to eat?’

‘I went on my own, comrade. I was hungry.’

  ‘Angka doesn’t provide you with enough food?’

‘Yes, enough food, but I was still hungry.’

  ‘Then  why  did  you  go  out,  when  other  people  don’t  go  out?  You’re

supposed to work. If you don’t work you do an injustice to others.’

I began to say something but he paid no attention and broke in, demanding

to know whether I was Vietnamese or Chinese. I said I was neither.

‘What did you do before? Were you a soldier? A teacher? High-ranking

job? What did you do in the Lon Nol regime?’

  ‘Taxi driver.’

‘What kind? What model car did you drive?’

‘404. A Peugeot model 404.’

  ‘Where did you go?’

  ‘Mostly  long-distance  drives.  From  Phnom  Penh  to  Takeo,  or  to

Battambang.  Wherever  they  wanted  to  go,  until  the  roads  were  closed

because of the war. Then just around Phnom Penh.’

  ‘NO!!!’ he roared. ‘You were not a taxi driver! I can tell you are lying!’

‘I was a taxi driver, comrade. Really. Not a high-class person.

My wife sold vegetables in the market. If there were no vegetables she

baked little cakes and sweets and sold them.’

  ‘NO! You’re not that kind of person! You’ve got to tell Angka the truth! If

you tell Angka the truth you can go back to your wife right now.’

‘I am telling you the truth, comrade,’ I insisted.

He called out for someone else, who arrived quickly. They tightened the

rope around my elbows and pushed me over on my side. While the second

one held my neck down in the dirt, the burly one put my right hand on top of

a mango tree root and then stepped on my wrist with his foot. He dropped

down and swung the hatchet. There was an excruciating pain in my little

finger,  and  the  shock  of  it  spread  throughout  my  body.  Automatically  Igasped and stiffened, but no matter how hard I clenched, the pain was there,

from the tip of my finger up my arm exploding into my brain.

  ‘The next time,’ the burly man said, ‘don’t steal food. If you do it again,

Angka will show you no mercy. Angka will not allow you to do it again.’

  They let go of my neck and hand and shoved me upright, but I pulled

against the ropes and fell partway over until the rope restrained me and my

back landed against the tree.

  ‘Why don’t we cut off a toe?’ said the second man. ‘We shouldn’t let him

walk. He’s too greedy.’

  ‘Right,’ said the man with the two pens. ‘Good thinking. Hold his leg here,

will you?’

The burly man aimed at my right ankle and swung the hatchet, not as hard

as he could have, because that would have severed the joint, but hard enough

to lay bare the bone underneath.

His face swam into focus near mine. ‘One more thing,’ he said. ‘Don’t call

your  wife  “sweetheart.”  Call  her  “comrade  woman.”  She  can  call  you

“comrade brother.” ’

  Then they left.

I could see my ankle, the white bone exposed in the middle of the wound,

the flesh red and bleeding around the edges. I couldn’t see my hand, which

was tied behind me. I tried to wiggle my little finger and, even with the pain

being so general, knew that the fingertip wasn’t there anymore. Drawn to the

blood, red ants swarmed over my hand and bit like hot, stinging needles, but

that didn’t matter.

The thought occurred that the wounds were going to get infected and I had

to stop the bleeding. I rubbed the heel of my good foot in the dirt and coated

my ankle wound with dust and did the same thing with my good hand and my

finger wound even though the nerve ending in my finger was naked and raw.

Of the late afternoon and sunset I remember little. My ankle hurt. My

finger throbbed. When the darkness came I dozed until red ants bit me around

the eyes. I got the ants off by turning my face to the side and rubbing my eye

sockets against my shoulders.

It  was  a  long,  long  night.  The  woman  on  the  bench  moaned  and

whimpered. She had defecated and urinated, and the smell drifted to me.

The next morning, the burly interrogator came out, untied my hands and

gave me a bowl of watery rice.

For the first time, I could see what he had done to the little finger on myright hand. He had chopped it off halfway. One and a half joints were still

there, the stub coated with dust, the bone showing white in the middle. The

other one and a half joints with the fingernail were gone.

He told me to stay there. I did. I didn’t have the strength to run away, and

besides it seemed as though they might release me. When he left I turned

around in a sitting position to look behind me and saw my missing fingertip

with ants crawling over it. It wasn’t part of my body anymore and it didn’t

frighten me. Then I turned back to my original position, sat and thought.

  With my good hand, my left hand, I felt the lymph nodes in the inguinal

crease, between the top of my thigh and the trunk of my body. The lymph

glands were bumpy and swollen from fighting the infections. I tore strips of

cloth from my shirt and tied the bandages around my finger and my ankle.

In the afternoon the guards retied my ropes but not too tightly. Then they

brought a new prisoner down the line of mango trees, a pregnant woman. As

they walked past the woman I heard her saying that her husband wasn’t a

soldier. It seemed to be the most common offence in the prison, being the

wife of someone in the Lon Nol military. She begged them to spare her life.

They told her she was still lying. They tied her wrists around a tree not far

away from me, then tied her ankles and left.

  Later a new interrogator, one I had not seen before, walked down the row

of trees holding a long, sharp knife. I could not make out their words, but he

spoke to the pregnant woman and she answered. What happened next makes

me nauseous to think about. I can only describe it in the briefest of terms: he

cut the clothes off her body, slit her stomach, and took the baby out. I turned

away but there was no escaping the sound of her agony, the screams that

slowly subsided into whimpers and after far too long lapsed into the merciful

silence of death. The killer walked calmly past me holding the fetus by its

neck. When he got to the prison, just within my range of vision, he tied a

string around the fetus and hung it from the eaves with the others, which were

dried and black and shrunken.

Each tree in the orchard had its prisoner, and each prisoner had a different

means of punishment or death. The sturdy man who chopped off my finger

and the other who disembowelled the pregnant woman were only two of the

specialists on the prison staff.

  Never had I seen deliberate killings before, carried out by professionals, in

front of terrified spectators who knew that their own turns to die would come

soon.  Never,  never,  never.  There  had  been  cruelty  in  the  Cambodia  ofSihanouk and Lon Nol. There had been torture in their prisons. Lon Nol

troops had done barbarous things to civilians of Vietnamese descent, and also

to captured Khmer Rouge. But I knew of nothing like this, no coldblooded

pleasure in such a broad range of torture and murder techniques.

I stayed awake that night, ants biting me as they wished. The faint light of

an oil lamp filtered through the thatch wall of the prison. The tree trunks with

the prisoners tied to them were black outlines in the silvery moonlight. Owls

hooted. Crickets sung in their chorus, and from one place and then another in

the mango orchard prisoners moaned.

In the depths of the night, a pack of chhke char-chark, similar to wolves

but smaller, drifted into the mango grove and sniffed the air. They trotted

toward the corpse of the pregnant woman and began tearing at her flesh,

eating it noisily and greedily. I could see them in the moonlight, three or four

of  them,  tugging  at  her,  pulling  backward,  snarling  and  growling  at  each

other in warning. If the wolves wanted to attack me there was nothing I could

do. I let go – pissed in my pants and shat, surrendering all control.

The burly torturer came again the next morning and tore another fingernail

from the woman on the bench, but he left me alone. In the afternoon two new

guards came. They asked what I had done before the revolution, and when I

told them I had been a taxi driver they seemed satisfied. They untied me from

the tree and told me to get up. I tried and I fell over. I tried again and got to

my knees and then they jerked me up to my feet.

We left the prison by the same footpath I had entered. My right foot was

swollen from my toes up to my calf. Every time I stepped on it the pain

flashed all the way up to my hip. To walk I put all my weight on my left foot,

brought my right foot a little ahead of my left foot, set my right foot lightly

on the ground, then hopped onto my left foot again.

We were out of sight of the prison, in a mixture of woods and uncultivated

rice fields.

‘Up there at that next hillock,’ said one of my escorts, ‘you will tell us the

truth. Or else you will sleep there for a long, long time.’

If they wanted to kill me by that hillock, it was okay by me. As long as

they got it over with quickly.

I hobbled to the hillock, a long mound with trees and brush on top, and

then past it. They didn’t tell me to stop.

  ‘We’ll stop at the next hillock on,’ they said after a while. We passed that

hillock and then they said the same thing about the next one.The three of us walked very slowly on dykes between rice paddies. Our

course lay at an angle to the dykes. They told me when to turn right and when

to turn left on the dykes, and we made slow progress across the fields.

I knew they weren’t going to let me go. This was part of the torture, to let

me think I was going to get away. But I really didn’t care. One hillock was as

good as another.

I concentrated on walking, one short step and then a hop, one short step

and a hop. The guards were behind me. They were going to do whatever they

were going to do, and I couldn’t prevent it.

  ‘Stop here!’

I stopped.

We were next to a hillock.

  They kicked me from behind and I fell on top of the dyke.

  They stood over me, looking down. ‘Why don’t you tell the truth? Hurry

up! We will kill you now!’

I said slowly, ‘I was a taxi driver. That is the truth.’

  They said I was still lying and they kicked me in the side. I fell down the

dyke  onto  the  dry  stubble  of  the  rice  field  and  lay  there  with  rice  stalks

poking me in the face until they hauled me on top of the dyke again. One of

them  put  his  foot  on  my  neck  and  twisted  his  foot  back  and  forth  like

stubbing out a cigarette. Then they took turns kicking me in the ribs.

‘Do you want to die or to live? You’ll die in the next minute if you don’t

tell the truth!’

I lay there without saying anything, breathing hoarsely.

  They squatted a short distance away with their rifle butts on the ground.

‘“If he lives there is no gain,” ’ one of them muttered to the other, quoting

a common Khmer Rouge expression. ‘“If he dies there is no loss.” ’

  When they had rested they pulled me to my feet and I limped a few more

yards to the next hillock.

  ‘Stop.’

I stopped again.

‘Do you want to go home, or what? Do you want to be reunited with your

wife?’

I turned around to face them but kept my eyes lowered, like a servant does

to his master. ‘Yes,’ I said. ‘If you allow me to go, I will. But if you don’t

allow me, if you kill me, it’s up to you.’

  They untied me and removed the rope. Apparently I had given them theright answer. I had told them they had power of life and death over me.

Hearing me admit this gave them almost as much satisfaction as killing me.

  ‘Don’t look back,’ they said. ‘Just keep on walking. Go home.’


I looked above the treetops and saw the mountain ridge with the two white

dots below the summit. From them I took my compass bearing.

  ‘Home,’ the most recent location of the front lines cooperative, was in a

southerly direction, about a mile away. I was in no condition to hurry. It hurt

to breathe. The stump of my finger was swollen to three times normal size.

But now that my hands were untied I could bend my right arm at the elbow

and elevate my hand so it wouldn’t throb so much. I found a stick of bamboo

and picked it up. I hobbled slowly along, using the bamboo as a staff in my

left hand to help support my weight.

I came to a canal with muddy water in the bottom. I took my clothes off

and sat down heavily with a splash. With my good hand I washed myself and

cleaned the dirt from the wounds as best I could. Blood still seeped from

what was left of my finger. There were large bruises on my ribs but nothing

broken. Shit and piss stained my trousers. I rinsed my clothes with one hand,

but there was no way to get them really clean. I put them on wet and rolled

the waistband of my trousers so they wouldn’t slip down.

I walked. Left foot; then a short, light step with the right foot and most of

the weight on the bamboo staff; then the left foot again.

  Right foot. Left foot. Right foot, left foot.

I stopped to rest. Then started again. My body was stiffening from the

bruises. The sun was setting.

  When I came into camp it was dusk. Work had finished for the day. On the

hillocks, other ‘new’ people saw me but weren’t sure whether to help, and I

didn’t ask them to. Huoy was in our hammock, gazing at something far away,

thinking. When the neighbours told her I was coming she jumped out of the

hammock and ran to me. She took the bamboo stick away and draped my left

arm around her shoulders and helped me walk the rest of the distance.

  Everybody from our hillock crowded around asking questions, until they

saw  me  up  close.  Then  they  fell  silent.  They  knew  the  answers  to  their

questions just by looking.

  Huoy brought me to the hammock, but I didn’t want to sit in it because I

wasn’t clean. Someone brought a pallet of split bamboo and I lay down on

that. The neighbours had gathered around, everyone silent except for Huoy,who was crying.

  They boiled water, and Huoy and the other women used their kramas like

washcloths to clean me. By then most of them were crying, because they

knew what happened when people disappeared and there could be no more

pretending. What had happened to me could happen to them. They brought

gifts of medicine, a capsule of ampicillin from one, a capsule of tetracycline

from another and from the rest a couple of aspirin and some herbs. I opened

the antibiotic capsules and sprinkled half of each directly on my wounds,

saving the rest for later.

One of the older ladies who had brought herbal medicine finally said what

had been on everyone’s mind.

  ‘Samnang,’ she said, ‘maybe you did something bad in a previous lifetime.

Perhaps you are being punished for it today.’

  ‘Yes,’ I said. ‘I think my kama is not so good.’                                          20



                                      The Wat


 




Chev gave me time off from work to recover from my injuries. I lay in the

hammock, suspended from two trees on a hillock, resting and watching.

I tried not to think too much about my experiences in prison. The pregnant

woman,  the  wolves,  the  burly  man  with  the  Montagut  shirt  –  I  tried  to

suppress them all from my memory. But the bruises on my body, the infected

cuts and the stump of my little finger were reminders of something that could

not be ignored. I began to analyse what I knew of the Khmer Rouge system

of justice. Or rather, injustice.

I had not known that the prison existed until I was taken there. I had never

heard  of  it.  The  reason  was  perfectly  simple.  Few  who  went  there  ever

returned. Why they had let me off so easily I did not know. Nor did I know

why they had gone to the trouble of taking me there at all instead of simply

taking me out to the woods and killing me, which is what the soldiers usually

did with their victims in the late afternoons. Why were some taken to prison

and the rest to the woods?

  Maybe,  I  thought,  prison  was  the  punishment  for  political  crimes,  and

death  in  the  woods  was  the  punishment  for  breaking  simpler  rules,  like

loitering at the work site. But that couldn’t be true. Why was gathering wild

food a political crime instead of a minor infraction? Why was being married

to a Lon Nol officer a political crime? More to the point, why was either of

them any kind of crime at all?

But that question had no answer.

  Perhaps,  I  thought,  there  were  two  parallel  systems  of  punishment.  Aprison  system,  part  of  a  bureaucracy  that  needed  to  be  fed  to  justify  its

existence.  And  another,  informal  system  that  gave  the  cooperative  leader

freedom to hand out the punishments, though the effect on the prisoner was

ultimately the same.

In either case, the prison or the woods, the key man was the cooperative

leader,  since  everyone  on  the  front  lines  took  orders  from  him.  In  our

cooperative the leader, Chev, didn’t do any of the killing himself, or at least

didn’t  kill  anyone  that  we  saw  with  our  own  eyes.  Nor  did  he  allow  his

soldiers to kill anyone in public. That was another holdover from the Khmer

Rouge code of the old days, when the guerrillas were still trying to gain

popular support: ‘Thou shalt behave with great meekness toward the workers

and peasants, and the entire population,’ the code said. Now that the Khmer

Rouge had won the war and their contempt for the ‘new’ people was so

obvious, it was strange that they even pretended to stick to their rules. In

effect, the new rule was, ‘Do not kill anyone in plain sight.’

And in fact Chev was a killer himself. More than once, as I recovered from

my wounds, I watched Chev accompany the soldiers to the afternoon arrests.

He  stood  around  pretending  to  inspect  the  canals  until  the  soldiers  and

prisoners were out of sight. Then he nonchalantly followed them with a hoe

over his shoulder, stopping now and again with the pleased expression of a

man who is enjoying his afternoon stroll. There were never any gunshots

later. Chev used his hoe to kill. The next day he was invariably in a cheerful

mood, walking around energetically without his hoe. He killed to feel good

about himself. If he purged enough enemies, he satisfied his conscience. He

had done his duty to Angka.

  Why? Why did they kill so many? For the Khmer Rouge in general, from

the lowest-ranking soldier to the burly interrogator who had chopped off my

finger to the ever-smiling Chev, the act of killing other human beings was

routine. Just part of the job. Not even worth a second thought. However, there

were differences in their backgrounds, and in their motivations. The low-

ranking soldiers, for example, were young and uneducated. Few of them had

any independent sense of right and wrong. In the civil war they had been

trained to kill Lon Nol forces. When they were ordered to kill ‘new’ people

on the front lines they obeyed automatically, without thinking much about the

difference. For some of them, of course, and for the prison interrogators,

there  was  an  element  of kum-monuss  in  what  they  did.  But  the  prison

interrogators were older and higher-ranking than the soldiers, like the two-pen rank of the burly man who chopped off my finger. Officers like that

didn’t kill just to obey, or to get revenge. They enjoyed it. They were sadists:

torturing others was the ultimate proof of their own power.

But for Chev and other front-lines leaders there was a more sophisticated

reason for killing, and that was political necessity. When they talked about

sacrificing everything for Angka, they meant it. Whatever got in the way of

Angka’s projects had to be eliminated, including people. To them, though, we

weren’t quite people. We were lower forms of life, because we were enemies.

Killing us was like swatting flies, a way to get rid of undesirables. We were a

disappointment  to  them  because  we  never  finished  the  projects  on  time,

because  we  didn’t  work  hard  for  twenty  hours  a  day,  because  we  were

constantly wearing out and getting sick.

The  worst  thing  was  that  the  killings  seemed  so  normal.  Maybe  not

normal, but inevitable. The way things were. To us war slaves, the old way of

life was gone and everything about it half forgotten, as if it had never really

existed  in  the  first  place.  Buddhist  monks,  making  their  tranquil  morning

rounds,  didn’t  exist  anymore.  Three-generation  families,  where  the

grandparents looked after the little children, didn’t exist anymore. Shopping

for food in the markets and staying to gossip. Inviting friends over to eat and

drink and talk in the evening. It was all gone, and without that pattern we had

nothing to hold on to. Demoralized, split apart, like atoms removed from their

chemical compounds, we let the Khmer Rouge do what they wanted with us.

We didn’t fight back. In the fields we were two thousand men and women

with hoes, and Angka was only two or three brainwashed teenagers with

rifles. Yet we let the soldiers take us away. Why? Because it was in our

nature to obey leaders. Because we were weak and sick and starved. Because

it was kama. We did not even know why, but we submitted to them.

  There had been an evening, before I went to prison, when a few of us

talked about rebellion. It was one of those rare evenings when we did not

have to go back to work after the political meeting. About a dozen of us from

the old elite sat around a fire. We swore an oath of secrecy and talked about

an armed uprising against the Khmer Rouge. Our leader was a ‘new’ person

named Thai, who had once been a Lon Nol soldier. Also there was Pen Tip,

the tiny X-ray technician from Phnom Penh whose path often crossed mine.

We talked about seizing weapons. We talked about heading for the border of

Thailand to join the freedom fighters, the Khmer Serei, who were supposed

to live there. But that’s all it was, just talk. Gradually, as the evening woreon,  we  stared  for  longer  and  longer  periods  into  the  flames,  not  saying

anything. Resistance was hopeless and we knew it. The Khmer Rouge had

already won. We looked into the fire and our thoughts were sad and far away.

Just like every evening, at every campfire on the front lines. Gazing into the

flames and feeling tired and defeated.

But  even  though  we  were  defeated,  and  even  though  we  could  feel

ourselves slipping farther down into slavery, we didn’t lose hope. Or a lot of

us didn’t, anyway. Take Huoy and me, for example. I had been to prison, but

I had survived. That was something to be grateful for. And while I was away

in  prison  something  very  good  had  happened  to  Huoy:  she  had  been

transferred from hauling mud baskets in the canal to preparing food in the

common kitchen. The kitchen staff didn’t have to work in the evenings, or

work very hard at all. Most important, they could always get enough to eat.

While  I  was  recovering  from  prison  Huoy  brought  me  rice  twice  a  day,

hidden  in  the  rolled-up  waist  of  her  sarong.  It  was  real  rice,  a  welcome

change from watery gruel – the same rice, she told me, that Chev and his

soldiers ate at every meal, as much as they wanted.

  Once  again,  like  the  time  when  I  had  dysentery,  Huoy  proved  to  be  a

perfect nurse. Besides bringing rice and preparing meals, she mended my

clothes. To cheer me up, she sang to me in her clear, soft voice. Without soap

or antibiotics she couldn’t stop my infections, but she changed my bandages

twice a day, and boiled them in water to sterilize them before hanging them

up to dry. Since leaving Phnom Penh I had seen a new side of Huoy, and it

made me respect her more and more: whenever anything needed to be done,

she taught herself how to do it, without any prompting. She was good at

everything she did. Except for losing her mother, which grieved her every

day, she had adapted to the hardships of the new regime better than most

people, and much better than me. Of the two of us, I was supposed to be the

strong one, but it wasn’t turning out that way. I was the one who was always

getting in trouble or getting sick.

  When I had recovered enough to walk without a cane I was sent back to

work with a mobile crew of eight people, none of whom I had known before.

On our first day we were summoned to the common kitchen, where Chev

addressed us. Huoy was only a few yards away, pouring rice into huge vats,

signalling to me with a frown that I should keep my mouth shut. She didn’t

have to worry about that – I was far too afraid of Chev to say anything. But

there  was  no  way  I  could  hide  from  him.  He  knew  with  a  glance  at  mybandaged ankle, at the bandaged stump of my finger, what had happened

when he sent me to Angka Leu. I kept my face blank and my eyes averted.

My usual expression.

  Chev smiled and nodded at us pleasantly.

He  said  the  cooperative  needed  to  build  a  bridge.  Because  we  had  no

lumber, our task would be to go to the old temple on top of the mountain, tear

it  apart  and  bring  its  lumber  down.  ‘I’m  sure  you  agree  that  this  is  an

excellent plan. Am I wrong or right?’

  ‘Right,’ everyone in the group said.

  ‘Exactly,’ said Chev. ‘It is better to destroy the temple, which is useless,

than to have no bridge. We don’t need Buddha. What we need are bridges for

the people’s transportation. The gods cannot build bridges for us. We must

take our destiny firmly in hand.’

My face registered agreement. But I thought, We don’t need Buddha at this

point in history? Are you crazy? Now we need him most of all.

  Chev was still smiling at us with his wide, full lips.

  Motherfucker, I thought, did Buddha ever do anything bad to you? If you

destroy  Buddha’s  temple,  Buddha  will  get  you  back.  Maybe  not  in  this

lifetime, maybe not even in your next lifetime. But someday. And I hope it’s

soon. Because I want to see you suffer. I want to see you die an awful death,

like the prisoners at Chhleav.

  Nobody moved.

He looked at each of us in turn. He peered closely at me. He was testing

me, to see whether I had learned my lesson in prison.

  Finally he dismissed us.

Our group walked without escort from the common kitchen to the road and

from there to Phum Phnom. A path near the Khmer Rouge headquarters led

into the forest to the base of the mountain ridge.

We climbed up the switchbacks in the trail. As the land flattened at the

edge of the plateau, we saw some concrete monks’ quarters on stilts, still

intact. Farther on we passed the remains of wooden quarters already torn

down by scavengers like us. Above we heard the faint, tinkling sounds of

wind chimes.

It was a clear day toward the end of the dry season. The landscape was

bright with yellow flowers. Pigeons and brown-speckled turtle-doves flew

from branch to branch in the nearly leafless trees. Over the treetops on the

lower slopes we could see the alluvial plain spread out far below. A steamtrain  whistled  in  the  distance.  It  came  along  the  tracks,  the  miniature

locomotive belching a cloud of black smoke, the long line of cars moving

through  the  curves  like  a  snake.  A  train  like  that  had  brought  us  to

Battambang, a long time ago.

We rested. It was an odd sensation not to have anyone supervising us, to sit

down  when  we  wanted.  We  listened  to  the  train  as  it  chuffed  along,  the

clicking of its wheels and the hooting of its steam whistle growing fainter and

fainter. And then above us we heard the tinkling of wind chimes again.

We walked up to the wat. To the side of the wat and perhaps two thirds its

height was the large stupa, or funeral monument, that had appeared as the

smaller of two white dots when I was ploughing in Phum Chhleav. Seen

close it was a graceful example of its type, two square layers at the base, then

a  large  bell  shape  with  convex  and  concave  circular  bands,  and  finally  a

tapering spire on top. Within the large stupa lay the ashes of some prominent

person, perhaps the person who had given the money for the wat to be built.

The wat itself was ten or twenty years old, with walls of concrete and

wooden beams, and planks supporting a roof with faded coloured tiles. The

building was not so much ruined as purposely destroyed, a sight that swelled

my heart with grief. Outside, Buddha statues lay toppled over, their parts

scattered. The grounds were grown up with weeds and vines and littered with

scraps of saffron cloth, the kind the monks had used for their robes, and also

the kind tied around the trunks of holy bodhi trees.

  Most  of  one  wall  was  missing,  the  concrete  broken  up  for  the  metal

reinforcement rods inside, which the Khmer Rouge used for making nails.

The thick, intricately carved wooden doors found in all temples were missing.

So were the door frames, the windows and the window frames, leaving ugly,

gaping holes. The ornamental railing leading up the stairs from the terrace in

the  shape  of  a  holy naga  or  snake  had  been  smashed,  also  for  the

reinforcement rods. The scavengers had wrecked the lower part of the roof,

taken the wood away for the lumber and left the coloured roof tiles in broken

heaps on the terrace.

We went inside. Debris and bird shit covered the floor. Pigeons flew in and

out of the holes in the roof. At the far wall, once filled with Buddha statues in

ascending rows, all the statues were gone, except for the largest Buddha at

the top. The vandals had cut off the statue’s head and right arm, but they had

been too lazy to destroy the rest.

To my ears came the polytonal tinkling of the wind chimes, from the eavesoutside.

We stood there, eight ragged, barefoot men.

  Without a word, we dropped to our knees and prayed.

Lord Buddha, I said silently, forgive us for what we are about to do. We do

not wish to tear down your temple. Our hearts are not in the work. Our hearts

belong to you. We obey only to save our lives, because we are weak and

afraid. Please do not punish us. Please protect us. Punish those who give us

these orders. Punish those who do not let us come here to worship or to clean

the grounds to make merit.

  There was nobody else around the temple, nobody watching. The previous

scavengers had left bamboo ladders outside. Slowly, reluctantly, gesturing

apologetically to the headless Buddha, we climbed the ladders to a part of the

lower roof where the tiles were already broken and the wood exposed. We

pried rafters loose with our axes, as few of them as possible. Then we left the

temple quickly and slid the rafters down the steep mountain slope.


Fortunately we didn’t have to go back to the temple the next day. Or ever.

The authorities were always changing their minds.

  Instead we were sent back to canal work. It was the same dreary routine as

before. Bells day and night. Walking out to the site before dawn in single file,

enduring the taped music from the loudspeakers, working until the lunch bell

rang, walking back to the common kitchen in single file, on and on. Too

much work, not enough sleep, not enough food. No real friendships. I was

luckier than most. For me, the lack of friends was no problem, as long as I

had Huoy. We shared everything. There was a bond between us as instinctive

as the bond between animal mates.

  What was hard was the terror. I had already been to prison once. Every

morning  I  wondered  if  I  would  make  it  through  the  day.  Every  night  I

wondered if I would make it until morning, or whether a shrill child’s voice

would bring a circle of accusers. It was the same for all the ‘new’ people. We

never got used to the terror, we just kept it inside, in our hearts. Our arms and

legs could be as thin as bamboo. Our hair could be turning brown or white,

but we didn’t show the terror on the outside. Inside, we were thinking all the

time, maybe the next hour. Maybe tonight. It was always on our minds that

the soldiers would take us away.

‘Be careful – bodies disappear’. That was one of the sayings that sprung up

among the ‘new’ people as a warning not to attract attention. Another sayingwas Dam doeum kor, which literally means ‘Plant a kapok tree’. The word

kor, however, also means ‘mute’, as in ‘Keep your mouth shut’. Stay quiet.

Plant  a  kapok  tree.  Bodies  disappear.  The  warnings  were  muttered  and

indirect, but the meaning was clear: avoid the soldiers completely. Don’t give

them a reason to single you out from the crowd. Whenever my work group

walked anywhere, we changed directions if there was any chance of crossing

paths with soldiers.

  Except to answer questions, I hadn’t spoken a word to soldiers since the

ride  to  Phnom  Penh  and  back  on  my  Vespa.  On  the  front  lines  the  low-

ranking soldiers seemed very much like the mit of that trip: dark-skinned,

illiterate, not very clean, unfamiliar with modern objects like engines and

toilets  and  televisions.  They  spoke  in  the  accent  of  the  Battambang  hill

people, with a singsong intonation. They could walk forever. Their feet were

too wide for their rubber-tyre sandals, but they were proud to be wearing

them, and their uniforms, and their silk kramas and Montagut shirts, because

most of them had never been fully dressed until joining the Khmer Rouge.

On the canal site we ‘new’ people moved with a feebleness that made us

seem old. No wasted movements, no spring to our step, no playing around.

Here and there were those of us who had lost their minds. They sang snatches

of old songs and then broke into tears. Or sat down on the clay when it wasn’t

break time. The soldiers took them away, six one day, two the next, none the

day  after,  three  the  day  after  that,  culling  the  insane  and  the  politically

suspect from the ranks in the late afternoons. Bodies disappear.

I worked harder than ever, because Huoy asked me to. She said our best

chance lay in being model workers. If I worked hard, she pointed out, it

might prove to Chev that I had reformed my ways after being sent to prison.

At her suggestion, I cut back on food-foraging too. Now that she had her job

in the kitchen we didn’t need wild foods as much anyway. I only continued

foraging at all to keep my fellow workers from suspecting how much food

Huoy was bringing home.

  Because of my energy on the job (made possible by the food Huoy stole

from the kitchen), I was promoted to group leader, a supervisor of nine other

workers. There were no extra rations or privileges that went with the position.

Now I was the one who got blamed for being unfair when I spooned the

portions of watery rice into the bowl. I went to meetings with other group

leaders to listen to our bosses, the section leaders. Invariably I agreed with

whatever the section leaders said, even when it didn’t make sense.The other group leaders were also ‘new’ people who inwardly opposed the

revolution but who obeyed to stay alive. There was only one group leader I

wasn’t sure about, and that was Pen Tip, who had been promoted just like

me.

  Pen Tip was an odd-looking man, with a duckfooted walk like Charlie

Chaplin. He liked to hang around with ‘old’ people and Khmer Rouge. He

joked with them and flattered them, and somehow he got away with it – other

people who got close to the soldiers were taken to the woods. Pen Tip knew

how to manipulate people, how to make them feel obligated. He conveyed

the impression that since he was well connected to Angka we other group

leaders  needed  to  stay  on  his  good  side.  I  began  to  avoid  him  whenever

possible.

I knew Pen Tip couldn’t tell Angka about the clandestine evening meeting

about joining the resistance. He had been part of that too. However, he could

conceivably  tell  Angka  about  my  background.  Pen  Tip  had  seen  me  in

hospitals in Phnom Penh. He knew I was a doctor. But he didn’t know any

details. He didn’t know my real name.

He called me over one day when he was sitting on a bamboo bench that

soldiers sometimes used, near the common kitchen. He was so short that his

legs didn’t reach the ground. He swung his feet back and forth like a child

and rotated his cigarette in his fingertips.

‘Tell me something, uh, “Samnang,” ’ he said, pronouncing the name with

deliberate  irony.  He  had  a  way  of  lifting  his  eyebrows  in  surprise  or

puzzlement, and darting his eyes around without looking directly at me. ‘Uh,

tell me the truth. You were a doctor back in Phnom Penh, but’ – he took a

puff on his cigarette – you’re a nice guy and, uh, I like you very much.’

He didn’t finish the thought. He didn’t need to. He was threatening to

expose me if I didn’t give him a bribe.

  ‘Look, Pen Tip,’ I said, ‘I helped sick people in Phum Chhleav, same as

you. You weren’t a doctor, I’m not a doctor. We were just concerned about

public health.’

‘I hear you have had, ah, problems before with your own health,’ he said.

His eyes rested on the stub of my little finger, then darted away. I found

myself suddenly perspiring.

‘I really don’t have time to talk now, Pen Tip,’ I said. ‘I’ve got to get some

more  mud  baskets  for  my  crew.  But  you’re  mistaken  about  me.  So dam

doeum kor, eh?’  ‘People disappear,’ he replied.

I walked away, calm on the outside, angry inside. It was bad enough to

humble myself to the Khmer Rouge. I wasn’t about to humble myself to

another ‘new’ person. And I didn’t like people who played up to the Khmer

Rouge. Aunt Kim in Tonle Batí, Pen Tip here – people like that made me

sick.

Over the next few weeks Pen Tip managed to extract concessions from all

the other group leaders, food or tobacco or other signs of respect, but I held

out. It became a contest of wills. I didn’t tell Huoy about it. There was no

sense upsetting her.

  Then  one  afternoon  during  tobacco  break,  when  several  groups  were

resting together on a hillock near the canal, Pen Tip made the struggle public.

There were no soldiers or high-level supervisors around. We were smoking

our tobacco cigarettes and relieving our depression by joking about what we

had done under the old regime. One man said he used to be the king, but he

had resigned to be a toilet inspector. The next man told him how lucky he

was, that he had been only an assistant toilet inspector. We all laughed and

tried to outdo each other with the most ridiculous stories.

  ‘You want to hear something funny?’ Pen Tip said. ‘I’ll tell you something

funny. Samnang was a doctor.’ The tone of his voice made everyone fall

silent.

  ‘No, Pen Tip,’ I said wearily, ‘that’s not true. And don’t call me that.

Angka might kill me.’

  ‘Don’t worry,’ Pen Tip replied. ‘Everybody knows you’re a doctor.’

  ‘Comrade Pen Tip,’ I replied, ‘don’t say that. If you play around like that

and Angka believes you, I’m in a lot of trouble. Don’t play games.’

The break ended and we all went back to work. From that time on it was

common  knowledge  that  I  had  been  accused  of  being  a  doctor,  though

nobody knew whether it was true or not.

A week or so later I was resting on a mat and Huoy was lying in the

hammock when two teenage soldiers came up. I had never seen them before.

They were not the soldiers usually assigned to our cooperative. One of them

held a rope in his hand. It was all I could do to persuade them to wait for me

to change into fresh trousers. There was gold in the trousers I was wearing

and, since it was obvious where I was going, it seemed better that Huoy keep

it. They tied my elbows behind my back again. Then they kicked me as I

stood on the edge on the hillock. I fell on my face in the rice stubble. Huoywas hysterical. They marched me away past the common kitchen in full view

of hundreds of people. If Pen Tip was watching, I didn’t notice.                                          21



                                The King of Death


 




A warning: this chapter tells of the very depths of suffering that people like

me saw and experienced under the Khmer Rouge regime. It is an important

part of the story, but it is not a pleasant part. So if you wish, or if you must,

skip this chapter and go on to the next one.



The soldiers directed me to turn left and right on the paths, and soon there

was no doubt that we were heading toward the prison at Phum Chhleav. Then

they told me to stop. We waited for about an hour, until six or seven more

prisoners and their guards came up. We prisoners were tied together in a line

and began walking again.

  When we reached the prison another group of tied-up ‘new’ people was

waiting, like us the victims of a roundup that had been planned in advance.

Our guards tied the two lines together but loosened the bonds around our

elbows, enough for the circulation to return to our arms. We sat with our

backs to the prison wall, which was part thatch and part corrugated metal, and

tried not to look in the direction of the mango trees, where other prisoners

were in various states of torture.

‘What did you do wrong?’ I whispered to a woman next to me.

  ‘Nothing. I don’t even know why they took me here,’ she said. ‘I’ve been

working very, very hard for them in the front lines.’ She was pregnant, one of

five obviously pregnant women in the line.

  None of the others knew why they had been arrested either. Quietly, inwhispers,  up  and  down  the  line,  we  agreed  not  to  tell  the  Khmer  Rouge

anything.

A young guard, fifteen or sixteen years old, asked us disdainfully if we

were hungry or thirsty. When everyone said yes, he brought a large bowl full

of water. He held it in his hands and the first person leaned over and put his

mouth in it and drank like a horse. Then the guard put the bowl in the first

person’s hands, which were tied behind his back. The first person turned,

holding the bowl behind him so the second person could drink like a horse,

and then the second person took the bowl in his hands and held it for the third

person and so on down the line.

‘ “No one will take care of you,” ’ the guard said smugly, reciting one of

the regime’s favourite expressions. ‘ “You have to take care of yourselves.” ’

We spent the night inside the jail, a long, narrow structure with an aisle in

the middle and a row of prisoners to each side. We lay on our backs with our

heads to the wall and our feet locked into leg-irons attached to a long piece of

wood running next to the centre aisle. Low wooden partitions gave us each a

space  to  lie  in,  like  a  private  pigsty,  already  dirtied  with  wastes.  The  air

reeked of shit and piss and an odour like ammonia. It was hard to breathe. For

me, it was impossible to sleep. There were about eighty ‘new’ people in the

jail, and some of them were always moaning.

  Early the next morning the noise of a motorcycle came to our ears. The

motorcycle approached, downshifted, stopped nearby. I thought: Somebody

important has arrived. In the Phnom Tippeday region, messengers and low-

ranking cadre usually rode bicycles or horses, middle and upper-middle cadre

rode motorcycles, and those at the very top rode in jeeps. A motorcycle rider

would be someone like . . . like an officer in the state security apparatus, I

decided. Yes, that was about right. It had been prearranged, the fresh capture

of political prisoners and our interrogation the following morning.

Our group of eighteen prisoners was taken outside, past a parked Honda

90,  into  a  neighbouring  building,  where  my  guess  about  the  visitor  was

confirmed.

In Cambodian folk religion one of the main mythological figures is known

as the King of Death. He is a judge, the one who assigns souls to heaven or

hell,  and  he  knows  all  about  everyone’s  good  and  bad  deeds.  Nothing  is

hidden  from  him.  The  souls  he  sends  to  hell  become pret,  spirits  of  the

damned, the victims of gory and everlasting tortures brought upon them by

their  own  misdeeds.  Looking  around  the  room  at  our  group  of  eighteenprisoners, all of us afraid, dressed in ragged, stinking clothes, I decided that

we were already pret; our fates had already been decided. The Khmer Rouge

who had ridden in on his Honda 90 and who sat smiling at us now – he was

the King of Death.

He was muscled and well fed, holding paper files and a black notebook

under one arm. He wore a green Mao cap and an old green-and-white krama

around his neck. His black clothes and rubber-tyre sandals were dusty from

his motorcycle ride. He sat down in a chair at a small table and asked us to

sit.  We  sat  on  the  floor  while  he  scanned  the  files.  Several  guards  with

holstered pistols stood at his side.

The  King  of  Death  was  calm  and  sweet.  He  was  like  Chev,  but  more

sophisticated. For a guess, he might have finished high school, or lycée.

  ‘Please  tell  Angka  the  truth,’  he  told  us.  ‘If  you  do,  you  will  not  be

punished.  Angka  never  kills  people  unnecessarily,  or  kills  the  innocent.

Those who tell the truth will merely be re-educated.’

One by one the prisoners went before him, sitting at his feet. He read from

their files. He knew some of their names. Their crimes were: being a CIA

agent, a Lon Nol officer, the wife of a Lon Nol officer, a ranking member of

the Lon Nol government. All of the prisoners denied that the charges were

true. At a signal from the judge, which I could not detect, even though I

looked for it, the guards came around the side of the desk and kicked the

prisoner. The guards did not kick everyone, but they kicked the pregnant

woman next to me in the ribs and in the stomach for denying that she was the

wife of a captain in the Lon Nol army. They dragged her back to where the

rest of us sat, and then it was my turn.

I sat in front of the judge with my hat in my lap and my krama neatly

folded on my knee. From where I sat I could only see his trouser legs and his

feet with their black rubber-tyre sandals.

  ‘Samnang, Angka knows who you are,’ the King of Death began gently.

‘You were a military doctor. You held the rank of captain. So please, tell

Angka the truth. You will make it much easier on yourself.’

Now I was certain that Pen Tip had informed on me. In Phnom Penh, few

knew I was in the military, because I hardly ever wore a uniform. Since then I

had not told anyone about it. Only a former hospital insider like Pen Tip

would know that a government doctor my age would have held a captain’s

rank. The only thing Pen Tip didn’t know was my real name. And Angka

didn’t either.I didn’t say anything.

‘If you tell the truth,’ the King of Death said, ‘Angka will forget the past

and give you a high-level position. Angka will let you operate on wounded

soldiers,  and  teach  medicine  to  students  of  the  younger  generation.  The

students will look up to you for giving them this knowledge. You will be a

hero.  But,’  he  said,  ‘if  you  don’t  tell  Angka  the  truth,  you  will  be  held

responsible.’

I cleared my throat.

  ‘Good comrade,’ I said, ‘I was not a captain, or a doctor. I was a taxi

driver.  My  taxi  number  was  213755.’  (The  numbers  were  from  my

motorcycle licence plate.) ‘I went to Takeo, Battambang, Kampot, anywhere

the passengers wanted to go. I’m telling the truth. This is the second time I’ve

been to jail, and still Angka doesn’t believe me. I work hard for Angka. I

struggle to master the elements for Angka. I do everything for Angka, and I

never make trouble. Why doesn’t Angka believe me?’

  ‘Because you are a liar,’ the judge answered in his calm, soothing voice.

‘Please tell Angka the truth. If you do, Angka will give you an excellent job.

You are an educated person. You can lead people. You can help the country

develop. You can help the country build its independence-sovereignty.’

I said, ‘Comrade, if I were a doctor I would tell you so. I want to help

Angka. If you don’t believe me, go to Phnom Penh and check the files at the

medical school. If you find I am really a doctor, Angka can do what it wants.’

  BAM! The kick came to my ribs. I fell over on my side. Then the other

guard kicked me with the hard edge of his rubber-tyre sandals. BAM! I arched

my back in agony. The guards took turns with me, first one, then the other.

Then the judge rapped on the table and the guards stopped. They dragged me

by the legs back to the line.

By the time I counted my bruises the judge was already interrogating the

next prisoner. The guards had kicked me in the rib cage, in the shoulders, the

thighs and the back of my neck. They were professionals. They knew what

they were doing. A beating like that would have been hard even on a healthy

man.

  When all eighteen had talked to the judge, the guards led us outside. We

walked in single file, away from the mango orchard, through another grove of

fruit trees and into an uncultivated rice field.

  There  we  saw  wooden  structures  with  uprights  and  cross-pieces,  like

soccer goalposts, except narrower and higher. There was a double line ofthem, each one the same. On the ground in the middle of each, where the

goalie would stand, was a pile of rice hulls and wood. In front of each goal

lay a wooden cross with a length of rope.

At first I couldn’t figure it out. Then I looked farther down the rows, which

stretched over several dykes and far down the field. At the far end of the

rows, prisoners were being punished in a manner I had never heard of before.

They were tied to the crosses, the weight of their bodies sagging against the

ropes. The crosses were upright, hanging from the goalpost crossbars. Smoke

and flames rose from the fires around the prisoners’ feet.

The soldiers stood crosses behind each prisoner and began tying us up.

I thought, I hope Huoy never knows about this. I didn’t tell her about the

worst things of prison last time, about how they cut the poor woman open. I

don’t want her to know. It would hurt her. She is so tender. She saved my

life. I love her so much. If I am gone, who will take care of her? Please, gods,

save Huoy and keep her away from this kind of punishment. But she has little

chance. The soldiers will probably come for her anyway, because they are

after the wives of soldiers and doctors. It is just a matter of time, unless the

gods intervene.

And please, gods, I prayed, when I have gone either to hell or to paradise,

keep me away from Khmer Rouge. When I am reborn, don’t send me near

them. I don’t want to be anywhere near Cambodia. If I did something wrong

in my last life I will pay for it now, but please, gods, surely this is payment in

full. In my next life let me be happy.

I was still on the ground and the soldiers were tying my wrists to the cross.

‘Just shoot me!’ I shouted at them. ‘Just shoot! Get it over with!’ I fought

them, but they were much stronger and they outnumbered me. They tied my

upper arms to the cross and then my thighs and my feet. Then they threw the

rope attached to the top of the cross over the goalpost and hoisted me up until

my feet were above the pile of wood and rice hulls. I swayed there, back and

forth, with a view of the double line of goalposts and the uncultivated rice

field.

  After the guards tied all of the prisoners they went around to each pile of

rice hulls and lit it with cigarette lighters.

Rice hulls have a consistency like sawdust. Fires with rice hulls give off

thick, stinging smoke and burn slowly, for days.


When the cross stopped swaying I was facing the double row of goalposts ata  forty-five-degree  angle,  twisted  around  to  the  left.  Judging  from  the

position  of  the  sun  I  was  facing  due  west;  the  rows  ran  southwest  to

northeast. Behind me was the grove of fruit trees we had walked through

from the prison. To my far left, at the edge of my vision, was a rooftop of a

separate building where teenage girls were imprisoned for ‘crimes’ against

Angka, like premarital sex. In front was the rice field, weeds covering the flat

patches and the raised paddy dykes, and the horrible, unavoidable sight of the

other prisoners hanging like me.

Of  those  who  had  been  crucified  longer,  some  had  already  died  from

starvation  or  thirst  –  generally  women,  their  heads  dropped  against  their

chests, their bodies sagging heavily against the ropes, their feet burned and

blistered. Their sarongs had dropped to the first tight circle of rope around

their  thighs.  They  didn’t  have  underwear.  Unable  to  control  their  bodily

functions, they had soiled themselves. Beneath them the fires smouldered.

Oh Huoy, Huoy, I am glad you are not here to see this.

My feet were about six feet off the ground and three feet above the pile of

wood and rice hulls. The fire had not yet spread to the wood underneath, but

the smoke rose into my nostrils and eyes.

Our group of eighteen prisoners didn’t do any more talking. We were too

thirsty to talk out loud. We were too busy praying.

  Hot sunlight struck me on the back of my neck. The weight of my body

dragged down on the ropes around my arms and legs. My feet had no feeling

at all. My fingers were numb but I could still wiggle them. Iridescent green

flies  whooshed  around  my  head.  I  shook  them  off  but  they  returned  and

settled on the wetness at the corner of my eyes. I shaped my lips and blew air

upward but they just buzzed around and landed again on my face, and on my

back where the skin was bleeding from the beating.

The buzzing of the flies was the loudest sound in the landscape. To my

right, a woman in her twenties moaned, begging her mother to save her. She

was pregnant, with a full roundness in her belly. I did not think she could last

long.

  Gradually the fire spread below the surface of the rice hulls to the wood.

There were no flames, but there was a new smell. I looked down. The hair on

my legs was shrivelled and burned. My feet must have been blistering and

burning, but I could not feel them. My eyes formed tears from the smoke.

The guards had built the fire for heat and smoke more than for flames. Their

purpose was not to burn us to death but to prolong and intensify the pain ofbeing tied to the crosses.

Late that afternoon, when my eyes were shut against the direct rays of the

sun,  I  felt  myself  swinging  around  on  the  cross.  The  wind  had  changed

direction. I opened my eyes. The wind blew the smoke away from me, at an

angle, but it also pushed the red line of fire farther through the rice hulls. The

fire grew hotter, and the heat rose up my thighs. To my left came a quiet

sputtering as the man on the next cross peed in his pants hoping to dampen

the fire, but it was no use. The drops of urine fell from his feet to the fire,

vaporized and rose up again, and the fire burned as strongly as before. The

flies attached themselves to my arms and legs, waiting for the wind to die

down.

The sun inched toward the horizon and sank. It was then, at dusk, that the

wind stopped and the mosquitoes came out.

The mosquitoes came in close, their high-pitched whine near one ear, then

the other. I didn’t even bother chasing them away.

Oh Huoy, you saved my life when I was sick. You saved my life. May the

gods and the winds bring you this message from me, that I am alive for now,

that my spirit will always be watching over you.

The moon was nearly full that night. When it rose above the trees behind

me, it cast an elongated shadow of the goalpost and of me hanging from the

cross in the middle. When the wind picked up, the coals glowed underneath

and the fire grew hotter; and when the wind slacked, the mosquitoes came

back, whining in my ear and biting my flesh, where I could still feel my flesh.

The moon rose silent and calm, and the shadows of the goalposts shortened.

The wind stirred the treetops, and the crucified hung like strange butchered

animals from the goalposts.

Oh Mother. Oh Huoy. Please save me.

You gods – any gods who can hear. Hindu gods. Jesus. Allah. Buddha.

Spirits of the forests and the rice fields. Spirits of my ancestors. Hear me,

gods: I never killed anyone. Never, never, never. I saved lives. I was a doctor

and I saved the lives of Lon Nol soldiers and Viet Cong and didn’t care who

they were. So why make me suffer?

  Spirits of the wind, I prayed. If the gods cannot hear, then carry the news

to them. To any god who has power. Tell the gods what is happening to me.

How Huoy would cry out if she were here. I am glad she cannot see me.

Please, gods, do not punish her. She is innocent. Do not let her know what I

am going through. I am one of the damned, a pret. I am already in hell. And Ido not know why. I never betrayed the nation. If I killed anybody in a past

life,  or  tortured  people,  then  punish  me  and  get  it  over  with.  If  this  is

vengeance finish it, so my next life will be free.

But I do not think I killed people in past lives. And I do not really know

why they are torturing me. This has got to be worse than Hitler and the Jews.

Hitler thought the Jews were different from him, like another race. But the

Khmer Rouge kill their own race. And the gods do nothing to stop it.


In the morning the guards took down those who had been crucified before us.

They put plates of rice in front of the ones who were still alive and asked

them questions. Then they tied plastic bags over the prisoners’ heads. The

prisoners began kicking spastically, to get free. I was too weak to look for

long. Or to care. All I knew was that the sun was hot on the back of my neck

and my mouth was dry and my lips were cracked. Whatever was happening

between the guards and the prisoners seemed incredibly far away, though it

was in plain sight. When the guards dragged the bodies away and put fresh

people in the goalposts, I barely noticed. What was left of me was a core – a

heart that still beat in my chest, a mouth that breathed, eyes that stung from

the smoke and the sun. And a brain that prayed.

  After four days and four nights with no food or water they let me down and

untied the ropes. The circulation returning to my arms and legs brought a

pain that was worse than the numbness and hotter than the fire. I fell over on

my back and didn’t move.

  They tied my hands and feet. They tried to make me kneel, but I fell over

and they grabbed my hair and shook my head until I saw the plate in front of

me. On the plate was fresh rice with two small salted fish on top.

‘Are you a doctor?’ a faraway voice asked. ‘A captain?’

I tried to form words, but my mouth wouldn’t work. In front of me was the

plate heaped with rice.

‘No,’ I whispered. ‘Give me water. Then shoot me.’

‘If you tell the truth. Just tell Angka the truth, and you will have water and

rice.’

  Blood had trickled into my mouth from my cracked lips. ‘Just shoot,’ I

croaked. ‘Please, I can’t bear it. Please, Angka, if you don’t trust me, just

shoot. I will be happy to die. Just shoot.’

  ‘Bigmouth!’ the guard exclaimed. He shouted to other guards, telling them

to come over. They pulled me to a sitting position. Just before they put theplastic  bag  over  my  head,  I  glimpsed  the  pregnant  lady  next  to  me.  She

already had a bag over her head and she was kicking convulsively with both

feet. They tied the bag around my neck, I couldn’t see anything, and they

pushed me and I fell over again. I tried to breathe, but the plastic got in the

way of my mouth and there was no air and I went wild, struggling to get the

bag off, but I couldn’t and my feet were kicking and I couldn’t see. Then they

pulled the bag off and I took great gasping lungfuls of air.

  They took the bag off the pregnant lady next to me, but it was too late. She

had died of suffocation. A guard ripped her blouse apart and pulled down her

sarong. Then he picked up his rifle, which had a bayonet attached. He pushed

her legs apart and jammed the bayonet into her vagina and tried to rip upward

but the pubic bone stopped the blade so he pulled the bayonet out and slashed

her belly from her sternum down below her navel. He took the fetus out, tied

a string around its neck and threw it in a pile with the fetuses from the other

pregnant women. Then he reached into her intestines, cut out her liver, and

finally sliced her breasts off with a sawing motion of his blade.

  ‘Good food,’ he remarked to the other guards. Then he bent down between

her legs where the wound was still quivering and he said, ‘Ha! Look at this!

Her cunt’s laughing.’ The other young guards came and looked and stood

around, grinning. The flies whooshed around the body of the poor woman,

whose crime had been marrying a Lon Nol soldier.

I lay on my side without moving. They would disembowel me next, just

for fun. It was nothing for them to cut someone open. Just a whim. They

would come for me soon. But the seconds turned into minutes and then they

walked away with the woman’s liver and breasts. ‘Enough food for tonight?’

said the nearest one, and another said in a voice that was fainter and farther

away, ‘Yes, I think so. Probably enough.’

  Time passed. Five minutes or five hours, I did not know the difference. A

rubber-tyre sandal shoved my shoulder and then I was on my back looking up

at a guard. He said, ‘This one isn’t dead yet. Give me some water to pour up

his nose.’

  Another guard came over and I found myself staring at a thin, brown-

coloured waterfall descending from a pail.

The muddy water splashed down near my nostrils and some of it went into

my mouth, which was partly open. I started to choke and cough but at the

same time my mouth began to work and I swallowed. I had never tasted

anything so good. A change come over my body, a stirring of strength. Hekept pouring and pouring in a thin, steady stream to get into my nose, and

some  of  it  did,  but  I  tilted  my  head  back  and  it  filled  my  mouth  and  I

swallowed again and again. The water also got in my eyes, but I blinked and

concentrated on the brown water pouring down.

  When the guard emptied the pail and walked away, I felt much better.

At twilight, the guards untied us and helped us walk back to the jail. Of our

group of eighteen, only five of us were still alive, and none of the women.

My feet and legs were covered with blisters, which popped underneath as I

walked.

  They gave us watery rice, and after four days with no food it was like a

banquet. Then they dragged us by the arms into jail and locked us into the

pens again. The next day I expected to be killed but they gave me a bowl of

watery rice again, and the same the day after that.

  They made me work around the prison. I gardened and raked and saw the

‘new’ people coming in and only a few of them leaving alive. In the daytime

vultures wheeled overhead. At night, the wolf-like chhke char-chark snarled

and growled as they ripped the flesh of corpses outside.

  Then they loaded me into an oxcart and drove me to another jail with

thatch walls. Here the prisoners ploughed rice fields and tended oxen and ate

the rations of watery rice. It was like the front lines, except harder, and we

were all terribly emaciated, with arms and legs like sticks. I spent two long

months at this place, living from one day to the next.

  Then I was released. Soldiers escorted me and some other prisoners back

to our cooperative, which was in a new and semipermanent location.

  They took us to the common kitchen and told us to sit down. The soldiers

went in to report to Chev.

  Huoy had seen us coming but she hadn’t recognized me and I didn’t want

to say anything. She was cutting vegetables for cooking. When she finished

she sat on the ground with her back to me and began cutting thick slices of

banana trunk. Before the revolution banana trunk was pig food, but on the

front lines it was used to add bulk to our rations.

  Chev came out and the soldiers read off the list of names. When she heard

‘Samnang’, Huoy froze, then turned around and stood up. She was shaking.

She called out in a choked voice, ‘My husband is here! My husband is here!’

in spite of her attempts at self-control.

  Chev told me, ‘You can go see your wife. She’s waiting.’

We walked rapidly toward each other but we were afraid to embrace. I putmy arm around her shoulders like a casual friend and took her aside.

I whispered, ‘I have survived. Don’t worry. I will stay here with you.’

  Huoy was barely able to say anything. ‘What did they do to you?’

  ‘Don’t talk right now. I have survived.’

  After  dinner,  when  she  got  off  work,  Huoy  brought  me  to  a  canal.

Somehow she had procured a bar of real soap. She bathed me and scrubbed

me, fighting back the tears when she saw how tight the skin was on my rib

cage. The infection on my ankle was worse than before. Sores covered my

legs and neck and chin. She asked me what had happened. I said, ‘Sweet,

don’t ask. I don’t want to see any more tears.’

  Huoy insisted. She wanted to know why I was so skinny, why I had so

many blisters, what they had made me do.

I said, ‘If you love me, don’t ask. I love you and I don’t want to tell you.’

  Huoy let my old clothes float away in the current of the muddy water. I put

on a sarong and we walked slowly back to where she had been sleeping, in a

long,  narrow  hut  with  a  thatched  roof  and  no  walls.  She  had  a  single

hammock. Someone gave her a rice bag and she made a double hammock for

us with needle and thread.

That night she snuggled next to me. She kissed me again and again. Then

she put her lips next to my ear and whispered that she had been sure I was

dead. There had been a big purge, she explained. Hundreds of people had

been taken away by the soldiers, tied up, a few at a time, without any reason

given. Few had returned. Their places had been taken by people from other

cooperatives, including – and she whispered names to me.

I  lay  back  in  the  hammock,  staring  in  the  darkness.  Around  us  were

hundreds of people in close quarters, in hammocks or on the ground. We

couldn’t really talk now. That would have to wait.

I was amazed. Amazed that I had lived, that the gods had let me survive a

second time, against the odds. To have my arm around my wife’s soft female

form, to feel her breathing. To hold her. She was so giving, so comforting.

She was alive. And she had told me joyous news: my father was alive too.                                          22



                                        Candles


 




The last time I had seen Papa, he and my mother were hurrying after the

oxcart holding Pheng Huor, Nay Chhun and the children. From there they

had all gone to a front-lines cooperative much like mine, only farther south,

near the foothills of the Cardamom Mountains. They had not fared well. First

the three children had been taken away – sent off to a youth group, to be

brainwashed into forgetting their parents and loving Angka. Then my aged

mother had been sent off to another work camp in the jungles. They had not

heard from her since.

  Three adults remained: Papa, Pheng Huor and Nay Chhun. By the whim of

Angka, or the gods, they had been transferred to my collective while I was

away in prison. My father was put in a long-house, a thatched roof on poles,

with barely enough space to lie down between his neighbours. Pheng Huor

and Nay Chhun were put in a second longhouse and Huoy was in a third.

There  were  twelve  of  these  longhouses  in  all,  with  roughly  two  hundred

people in each for a total of approximately twenty-four hundred people.

My father was assigned to a work group of elderly people. He fixed hoe

handles,  wove  baskets,  made  bamboo  shoulderboards  and  did  other  light

tasks. It didn’t take him long to spot Huoy in the common kitchen. Her grief-

stricken face told him what her lips could not, that she thought I was dead.

My father consoled her, urged her to keep hoping. Every afternoon he went to

Huoy’s longhouse to visit. When Huoy came back from work he was already

there, sitting on the white piece of plastic next to her hammock.

A bond grew between them like father and daughter. The time they spenttogether was their favourite part of the day. Huoy told him stories, mended

his clothes, kept his spirits up. After meals in the common kitchen where she

worked, Huoy cleaned the fifty-five-gallon steel-drum rice pots but purposely

left a crust of rice grains along the side. Papa came along later and scooped

the  crust  with  his  hands.  For  a  man  who  used  to  be  a  millionaire,  pot

scrapings  don’t  sound  like  much,  but  they  made  a  real  difference  to  his

health.

Life on the front lines had one good effect: it stripped away everything

unimportant and allowed us to see each other’s true worth. Papa finally saw

what kind of woman Huoy was, that she didn’t care whether he was rich or

poor and that she had never asked for anything from him, except the chance

to show him love and respect. And Papa began to compare her to Nay Chhun,

my brother’s wife. Nay Chhun had been very nice to my father as long as he

owned the lumber mill, but she didn’t have much time for him when he was a

war slave.

The morning after I returned from prison I was resting in the hammock

when Papa walked up. He was even thinner than before, with hollow cheeks

and a flat belly. He wore only a faded black t-shirt and a pair of light blue

culottes  that  had  been  skillfully  patched  in  several  places;  I  recognized

Huoy’s handiwork. When he saw me, tears came to his eyes.

  When Papa asked what had happened in prison I left out the details, as I

had with Huoy. He listened. He shook his head, sighing. He wept. He got up,

walked around and paced back and forth, taking deep breaths.

He had changed, I decided. When I was growing up he had always been

tough  and  stern  and  sceptical.  In  old  age,  he  was  softer  inside,  more

sympathetic. But he was still the leader of the family. He sat on the plastic

mat beside the hammock and gave me advice:

  ‘Son,’ he said, ‘I just have to look at you to know you have suffered.

People hardly ever come back when they are taken away. You have come

back twice. From now on, keep your mouth shut. Plant a kapok tree. Dam

doeum kor. No matter what happens, don’t give them any excuse to take you

away again.

‘When you were a young boy you were very hothearted. Since meeting

Huoy you have become less so, but you are still too angry underneath. You

must cool your heart even more. Keep your emotions under control, so they

will not show on your face. You have fooled many people but not everybody.

If you were as smart as you think you are, they would not keep taking youaway.

‘Yes, Papa,’ I said.

  ‘And another thing,’ said my father. ‘Pen Tip. You have not spoken of

taking revenge on him, but it is written all over you. Forget it. You are an

educated person; he is not. He has done you wrong, but let the gods punish

him. Do not attempt it yourself. If you do, the Khmer Rouge will find out.

Then they will kill you, and Huoy will be a widow again. If you see him,

pretend nothing has happened.’

This was harder to accept, but thinking it over I slowly began to see that he

was right. ‘Yes, Papa,’ I said.

  ‘The Khmer Rouge are crazy and uneducated,’ he went on. ‘To survive

them you must be patient and very, very smart. Use your brain, son. Look

around you. The canals they are building will fall apart when the rains come.

You know that yourself, because you have worked in them. They will not

hold up to the rains of Battambang. Everything the Khmer Rouge try to do

will fail. And they do not have the support of the people. So plant your kapok

tree, son. Be patient, be quiet and stay calm. One day, sooner or later, the

revolution will be overturned. The regime will be replaced and we will be

free again.’

I listened carefully. He was certainly right about one thing: the regime

could not last forever. The best way to fight it was to lie low and allow it to

self-destruct. Not taking revenge on Pen Tip was going to be harder. Many

nights in prison I had lain awake thinking what I was going to do to Pen Tip

for informing on me. I had not learned about pain without wanting to inflict

it. I had not endured torture without wanting revenge. My thoughts were so

dark and gruesome that I never would have mentioned them to anybody, but

my father guessed them. And he was right again. It was more important to

avoid future suffering than to take revenge for the past. And to avoid more

suffering I was going to have to become a better actor than I had been before.

I was going to have to control and conceal my emotions.

The visit of my sister-in-law Nay Chhun that afternoon gave me a chance

to practise. Nay Chhun and I didn’t like each other. We hadn’t had a real

conversation since before the revolution. She had never visited me when I

was sick in Phum Chhleav. But this was a chance to repair the damage and

forge a new relationship. When she asked how I was, I answered, ‘Not too

badly, thank you.’ She said I had lost weight, and I said with a smile, ‘Who

hasn’t?’ I asked her how she and my brother were. We had a superficial butpolite conversation.

  What absorbed my attention was not Nay Chhun but my father, who went

silent  and  cold  when  she  approached.  On  the  front  lines  he  avoided  her,

except  when  she  was  with  my  brother.  Papa  had  finally  seen  into  her

character. Yet when she left he heaved another sigh and wiped a tear away –

glad, I supposed, that she and I were finally on speaking terms.

  Such changes in my father! In the old days, when he was rich, he barely

noticed Huoy when she came into his house. That I had chosen a poor woman

like  Huoy  embarrassed  him.  Because  of  him  Huoy  and  I  never  had  the

wedding  we  wanted,  with  the  monks  and  the  ceremony  and  the  families

coming together and the great feast with half of Phnom Penh invited to the

tables. Huoy had paid a price for not being married, with insults from Nay

Chhun, Aunt Kim and my other relatives – insults to which she never replied.

But the past didn’t matter anymore. We were all on the same level now.

My father brightened visibly when Huoy came back from the kitchen that

afternoon. His entire manner changed, and a smile creased his wrinkled face.

That was what I had been waiting for, to know that he welcomed her into the

family.

But it was my fate barely to recover from one disaster before being hit with

another.


I went back to work. The first sporadic rains had fallen. The weather was hot

and muggy, as it always is before the real rainy season begins.

  Chev assigned my group to create paddies for large-scale rice farming –

dyked  fields  much  longer  and  wider  than  those  of  the  prerevolutionary

peasants. It was a good idea in theory, because big paddies would allow us to

put  more  land  into  cultivation  than  before,  with  proportionately  less

maintenance. The problem was with the plan for the dykes. Instead of just

taking half of the old dykes out to create fields twice as large, which would

have been a sensible plan, Chev told us to tear all of them out and then build

new ones. It was an enormous job, with no practical benefit, and it had to be

done in a hurry. Perhaps Chev wanted us to show how zealous we could be in

proving our devotion. I worked in mud up to my shoulders. The air was hot,

the mud was cool, and I went back and forth. I was exhausted. From the

woods nearby came swarms of mosquitoes.

  When I came down with shivering fits twice in one day, and then with fits

at the same times the next day, it seemed almost like a blessing. It was aperfect excuse for getting out of work without faking it. There was plenty of

malaria around. Everyone knew the symptoms.

  Released  from  work,  I  set  out  to  find  medicines.  My  first  choice  was

Western medicine, either quinine or a similar drug like chloroquine. I didn’t

have any myself. I looked and asked, but there was none to be found on the

black market. There were people moaning and shaking with malaria in all the

long-houses – crowded, unclean places that stank of urine and buzzed with

flies.

Next I tried the regime, which had three levels of medical care. The top

cadre could go to a reasonably good, Western-style hospital in Battambang

City, but that was off-limits for me. Ordinary Khmer Rouge and ‘old’ people

could go to a smaller regional hospital in Phum Phnom, but I couldn’t get in

there either. There was only the front-lines clinic, the place where the nurses

called the patients ‘war slaves’. This was an ordinary house on stilts next to a

yam garden. When I went there, the clinic staff announced a meal, and the

war slaves, who were pathetically thin, crowded in line and started pushing

each other to get to the food table first. One patient started a fight, and a mit

neary broke her serving ladle over his head getting him to stop.

In  this  clinic  there  were  only  two  medicines:  vitamin  injections  and

homemade malaria pills. The multivitamin solutions seem to have been made

in Phnom Penh by someone with a basic knowledge of pharmacology. They

were stored in old Coca-Cola bottles. Following standard medical procedure,

the nurses sterilized the hypodermic needles in boiling water, but before they

gave the injections they ran their dirty fingers along the length of the needles

to make sure the needles were firmly attached to the syringes. As a result,

almost all the patients developed abscesses at the injection site. Few of them

recovered from the illnesses that brought them to the clinic in the first place.

The malaria pills were made at the clinic from yams grown outside in the

garden and sdao leaves. The mixture was ground up with a mortar and pestle,

baked in sheets and stamped into pill form with M-16 shell casings. The pills

were popularly known as ‘rabbit turds’ because of their circular shape and tan

colour. I was given a handful of rabbit turds and walked away quickly, before

the nurses could give me an injection. The sdao, I thought, would be mildly

helpful against malaria; sdao was one of those folk remedies that had a basis

in fact. But it was the yam in the pills that appealed to me. Yam was food.

As  the  malaria  infection  attacked  more  of  my  red  blood  cells,  I  grew

weaker. I lay on the white plastic mat in the longhouse and waited. I felt coldand unable to stop shivering. The next thing I knew, Huoy was sitting astride

my  waist  holding  my  arms,  and  my  father  was  holding  my  feet.  I  was

drenched  with  sweat.  They  said  I  had  been  unconscious,  flailing  around

convulsively with my arms and legs. I didn’t remember any of the fit. All I

knew was that I was thirsty. I drank what seemed to be gallons of water

without stopping.

  Huoy and my father took care of me together. When I had used up the

rabbit turds my father gathered sdao leaves and bark. I ate the leaves, and

Huoy brewed the bark into a tea for me to drink. My father roamed through

the forests at dawn, looking for new, tender bamboo leaf shoots with the dew

still on them. This was a traditional Cambodian cure. He also made a Chinese

medicine for me with shavings from a piece of animal horn he had brought

with him from Phnom Penh.

  Huoy  was  worried  too.  Every  day  she  went  off  looking  for  Western

medicines. Finally she found eight 300-mg quinine tablets and bought them

for a damleung, or 1.2 ounces, of gold. I took half a pill in the morning and

half at night, along with the sdao leaves and the sdao tea and my father’s

traditional cures. With the medicine and with the devoted attention of Huoy

and my father, I recovered.


Then it was back to work. The rains arrived. Water flowing down from the

hills filled the canals and poured across as if no obstacle were there. The

paddies  were  submerged  except  for  a  few  of  the  higher  dykes,  which

protruded like the lines on a chequerboard, and the hillocks, which were like

chequers,  some  of  them  in  the  middle  of  the  squares  and  the  rest  out  of

position on the dykes between squares. Chev came to inspect, carrying his

hoe. He was muddy from head to foot. Under the water surface, invisible

from sight, were the delicate green shoots of the rice seedbeds.

  ‘The seedlings will die in a few hours if the water does not go down,’ Chev

remarked. He spoke calmly, but as I followed his gaze to the flooded fields I

felt weak. It wasn’t our fault! The canal hadn’t been deep enough to contain

the  water.  We  didn’t  have  the  manpower  to  build  dykes  to  protect  the

seedbeds. We had only four in our group – two out with malaria, another two

taken away to the woods.

  ‘You must take your destiny firmly in hand,’ Chev told us as he began to

walk away. ‘If you lose this battle, you will be responsible.’

We  went  back  to  rebuilding  dykes  with  a  desperation  made  worse  byknowing that whatever we did would not be enough. I prayed while I worked.

The others did too. And that afternoon, by the kindness of the gods, the rain

stopped. The runoff water ceased flowing. The water level in the paddies

subsided and the green shoots of the rice seedlings reappeared.

But  the  next  day  the  rains  fell  again.  Every  day  the  work  was  urgent.

Dykes washed out, patches of rice were swept away. I put everything in my

work. It was a matter of saving my own life and also raising rice, so the

cooperative would have food to eat.

  Chev decided to reorganize the cooperative with two common kitchens a

mile apart. My father and brother were assigned to the new kitchen, but I still

saw them often. A major purge began. The soldiers took captives morning

and  afternoon.  Instead  of  marching  them  away  immediately,  the  soldiers

made public examples of them, tying them to trees and shouting to anyone

who would listen what they had done wrong. I tried not to look or listen. I

had enough on my mind just getting through each day.

So  I  wasn’t  really  paying  attention  when  I  trudged  back  toward  the

longhouse at the end of an afternoon early in the rainy season of 1976. There

were puddles on the footpath. I walked around the puddles half-noticing how

they reflected the sky. ‘See the enemies here! See the enemies!’ a teenage

soldier was shouting, like an announcer at a carnival. ‘Angka caught them for

stealing food! They stole food from all of us! See them now, while you have

a  chance!  Learn  from  their  example!’  Near  the  soldier’s  feet  sat  several

captives with their hands tied around a tree trunk. Their faces were angled

away. I was wondering how much the dinner rations were going to be when

something caught my eye: one of the captives was my father.

I froze.

My father turned his face and looked sadly into mine. His lips moved. He

wanted to explain something to me. He wanted my help.

  ‘Why have you stopped?’ the soldier yelled at me. ‘Go on!’

The people behind me had almost collided into my back. They turned to

look at the prisoners and their muttered comments came to me from far away.

‘They are already old. Why make them suffer?’ said one voice. Said another,

‘That’s a nice old man there, the skinny one. Why kill him?’

  ‘Go!’ roared the soldier.

It  was  like  looking  into  a  tunnel,  seeing  my  father’s  eyes  widened  in

sorrow and fear and not being able to see anything else. He signalled me to

go. Numbly, I obeyed.  Huoy’s face was already swollen from weeping. She knew. She had heard

that a high-ranking official visiting the new kitchen had seen my father scoop

rice from the sides of a fifty-five-gallon drum. He had asked Chev why the

‘new’ people were scavenging for food while they should be working. Chev

arrested Papa on the spot.

  Around sunset the procession walked slowly past our long-house. Papa

was roped to two other prisoners. A soldier walking behind them held the end

of the rope in his hand. As they came close, my father lifted his head and

looked at me. There was no accusation, merely an immense sadness. From

where he was going there was no coming back.

  Plant a kapok tree, he had told me.

I went outside the longhouse and sat on the ground. There was a lump in

my throat and the tears rolled down my cheeks, but I didn’t say anything.

Plant a kapok tree.

  When three days had passed, Huoy and I brought our evening rations back

to the longhouse with some candles. Our neighbours knew what we were

doing and left us alone. Late at night, Pheng Huor and Nay Chhun arrived.

We lit the candles. My brother and his wife went first, because they were

older. They sompeahed to the improvised altar, put their palms on the ground

three  times,  bowed  down  until  their  foreheads  touched  the  backs  of  their

hands another three times and prayed. Huoy and I sat behind them until they

had finished and it was our turn.

I prayed that my father be reborn away from Cambodia.

Day  after  day  the  purge  grew  worse.  Some  were  taken  away  for

complaining, most for stealing food to stay alive. We tried to learn why the

Khmer Route were killing so many but found no real reason. It was just

something they did, a craving they could not satisfy. They created enemies to

devour, which increased their appetite for enemies.

  Shock, horror, grief – with the death of my father, part of us died too.

Under control of an alien force we responded, but without energy to spare.

We were beings so imperfect and fragile in manufacture that we wore out

constantly, or were destroyed for being defective by those who did not care.

Everything  was  gone.  Society  was  destroyed  and  monks  and  temples

destroyed  and  markets  and  families  and  the  bonds  between  humans

destroyed. There was no hope.

Two  weeks  later,  my  brother  and  his  wife  were  taken  away  with  their

hands tied. I never learned why. They never came back. Huoy and I had aservice, the same as we did for my father, sompeahing, bowing, praying. We

lit the same candles, which were already burned down to stubs. There were

only two of us to pray for their souls. We wondered who would light candles

for us.                                          23



                                      The Rains


 




The sky was clear at dawn.

By midmorning the first clouds had sailed in from the west, puffy and white,

like the cottony fibres of the kapok tree.

The clouds billowed and grew and spread out until they blocked the sun.

  From far away came the sound of thunder, a low rumbling, like bombs

from a B-52. The air turned cold. The wind rose, the rice flattened in the

fields and the trees bent over on the hillocks with their leaves flying off

horizontally.

  Small tornadoes of dust and rice stalks spun through the fields and onto the

bare ground by the longhouses. Clothes flew off clotheslines. Thatch panels

flapped on the roofs and wood frames creaked. The people tied their kramas

tightly around their heads, and clapped their hands over their faces to protect

themselves from the dust.

For  a  minute  or  two,  the  wind  paused  and  the  trees  and  the  rice

straightened. It was as dark as twilight. In the stillness the birds chirped with

unusual  loudness  and  clarity.  Swallows  dipped  and  rose  through  the  air,

hunting for insects.

  Then the sky closed in. The wind blew and the trees leaned over and the

rain fell diagonally from the black undersides of the clouds, stinging my face.

I ducked my head but the wind pushed my hat brim against my cheek, and

when I raised my head the brim flew up and the rain stung me again. The

droplets made a tinkling noise when they struck the water in the rice paddies,

and splashed upward again like tiny fountains. I could see the man next to meswinging  his  hoe,  and  beyond  him  there  was  another  one  less  distinctly.

Beyond that there was nobody at all, no people and no landscape, only a veil

of water.

I loved the rains. They made the greens in the landscape brighter, the clay

redder. The coolness they brought was like the answer to a prayer. Leaves

sprouted on the trees, rice paddies turned green, insects and fish and crabs

multiplied. Life was better. On the front lines we were given more food. We

didn’t have to work at night. There were fewer evening meetings, because the

leaders  didn’t  like  getting  wet.  The  water  dripped  from  the  eaves  of  the

longhouse with a sound like the softest music. It splashed from roofs and

trees onto the ground, flowed down the paths, cut snaking, twisting channels

where it chose. In the longhouse Huoy and I put the white plastic tarp above

us, but that didn’t keep us dry. Lightning flashed, as bright as day. Thunder

boomed like artillery, and Huoy wrapped her arms around me and buried her

head in my chest for protection. It rained for days and then turned foggy, with

a shower so fine and thin it was nearly invisible.

  During the rainy season of 1976, from about July through September, I

worked with a mobile crew, filling in wherever help was needed. We built

more dykes. We ploughed fields, planted and transplanted rice. Sometimes

we tended oxen and water buffalo. But our biggest job was road repair. On

the road leading toward the Khmer Rouge headquarters at Phum Phnom, the

runoff  water  had  carved  a  gully  thirty  yards  long.  Brown,  muddy  water

poured through like a river, and the rice fields beyond were like a lake.

We hadn’t seen the sun in a week. With new members there were eight

men in our crew, each with a hatchet and hoe. We cut saplings near the

roadside and put the trunks vertically in the ground as a stockade against the

water flow. We laid logs and branches behind to buttress it, and packed it full

of mud entangled with roots and plants. The rain was falling steadily, neither

hard nor soft.

I told the others which trees to chop, where to get the mud, even though I

was not the official leader. My father used to say, ‘Think like a boss, not like

a worker.’ He meant that it is better to use your brain and be active than to be

sullen and passive, as most workers are. I worked harder than anyone in the

crew because it kept my mind sharp and because it kept me from thinking

about other things. For hours at a time, if I was lucky, I would not have a

mental picture of my father’s face when he was tied up, or my brother and his

wife when they were being marched away.I chopped down a sapling and threw it like a spear across a small canal,

where the others were building the vertical stockade. They moved in slow

motion, their tiredness a form of protest. Only one worked as hard as me. His

name  was  Seng,  and  he  was  overseeing  us  that  day.  He  was  short  and

muscular, maybe fifty years old, with Buddhist tattoos on his chest. He was a

village chief on the back lines and one of Chev’s assistant chiefs on the front

lines.

  From farther up the road, out of sight, came a noise interrupting the quiet

of the rain. It sounded like an engine whining at high rpm and tyres spinning

in the mud. Seng raised his head to listen, then walked off to investigate.

I chopped another sapling down without slowing my pace. It was funny

about Seng – ‘Uncle’ Seng, as he liked to be called. He was the only one of

the Khmer Rouge who seemed fully human. The last time he supervised us,

we  had  been  tending  livestock.  While  I  sneaked  off  to  cook  a  meal  in  a

hillock, a pair of oxen wandered off into the forest. I looked for them all night

and  didn’t  find  them  until  morning.  Chev  would  have  killed  me  for

carelessness if he had known, but Uncle Seng only warned me not to do it

again. He had never ordered anybody killed.

That wasn’t to say I trusted him. If he thought I was a model worker, fine.

If he liked me as a person, even better. Neither he nor anyone else knew that I

led a double life. They didn’t know that almost every night I crept out of the

longhouse to steal. I took vegetables from a nearby village. I carried my

hatchet as a weapon, ready to attack anyone who caught me. I was willing to

die. They had already taken everything else away from me except for Huoy,

and Huoy and I had decided that if the time came we would commit suicide

together.

  ‘Hey! All of you!’ Uncle Seng’s reappearance broke my train of thought.

He was waving for us to follow him. I plunged into the canal and swam

across it with my hoe and hatchet. When I climbed out I was no wetter than I

had been before.

I  trotted  down  the  road  with  a  few  others  just  behind  me  and  the  rest

hurrying to catch up. When we got close to Seng we saw a low, wide, model

B-1 jeep with a cloth roof.

  Only one jeep looked like that in the Phnom Tippeday region, and that was

the one belonging to the highest-ranking civilian Khmer Rouge. I had often

seen it driving around, the leader’s right arm sticking out of the passenger

window, his hand on the roof.One of the jeep’s wheels had become stuck between logs lain across the

road below the surface. The motor roared, the tyres spun and a plume of

slippery mud shot to the rear. The driver, a soldier with a green Mao cap, sat

blankly behind the steering wheel and revved the accelerator while two other

soldiers pushed the jeep from behind. Nothing happened. The tyres spun and

the wheel sank even farther between the logs, tilting the jeep at a crazy angle.

‘Stop, please,’ a voice said mildly, and the driver lifted his foot from the

accelerator. I walked behind and saw a man bending down to examine the

wheel. He wore the same black pajama uniform and Mao cap as the soldiers,

but there was something about him that suggested authority. He was good-

natured, with narrow Chinese eyes and a wart on his cheek. It’s Chea Huon, I

said to myself. Then I thought: No, it can’t be.

‘What should we do?’ he asked the driver, but the driver was too shy to

answer. Better to act stupid than risk contradicting a superior – that was the

driver’s attitude. Typically Cambodian. If Chea Huon said the best way to get

the jeep out was to spit on the tyres, the driver would have started spitting.

But I was not sure it was Chea Huon. He had the same slight build, hunched

shoulders and bad posture. The same wart. If it was not Chea Huon it was his

twin. What was he doing here?

  ‘We’ll  do  it  for  you,  comrade,’  Seng  said  deferentially  to  him.  ‘We’re

already muddy. No need for you to be muddy too. Come on,’ he said to our

group. While Chea Huon watched, the rest of us and the two bodyguards

started pushing the jeep. If he noticed me glancing at him, then away, then at

him again, he didn’t react. He looked as if he wanted to oblige Seng, to

cooperate with what was asked of him.

The rest of us pushed, but the tyres spun and the jeep sank even lower. We

weren’t getting any traction.

‘Uncle Seng,’ I said, ‘maybe we could try putting tree branches under the

tyres. It might give them something to catch hold of.’

  Chea Huon had started walking slowly down the road. ‘Good idea,’ he said

over his shoulder.

At Seng’s nod, we picked up our hatchets. ‘Get long tree trunks if you

can,’ I called to the others in the group. ‘Branches too, and rocks if you find

any.’ Two of them immediately started hacking at a tree by the side of the

road. I followed Chea Huon and passed him. He was pointing at a sapling

farther on. I started to hack at its branches. He came even with me.

  There was nobody else in earshot.I spoke in a low voice, without looking at him. ‘Excuse me, luk teacher. I

may be wrong, but your name is Chea Huon. You were a teacher in Takeo. I

recognize the mark on your cheek.’

  ‘You know me?’

  ‘You taught me in 1962 and 1963.’

I removed the last of the branches, bent down, and attacked the trunk.

‘Yes, you’re right,’ he said after a moment. ‘And I now know who you are

too. You got your doctor’s degree, right?’

‘Yes, luk teacher.’

The rain fell. He stood with his hands on his hips, nodding his head up and

down to show he understood. Then he came closer, patted me on the shoulder

and said in a kind and friendly voice, ‘Just keep working and stay quiet.’

The  two  bodyguards  came  up  before  he  could  say  more.  They  walked

within  earshot  and  then  stood  a  respectful  distance  away.  I  bent  over,

chopping at the trunk of the sapling. Only a few more blows to go. It was up

to Chea Huon, to keep on talking or not.

‘. . . And how is the rice coming along?’ he asked me, as if we were

continuing our conversation. ‘Is the irrigation under control?’

‘It goes very well, comrade,’ I answered, a little louder than necessary.

‘Right now we have a heavy flow of water coming down from the hills and

cutting the road, but under Uncle Seng’s leadership we have launched a road-

repairing offensive. We have already repaired many washed-out spots.’

‘We must fight on all battlefields,’ Chea Huon replied piously. ‘We must

struggle to control nature.’

  With  that  he  walked  farther  down  the  road  to  inspect  the  rice  fields,

followed by the bodyguards. I carried the pieces of the sapling back to the

jeep.

I  got  on  my  hands  and  knees  in  the  mud  and  jammed  the  branches

underneath the tyre. Then I directed the others to bring the branches and the

rocks, while making sure that Uncle Seng approved of the way things were

proceeding so he would appear to be the one in charge. The driver wasn’t

very bright and didn’t understand that he had to rock his jeep forward and

back so we could work the branches in. I had to be polite about telling him

what to do, because his rank was much higher than mine and I didn’t want

him to lose face.

  Covered in mud from head to toe, I thought about those long-ago days

when  I  went  to  Chea  Huon  for  free  tutoring  in  mathematics.  He  lived  asimple, spartan life. In his house on stilts outside Takeo he wore a sarong,

like  a  farmer.  When  we  students  were  thirsty  we  dipped  a  bowl  into  the

earthern water jar. He was very pure and intellectual and treated everybody

the same. I never suspected he was communist until later, in 1967, when I

visited him in jail in Phnom Penh. Yet when I looked back, it all made sense.

He was typical of the idealists who joined the communists in the 1960s and

then  vanished  into  the  forests.  Yes,  he  was  about  the  right  age  and

background to be at his level of the Khmer Rouge hierarchy.

I pushed more branches in the tyre’s hole. When the driver rocked forward

and back we wedged the poles farther and farther in.

  Chea Huon knew I was a doctor. Somehow I was certain he wouldn’t turn

me in. But everything else about him left me confused. ‘Just keep working

and stay quiet,’ he had told me. And that was all. What was that supposed to

mean – that he wasn’t going to help me? He had a brain, he had eyes! He saw

the unhealed sores on my arms and legs and face. He knew I was a doctor. It

was in his power to order me to set up a real clinic, to treat the sick on the

front lines. He had a higher rank than Chev. He could save even me from

being a war slave, if he wanted. He could take me off the front lines!

Why didn’t he?

We  rocked  the  jeep  forward  and  back,  wedging  more  and  more  brush

underneath. Finally the jeep popped out of the hole and onto the level road

surface.

  Chea Huon returned from inspecting the flooded fields. He was soaking

wet, but unlike the rest of us he was not muddy. He thanked everybody and

looked at each of us briefly in turn, nodding and smiling. He turned to Uncle

Seng. ‘That one there,’ he said, pointing at me, ‘is a good worker. He shows

initiative. Take good care of him.’

  Then he climbed in his jeep and drove off, disappearing in the drizzle.

We stood there, holding our hatchets and hoes. The road was emptier than

before. The rain was cold on our skins.


The rest of that day, and the next day, and for many to come, questions and

attempts at answers crowded my brain:

  Chea Huon is educated. He is smart. He is not like the rest. Why then does

he allow those like Chev to kill people like my father and brother? Does he

know about it, or not?

If he does know, why doesn’t he stop the killing? He is smart enough torealize that the revolution will fail if it doesn’t have the support of the people.

If he doesn’t know of the killings directly, he must have heard about them.

If he hasn’t heard, how could he be so stupid? But I know he isn’t stupid, so

he must have heard of them.

He is the head man in the entire region! Doesn’t he have enough power to

stop the killing? And if he doesn’t have enough power, why doesn’t he go to

someone higher up who does?

I must go to his headquarters to talk to him and ask why there is so much

killing. He would receive me. He knows me from the past. If I could get

through to him, it could change the entire situation on the front lines. The

upper-level  Khmer  Rouge  just  need  to  realize  what  a  disaster  they  have

created. Then they would change it.

No, they wouldn’t. They wouldn’t do that at all.

I must think this over carefully.

Dam doeum kor.

I don’t want to go to Khmer Rouge headquarters. It is too dangerous. I

cannot trust Chea Huon, because he has killed many, many people. He must

have. He is one of them! The last thing the Khmer Rouge want is suggestions

for change. They would call it complaining or having a capitalist mentality.

They would kill me for sure.

I am afraid.

And – I think – Chea Huon is afraid too.                                          24



                                  Rice Farming


 




When the heaviest of the rains was over and the roads were fixed, my group

went back to rice farming.

  Farming was our reason for being on the front lines. Directly or indirectly,

everything centred around it. We dug canals to have irrigation water for the

dry season and to prevent flooding in the rainy season. We built paddy dykes

to grow rice on a huge scale. We tended oxen and water buffalo so they could

pull our ploughs. We guided the ploughs and harrows around and around the

fields. We went to propaganda meetings so the Khmer Rouge could tell us

how glorious farming was.

For anyone whose mind had been sharpened by education, farming was

easy to learn. When another man in my group broke a wooden plough tip, I

walked into the forest, chopped a tree down and made a replacement part. In

an hour he was ploughing again. When someone stole the reins for my oxen,

probably to eat the leather, a common practice on the front lines, I didn’t get

upset. I went into the forest again, cut vines, quartered them and braided the

outer strips. The new reins were as tightly woven and strong as anything the

old peasants could make. And I cursed the Khmer Rouge for saying that

anybody could practise medicine. It had taken me seven years of training to

get my degree as a doctor. There was no single skill of farming that I couldn’t

learn  in  a  day.  What  nonsense,  to  say  that  only  the  peasants  possessed

worthwhile knowledge!

Yet I liked farming. I liked working with the rice plants most of all. When

the seedbeds were ploughed and harrowed and a few inches of rainwatercovered the soil, we put seed rice (rice with the husks on, or paddy rice) in

pails for a few days to sprout. We took handfuls of sprouts and scattered them

into the water, which had been fertilized with manure. A day or two later,

narrow, whitish shoots showed above the water. A few days more and the

shoots had turned a pale green, and then a delicate green that is difficult to

describe. This was the most critical phase of rice cultivation. A hard rain

could cover the young shoots with water and kill them in a few hours. A lack

of  rain  could  deprive  them  of  water  and  do  the  same.  We  stood  by  the

seedbeds with our hoes to let water in and out of the dykes as needed.

A month after planting, the rice seedlings were a foot high and densely

packed together, like a lawn. There is no sight in the world as lovely as a

young rice field with the sun shining through. It is like light shining through

stained glass, only more natural, and more refreshing to the eyes. The rice has

a clean, fragrant smell. Walk close to it and you can see the clouds and the

sky reflected on the water between the stalks, or the reflection of your own

face,  until  the  wind  ripples  the  water  surface  and  stirs  the  rice  shoots  in

waves.

It was on sunny mornings in the rice fields that I felt happiest. The air was

fresh. The scenery was beautiful in every direction. Working in the fields did

something  to  me,  like  awakening  an  ancestral  memory.  My  parents  had

farmed rice when they were young. I was descended from people who had

farmed  rice  generation  after  generation,  as  far  back  as  there  had  been  a

human race. It was almost enough to make me forget what had happened

under the Khmer Rouge and forgive them. Almost, but not quite. If only I had

time to fish and to gather foods openly, if only they didn’t kill us, if only men

like  me  had  time  to  make  love  to  our  wives  and  raise  our  families  with

dignity and take care of our old parents – if, if, if – I would have accepted my

fate, and become a rice farmer with all my heart and soul.

The most backbreaking part of the cycle was transplanting the rice from

the crowded seedbeds to the rest of the fields. Most of the collective was

mobilized to help with it. We used an ancient technique for uprooting the

seedlings: standing with our knees bent to take the strain off our backs, we

grabbed a few rice shoots at a time with a circular motion. The shoots came

up easily and we put them in our left hands. When our left hands were full we

swished the roots around in the water to loosen the mud, lifted our left feet

and whacked the roots against the instep to make the mud and water fly off.

Then we stacked the clean, neat bundles of shoots in the water behind us andmoved forward. To either side were people doing the same; we were in a long

line, making patient progress across a field.

  Then  came  replanting,  another  ancient  technique.  Carrying  bunches  of

shoots in the crooks of our arms, taking care that the roots always stayed wet,

we transferred the shoots one at a time to our right hands and planted them

with a swift thumb-and-forefinger motion, first poking a hole in the mud with

our thumbs, then lowering the roots into the hole, then tamping the mud

around  the  stalk  with  our  forefingers.  Two  plants  in  a  row,  then  a  step

forward  and  one  in  the  next  row,  then  two  again,  planting  in  equilateral

triangles. Again, I was part of a row of people working its way slowly across

a field. The fields seemed to go on and on without end. It was an extremely

ambitious planting programme.

  Everything  about  the  front  lines  was  ambitious.  There  wasn’t  much

planning or careful follow-through. The canals on which we had worked such

agonizing hours were never a success. The rains had rounded the edges and

silted the bottoms. In some places the water surged right over the canals, tore

away huge patches of rice plants and carried the plants off with the current.

For the fields that survived, and well over half did, the crews were too small

to keep up with the maintenance. We went out there with our hoes, to weed

and to regulate the water levels by tearing down or building up dykes, but we

were like tiny human figurines in a vast landscape. Chev threatened us, but

we simply couldn’t do it all. Most ‘new’ people didn’t even feel like trying.

Whether we were diligent or not, we knew we would get the same amount of

rice at harvest-time. There were no incentives. It was not like the old days,

when the peasants worked much less and planted smaller crops, but ate more

because they knew what they were doing and could keep what they produced.

I worked hard to keep my mind sharp, but the others in the crew were

sullen and slow and did as little as they could get away with. When there

were no guards in sight we caught crabs in the rice paddies, then sat down

and talked about food. The conversations were always the same:

  ‘Ahhhh . . .’ (a big sigh). It was a man named Som, who had one withered

arm and who was our most outspoken critic of the regime. ‘Look at all this

rice. We can plant it but we cannot eat it.’

‘Of course you can eat it,’ I said. ‘Just start chewing on a stalk, the way an

ox chews on grass.’

‘Do you remember Phnom Penh?’ said Som. ‘Rice every day? Anytime

you  wanted  it  you  could  step  into  a  restaurant.  You  could  have  it  withanything you wanted, fried rice, steamed rice – ’

‘I’d rather have some noodles,’ another man said. ‘Every afternoon, I had

noodle soup with curried beef and fish balls. Very spicy and tasty – ’

  ‘No, fried noodles are better, with ginger and beef – ’

  Everybody was talking now.

  ‘Fish fried with ginger and lemongrass was my wife’s specialty – ’

‘What I wouldn’t give for some fried catfish. Or pork.’

‘. . . or some juicy grilled chicken stuffed with herbs – ’

‘. . . so juicy, so tasty – ’

  ‘How about fruits?’ said Som. ‘Do you remember papayas? Mangoes? The

tiny fried bananas in the market? I used to buy a bag of those every morning

– ’

‘. . . so delicious, so good – ’

We sat in the paddies and reminisced, licking our lips while our stomachs

rumbled.

  ‘No, noooooo! Don’t remind me! Enough of this!’ said our group leader.

‘We’ve got to get back to work.’

‘Or cognac with ginseng,’ said Som. ‘I used to drink that before going to a

whorehouse. Put my brain to sleep but woke my dick up – ’

‘Be quiet, will you? I don’t have the strength to think about sex. Let me get

my belly full of food first.’

  ‘Back to work, comrades,’ said the group leader. ‘I think I see a guard

coming.’

‘. . . fried rice with pork and lots of soy sauce . . .’ Som muttered as he

picked up his hoe.


When the rains stopped the rice paddies still held a foot of water. The plants

branched and swelled to the sides – ‘pregnant’ was how they were usually

described. They gave off a sweet, fertile smell. As the water in the paddies

dried, seed buds appeared and the plants turned a tawny gold.

As the harvest approached, Uncle Seng assigned us to make scarecrows for

the paddies and to chase birds away when the scarecrows failed. We were

also supposed to guard the fields against thieves. Naturally, we field workers

were the biggest thieves of all. We just had to be careful, because we never

knew when chhlop might be watching. I ducked down between the rows of

rice  plants  and  stripped  the  seeds  off  lower  branches.  I  stored  them  in

whatever container I could find, then went back to pick it up at night-timewhen nobody could see me.

  Finally,  in  November  1976,  the  harvest  began.  Everyone  had  high

expectations. Chev said the regime was going to trade the surplus rice to

other countries for tractors and bulldozers, so we could grow even more rice

the next year. We ‘new’ people had hopes of eating bowl after bowl of real

rice, the full year around, instead of the thin gruel with a spoonful of rice the

common kitchen served at meals.

  Everybody in the collective was mobilized for the harvest. Even Huoy,

who worked in the kitchen, came out to the fields and worked beside me in

one of those long rows that stretched from one side of the field to the other

and was just one of many rows in sight. We cut hour after hour, placing

bundles of rice behind us, which others piled on oxcarts and drove off to the

threshing ground.

As soon as the first rice was threshed, the common kitchen began serving

real rice at meals. We weren’t satisfied. The rice was ours. We wanted more.

We helped ourselves to the rice in the fields. Smoke rose from quick, furtive

fires on every hillock. We used sticks and holes in the ground as makeshift

mortars and pestles, milling the husks away, then cooked the rice and ate it as

fast as we could. Little children sat by the fields, pounding sticks into holes,

sometimes just imitating the elders in play, but usually with actual rice in the

bottom of the holes, milling the husks from the white inner seeds.

The soldiers tried to stop the stealing. To set an example, they took a four-

year-old child who had been milling rice and tied him to a post in front of his

parents. They made the parents watch their little boy without touching him or

giving  him  any  food  or  water  until  a  few  days  later,  when  he  died  of

dehydration. But even the horror of that punishment didn’t stop the rest of us

from stealing.

As we cut the stalks in the fields, revolutionary songs blared from the

loudspeakers,  alternating  with  news  broadcasts  from  the  radio.  The  news

programmes  announced  the  ‘glorious  victory  over  the  elements’  that  had

resulted in a harvest larger than ever before. ‘Soon we will begin the struggle

again to put more fields into production!’ said the announcer, who started

reading a long list of rice tonnage statistics in which Phnom Tippeday was

mentioned.  ‘The  women  and  men  there  are  very  active  and  working

vigorously in the harvest! And they are very happy, singing in the rice fields

and coming home to plenty of rice to eat!’

That was what the Khmer Rouge radio said. But in reality there was nosinging.  Our  faces  had  become  pained  and  sorrowful.  A  month  after  the

harvest began, while we were still cutting the fields, the rations were cut back

again. Not to watery rice, but to a loose porridge with five or six spoonsful of

rice in each bowl. Next year, Chev promised us, we would get to eat more.

  From  a  distance,  with  aching  hearts,  we  watched  the  activity  at  the

threshing  grounds.  Soldiers  poured  the  rice  into  large  hempen  sacks  and

loaded  them  onto  trucks.  The  trucks  drove  off.  A  few  were  unloaded  at

nearby warehouses under heavy guard. Most drove away and vanished. And

by early January 1977, when the harvest was half through, we were eating

watery rice again.                                          25



                                      The Dam


 




The Khmer Rouge always held meetings before the start of new projects to

make sure we had the correct revolutionary understanding of our tasks. In

January 1977 they called a mass meeting and gave us half a day off to attend

it – a very unusual step for a regime that never gave weekends, vacations or

any other relief from the work routine.

On the day of the meeting I collected my ration of watery rice, put it in my

field cooking pot and started walking. The paths and roads were crowded

with ‘new’ people heading toward the same destination. Huoy was waiting

for me there. We sat down on a hillock, spread her krama over both our heads

as a sunshade and took out our food. I brought leaves of water convolvulus

and several aquatic plants called truoy snor and slap chang wa and kamping

puoy. Huoy had fixed a traditional dish of crabs ground up with tamarind and

peppers. We ate with our spoons, reaching into the watery rice and then the

crabs and the leaves. It was a good rural-style meal under the circumstances,

though with real rice it would have been much better.

  Around  us  sat  war  slaves  in  ragged  clothes,  eating  watery  rice  with

whatever they had found to add to it. It was the largest gathering I had seen

on the front lines – more than ten thousand people, by my guess. Yet we

looked  small  in  comparison  to  our  surroundings.  To  the  east,  drab  clay

flatland stretched for miles, broken by the humps of two hills. To the north,

the mountain ridge rose almost vertically, the ridgeline hiding the old temple,

which lay on the far side. To the west, the ridge curved around and southward

to a point in front of us, where it was joined by the start of an earthen dam.The completed segment of the dam was a slope of orange clay about a

hundred  feet  high  and  a  hundred  feet  long.  When  finished,  the  dam  was

supposed to connect to the first hill, from there to the second hill and from

there to the big curving mountain ridge, making a reservoir in the shape of a

ring.

  Huge red flags hung limply from poles on top of the dam segment and on

top  of  the  ridge.  Armed  soldiers  walked  from  one  flagpole  to  the  next,

keeping a lookout for trouble that would never come from unarmed people as

tired and beaten-down as we were. Where the dam and ridge intersected, a

stage had been set up, with more red flags and palm fronds around the dais

and on top of the roof. A jeep was parked off to one side of the stage, and

next to the jeep a horse was tethered. A throbbing generator powered the

loudspeakers.

On the stage sat Chea Huon, his subordinate Comrade Ik – the old man

who rode the horse – and the village chiefs, including Chev and the kindly

Uncle Seng. The lesser leaders had already made their speeches, expressed

their allegiance and repeated revolutionary clichés. The master of ceremonies

was at the microphone.

  ‘Today is an historic day,’ he was saying. ‘We have an opportunity to

listen to our leader speak about the new dam-building offensive. He will talk

about the revolutionary spirit of struggle and renunciation! Let us show him

how firmly we take our destiny in hand! Let us demonstrate our solidarity

with Angka’s goal of rebuildmg our nation! Here’s Sama Mit Vanh! Please

give him a big hand!’

  Everybody  clapped  dutifully  as  the  thin,  stooped  figure  stepped  to  the

microphone.  Of  ten  thousand  people,  only  Huoy  and  I  knew  his  original

identity: Chea Huon. To the rest he was Sama Mit Vanh. ‘Vanh’ was his

revolutionary nom de querre. ‘Sama Mit’, meaning ‘Equal Comrade’, was a

title given only to high officials. I always wondered why the bosses were

called  Equal  Comrades;  it  was  another  one  of  the  Khmer  Rouge’s  crazy

inconsistencies.

  ‘LONG  LIVE  THE  KAMPUCHEAN  REVOLUTION!’  Chea  Huon

bellowed into the microphone, his amplified voice echoing off the mountain

walls.

We  scrambled  to  our  feet  and  answered,  ‘Long  live  the  Kampuchean

revolution!’ pounding our right fists over our hearts, then raising our fists in

the straight-arm salute.  ‘LONG LIVE THE KAMPUCHEAN REVOLUTION!’ he repeated. We

gave it back to him. ‘LONG LIVE THE KAMPUCHEAN REVOLUTION!’

he said a third time, and we answered. Then he recited other revolutionary

slogans, three times each, and we echoed, as automatically as the mountain,

and saluted with our fists.

  ‘Long live the great solidarity!

  ‘Down with the American capitalists!

  ‘Long live the great leap forward!

  ‘Long live the great prosperity!

  ‘Long live the great splendour!’

  When everybody sat down again, Chea Huon began his speech. He spoke

in a mild voice, though to emphasize his points he waved his two clenched

fists. It was a gesture I remembered from the classroom in Takeo.

I still couldn’t get over it. My former teacher, who had helped me when I

was an adolescent, was now the leader of my enemies.

It wasn’t so much that Chea Huon had killed my father and my brother. He

didn’t deserve all the blame for that. Chev, who sat smiling and nodding

onstage, had been much more directly responsible for their deaths. Of course,

Chea Huon could have stopped Chev from killing so many, but on the front

lines the cooperative leaders had a great deal of autonomy. It was our bad

luck to get Chev as a leader rather than a basically kind man like Uncle Seng.

No,  what  amazed  me  most  about  Chea  Huon  was  the  change  in  his

character. He was the first intellectual I had ever known. He was very smart.

But if he was smart he couldn’t possibly believe what he was saying to us

now, in the dam dedication ceremony.

He had begun with a recital of the victory over the American capitalists.

How the patriots had fought the American invaders, first with ‘empty hands,’

later with hatchets and crossbows, and driven them out of Cambodia. It was a

lie. And he knew it was a lie. The Americans had hardly ever engaged the

Khmer  Rouge  in  head-on  combat.  American  ground  troops  had  been  in

Cambodia for only a few months, in 1970, fighting the North Vietnamese.

The US bombing had stopped in 1973, two years before the communists took

over.

But  Chea  Huon  wasn’t  interested  in  facts.  The  myth  of  defeating  the

Americans  was  something  that  the  Khmer  Rouge  repeated  over  and  over

again until they believed it. They needed to believe in it, because it was the

basis  of  their  programmes  to  develop  the  country.  To  them,  defeating  asuperpower proved that they, the Khmer Rouge, were superior beings, like

supermen. If they had defeated the largest superpower in the world, they were

capable of anything. Nothing could stop them. Nothing could stand in their

way. Not logic. Not common sense. Not even the laws of physics. And if they

were supermen surely we, their war slaves, could work twenty-hour days and

never complain.

He said that anti-aircraft guns would shoot down any American planes that

dared fly over Cambodian territory and send them hurtling in flames into the

sea. I thought, Oh yeah, motherfucker? I’d like to see what would really

happen if the Americans came back. In my mind’s eye American jet fighters

came in low and fast over the treetops, and the stage went up in splinters and

black smoke and billowing flames. If the planes blew me up too that was all

right.

  Chea Huon said, ‘Democratic Kampuchea isn’t afraid of any aggressors.

Right now our soldiers are guarding the borders against imperialist invaders.’

Oh yeah? I thought. I wish the imperialist invaders good luck. Whoever they

are. Probably the Khmer Serei. I’ve heard they have been growing stronger

near  the  Thai  border.  Why  don’t  you  tell  us  who  the  invaders  are,  Chea

Huon? But he didn’t.

He  talked  for  the  first  hour  and  into  the  second  hour  and  it  was  all

propaganda. Word for word, the same as the speeches on the radio. ‘Under

the  regime  of  the  arch-fascist,  arch-corrupt,  arch-imperialist  Lon  Nol,  we

were oppressed and never had any happiness.’ The same nonsense. ‘Under

the glorious rule of Angka, we have entered a new age, as masters of the

nation, the land, the waters, the rice fields and our destiny, working together

to achieve independence-sovereignty.’ Chea Huon wasn’t telling us anything

we hadn’t heard before. What he was doing was proving his orthodoxy. It

was like what he had said to me when I was cutting the sapling and his

bodyguards came near:

‘We must fight on all battlefields. We must struggle to control nature.’ The

words meant nothing – except that he was faithful to Angka. I wondered why

someone as high-ranking as that needed to go to such lengths to show his

devotion.

At last, in the third hour, he began to talk about the dam. ‘It is a big

project,’ he said. ‘When it is finished and we have connected the mountains,

we will have a water supply the full year around. We will use the water to

grow two or even three annual rice crops. We will never go hungry again. Wewill eat rice anytime we want, day or night.’

  ‘Liar,’ I said under my breath.

‘But,’ he said, clenching both fists and waving them in front of his body,

‘the dam will not just be used for agriculture. No, comrades! The water will

also drive turbines to create electrical power! People from here to the Thai

border, in the cities, in the villages and in the jungles will all have electricity

to use!’

I looked at the tiny segment of the dam that had already been completed

and at the miles of dry surrounding landscape. We didn’t have any concrete

to build the dam with. All we had was clay. We didn’t have any bulldozers to

dig with. All we had was hoes. Our earlier projects on the front lines had all

failed. The canals hadn’t stopped the flooding. There had been a halfhearted

attempt to use canal water to irrigate fields for dry-season rice, but the rice

had all died. And the dam was to be much larger than anything else we had

attempted – on the same scale as the huge hydroelectric dams in America and

Europe. Huoy poked me in the ribs and I turned back toward the stage again.

  ‘And when we have electricity we will build factories,’ Chea Huon was

saying. ‘We won’t even need oxcarts anymore! We will build our own cars

and trucks in our factories! Each family will have at least one car. And each

house will have its own electric lights, to turn on and off whenever we like!

And – this is not all – after we build factories, we will build skyscrapers near

the reservoir! Anyone who wants an apartment to live in will have one! Our

nation will be developed! Our factories will build our own bulldozers and

tractors! We will use our machines to perform all the labour we need! And we

will never use human beings to farm again!

  ‘LONG LIVE THE KAMPUCHEAN REVOLUTION!’ he roared, and the

mass of ragged people struggled to its feet and obediently told him what he

wanted to hear.

  ‘LONG LIVE THE GREAT SOLIDARITY!’ Onstage, the old skinny man

and Chev and the rest of the leaders outdid one another with their enthusiasm

and their clenched-fist salutes.

  ‘LONG LIVE THE GREAT LEAP FORWARD!’ On the site of the future

city of skyscrapers and factories and shining automobiles there were exactly

two  machines,  sitting  on  the  clay:  a  generator,  to  amplify  Chea  Huon’s

words, and a jeep to take him away. I hoped he would leave soon. The Chea

Huon I used to know didn’t exist anymore. A puppet named Sama Mit Vanh

occupied his body.  ‘LONG LIVE THE GREAT PROSPERITY!’

Give me real rice to eat.

  ‘LONG LIVE THE GREAT SPLENDOUR!’

Just give me rice. And forget your stupid dreams.


To supply the dam project with labour the front lines were reorganized once

again. Several cooperatives like ours were merged into a giant one whose

headquarters was next to the dam site. Huoy lost her job in the kitchen. She

became a dam worker, carrying mud baskets. She worked harder than before,

for much longer hours, with much less to eat.

I was luckier. My group – the same I had worked with since rescuing Chea

Huon’s jeep – was assigned to build houses on the back lines. Now that a

hydroelectric dam was being built and the region was entering a new stage of

development, the nearby villages were supposed to have permanent housing

for ‘new’ and ‘old’ people. The houses were on stilts in traditional style, but

they would hold three or four families each instead of just one. It was an easy

job. We hammered secondhand nails into used boards. If the poles rested on

dirt instead of foundations, or if one roof wasn’t finished before we moved on

to the next, we didn’t care. We were just following orders. We didn’t have to

work in the evenings. We didn’t have to go to many political meetings. We

moved from one village to the next, sleeping in the houses we built.

For me, life was much easier than before. My health was good. I was

skinny but tough, and my infections had finally healed. There was only one

drawback, and that was being apart from Huoy. I asked permission to rejoin

her. I volunteered to work on the dam. But the leaders said no. They never

even considered my request. To them, ‘new’ people were lower-level beings,

politically suspect, enemies. To give in to my wishes would imply that I was

on the same level as they. They could not give me permission without losing

face.

If  Huoy  and  I  had  been  like  most  married  ‘new’  people,  being  apart

wouldn’t have mattered. The strain of work, the shortage of food and the

absence of normal family life had turned most marriages sour. There just

wasn’t much left to keep couples together. Sex hadn’t disappeared entirely

but there wasn’t much of it, because husbands and wives didn’t have the

energy or the privacy. People carried within them an unspoken fear. They

worried about their own survival, and they didn’t trust anyone else, even their

spouses.  Huoy and I had been exceptions. We spent all our free time together. We

went for walks, talking and gathering wild foods when it was possible. We

shared our food. We had the normal arguments between husbands and wives,

but no more. I had never forgotten how Huoy had nursed me when I was sick

and when I came back from prison. I needed her. I relied on her judgement.

Every day she told me to keep my mouth shut, to plant a kapok tree. And she

needed me to keep her from giving in to fear and depression.

  Within a few weeks of being assigned to my new job I was commuting to

the dam site to spend the nights with her. I didn’t have permission. If the

soldiers had caught me they would have killed me. But it was a relatively

peaceful time in the area. There were few purges and hardly any night-time

sentries. Besides, I figured that if I couldn’t be with her it didn’t matter what

happened to me.

I made my nightly trips with a man named Som from my work group. He

and I had fixed roads and dykes together, transplanted rice together, talked

about  the  foods  we  missed  together  and  now  we  were  building  houses

together. Like me, he wanted to spend the nights with his wife, who worked

in Huoy’s group on the dam.

Som was an intellectual from Phnom Penh. I knew that from his choice of

words and his accent. From the start I also sensed that he was an idealist and

a rebel. But he knew much more about me.

One day when he and I were alone, Som told me that he recognized me

from the military hospital in Phnom Penh. I felt a sudden tightening in my

stomach  and  told  him  it  was  impossible,  that  I  had  been  a  taxi  driver.

Whenever I thought about admitting I was a doctor, my mind turned to Pen

Tip. I still saw Pen Tip occasionally, and whenever I did it was all I could do

to control my anger.

Som pulled up the sleeve of his right arm and showed me a scar. He said

he had been wounded by a Khmer Rouge artillery shell and that I had done

the reconstructive surgery. When the Khmer Rouge came into the hospitals

on April 17, 1975 he had been in traction. He was forced to leave, and his

tibia had never healed properly. He now had about seventy percent use of his

right arm, which was visibly crooked and atrophied.

I didn’t remember operating on him and at first I thought he was lying. But

gradually it became clear that Som wasn’t trying to gain power over me. Nor

was he trying to gain favour with the Khmer Rouge. Whenever he had the

chance, Som cursed them behind their backs for the misery they had broughtus. He was far more outspoken than me. He told me he had been a Buddhist

monk for many years, then left the priesthood to become a student. He was

good at languages. Eventually he became an interpreter at the US embassy in

Phnom Penh.

This was not the sort of background an informer would confess to. Being a

monk was counterrevolutionary. Being a US embassy employee was cause

enough for a one-way trip to the woods. I watched Som closely for signs that

he was a chhlop. There weren’t any. We became friends. Sometimes, when

nobody else was around, he spoke English for me, and it sounded exactly like

the broadcasts on the Voice of America. I couldn’t understand what he was

saying except for occasional words that were similar to French. But I wanted

to understand.

  Among the books I kept wrapped in plastic and buried underground was

one that taught basic English words and phrases to French speakers. I had

traded some freshwater crabs for it in Phum Chhleav without quite knowing

why. Huoy often asked me to get rid of it; she pointed out that if it were

found it could mean my death. Now I realized why I had kept it. I wanted to

learn English.

Of course it was a crazy thing to do. I wanted to learn something, a new

subject of any kind, to keep my mind sharp. I needed to use my brain for

more than hammering nails for Angka. But I had another reason too. English

was the language of the enemy. Learning it was a subversive act. I asked Som

to become my teacher.

  During the day Som and I and about thirty others built houses. At the end

of the afternoon, when the bell rang, the crew put down its tools, and Som

and I got ready to visit our wives.

  After a quick dinner at the common kitchen we walked toward a nearby

lake as if to bathe. From the lake we cut over to a canal, a long, straight

trough of muddy water, the orange ball of the sinking sun reflecting on its

surface. Birds chirped and twittered, and swallows dipped and soared above

the water, catching insects. Frogs croaked, fell silent as we approached, then

croaked again when we had passed by.

  When there was nobody in sight I pulled some pages I had torn from the

book out of my pocket. We were on Huitième leçon, or, as it appeared in

English on the facing page, ‘Eighth Lesson.’ Without effort, I read the French

phrases:    1. Puis-je vous aider?

    2. Avez-vous du thé?

    3. Bien sur. En voulez-vous?

 

I pointed at the equivalent English phrases and asked Som, in Khmer, how to

pronounce them.

He  looked  at  the  first  one.  “Can  I  help  you?”  he  said  in  what  was

undoubtedly English in a Cambodian accent.

‘ “Can I hel’ jou?” ’ I repeated.

Som went on to the second phrase: ‘ “Have you got any tea?” ’

“Haf jou enny tea?” ’ I repeated. ‘Tea’ was an easy word. It was the same

as thé in French, only pronounced a bit differently. For that matter, it was like

té in Khmer, té in Teochiew and not too different from cha in Mandarin. The

lesson went on, the English sentences numbered down the page, the syllables

receiving the stress printed in boldface. As Som pointed out, it was a lesson

in British English:


    3. Of course. Do you want some?

    4. Yes, please. Give me two pounds. And a packet of biscuits.

    5. Do you want some beans?

    6. No, thanks. We’ve got some at home.

    7. Well, some bread?

    8. Yes, please. Two loaves. Oh, and half a pound of butter. That’s all.

    9. How much is that?

    10. That’s one pound twenty.

    11. Oh dear, I’ve only got one pound.

    12. You can pay the rest next time.

    13. Thanks very much. Good-bye.

    14. Good-bye, madam.

 

So much food! Extra food! People were so polite! You could even pay later if

you  wanted!  It  was  a  bit  confusing  how  the  British  used  ‘pounds’  as  a

measure of weight as well as money, but Som assured me that people who

spoke real English didn’t do that. ‘They use dollars,’ I said in Khmer, and

Som nodded solemnly. ‘I like dollars,’ I told him a moment later, thinking of

the  twenty-six  hundred  dollars  I  brought  back  from  Phnom  Penh  on  my

scooter, along with the medicine and the gold. Several times on the front linesI had traded a hundred-dollar bill for a yam. What amazed me was not that

American money was worth so little but that it was worth anything at all in a

society where money was outlawed and where there was no contact with the

outside world. But there it was – something very special about America that

inspired hope and faith. What a marvellous place it must be, America. So

much food to eat, and people so polite to each other. ‘ “Yes, pliss,” ’ I read

again. ‘ “Two loa-ves. Oh, and haff a poond of but-ter.” ’

It seemed completely normal to me, to be walking along the canal with

Som and asking him how to pronounce English words and phrases.

We  reached  the  dam  and  skirted  the  outdoor  meeting  where  the  ‘new’

people listened resignedly to the speeches. The message never changed: Lazy

people are enemies of the revolution. Because of traitors, the economy of the

country is very low. ‘Please give me a big hand,’ the speaker was saying,

followed by unenthusiastic applause.

We walked unnoticed into the longhouse. It was nearly empty, with most

of its inhabitants at work or at the meeting. I located Huoy’s hammock and

lay down in it and pulled the mosquito net over me. It was the mosquito net

we had brought from Phnom Penh, by now torn and mended many times, and

nearly black from the smoke of fires. To have one at all was a luxury. Most

people kept mosquitoes away by building fires with piles of rice husks. The

low, sloping, thatched ceiling reflected the red glow of fires, and smoke filled

the air.

  There was another round of applause outside and finally Huoy came in.

  ‘How was your day, sweet?’ I asked. ‘Did they give you enough food? Is

your health all right?’

‘Not too bad today, thanks. Have you been here long?’ She reached for her

washcloth and jar of homemade soap and began washing her face and hands.

  ‘No, I just got here.’ I loved watching her wash. She had learned a folk

recipe for making soap by burning the skin of kapok fruit, which was rich in

potash,  and  soaking  the  ashes  in  water.  She  was  always  clean.  Even  her

clothes were clean.

  She changed from her black work trousers and blouse into her sleeping

sarong, washed her feet, lifted the edge of the mosquito net and climbed in

beside  me,  clutching  her  pillow.  An  arm’s  length  away,  a  neighbour

remarked  from  his  hammock,  ‘How  nice!  What  a  loving  couple!  Always

coming here to visit your wife, eh, Samnang?’

I knew this fellow. He was friendly, like most of them in Huoy’s workgroup.

  ‘And why not?’ I answered. ‘I give ninety-nine percent to Angka, but I

keep one percent for myself. I keep my wife for me.’

The neighbour on the other side of the hammock said, ‘Aaeee! I hope one

percent of you is big and long enough to keep your wife satisfied!’

I found myself grinning in the darkness. ‘Nothing so lucky as that,’ I said.

‘My  wife  hates  me  very  much.  She  won’t  even  let  me  touch  her  in  the

hammock. She tells me she wants to be alone.’

  There was laughter throughout the longhouse. I always joked with them. It

helped pass the time and keep our minds from other worries.

In fact, Huoy’s soft, feminine body was snuggled next to mine, and she

was kissing me on the cheek. Now that she worked on the dam, this was our

only chance to be together. She put her lips next to my ear and whispered,

‘How were your rations today?’

I whispered back, ‘Not bad. A quarter at dinner.’ A condensed-milk can of

cooked rice, split among four people, dumped into watery broth. That was

what a quarter meant. But I had other thoughts on my mind.

  ‘Sweet,’ I said so carefully that even Huoy could barely hear, ‘I want to go

to America.’

We turned our heads so her mouth was next to my ear. ‘You’re crazy,’ she

said.

We turned our heads again. ‘I know,’ I said into her ear. ‘But we’ve got to

go there someday.’

  Som’s  lessons  had  started  me  thinking  about  America.  Plenty  of  food

there.  A  very  developed  country.  In  America,  dams  were  built  with  real

concrete, houses actually had electricity, skyscrapers were real. Heavy work

was  done  with  bulldozers  and  tractors.  It  was  a  place  as  different  from

Cambodia as heaven is from hell.

‘I’d rather be a dog in America than a human being in Cambodia,’ I added.

  Huoy’s fingertips found my temple, pushed gently, and her lips spoke into

my ear. ‘How do you know?’ said Huoy. ‘You’ve never even been outside of

Cambodia.’

‘I just know. Let me dream in peace, will you?’ As I closed my eyes, I

imagined what it would be like to be an American dog. How wonderful.

Human hands would reach down to pat me and brush my fur. They wouldn’t

beat me or torture me. My owner would put plenty of food in my dish, and I

could  eat  whenever  I  wanted.  If  I  got  sick  they  would  take  me  to  aveterinarian. I wouldn’t even have to work.

‘Do you want to know my dream?’ Huoy whispered sleepily.

‘To open a pastry shop,’ I said.

  ‘Well, first I want babies. When the regime is overturned I want to make

lots and lots of babies and raise them with you in a nice house, with plenty to

eat. But when the children are old enough to go to school I will open a sweet

shop. I just want to cook food and have good things to eat and live in a city.’

‘I’d still rather be a dog in America,’ I said.

  Around us, as the red glow of the mosquito fires flickered on the thatch

roof,  our  neighbours  grumbled  and  sank  with  heavy  sighs  into  their

hammocks. The snores begun. I leaned next to Huoy and kissed her, but she

barely  stirred.  Her  breathing  was  regular.  A  minute  later  she  was  sound

asleep.

It was usually like that. I met her in the hammock, we talked for a few

minutes and then she fell asleep. She was exhausted. Once every few weeks

we had a special night. Huoy and Som’s wife would bribe their group leader

with tobacco rations and then walk through the darkness to see Som and me.

Together we ate the best wild foods the landscape offered and then retired,

Huoy and I to one side of the floor of a partially built house, Som and his

wife on the other, and the floor boards squeaking underneath. But most nights

Huoy came into the longhouse at 10.00 p.m. so tired she fell asleep as soon as

she lay down.

At 2.00 a.m. we were woken up by the group leader.

  ‘Time to wake up! Let’s go, group! Everybody awake! Back to work!’ he

shouted. To finish the dam, each worker slept only four hours and worked or

went to political meetings the other twenty.

  Huoy  got  groggily  to  her  feet,  slipped  into  her  rubber  shower  sandals,

washed her face again, changed into a clean sarong and blouse and brushed

her hair. Somehow she had adapted to the schedule without falling seriously

ill. She trudged after her work group, carrying her hoe and a plastic container

full of boiled water. I followed. I had to be up in a couple of hours anyway,

and I liked to keep her company.

  Huoy’s group of about thirty men and women began to dig near the inside

face of the dam. It was just like canal work. The men chopped halfheartedly

at the clay with their hoes, and the women gathered the loose clay with their

hoes and scooped it into baskets. I sat on the ground, slapping the gnats that

settled on my arms and face. When enough baskets were filled, the groupformed a human chain and passed them from one person to the next to the top

of the dam. When they had done this they returned to their previous spot and

sat with their elbows on their knees, in that state of rest that is not quite sleep,

with one part of the brain alert for soldiers.

  From all across the dam face came the faint sounds of hoes and muttered

conversations. Thousands of people were working there, though in the dark

they were no more than shadows. A lone soldier wearing a Mao cap appeared

in silhouette, strolling along the dam top. The comments from the war slaves

began, loud enough to reach him.

‘Hey, comrade, go to work! We’ll give you an extra ration!’

  ‘Comrade, be careful when you make your great leap forward! You might

leap into a hole and break your neck!’

The soldier walked on without answering. He was outnumbered, and in the

darkness he could not tell who was saying what.

I pulled my watch out of the small pocket inside my waistband. By peering

in the starlight it was possible to read the time. Almost four o’clock.

‘I have to go, sweet,’ I said to Huoy, but our neighbour from the longhouse

overheard me.

  ‘You are leaving too soon, Samnang. You don’t want to stay here, to slap

gnats and cuss at the soldiers?’

  They knew me as a prankster, a comedian, and I obliged them. ‘Please,’ I

replied. ‘If you would be so kind, turn away, so I can kiss my wife good-bye.’

To them I was a man who had accepted his fate but makes jokes about it.

And why not? Everybody was so tired that nothing seemed to matter. Work

mattered least of all. If the King of Death wanted to take us we could not stop

him, but he could not stop us from laughing until then.

The responses came in the darkness:

– ‘Can’t I look when you kiss her? I haven’t seen anything like that in a

long time.’

– ‘You can kiss me, if you don’t mind,’ said a giggling woman’s voice.

‘I’m so horny I don’t know what to do.’

– ‘Why should we turn away? You two are always hugging and kissing.’

  ‘And please,’ I told them, ‘close your ears so I can tell her how much I

love her too.’

– ‘. . . Aaaee! What a lover . . .’

– ‘Tell her, Samnang.’

‘I’m going now, sweet,’ I said quietly to Huoy, who had half-turned awayin embarrassment. ‘I’ll see you the same time tonight.’ And I touched her

lightly on the shoulder.

I went back to the longhouse to wake Som, who was asleep. We set out

along the dirt road, taking the short route back to our work site, knowing that

at this hour we would not meet any soldiers.

The sky was growing light in the east by the time Som and I got back to

our work site. I climbed up the stairs of a half-built house and fell asleep on

the bare floor. The bell rang at 5.30 a.m. We were supposed to go to work

then, but I pounded the floor to imitate hammering and stole a few extra

minutes of sleep.                                          26



                          The Cracks Begin to Show


 




Looking back, it seems clear that 1977 was the year the regime began to

crack. The Khmer Rouge had tried to reorganize the nation too quickly and

radically for the structure to hold. The leaders themselves developed internal

feuds, and the people at the bottom showed signs of discontent and even open

rebellion.

At  the  time,  however,  I  didn’t  notice  the  changes  as  much  as  the

unbearably slow passing of the days. The work was dull. In spite of Som’s

English lessons I could feel my brain slowing down. It was hard to think

about anything. The situation in the countryside seemed permanent. Bells

controlled the schedule. Workers crisscrossed the landscape wearily, in single

file.  The  revolutionary  songs  blaring  out  from  the  loudspeakers  and  the

speeches at the meetings never changed. At meals we gathered in circles near

the common kitchen and looked on with jealous eyes as our portions of rice

gruel were ladled into rusty bowls.

  Food – that was our main obsession. The size of the rations, and whether

the common kitchen was going to serve a vegetable along with the rice. If

certain days stand out from the others in my memories of 1977, food was

usually  the  cause.  Like  the  time  a  particularly  ignorant  cadre  suggested

growing clams in the vegetable gardens. Or the night I made oxtail soup by

cutting the tail off an ox that was still alive. Or the time I raided a vegetable

garden,  cooked  the  food,  overate,  vomited  and  then  ate  the  vomit.  It  is

extremely unpleasant to remember eating my own vomit. It was not a normal

act. But it shows how malnourished my body was and how obsessed mymind was by food.

But to some extent Huoy and I got used to being hungry. At least we could

exercise  a  basic  choice:  if  I  was  willing  to  take  the  risk  of  foraging  or

stealing, we could eat.

  What  was  worse  than  hunger  was  the  terror,  because  we  couldn’t  do

anything about it. The terror was always there, deep in our hearts. In the late

afternoon, wondering whether the soldiers would choose us as their victims.

And  then  feeling  guilty  when  the  soldiers  took  someone  else.  At  night,

blowing out our tiny oil lanterns so the soldiers wouldn’t notice the light and

come investigate, and then lying awake and wondering whether we would see

the dawn. Waking up the next day and wondering whether it would be our

last.

We  didn’t  talk  about  the  terror  much.  There  was  no  use.  Huoy  and  I

wanted to live; we were willing to die if we had to, but the terror forced us

into a state of half life that was worse than either. Everything else about being

war slaves – the grating music from the loudspeakers, the tedious meetings,

the lice in our hair, the drab and endless work, the gruel we pretended was

food – we could get used to, but our fear of dying was worse than death itself.

I tried fighting it. I joked with Huoy’s fellow workers. I learned English from

Som.  I  deliberately  took  risks  in  stealing,  hoping  to  master  my  fear.  But

everything I did to rebel against it merely confirmed that it ruled me.

I had full trust only in Huoy. We were as close as two people can be. Only

grudgingly did we give portions of trust to outsiders. I began to trust Som

more and more as time went on. And even this was a mistake.

Som and I talked about everything. We were intellectual equals. I only

wish he was my physical equal, because that was his downfall – his right

arm, hit by shrapnel, operated on by me, but never allowed to heal properly

during the takeover.

It happened this way: Som was sent off on a detail to cut bamboo in the

mountains and got less done than his fellow workers because of his withered

arm. He fell into disfavour with a Khmer Rouge who, a few weeks later, also

supervised the ploughing of rice fields. All work on house construction was

suspended for the important job of readying the rice fields. I was part of the

ploughing detail and Som was too. It hadn’t rained enough yet to make the

ground soft. By using all my strength and skill, I ploughed straight furrows,

but Som’s plough kept drifting to the right, the side of his weak arm.

The  soldiers  came  at  lunchtime,  when  Som  and  I  and  our  wives  wereresting on a hillock. They tied his arms behind his back. They kicked him and

he fell head first on the ground while his wife and Huoy were sobbing and

screaming. Then they took him away. The rest of us were in shock. For me it

was not only shock but loss. He had been my only friend.

I grieved for Som. He was certain to be killed. Then it occurred to me:

what  if  they  torture  him?  He  will  tell  them  I  was  a  doctor!  He  knows

everything about my past! He was still in sight, a sad figure trudging away to

his death, when I forgot about him and started worrying about myself.

I couldn’t sleep that night, or the next night. Surely the soldiers would

come for me. A heavy rain fell. While ploughing the fields, I misguided the

ox, who stumbled. The ox, the plough and I tumbled over into the muddy

water of the rice paddy. The same Khmer Rouge who ordered Som’s death

looked on. His eyes burned into mine. At lunch, on a hillock, my hands were

shaking. I told Huoy good-bye. I knew the soldiers were going to take me

away.  But  at  the  end  of  lunch  the  bell  rang  and  I  went  back  to  work.  I

ploughed all afternoon. At the end of the day the bell rang again, and Huoy

and I went to the common kitchen. There was no explanation. I was allowed

to keep on waiting.

I  knew  my  own  death  was  near.  It  could  be  delayed  but  not  avoided.

Maybe  a  few  days,  maybe  a  few  months  until  they  caught  me  doing

something wrong, and then it would be over. I could feel myself aging from

the stress. And everyone was, not just me. I came to believe more than ever

before what my father had said, that such a regime could not last.

The  cracks  began  to  show.  One  of  the  first  signs  was  the  increase  in

stealing from the ‘common gardens’ that provided vegetables to the kitchens.

In 1975 and 1976, many ‘new’ people had gathered wild foods, but few had

stolen from gardens, because we were afraid of the sentries. In 1977, when I

stole, I began noticing that I had more and more company. If I saw another

shadowy figure walking around in the dark, it was almost always a ‘new’

person. It was nothing we could talk about openly during the day; not yet,

anyhow. But the night belonged to us. The soldiers didn’t like sentry duty

anymore, and they wouldn’t go out on patrol except in groups.

  Another sign was the talk about the Khmer Serei. Stories had travelled

from one cooperative to the next of the freedom fighters based on the border

with Thailand, less than a hundred miles away. There was so many rumours

about the coming of the freedom fighters that people looked up in the sky,

wondering when the helicopters were going to land.I was still building houses on the back lines when the rebellion broke out.

The leader was a man whose name was Thai. I had talked with him around a

fire the year before and been sworn to silence. So had Pen Tip.

Thai and a few handpicked men, a mixture of ‘new’ and ‘old’ people, one

of them an assistant to Chev, killed half a dozen soldiers one night and stole

their weapons. They went to work the next day as if nothing had happened,

then  killed  a  few  more  soldiers  the  following  night.  The  third  night  they

hijacked a train and rode it northwest toward Battambang City, intending to

go west from there to the border with Thailand, to join the freedom fighters.

It must have been a wild, dramatic ride.

The Khmer Rouge announced they had killed Thai and his fellow rebels,

and though I never knew for sure, in this case I tended to believe them. Thai

should have hijacked the train the first night, when the Khmer Rouge were

not on the alert.

A purge began on the front lines to frighten the rest of us. Every afternoon

for about a week, soldiers tied up about a hundred prisoners and led them into

the forests for execution. Huoy told me about it. She said Pen Tip kept an

especially low profile and worked harder than he ever had before.

But even though the rebellion failed, it had one lasting effect: it destroyed

the mystique of the Khmer Rouge’s invincibility. Angka was strong but not

omnipotent. Angka had lost face.


The regime did very little about the uprising and the stealing except to punish

people. There were no real changes in policy, no attempts to cure what was

wrong. The leaders of most revolutions would have realized that they needed

the support of the people, but not Angka. Instead, the drive to restructure

society went on, alienating us war slaves even farther – if that was possible.

There was, for example, the matter of marriages.

The Khmer Rouge wanted to regulate and control sex, just as they tried to

control all other basic human practices, like eating and working and sleeping.

Earlier  on  in  the  regime,  couples  who  wanted  to  get  married  had  to  get

permission from their village chiefs. If the answer was yes, they could go

ahead. If the answer was no, they were in trouble, especially if chhlop found

out they were having sexual relations anyway. In prison I had seen lines of

young  women  being  led  away  for  breaking  Angka’s  puritanical  rules  of

behaviour.

But at the same time that people were being killed for the crime of sex, andhundreds of thousands of others were dying of starvation and disease, the

Khmer  Rouge  encouraged  population  growth.  They  told  us  that  Angka

needed  more  comrades  ‘to  protect  the  nation’s  borders  and  to  join  the

struggle for independence-sovereignty’.

The  ceremony  was  announced  in  the  morning  over  the  loudspeakers.

Comrade Ik, the old man on horseback, rode out into the fields to watch men

and women at work and choose who to mate with whom. Some of the more

clever single women insisted they had been separated from their husbands,

and they were excused. But the rest obeyed. They had no choice. Whether the

men and women in the couples knew or liked each other didn’t have anything

to do with it.

  When the noon bell rang, the workers came in from the fields, their hair

matted, their bodies sweaty, manure from the rice fields caking their feet. The

chosen couples sat impassively on a long bench next to each other.

The old man stood and said into a microphone, ‘Today Angka has allowed

these couples to marry. It recognizes them as being legally married. Let the

people  recognize  these  couples  as  well.  Angka  hopes  these  people  are

revolutionary  in  spirit.  They  must  have  high  levels  of  understanding  of

revolutionary  ideals.  They  will  have  to  work  hand  in  hand,  shoulder  to

shoulder, sacrificing to help complete Angka’s projects.’

Chev, grinning and dangerous, and sturdy, tattooed Uncle Seng, who had

never hurt anyone, squatted on their haunches behind the old man, along with

the other village leaders. Except for Chea Huon, who was absent, it was the

same set of leaders I had seen at the dam ceremony. As usual, Comrade Ik

was barefoot and shirtless. He wore only baggy shorts, a half-length sarong

and a krama. His toothless lips held a banana-leaf cigarette.

  Those of us in the audience stood outside a longhouse and watched.

The married couples sat expressionlessly on the bench, their hats in their

laps.

The old man continued, ‘The new man must know our revolution and its

goals. The new man and the new woman will be creating our future society.’

He  removed  the  cigarette,  and  his  toothless  lips  broke  into  a  leer.  ‘You

women must be quiet if your husband gets angry.’

In Khmer slang, ‘getting angry’ means getting an erection.

  Comrade Ik leaned forward into the microphone and shouted, ‘Long live

the Kampuchean revolution!’

  Everybody rose to their feet and repeated his words and they gave theclenched-fist salute. Each phrase was spoken three times.

  ‘Long live the great solidarity!’

  Everyone watched the married couples to see if they yelled with the proper

enthusiasm.

  ‘Long live the newlyweds!’

The brides and grooms echoed the words without a smile.

  ‘Long live the great leap forward!’

  There were other slogans. And finally, again, ‘Long live the Kampuchean

revolution!’

  ‘You may now have lunch,’ the old man said with a kindly smile. The new

couples went off to eat watery rice with everybody else. No feasts and no

honeymoons for them. They sewed their single hammocks together and slept

in the longhouses, with neighbours a few inches away on either side. Later

some of them moved into the houses my crew built, or built their own. From

what I heard, few of the husbands and wives really cared for one another.

They certainly didn’t trust one another. They fought over food. There were a

few instances of wives getting rid of their husbands by reporting them to the

Khmer  Rouge  for  stealing.  Virtually  no  pregnancies  resulted  from  these

marriages, because the food rations were too low for the women to be fertile.

The next time I saw the old man was a few months later, at the beginning

of the rainy season of 1977, when all the heads of families were called to

another  special  meeting.  He  presided  again,  standing  in  front  of  a

microphone.

He  started  off  with  the  usual  speech  about  building  up  the  country’s

economy. ‘You people in the second lines have to give greater support to the

people in the front lines. You must plant more food to support them. You

must work even harder.’ He went into a long harangue about sacrificing to

achieve work goals. What he didn’t say was what everyone knew – that the

work on the dam had fallen far behind schedule. A few small segments had

been completed, but at the current pace it would take five or ten years before

it was finished.

  Then he changed the subject. ‘The other reason we invited you here is to

tell you about a man who betrayed the country. For a long time we did not

know that our very own Angka had a traitor within. Before, we trusted him to

the highest degree, but now we know his true character. I am talking about

Vanh,’ he said.

  Behind me someone whispered, ‘Incredible! Is that why we haven’t seenVanh driving around in a while?’ A buzz of conversation broke out, but I

kept quiet. I wanted to hear what had happened to the man I knew as Chea

Huon.

‘We have already captured Enemy Vanh,’ the old man was saying. He

shifted his glance uneasily over those of us in the audience. ‘And we will find

out those who have connections to him. These people will not be allowed to

make trouble anymore. Furthermore, if someone in your villages says good

things about Vanh, don’t believe him. Report him to Angka. Those people are

Vanh’s henchmen and collaborators. They are the enemy. They will not be

allowed to live in our country anymore.

  ‘That’s all. Before leaving, please give me a big hand.’

I looked closely at Comrade Ik as I clapped. He wasn’t telling everything

that he knew. If Chea Huon had been captured alive, he wouldn’t be asking

for our help to discover who the collaborators were. He would have already

extracted the information, by torture.

And I was glad. Chea Huon, who had become a revolutionary so early, had

finally  realized  his  mistake.  He  knew  he  couldn’t  stop  the  madness,  and

finally he got out. When did he decide to leave? I wondered. Did he know it

even when he met me? If so, the advice he gave me – to keep my mouth shut

and keep on working – was the best he had to offer. Yes! He knew even then!

Or maybe he did. He knew if I became his protégé the Khmer Rouge would

hurt me later.

A story arose that Chea Huon left for the Thai border with his jeep and his

bodyguards and bags of dollars and gold. I don’t know if it was true, but it

was possible. As the ranking commander, Chea Huon could have written

passes to get himself through any checkpoints. He also had access to the

money and gold collected from ‘new’ people when Angka abolished private

property. And he was smart. If anybody could have made it to the border, it

was Chea Huon. From there he could have joined the freedom fighters, or

else travelled on to another country. With bags of dollars and gold he could

have done anything he wanted. But I never really knew whether he succeeded

or failed, or where he went. I never heard anything about him again.


Ironically, while the regime was slowly disintegrating in front of our eyes,

with  forced  marriages,  increased  stealing,  rebellions  from  below,  and

defections at the highest levels, Huoy and I began to live better than before.

Like convicts in a prison, we learned how to manipulate the rules to ouradvantage.

  What triggered the move to a better life was another case of malaria. This

time when I got sick I arranged to be sent to the front-lines clinic, the place

where  they  made  the  rabbit  turds.  As  I  had  foreseen,  the  clinic  was

overcrowded.  From  there  I  got  permission  to  recuperate  at  my  youngest

brother  Hok’s  house,  on  the  other  side  of  the  mountain,  near  the  Phnom

Tippeday railroad station, in a village called Phum Ra. Once in Phum Ra, I

got permission for Huoy to join me, to nurse me back to health.

  After a few days I knew we would have to move on. Long ago Hok and I

had chosen different paths. He finished the eighth grade, I finished medical

school. He chose one kind of woman to be his wife, I chose another. His wife

told the neighbours that Huoy and I weren’t really married, and soon the two

women were not speaking to each other. But that wasn’t the worst of it. There

was an atmosphere of fear and hunger in the house. The sounds of raised

voices and children crying. It was typical of households under the Khmer

Rouge, but that didn’t make us like it any better. When my sister-in-law

cooked she squatted in front of the fire facing away from us so we wouldn’t

see her hand moving from the cooking pot to her mouth. She thought we

didn’t notice.

But Hok was my brother, and he was also the supervisor of a vegetable

garden. As soon as I had recovered from malaria, he arranged for Huoy and

me to work for him. I became a waterboy, walking back and forth from a

pond  to  the  garden,  carrying  a  pair  of  watering  cans  on  a  bamboo

shoulderboard, sprinkling the plants. Huoy weeded the vegetables.

A  short  time  later,  when  a  building  site  and  some  materials  became

available, I got permission from the leader of the village to build a house.

Imagine! A place of our own. Ever since the Khmer Rouge took over, Huoy

and I had been transients. We had stayed under the house on stilts in Wat

Kien Svay Krao, in the little hut in Tonle Batí, in the reed hut in Phum

Chhleav and in the hut in Youen’s village. We had camped on hillocks and

slept in longhouses on the front lines. And finally this. This was home.

By then I was a skilled builder. Our new house was cool in the middle of

the day and cozy at night. It had a view out the back, directly across the rice

fields to the old temple high on the mountain ridge. We had clean water

nearby. Because we were on the back lines, we were allowed to plant our

own vegetables, provided we gave some to the common kitchen.

  While waiting for our garden to produce, I stole food. Each night before Iwent out I prayed to Buddha. I explained that I wasn’t going to sell what I

stole, that I was going to take only what we needed to survive.

I didn’t steal much from my brother’s garden. There were larger gardens

up on the mountain plateau, near the wat. It was an all-night trip to sneak up

to the gardens, fill a big sack, come down again and cook the vegetables

outside the village to avoid detection. I was a capable thief and never had any

problems. Many times Huoy and I ate until we couldn’t eat any more.

We liked living in Phum Ra. It was wonderful being away from the front

lines. And it was not stealing that got me into trouble. It was Pen Tip.                                          27



                                  Drops of Water


 




Like me, Pen Tip engineered a transfer away from the front lines. He and his

family moved to the village of Phum Ra about the same time Huoy and I did.

We were neighbours. But while I carried water to the common garden all day

long,  like  the  lowest  class  of  peasant,  and  avoided  the  Khmer  Rouge

whenever possible, Pen Tip cultivated connections with the Khmer Rouge for

his  own  gain.  He  rose  from  the  rank  of  group  leader  to  assistant  section

leader, becoming the most influential ‘new’ person in the village.

Under different circumstances I might have found Pen Tip amusing. He

was so short he looked up at people, like a child. He walked duckfooted, like

Charlie Chaplin, and his eyebrows were always moving up and down, like a

man who is always being surprised. Maybe being tiny and funny-looking

made Pen Tip what he was. Maybe he had been teased and pushed around a

lot when he was young. But whatever his motivations, he was hungry for

power. He played up to ‘old’ people and Khmer Rouge. He ordered other

‘new’ people around. I was his favourite target, because I had once been his

social superior, as a doctor. To prove himself he needed to dominate me.

The two of us were careful how we behaved in public, because fighting

was not allowed. We always spoke politely when we met. I had never told

him I knew he had been responsible for sending me to prison. He never said

anything about it either. But underneath the polite exterior we both knew that

one of us was going to kill the other.

How to kill him before he killed me was a difficult problem. Whenever I

saw him my fingers itched to close around the handle of my hatchet and goafter him. I never did, because we were never alone. If I killed Pen Tip with a

hatchet and somebody saw it, the Khmer Rouge would kill me, and Huoy

would be a widow. Revenge was useless unless Huoy and I were around to

enjoy the aftermath.

  There was another possibility. It wasn’t the kind of plan to share with

anybody,  even  with  Huoy,  because  it  was  so  low  and  mean  and  sneaky.

Growing up in Samrong Yong, I had learned that thieves who want to kill

watchdogs make a poison from the bark of the kantout tree. They peel the

bark, grind it up, cook it with sugar and make it into cakes. The dogs eat the

cakes and die. The poison works well on people too.

  Poisoning  Pen  Tip  had  two  drawbacks.  The  first  was  practical.  There

wasn’t any sugar around – no way to disguise the nasty taste of kantout. Even

if I somehow made the cakes, it would be hard tricking Pen Tip into eating

them.

The second problem was moral. The idea of poisoning him showed the

same instinct for delayed and violent revenge that characterized the Khmer

Rouge. If I poisoned him, or even if I killed him on a dark night with a

hatchet, I would become just like them. Kum-monuss. And that made me

think about who I really was. Deep, deep within me there was a dark and

violent streak, the same as in most Cambodians. On this instinctive level,

perhaps, the Khmer Rouge and I were not so different. But unlike them and

unlike Pen Tip, I was capable of rising above my instincts, because of my

education. I was a doctor. My job was saving people, not killing them. I was

also Buddhist. I believed that if I didn’t kill Pen Tip myself, either in this life

or  the  next  life,  somebody  else  would.  It  was kama.  That  didn’t  mean  I

wouldn’t go after Pen Tip if I had the chance, but it did mean I could watch

and wait.

  Pen Tip moved first. In an administrative meeting he attended, Uncle Phan,

the leader of the village, mentioned a vacancy in the fertilizer crew. Pen Tip

volunteered me for the job. Uncle Phan approved.

  When I heard about it I was furious. Carrying water to the garden wasn’t

low enough for me; now, instead, I would be carrying slop from the public

latrines.  It  was  Pen  Tip’s  way  of  lowering  my  status  even  farther,  of

‘breaking’ my face.

The job was also dangerous. Previous men on the fertilizer crew had died

from  infections  entering  their  bodies  through  cuts.  Even  if  working  with

untreated sewage was socially acceptable, which it wasn’t, because of thestigma and the smell, I never would have volunteered to do anything of the

kind without rubber gloves, rubber boots and lots of medicine for protection.

And I had none of those.

I  started  the  new  job,  going  around  barefoot  to  the  public  toilets  and

emptying  them  with  a  pail  on  an  extremely  long  wooden  handle,  then

carrying a vat of the wastes on a very long thick pole with another man. My

social downfall was complete. I was at the bottom caste of the war slaves,

who were at the bottom of Cambodian society. But Pen Tip hadn’t finished.

  Three soldiers walked toward my new house one afternoon when work was

over and I was planting yams in my new private garden. Until they stood next

to me and clicked off the safety switches of their rifles, I had no idea what

they wanted.

It  was  like  the  other  times  I’d  been  seized:  Huoy  weeping,  my  heart

pounding. Pleading to be allowed to change my trousers so that Huoy would

have the gold hidden in my waistband. Having my arms tied behind me.

Being kicked to the floor. Huoy trying to keep them from beating me but

being shoved roughly aside.

As I walked away, Huoy begged the soldiers to tie her up and take her too.

For the last time in this book, I ask the sensitive readers to skip over the

following pages until the beginning of the next chapter. Those who want to

know what happened, read on:


The soldiers didn’t take me to the prison near Phum Chhleav, where I had

gone  twice  before.  Instead,  we  walked  across  the  railroad  track,  past  my

brother’s  common  garden,  through  fields  where  oxen  and  water  buffalo

grazed, and into the jungle.

I felt healthy and excited. My heart was beating fast. Except for leaving

Huoy a widow, I had no regrets. The waiting was over. Surely the end would

come at the next turn of the path.

  Since we weren’t going to Chhleav, I assumed that the soldiers were going

to execute me in some spot where they had already executed others. I had

never seen such a place, but it was logical that they existed. Mass graves.

Killing fields. But we walked through the jungle until it was nearly dark. We

came to an old prerevolutionary village with houses on stilts, mounds of rice

straw next to them, and banana and tamarind trees. Even kantout trees, the

kind I had thought about using for poisoning Pen Tip. The far side of the

village opened up into a view of rice fields, interrupted here and there byhillocks crowned with sprays of tall bamboo.

The soldiers went in to report to the prison office, a small hut in Khmer

Rouge style with a roof and wooden pillars but no walls. Then they took me

to  the  outskirts  of  the  village  to  a  long,  skinny  thatch  building  with  a

corrugated metal roof and a horrible fetid smell.

A soldier pushed me into the prison and down an aisle. I couldn’t see

anything. The stench in the air made me want to vomit. Slime covered the

ground under my bare feet. My left foot slipped into a ditch full of sewage.

The soldier switched on a flashlight, found an empty space, untied my arms

and told me to lie down on my back. I obeyed. My head knocked against

something; a man’s voice objected and I apologized. The soldier shined the

flashlight on my feet. He was going to lock my left ankle into a leg iron

attached  to  a  block  of  wood,  but  he  saw  the  slime,  wrinkled  his  face  in

disgust, and instead locked my right ankle, which was cleaner.

  There I was, in jail again.

  What a disappointment.

  Better that they had killed me quickly.

I lay awake, listening.

A mosquito whined near my ear and flew off.

  From far away came a sound of trucks on National Route 5, the road that

led to Battambang City. The flash of headlights swept across the wall of the

prison, then left the wall in darkness.

I listened more carefully and heard flies buzzing around, along with the

mosquitoes, and the moans of the prisoners.

  Outside, crickets chirped. Mice scampered along the metal roof.

  From  somewhere  near  came  a  howling  sound  as  the chhke  char-chark

drifted to the edge of the jungle and prepared to take their meals.

The man to the right of me coughed and stirred, but the woman to my left

was silent. When it grew light outside I saw she was thin and old and dead. I

felt her wrist. It was as cold as stone and without a pulse. A guard unlocked

her foot and then mine and then the prisoner on her far side, and the two of us

carried the old woman’s body out of the building. Beyond a quick prayer for

her soul I didn’t grieve. If anything I was jealous. She had taken the easy way

out.

My hands were tied again and I was taken to the administrative shack. Two

soldiers entered with a big hempen rice sack.

‘Is your name Samnang?’  ‘Yes.’

  ‘You are the one who lied to Angka?’

‘I have never lied to Angka.’

  ‘You were a military doctor, a captain.’

  Pen Tip has done this, I thought. Now I am sure.

  ‘No, comrade,’ I answered. ‘I have gone to jail before for this, but the

charge is false. I was a taxi driver. You could go to Phnom Penh and check

the files if you want to find out.’

The soldier’s answer was a blow to my ribs. They beat me with sticks until

I crumpled to the floor and then they took turns kicking me. They opened the

rice sack and put my feet in and drew it over me until it covered everything

but my head. I struggled but my hands were tied behind my back and they

tied the mouth of the bag over my head, leaving me in darkness.

  They dragged me across the floor and then outdoors. Through the rough

cloth I could feel the stubble of rice fields, then the bump when they dragged

me up and over a paddy dyke, and then more stubble and more dykes. They

stopped, then hoisted me in the air.

‘Say you were a doctor! Say yes! Say yes!’

I said nothing.

  Thump! The blow hit me square across the back.

  Thump! Again.

The bag swayed and lurched on the rope. I tucked my face between my

knees as far as possible to protect my eyes.

  Thump! My body was breaking like rotten wood.

  They kept asking me if I was a doctor. I groaned but didn’t answer. Then I

went silent, hoping they would think I was dead.

  Thump! No such luck. They were strong and well fed and they were taking

their exercise on me.

At last when they grew tired of hitting me with their clubs, they went

away.

The bag swung like a pendulum, back and forth, less and less, never quite

stopping because of the wind. The wind penetrated the weave of the cloth,

and light filtered in.

The day passed. As the light coming through the bag took on a weaker,

redder colour, footsteps approached. The bag dropped abruptly and I fell to

the ground with a crash. Fresh pain exploded through my lower back, like a

crushed vertabra or ruptured disk.The guards let me out of the bag. I lay on the ground in a fetal position, my

hands still tied behind me. When I opened my eyes I saw blood on my knees.

It had flowed from my head wounds and coagulated.

The guards left me there as the sun set.

A cool wind blew. Above me, in the branches of the tamarind tree, a bird

began to sing. It flew from one branch to another, chirping and twittering

sweetly.

But it was not just a bird. It was one of the spirits of the landscape, like the

gods who live in the rocks and sky and forest and water. The bird trilled and

sang happily. It was telling me not to worry. Everything was going to be all

right.

  Silently I gave the bird my answer: I do not agree with you. The guards are

going to come back and kill me. Please, spirit, tell me what the future holds.

The bird repeated its song, cheerfully, but its message did not change.

I  closed  my  eyes  and  thought,  you  are  so  lucky.  You  can  fly  away

whenever you want. Are you consoling me, or do you bring me a message?

You must tell me the truth.


The guards took me back toward the jail that night. I limped along between

them. No bones broken after all. No crushed vertebra, only a badly bruised

coccyx. When I got inside the jail I lay down in the slime and listened to the

groans of the other prisoners and the buzzing of the flies.

  They interrogated me again the next morning and still I would not confess

to being a doctor. They beat me again and dragged me outside to a spot under

a tree. They locked my wrists and ankles into brackets on the ground. I lay on

my back, waiting and wondering what the torture was going to be. A Khmer

Rouge wearing a Montagut shirt inside his black tunic walked up holding

something that looked like a wooden vice with steel handles, though I didn’t

have the chance to see it clearly. He placed the vice over my head with the

two inner sides touching my temples. Then he tightened it by adjusting the

handles while watching my face closely.

The inside of the vice was studded with the sharp ends of metal spikes. He

wound it tighter, tighter, then paused. The spikes felt as though they were

about to break through my skin and then crush my head. He peered down on

me with the concentrated expression of a man looking through a microscope,

focusing on every detail but not feeling my pain.

I moved my head incrementally to relieve the sore points on my temples.He was not touching the handles. Even so, the vice closed in a little tighter. I

moved my head back to the original position – the vice tightened farther still.

I began to understand. In some ingenious manner, the vice was spring-

loaded.  Every  time  I  wiggled  or  squirmed,  the  vice  would  punish  me  by

tightening farther. As he reached for the handle again and began to twist it, I

began to cry and whimper, not out of pain but because I realized he was

calibrating the tightness to my pain threshold. The vice wasn’t supposed to

crush my skull. It had a far more clever purpose, and it was only part of the

torture.

  Satisfied, he stood up. He lifted a pail of water above me and fastened it to

a tree branch high overhead. Water leaked from a hole in the centre of the

underside of the pail and dribbled onto the dirt next to me. He took a piece of

rice straw and stuck it in the hole, adjusting it carefully until the drops of

water rolled down the length of the rice straw and onto a spot in the middle of

my forehead.

Drop.

Drop.

Drop.

Now I understood the torture.

The water was falling from a height of seven or eight feet, enough to give

it a sharp, stinging impact. Over the course of a single Cambodian rainy

season,  I  have  seen  water  falling  in  drops  from  a  roof  drill  holes  into  a

concrete patio.

Drop.

Drop.

The man in the Montagut shirt stood over me, watching intently.

  After the first five hundred drops I closed my eyes. The water hit the same

spot  every  time,  above  my  eyes  in  the  middle  of  my  forehead.  My  skin

chafed, and the drops continued, like a pounding.

Drop.

Drop.

  Drop-drop. A double beat.

  Then a missed beat.

  Then again: Drop.

Drop.

Drop.

Drop.Drop.

  After the thousandth drop the soreness on my skin began to turn into a

headache, like the pressure of a weight on my head.

I shifted my position so the water would hit another spot. It was a mistake:

the spikes squeezed in tighter on my temples. So now I had the pounding on

my forehead and the pain of the spikes too. I tried not to move but I could not

help it. Each time I did, the vice grew tighter.

His voice called from above me. ‘Comrade, are you really a doctor? If you

say you were, I will stop the water.’

‘I was not a doctor,’ said my voice.

  ‘Strong guy, huh? We’ll just keep the water dropping on you, then. “If you

live, there is no gain. If you die, there is no loss.” ’

Drop.

Drop.

Drop.

How much water is in the pail?

How long can this go on?

The drops were solid objects. Like nails. They were drilling through my

skull.

I kept my eyes closed. The pain on my forehead grew as great as the pain

in my temples. Then the pain in my forehead and temples connected. When

the drops landed, the whole interior of my skull throbbed together. Each time

the drops struck I saw white. My feet and legs twitched to contain the shock.

The pail had no bottom. It contained a lake. The day took a century to pass.

I kept my head absolutely still and thought: if the Khmer Rouge keep it up

all night, I will die. The pain will kill me. I am sure.

Twice before – with dysentery, and with being crucified in prison – I had

nearly died. From that I had developed a sense, a measurement, of my life-

force. I knew what I could take and what would break me.

I sent a message to the wind, the trees, the birds, the rice fields, to every

place the gods resided: if I gave too much bonjour in my previous life, now I

am paying it back. If I hurt people in my previous life, now I am paying it

back. Please, gods, let my next life be easier.

Drop.

Drop.

  Drop-drop.

Drop.  Drop . . .

The Pacific Ocean is in that bucket. I have lived in agony for a thousand

years.


The man in the Montagut shirt came back and pushed the rice straw into the

hole  in  the  pail  with  his  finger.  The  dripping  stopped  except  that  every

minute, or every hour, a drop hit my forehead, though not in the same place

as before, and then it hit on my temple and then the top of my head, in no

pattern.

I opened my eyes. The sun had set but the sky was still full of colour, and

beautiful beyond belief.

I dared not move my head to look around but sensed that I was alone.

My eyes closed again. I had sunk deep inside my being. My mind sent

messages to Huoy:

  Huoy, in your whole life you have not suffered like this. Even to see me

now would make you cry out. You cried when the Khmer Rouge tied me up

and pushed me down. I do not think you could stand it here. I’m glad you’re

not here. You’re not strong enough to be here. Let the wind tell you this: for

now, they have stopped torturing me. I pray that the wind blows over the

landscape and around our house and brings the news to you. I pray that the

gods console you.

I lay there locked in the brace, dreaming but not sleeping.

The next morning the man with the Montagut shirt came back and poured

fresh water into the pail. He missed, and some of the water spilled over the

side and onto my face. I opened my mouth and swallowed what I could.

He asked if I were a doctor.

I said no.

He adjusted the rice straw. The water ran out of the hole in the bucket,

down the straw and onto me.

The drops started again.

  Regularly.

That day, my mother and father appeared before me and talked to me.

Then Huoy, then Huoy and her mother, and finally Huoy alone.

At every drop my body went numb for an instant, and then the sensation

flooded back, and then at the next drop I went numb again. Then the numb

parts blurred together and I couldn’t feel anything.

The  sun  woke  me  once  in  its  afternoon  position,  but  after  that  I  don’tremember much. A small part of my brain reminded me that I was still alive.

  Some men came and asked one another if I was in a coma. I heard them,

but even if I had wanted to I could not have summoned the control over my

muscles to tell them no. They were too far away from me. They were so far

away.

And I don’t even know if they stopped the water torture or not.


The next thing I knew the sun was a swollen red ball on the horizon and I was

lying down. The pail wasn’t overhead anymore, and the vice was gone.

I was lying on my back on the ground. My head was turned to the side, and

there was nothing to hold it in place. Ants were biting me, and from the smell

I knew I had shat in my trousers.

I closed my eyes.

I told myself not to move, or lose self-control, or be angry. Just to rest.

  Sometime  later  footsteps  approached  and  then  I  was  nudged  on  the

shoulder  and  a  voice  shouted  at  me  to  wake  up,  but  I  pretended  to  be

unconscious.

  ‘Wake up! It’s dinnertime!’ the voice said.

I turned my head slowly, opened my eyes and raised an arm, then let my

head and hand drop, pretending to fall asleep.

  ‘Wake up! Eat! Eat!’

A foot kicked me a few times, not hard, and I said, ‘Yes,’ in a low, dull

voice but still pretended to be asleep.

The guard grabbed my wrist and yanked me up to a sitting position. On the

ground next to me was a shallow bowl of watery rice. I wanted it but slumped

back to the ground again, still acting, and he pulled me up again. This time I

ate the food very slowly, savouring the taste.

  Then I went back to sleep on my side.

That night they brought me to the jail. If the flies landed on me or the

mosquitoes bit me, I did not know. It did not matter. On the outside were the

flies and the slime and the bruises. Deep within me, the force of life was

recovering.

The next day passed inside the jail. The long narrow building, with its

double row of prisoners lying on their backs head to head, was raised in the

middle, so the shit and piss would simply flow downhill to the sewage canals

along the walls. Four of us prisoners were locked into the same heavy block

of wood, next to another foursome, who were next to the door. We got onemeal of watery rice, served in bowls spattered with excrement. Flies with red

eyes buzzed around us like miniature helicopters, hovering, then darting off,

then hovering again. It was hot in the jail, because of the sun on the metal

roof. It must have been over a hundred degrees.

At  night  I  dozed  but  didn’t  sleep.  There  were  no  lights.  My  sense  of

hearing had sharpened to the night sounds, the insects and the faraway trucks

and the occasional call of the chhke char-chark.

  There was another sound I couldn’t place, a rustling outside the perimeter

of the building. I lay quietly with my eyes shut, listening.

The rustling started again, then stopped.

It was not the sound of mice. Mice made a smaller, scampering noise.

  Somebody was just outside the jail, walking in the leaves.

  What is wrong? I asked myself. What is this sudden cold sweat on my

limbs? Why do I know to be afraid?

  Listen!

  There is more than one of them.

I nudged the prisoners to either side.

  ‘Stay awake,’ I whispered to them. ‘The prison is surrounded. Something’s

going to happen.’

My neighbours passed the word along.

We waited.

The crickets chirped steadily.

  When it finally happened, it was fast. The quiet of one moment changed to

confused yelling as flames roared through the thatch. As the walls went up in

fire, the bamboo restraining strips were illuminated in outline for a few brief

seconds before they caught fire too, and the prisoners jumping and yelling

were  silhouetted  in  the  light.  The  four  of  us  in  the  heavy  wooden  block

jumped to our feet and dragged the block toward the door. The woman next

to me fell, twisting the wood and wrenching the leg irons against our ankles. I

picked her up and we dragged her and the heavy block outside into clear air.

From the outside we could see the jail burning and one end of the metal roof

falling on top of the screaming prisoners trapped inside. We felt the blast of

heat against our skins, and then we heard the rapid bursts of gunfire from the

other side of the jail as the guards mowed prisoners down. Other groups of

four, sixteen or twenty people in all, hobbled out of our side of the jail before

the whole building collapsed, and the guards ran around to our side holding

M-16s and looking fierce in the firelight, but they didn’t shoot us. Still in ourblocks, we moved farther away from the building, listening to the screams of

the dying inside.

The guards stood over us menacingly. We watched the remnants of the

building burn.

The coals glowed in the darkness, and the metal from the roof contracted

noisily as it cooled.

As the sky grew light we saw that our skins were black from the smoke.

Little  was  left  of  the  jail  except  for  charred  metal  sheets  and  blackened,

twisted bodies on the ground.


The prison-keepers never explained why they had burned the jail, and it has

always remained a mystery to me. Perhaps the guards took the initiative,

without orders from above. Maybe they had tired of their methods of torture

and wanted some variety. Or perhaps they wanted to get rid of the building

because of the awful smell.

Of eighty prisoners, twenty-eight survived. The Khmer Rouge met among

themselves to decide what to do. They brought us watery rice and then asked

us which cooperatives we came from.

  They sent off messengers.

That afternoon Uncle Phan, Phum Ra’s chief, appeared to escort me and

another prisoner back to his village.

As  we  walked  away,  Uncle  Phan  explained  that  he  hadn’t  known  the

soldiers  had  taken  me  away  until  after  it  had  happened.  ‘I  couldn’t  have

protected you, son,’ he said.

I partly believed him. He didn’t seem to know anything of my quarrel with

Pen Tip. I thanked him for picking me up. But in truth, I was angry. By

Khmer  Rouge  standards  Phan  was  a  decent  man,  but  that  wasn’t  good

enough. I had not done anything to deserve prison.

  ‘From now on,’ Uncle Phan was saying, ‘Dam doeum kor. Plant a kapok

tree.  Keep  your  mouth  shut.  Behave.  Don’t  do  any  more  misdeeds.

Understand?’

‘I will do anything to avoid an experience like that,’ I replied. ‘I have had

enough suffering. Please, Uncle Phan, could we walk more slowly?’

We stopped to rest a few times. There was a raw spot on the skin in the

middle of my forehead, but it was barely noticeable compared to the lumps

and the dried blood on the top of my head and the bruises everywhere else. I

was weak and sore, but in better condition than after the other two times I gotout of prison.

  When we got back to Phum Ra work was over for the afternoon, and Huoy

was at the house. When she first saw me she wept with happiness. Then,

when I came closer and she saw the discolorations from the bruises and the

cuts on my head, she lost control. She sobbed with irregular gasps of air, her

facial features contorted and her shoulders shook. I held her, but she would

not stop.

I  stripped  off  my  clothes  and  wrapped  a  krama  around  my  waist.  We

walked in back of the house to the minicanal with water in the bottom. She

bathed me and shaved the hair around the cuts on my head. Her hands were

steady, but she could not stop crying.

For all Huoy had lived through, she was soft. She was like a crab without a

shell. I was her shell, her protection. When I came back to her broken, she

absorbed the blows I had taken. She felt the pain even more than me.

  She would not stop crying. Even as she daubed at my wounds and soaped

me, even as I abandoned myself to her tender care, I worried about her health.

My injuries were only physical. They would heal. Hers were in her mind.                                          28



                                      Happiness


 




If anybody else in Cambodia survived being tortured by the Khmer Rouge

three times, I never heard of it. In the Phnom Tippeday region I knew of only

one other person, a teenager, who survived even twice. His hair fell out, and

he turned pale and trembled at the sight of soldiers.

Yet somehow I had survived three episodes of torture and prison as well as

malaria and dysentery. I was alive. There were scars-scalp wounds, from the

third prison; burn scars on my leg, from the second prison; half of my little

finger missing, from the first prison. There were other injuries, mental and

emotional,  but  I  wasn’t  aware  of  them  until  later.  At  the  time,  I  was  in

reasonably good spirits. And I was amazed. I had survived when thousands of

people around me had died of illness or starvation, and thousands more had

been executed.

Why did I survive?

To me, the only answer that makes sense is that the gods willed it. It was

kama. It was not chance, because the mathematical odds against me were too

high. What were the chances against my surviving what I had been through?

A thousand to one? A hundred thousand to one? Or even a million to one?

  Admittedly, a few factors worked in my favor: One, I am physically tough

and energetic. Two, I did a lot of street fighting growing up, and that helped

prepare me to outsmart and outlast my torturers. Three, I had someone to live

for:  Huoy.  Anyone  with  those  three  characteristics  has  better  odds  than

someone who doesn’t. Of course. But that still doesn’t explain why I made it

through when so many others didn’t.  There were so many times I could have died. The third time in prison, if I

hadn’t been near the door when the fire started. The second time in prison, if

the guards hadn’t pulled the plastic bag off my head when they did. Anytime

at all, if I had admitted that I was a doctor or a military officer. I would have

died of dysentery if the yams hadn’t been distributed.

It was a miracle I was alive. I accepted it as such and thanked the gods.

When I looked around, I saw other miracles. Everything, from the colour of

the sky to the taste of rice to the sight of the temple on the mountainside,

seemed new and fresh. And the life-force within me was the same as the

force within the earth and sky and all other living beings.

My bruises healed quickly. The nightmare of the water torture vanished

from  my  thoughts.  The  days  returned  to  their  normal  pattern,  and  still  I

retained  this  deeper,  greater  appreciation  for  everything  around  me.  For

Huoy, especially, and for our house.

  Chang  My  Huoy  –  known  as  ‘Bopha’  to  the  Khmer  Rouge,  known  as

Huoy to me. We had been denied the wedding we both wanted, first by my

father, then by the revolution. But we were closer than any of the married

couples around. This is not to say we were perfect. Sometimes I was harsh

with her, and at other times I teased her more than she would have liked. But

we were glad for each other’s company.

I loved watching her in our new house in the early mornings. When she

slept, she hugged her little blue-covered pillow to her chest, the one she had

brought with her from Phnom Penh. She rose before sunrise, when the sky

was growing light. She went to her small, rectangular mirror and brushed her

hair, put clips in her hair above each ear, and washed her face. She dressed.

As I got up groggily, she rolled the mosquito net, folded the night-clothes and

the bedding and put them neatly away. There was something about her –

organized, clean, feminine, desirable – that attracted me on all levels. Man to

woman. Husband to wife. Strange to think that when we first met I had been

her teacher. Ever since then, those roles had been reversed.

I had always felt something special toward women, and by that I mean

toward the entire female sex. In childhood, after the beating my father gave

me, I realized that men were the cause of most suffering. My experiences in

Khmer Rouge prisons proved it over and over. When had a woman ever hurt

me?  When  had  I  ever  seen  a  woman  physically  harming  someone  else?

Never. Perhaps that was why I was so drawn to women, because they were

the healers of suffering. The suffering that men inflicted.To me, Huoy represented the best of womankind. She never caused pain.

She was a healer. She was also much smarter than me. She never got into

trouble, or even into arguments. Just by advising me and by quietly setting an

example, she kept me out of more trouble with Angka.

  She avoided the worst trait of women, which is idle, malicious gossip. She

sought out the company of a few women who were polite and educated like

herself.  In  her  spare  time  she  tended  the  house  and  garden,  or  cooked,

improvising recipes from wild foods, or sang in her smooth, clear voice. She

mended our clothes with precise, expert stitching. She was sentimental but

practical, making trousers for herself from one of her mother’s old sampots

and wearing her mother’s rubber sandals when her own wore out. She was

not the most beautiful woman in the world, but she was beautiful to me.

Outsiders didn’t know much about her. To them she looked like a good-

natured but quiet young woman.

I knew Huoy better than anyone, except perhaps her mother. If Huoy had a

fault, it was that she could not protect herself. Even when she was happy, the

tears rolled down her cheeks. Sad events affected her deeply. She had never

recovered from her mother’s death. She had prayed to her mother nonstop

when I was in prison; even when times were good, she prayed to her mother

almost every day. My own near-deaths and the deaths around her left her

permanently saddened and frightened. We heard that my own mother had

died, off in the Cardamom Mountains, and Hok and his wife and Huoy and I

held a ceremony with candles and incense, the same as we had held for my

father and brother. In a way I was glad that my mother had died, because it

freed her from the hardships of this life, but Huoy took the news badly. I kept

trying to cheer her up, but it wasn’t easy. Her mental health was fragile. She

belonged  to  a  more  peaceful  time,  of  going  to  the  temples  and  raising

children and running a clean and comfortable household.

Our new house in Phum Ra was not what I had expected to give her before

the  revolution.  It  was  made  of  thatch,  except  for  a  few  corrugated  metal

panels along the walls. The floor was dirt. But we both loved the house and I

was proud of it, because I had designed it myself and built it with my own

hands. We had only to compare our house to our neighbours’ to know how

good it was.

Our neighbours lived in houses on stilts like the ones I helped build when I

was on the construction crew. The pilings had sunk unevenly, and as a result

the floors were tilted at various crazy angles. The metal roofs got so hot inthe sun that sometimes the inhabitants fried freshwater clams on them to save

building a fire.

Our little house was sturdy and comfortable. For the site I chose a hillock,

elevated  above  the  surrounding  ground,  so  it  would  never  flood.  We

sprinkled water on the dirt floor in the morning, which kept it cool all day.

Doors and windows gave us plenty of ventilation. The thatch roof kept out

the sun and the rain. To protect against heat even more, I planted a climbing

squash that grew up onto the roof and covered it with leaves. On the south

side of the house, which got the direct rays of the sun, I planted banana trees

for shade, plus climbing beans to grow up and cover the outside wall.

The main room of the house was about ten feet by six. An L-shaped bench

made of smooth boards ran along the west and south walls. Huoy and I slept

on the long side and used the short side for sitting on during the day. At the

far end of the bench, near the door, we kept a ceramic jar with a lid and cool,

clean drinking water inside.

The kitchen was a lean-to shed attached to the north side of the house. We

stacked firewood along one wall and set three stones in a triangle to support

the pot. We went through the motions of showing up at the common kitchen

for meals, but like most families in Phum Ra we did our real cooking at home

every day, while pretending to make tea. We had yams, taro, arrow root,

onions,  pumpkins,  beans,  squash,  cabbage,  cucumber,  peppers,  corn  and

other vegetables in our garden. We raised ducks and chickens. Huoy, who

had strong maternal instincts, loved to gather the tiny, fluffy-feathered chicks

in her hands and carry them to spots where they could peck at the termites on

the ground, making their cheeping noises.

  Truly, we had everything we needed. By our standards we were rich. I had

a bamboo shoulderboard, two pails and an all-purpose hatchet. We had hoes

and  mattocks  for  the  garden;  kitchen  utensils;  the  crockery  water  jar;  the

mended and blackened mosquito net; and a soft, silk-like brocaded blanket to

keep us warm at night. (Somebody had stolen our white plastic tarp but we

didn’t  care,  because  our  roof  kept  us  dry.)  We  had  our  clothes.  We  had

enough  food.  We  had  hidden  possessions  –  some  bits  of  gold  in  our

waistbands; my eyeglasses and medical equipment on top of the roofbeam;

rice and extra food and medical textbooks in a storage cellar under the dirt

floor. The French-English instruction book lay hidden between the bench and

the wall, where I could reach for it when I chose. We had no Mercedes, no

gasoline trucks, no bank accounts, and we didn’t care. We didn’t even missthem anymore.

I felt reborn. Huoy made me happy. Our house made me happy. We had

moved from the front lines to the back lines, where life was more relaxed.

Every day I heard the whistle of the steam trains approaching and watched

the  trains  chuff  past  on  the  railroad  tracks  and  saw  the  railroad  workers

poling themselves rapidly along on their little flatcar, and I marvelled, like a

child who had never seen such things before. When the bells rang in the

village – ‘DING. DING. Ding, ding, ding, dingdingding’ – the sound didn’t

set my teeth on edge, as it had earlier. The bells fit in with the trains and the

birds and everything else.

In the evenings Huoy and I went walking together to look for food. We

gathered wild plants. We hunted for mice and crabs. We used our mosquito

net to catch tiny shrimp and crayfish in a pond. Once we caught a big fish in

the net, and when I had hauled it ashore Huoy wrapped her arms around my

neck and wept.

  ‘Why are you crying?’

  ‘Because I’m happy, sweet, I’m happy,’ she said. At home she cooked the

fish with water convolvulus, and it was perfect.

  Sometimes  the  two  of  us  were  alone  together,  bathing  in  a  canal.  We

scrubbed and washed one another. We were happy to serve one another.

We were so close and so dependent on each other that we often joked

about it. A man I knew came over to the house and asked me to go out

foraging with him.

‘I need my wife’s permission,’ I said.

  ‘You’re scared of your wife?’ my friend said.

  ‘Absolutely,’ I said. Huoy was standing next to me. ‘She’s the minister of

education and finance around here. She’s minister of cultural affairs too. She

runs everything. She’s the boss.’

My friend said sceptically, ‘Oh yeah? You have to give her respect like

that, in front of her?’

‘Of course,’ I said. I turned to Huoy and asked her please to give me

permission to go out foraging. Huoy folded her arms, pouted and said no.

  ‘Sorry, I can’t go,’ I told my friend.

I put my palms together and sompeahed Huoy, but she shook her head.

Then I grabbed her and tickled her until she finally said yes.

  ‘The boss has given permission now,’ I said. ‘We can go.’

The truth was that Huoy was the boss. I liked it that way. She modified myquick temper, my stubbornness, my tendency to joke too much. She brought

out my patience, my quiet side. I was her boss too. Each served the other. I

kept her alive by providing the food and shelter and love she needed. She had

saved my life when I was sick. She kept me from doing rash things, like

killing Pen Tip. She was my reason for living.


When I returned from my third time in prison, Pen Tip pretended to ignore

me. It didn’t matter. I knew and he knew that there was unfinished business

between us. I let him worry about it. I didn’t worry. Until the right day came,

I was content to wait.

As far as I was concerned, I had gained the upper hand. I was the man

prison couldn’t kill. I was the ghost who kept reappearing. And Pen Tip’s

attempt to dominate me by putting me in a low-class job had backfired. It was

low-class, without a doubt, but it was the best job in the village.

The fertilizer crew was outside Pen Tip’s jurisdiction. He didn’t supervise

us. Nobody really did. Few people went near the fertilizer shed because of the

smell. Occasionally Uncle Phan, the village chief, came by on an inspection

tour, but he was easy to deal with. Uncle Phan told me to put salt in the

fertilizer. He thought plants need salt, the way people do. I went off to the

common kitchen, shaking my head, and requisitioned salt. From what I could

remember from biology courses, plants need nitrogen, phosphates and other

nutrients, but they do not need salt, which is harmful to them. I put the salt

aside for my own use, and the next time I saw Uncle Phan I said solemly, ‘I

have tasted the fertilizer. The salt level is exactly right. Would you like to

taste some too?’ He turned pale, like a man who was about to be sick. And

that kept him away from the fertilizer shed for a while.

My colleague on the fertilizer crew was an old guy with no side teeth,

named Sangam. Once a day, Sangam and I strolled leisurely to a public toilet

with our tools. There were several toilets scattered around the village. They

had  half-height  thatch  walls,  meaning  that  someone  who  went  inside  and

squatted  still  had  his  head  and  shoulders  visible  to  passersby.  Not  much

privacy at all. The users had to place their feet on two wooden slats, and

carefully – one slip could mean a fall into the retaining pit, a fifty-five-gallon

steel drum cut in half. Needless to say, the toilets were unpopular among the

residents of the village, who preferred to sneak off into the bushes when no

one was watching.

  Sangam and I took turns emptying the steel drums with a pail attached to avery, very, very long wooden handle. We dumped the contents into another

half of a fifty-five-gallon drum and carried it between us on the longest pole

we could find. At the fertilizer shed, which was far out in the rice fields, we

stirred  other  ingredients  into  the  drum  –  mud  from  hillocks  (which  was

exceptionally fertile) and rice husks or leaves. We poured the mixture onto

the ground. By the time it dried a day or two later, it had lost most of its

odour and was ready to be spread. Every week or so Sangam and I made

deliveries to the common gardens in an oxcart.

The only disadvantages to the job were the smell, which was awful, and

the danger to health. I was extremely careful not to get cuts. I bathed twice a

day and washed thoroughly with kapok soap and real soap that I got from the

common kitchen. I never got internal infections, but the red rash spread back

over my feet and ankles.

The advantage of the job was that Sangam and I were left alone. It was

nothing at all like working on the front lines. We didn’t pay any attention to

the bells. We didn’t work hard. I took at least one long nap each day. About

once a week I stayed up all night to steal from the common gardens. When I

came back from stealing I wrapped the vegetables carefully and stored them

under the pile of fertilizer, where nobody ever looked. Then I slept at the

fertilizer shed until noon, while Sangam kept watch.

We used the job as a cover for getting food. If we wanted to spend an

afternoon collecting red ant eggs, or gathering wild plants, or fishing, we

went through the fields collecting manure from the oxen and water buffalo,

until we were safely out of sight. If I wanted rice, I splashed smelly night soil

on my sleeves, pretended to be tired and lay down on a long table in the

common  kitchen.  When  Uncle  Phan’s  wife,  who  was  the  leader  of  the

kitchen, tried to get me to leave, I pretended to stay asleep until she offered

me a big enough bribe of rice.

  Luck was running in our direction. A railroad worker living nearby had a

sick child and asked my brother Hok for advice. Hok referred the case to me.

I treated the child and got to know the entire railroad crew. These were the

men I had seen poling along on their flatcar ever since I had first come to

Battambang. They were members of an elite class under the regime. They ate

even better than soldiers. Their food was sent to them in boxcars, more than

they could eat. They also had their own vegetable garden, which Sangam and

I supplied fertilizer to, secretly, as a favour.

  They invited us to secret feasts and served me dishes I hadn’t seen in years.I set food aside for Huoy, then ate so much I couldn’t move.

  With the food from the railroad workers, and the food I collected on and

off the job, plus the vegetables from our garden, Huoy and I ate better than

ever before. For the first time since coming to Battambang, we were actually

healthy.

  What a change! Our body weights were nearly normal. We were strong

from all the exercise. We had our own private house to live in, just the two of

us. We didn’t like the regime, but we had learned how to get around the

system, especially now that we were away from the front lines.

My only regret, when I look back on that period, was an argument I had

with Huoy. She had taken some cooked food from its hiding place in the

woodpile when a boy about eleven years old happened to walk past and see

it. The boy was smoking a cigarette. He gave Huoy a long, bold, suspicious

glare. When he walked past me working in the garden he glared at me too.

The boy’s name was Yoeung, and he was Uncle Phan’s adopted son. He

often went around the village, joined work crews just long enough to watch

the workers closely, then wandered off again to report what he saw. He was a

chhlop.

  ‘Sweet,’ I said to Huoy after Yoeung had left, ‘did you listen to me? What

was I talking about just last night? What did I tell you? To keep the food

hidden. It means our lives. So why didn’t you?’

  Huoy said, ‘I know. I’m sorry. It was bad timing, that’s all. I took out the

food, and the chhlop was right there. I didn’t mean to.’

  Something in my mind snapped, like a twig that had been stepped on. My

happiness vanished. I saw myself being tied up and dragged off to prison. I

went into a cold rage.

  ‘Don’t talk to me for five days,’ I said. ‘If you say even a word, I won’t

answer.’

  Huoy was silent, her eyes downcast.

  Uncle Phan summoned me to his house.

I walked there slowly, thinking the end had come. If I went to prison a

fourth time, there was no way I could survive.

I  lied  to  Uncle  Phan.  I  lied  better  than  I  had  ever  lied  in  my  life,  by

convincing myself that what I said was true. I swore to him that the food was

given to me by the railroad workers (though in fact I had stolen it from the

common garden). It was my word against the chhlop’s, and Uncle Phan let

me go with a warning. Perhaps he thought I had suffered enough. Or maybehis conscience was bothering him. He did not know it, but many evenings I

had seen him strolling back from the common garden with a bulge in his

krama. I had seen the lantern light shine through the cracks of his house when

he and his wife cooked the stolen food and ate it. In Phum Ra, everyone was

a thief. Even the village leader.

So  this  time  Huoy  and  I  got  away  with  it.  We  were  not  punished  for

stealing the food. But when I got back to our house I gave her the silent

treatment  anyway.  I  was  determined  to  be  strong  and  to  show  her  the

consequences of her action.

  After two days of not saying a word to her, I was standing in the doorway

of the house looking out at the garden. Huoy came to me and knelt at my feet.

She looked up at me, with teardrops at the corners of her eyes.

  ‘Sweet, are you still angry at me?’ she said. ‘I did wrong. I was careless. If

you want to beat me for it, then beat me. Do as you wish. But once you are

through, talk to me. Please talk to me.’

I raised her up and put my arms around her. I hugged her. Her body was

soft and warm. And once I had hugged her I knew I had done wrong. She was

my wife. She would never harm me, and I knew that. It was the one thing I

was certain of in the world.

I took a deep breath.

‘Yes, I will talk to you,’ I said huskily. Then I had to go out in the garden

to clear my thoughts.

I was upset and confused. My temper had got the best of me again. After

all those years of learning to control it. Underneath the adult exterior I was

the same boy who had thrown the starter wrench into the radiator of the

engine at my father’s sawmill and then kicked the dog.

I had been crazy to treat Huoy that way. Crazy and wrong.

  Standing  in  the  garden,  I  decided  never  to  do  anything  to  make  Huoy

unhappy again. If I had a single purpose in life, it was to comfort her, and to

serve her just as she served me.

We made up, and our bonheur was restored. The last barrier between us

had been removed, a barrier I had not known about until it was gone. We

became even closer than before, like the cupped halves of male and female

fitting snugly in the symbol of yin and yang.

This is not to say that life was perfect. We never forgot that we were living

under a shadow. We always knew that somewhere nearby, the soldiers were

marching some unfortunate person away and that we were powerless to doanything about it. Someday, perhaps, it would be our turn. Huoy and I didn’t

talk about the terror much, but it was always there, like a cold hand around

our hearts.

Yet even the terror had one beneficial effect: it had driven us closer. And

except for the fear itself, life had never been so good. I didn’t miss the old

times. I didn’t care about being a doctor anymore, or being rich. I didn’t miss

having  a  motorcycle,  or  even  wearing  shoes.  We  didn’t  like  the  Khmer

Rouge, but we accepted our circumstances under them. We were close to the

land. We were peasants, as generations of our ancestors had been. We were

healthy. We had enough to eat. We had each other’s company. We had our

own house. In the late afternoons we sat by the back door and looked at the

view: rice fields spreading out into the distance, dotted with hillocks. It was

perfect. One hillock rose higher than the rest, crowned with a leaning sdao

tree. Beyond the rice fields rose the mountain, with the temple on the plateau,

a reminder of the religion we had not forgotten. The sun set behind the long,

uneven ridge.

Over the months we watched the rice fields change from brown to green

and from green to gold, and then there was joyous news:

  Huoy was pregnant.                                          29



                                Crossing the Sea


 




In our pillow talk at night Huoy often said she wanted babies. She wanted to

be a mother badly, but she also thought it best to put it off until the Khmer

Rouge had been overthrown, so our children could grow up in a better world.

Until my third time in prison I had agreed.

But  after  I  came  back  from  prison  for  the  last  time,  life  seemed  too

precious and fragile to wait any longer. I told her it was time to start a family

and she agreed. With the food I provided and the larger rations we got from

the common kitchen during the rice harvest, Huoy became fertile toward the

end of 1977.

We knew she was pregnant because of morning sickness. She had a bad

case, vomiting both in the morning and the afternoon. Even rice made her

nauseous. The only foods she could keep down were sweet. I hunted for

papayas and jackfruits. I made doctor’s visits in exchange for bananas and

pieces of sugar cane. Finally we traded gold for a supply of palm tree sugar.

She sprinkled the sugar on food, and that helped keep it down. But she didn’t

have much appetite.

  Except to find food that agreed with her, there was nothing I could do

about her morning sickness. We would just have to wait for it to pass. I took

my medical instruments out of hiding – a stethoscope, a blood-pressure cuff

and a thermometer – and gave her an exam, using spoons as an improvised

speculum. All her signs were good. Aside from the nausea, which caused a

slight weight loss, she was healthy. She was then twenty-seven years old.

  Because she was strong and relatively young, she had a good chance ofgiving birth successfully, or, as we say in the Khmer language, ‘crossing the

sea’. Most Cambodian women thought of childbirth as something like a long

and dangerous voyage, which is how the expression ‘crossing the sea’ came

into being. Huoy wasn’t too worried about the act of giving birth itself. After

all, I was a doctor. She knew that I would take care of her. She was more

concerned about the upbringing of the child after it was born.

  Huoy  told  me  many  times  that  she  was  going  to  raise  our  child  to  be

religious and well mannered and to respect its elders. If there were no schools

she would educate the child herself. She didn’t really care whether we had a

boy or a girl, as long as the child was healthy. I hoped for a little girl – a

small version of Huoy, to grow up and help heal the suffering of the world.

By the third month Huoy’s belly began to show. From then on she wore

sarongs instead of trousers, because it was easy to adjust the size of the waist.

During the days she did light tasks in the common garden. When she came

home she chewed on a piece of sugar cane, for energy, and then watered our

vegetables with a small watering can, careful not to strain herself. She was

beginning to get over her morning sickness, and she had that contented inner

glow of a woman who is glad to be pregnant.

But the dry season of 1978 was a difficult time in the Phnom Tippeday

region. The common kitchen began serving smaller rations than before. There

was a warehouse nearby, a large building with mud walls and a metal roof,

next  to  the  railroad  tracks,  but  the  rice  inside  was  not  meant  for  us.

Occasionally the doors opened and soldiers loaded great, heavy sacks of rice

onto railroad trains, or else onto trucks, and we who had grown the rice sadly

watched it disappear.

  Toward the end of March 1978 the common kitchen began skipping meals.

At  first  I  simply  stole  more  food  to  make  up  for  it.  My  partner  was  a

courageous twelve-year-old boy named Tha, who fed his crippled father, his

pregnant mother and two small children with what he stole. Together we

went on night-time expeditions to the common garden on the mountainside,

near the ruined temple. One night the civilian guards at the garden heard us

coming, threw stones at us and yelled at the top of their lungs for the soldiers.

There was only one thing for us to do: Tha and I climbed above the guards,

threw stones at them and shouted ‘Thieves! Thieves!’ at them as loudly as we

could  so  the  soldiers  wouldn’t  know  whom  to  shoot.  Quickly  we  threw

vegetables in our sacks and came crashing down the mountainside with our

sacks in one hand and hatchets in the other. When we came back to thevillage we cooked our food out in the open. Except for stealing itself, there

was  nothing  to  hide.  With  the  common  kitchen  closed  part  of  the  time,

everybody prepared private meals. Angka’s authority was breaking down in

front of our eyes.

In April 1978 the common kitchen in Phum Ra closed entirely. The bells

stopped ringing. There were no more loudspeaker announcements, no more

music.

One of the first to stop working was Pen Tip. He was like a weather vane,

sensing which way the political winds were blowing. Others followed his

example. A few ‘old’ people who were closest to the village leaders, or who

were particularly scared of the soldiers, continued to work at their jobs. But

most wandered off into the fields and jungle to forage.

At our house, by mid-April, there was no more food left in the hiding

places. We ate the water convolvulus, the cabbages and the underdeveloped

yams from our garden, then the flowers from the pumpkins and the leaves

from the taro. It was too early for the corn and beans and other vegetables,

and there were no bananas on our trees.

We had already eaten the ducks. The common kitchen had taken some of

the  chickens,  and  I  had  given  the  rest  to  someone  to  raise  in  a  remote

location, out of Angka’s reach.

I was worried. There is little that helps a pregnant woman as much as food,

and little that complicates a pregnancy as much as malnutrition. I didn’t say

that to Huoy, but she knew it herself.

By her fourth month of pregnancy she was no longer nauseous, but there

was little for her to eat. The weather was unusually dry and hot.

  Though the common kitchen was closed, soldiers continued to take people

away for gathering wild foods. It had no effect. After three and a half years of

listening to promises about the country’s future, the patience of the ‘new’

people and even the ‘old’ people was exhausted. We foraged in the open. We

stole more than ever before, during the day as well as the night. Everybody

stole. The guards at the common gardens stole until there was not an edible

leaf left, and then they left the garden gates open. Tha and I made trips into

the  rice  fields,  to  glean  the  leftovers  from  the  rice  harvest.  People  were

everywhere, bending over, scanning the ground, picking up unhusked grains

of rice, wandering uncertainly this way and that. In an entire day I collected

less than a can of rice and saved it all for Huoy. All the wild food was gone,

picked by other hungry people.Huoy became depressed.

It was not just the lack of food, though that was the greatest part of it – the

unrelenting emptiness in her stomach, day after day, just when she needed

food the most. Adding to her sorrow, draining her strength further, were other

events that affected her mental well-being. Like the purges. The latest purge

was against the ‘Vietnamese’. The Khmer Rouge leaders had the same racial

prejudice against the Vietnamese as the Lon Nol regime did. They decided

that Cambodians of Vietnamese descent and even Cambodians who spoke the

Vietnamese  language  were  the  cause  of  all  our  problems  and  that  it  was

necessary to purify the nation of traitors of this type. The chhlop Yoeung

came around, trying to discover who in our village spoke Vietnamese, and

many  were  taken  away.  Huoy,  who  had  grown  up  near  the  Vietnamese

border, spoke fluent Vietnamese. The chhlop didn’t find out, but still she

became depressed.

But it was not just the hunger and the purges that depressed her. Earlier in

the regime there had been one element of truth to the communists’ claim of

moral superiority: Khmer Rouge cadre and soldiers did not take bribes. Now

even that was no longer true. With gold, people could get food from the

common  kitchen,  even  though  it  was  closed.  With  gold,  they  could  get

relatives  or  friends  reassigned  from  the  front  lines. Bonjour,  Cambodia’s

great moral weakness, had reappeared.

I spent long hours consoling Huoy.

  ‘You have to be strong, sweet,’ I said. ‘Don’t allow yourself to be sick. If

you are sick, I feel sick. If you have any kind of disease in your mind or your

heart, give it to me, but get rid of it. I want you to be healthy.’

  ‘Yes,’ Huoy said, but she was unconvinced.

  She lay on the smooth wooden bench in our tiny house, tired, hot, fanning

herself. She was six months pregnant, with a swollen belly.

‘I have never seen this kind of government before,’ said Huoy listlessly. It

was her favourite complaint. ‘I have read a lot of history books, about Europe

and  Asia,  but  I  never  read  about  anything  like  this.  No  hospitals.  No

communication. If we lived in any other country, we could send a letter out to

relatives abroad, and they would send money or food. But we cannot even

send a letter out of Cambodia. We are not even allowed to have pencil or

paper to write a letter. If we object they say we are CIA, or KGB, or spies for

the Vietnamese. There is no way to call for help.’

‘I help you,’ I said.‘But you are hungry too,’ she said. ‘In Sihanouk’s regime and Lon Nol’s

regime if you were poor you could at least go out and beg. Or you were free

to  find  wild  foods  in  the  countryside.  But  here,  nothing.  Nothing.  Even

beggars cannot survive.’

I didn’t know what to say to that. It was all true.

  ‘The government treats us worse than animals,’ she murmured. ‘Nobody

cares. When someone dies on the dykes of the canals, nobody comes to take

the  bodies  away.  Only  the  vultures.  Or  the chhke  char-chark.  Or  the

cannibals. People are eating people. That’s what we have come to.’

‘I have heard the stories,’ I answered. ‘But I do not think there have been

many cases. The Khmer Rouge do not like cannabalism either.’

  Huoy fanned herself, staring at the thatch ceiling.

‘If  there  is  no  food,  maybe  the  baby  will  be  retarded,’  she  said.  ‘Or

deformed.’

  ‘No, sweet,’ I said firmly. ‘I have examined you. I have listened to the

baby’s heartbeat. The signs are all good. The baby will be fine.’

  Huoy didn’t seem to hear me. Her attention had drifted, and her thoughts

were focused on something far away. ‘If there is no food, how can I make

milk in my breasts?’ she whispered. ‘How long can I go on like this? How

long has it been since Angka has given us food?’

  ‘No,  don’t  worry,’  I  said.  ‘Your  breasts  will  automatically  have  milk.

Automatically. I’m a doctor. This is my specialty. I know.’

‘Yes, I know the milk comes automatically,’ said Huoy. ‘But maybe there

won’t be enough.’

I  didn’t  know  what  to  say  to  that  either.  She  was  right.  If  she  was  as

malnourished when she delivered the baby as she was now, she probably

wouldn’t be able to produce enough milk. But for the moment, breast milk

was the least of our problems. Even her malnourishment didn’t worry me as

much as the state of her mind.

  Ever since the Khmer Rouge had taken over I had talked with Huoy, trying

to encourage her. At first she believed me, and kept her spirits up. She said

she understood that we had to wait for things to improve. But that was before

the death of her mother. After that, Huoy was never quite the same. We went

to the front lines, my father and brother died, and I kept getting sent to prison.

And as Huoy saw conditions worsening each year, she became discouraged.

She didn’t have the instinct to fight when all the odds were against us. To her,

there was no use fighting anymore. The hunger, the terror, the chhlop, thecorruption,  the  energy  the  baby  drew  away  from  her  –  all  these  things

combined to break her will.

Her weight loss showed first in her cheeks, which lost their roundness.

Then in the outline of her jawbones and her collarbones. All her ribs were

showing.

I went out every day, all day, searching for food but finding only a handful.

There was nothing left of Hok’s gardens or any of the common gardens.

Every plant had been plucked.

I took gold out of my waistband pocket and tried to buy rice, but there was

no more for sale, at any price, anywhere. There was only rice flour. For a

damleung, more than an ounce of gold, I bought two small cans of rice flour

weighing less than half a pound. I gave it all to Huoy but it wasn’t enough. I

went  to  the  railroad  workers  for  help  but  they  said  sorry,  they  were  not

allowed to talk to me because of the purges.

I  went  back  to  foraging  for  wild  foods.  The  forests  were  barren.  No

bamboo shoots, red ant nests, tokay lizards, water convolvulus patches or

field  mice.  Nothing,  because  of  the  drought  and  because  of  all  the  other

foragers. From foraging I went back to trying the black market, and from the

black market I went back to foraging. I tried everything, many times over.

There was no more food.

  Huoy was seven months’ pregnant when she felt a pain like a menstrual

cramp. It went away and then a few hours later she had another one. I gave

her another obstetrical exam. It was just what I feared: a softening of the

cervix, and the beginning of dilation.

  ‘You’re going into labour,’ I told her.

  Huoy  looked  at  me  with  her  great  round  eyes,  and  she  saw  into  my

thoughts but said nothing. She turned her head to the wall. After a while I

heard her whisper, ‘Help me, Mother. Please protect me.’

  Yes, please protect her, I thought. A premature birth. No intensive-care

unit, no operating room. No food for Huoy or the child. And chhlop hanging

around, looking for trouble.

Under the Khmer Rouge’s puritanical rules, it was forbidden for a man to

deliver his wife’s baby. If I delivered it myself the neighbours would know

and the chhlop would find out and that would be the end of me. Or if I did

anything that suggested I was a doctor, that would be the end.

  Luckily a midwife named Seng Orn lived in a village nearby. I knew her

from Phnom Penh, where she had worked as a midwife at a hospital. BetweenSeng Orn and me was friendship and respect.

If the birth was normal, Seng Orn and I could handle it easily. If there were

complications, maybe we could handle it but maybe not. For one thing, I

didn’t  have  surgical  instruments,  antibiotics,  anaesthesia  or  any  of  the

standard equipment of an operating theatre. For another, I was out of practice

in performing obstetrical surgery. For the last year I had been a fertilizer

maker, and before that a house builder, and before that a rice farmer and

canal  digger.  I  still  had  my  doctor’s  skills,  but  I  was  rusty.  The  worst

problem, though, was the presence of the chhlop.

In  the  back  of  my  mind  there  was  one  last  option  to  try  in  a  true

emergency. Not the front-lines clinic for war slaves. Not the local hospital in

Phum Phnom for soldiers and ‘old’ people. There was only one place: the old

government hospital in Battambang City. I had heard that a former professor

of mine, one of the most eminent doctors in the nation, was teaching at the

hospital.  The  Khmer  Rouge  were  said  to  tolerate  his  brand  of  Western

medicine. But I knew there was only a small chance that he was really in

Battambang or that Huoy and I could get permission to go there.

  Huoy’s contractions were irregular and far apart, which is common for

preliminary or ‘false’ labour, before the first stage of true labour begins. I

held her hand as the contractions took her, and looked around our tiny house.

It was so primitive. The thatched roof, the dirt floor. No running water or

electricity. I would have given anything to be back in Phnom Penh.

  Between contractions, Huoy asked me to help her bathe. I walked her out

the back door to the minicanal and washed her tenderly. We went inside

again and she lay down on the bed, clutching her small blue kapok-filled

pillow to her chest. I built a fire in the lean-to kitchen and made sure we had

plenty of wood and lots of water. Later that afternoon, when the labour pains

were forty minutes apart, I summoned a neighbour of ours, an old woman, to

watch over Huoy. I went to get Seng Orn.

I ran to the village at the base of the mountain where Seng Orn lived. She

said she was ready to go but needed permission. We went to see her village

leader, who refused to let her go at first, and gave in only after prolonged

pleading and arguments. When we got to Phum Ra, we had to report to Uncle

Phan, my village leader. His adopted son Yoeung, the chhlop, eyed us closely

as we left and then followed us out into the yard.

By the time we returned to the house, it was nearly sunset. I took my watch

out and timed the labour pains, which were half an hour apart.  Cautiously, I looked out the door. In the twilight stood the figure of a boy,

facing us as he leaned against a tree, smoking a cigarette.

  Huoy lay on the bed, a small oil lamp beside her and another borrowed

lamp at her feet. I massaged her limbs, smoothed her hair, wiped her face

with a damp cloth.

  When she went into contractions she looked at me and then her attention

turned inward. Frowning, contorting her face, she clenched my arms very,

very  tightly,  so  tightly  I  thought  my  bones  were  going  to  break.  The

contractions peaked and then sometimes went on to a second or third peak

before going down. Finally, as the pain eased, Huoy relaxed her hold on my

arm. She became aware of her own tiredness, and then me sitting next to her.

Her face was wet with perspiration, and I smoothed the wet strands of hair

away from her forehead and tried to encourage her.

At eleven o’clock her water broke, the sac containing the amniotic fluid.

That  was  normal.  Seng  Orn  reported  that  the  cervix  was  dilated  to  three

centimetres.

The next interval was ten minutes.

  Then fifteen minutes.

  Then  as  the  hands  of  my  watch  swept  past  eleven-thirty  and  the  next

contraction didn’t come, and by eleven forty-five it still hadn’t come, we

knew there was trouble. The intervals should have gotten closer together, not

farther apart.

I had one ampule of an antispasmodic medication. I drew it into a syringe

and injected Huoy twice, first in the buttocks, then through the stomach wall

into the fundus, or dome, a large, smooth muscle on top of the uterus, to help

her relax and to make it easier for the cervix to widen so the child could

descend from the womb. I had one capsule of vitamins, and I gave it to Huoy

as a placebo – to make her feel as if she were getting medicine, to put her in a

better frame of mind.

At midnight, her blood pressure was at the low end of the normal range.

Her heartbeat was slower than before.

‘Her cervix is still at three centimetres,’ Seng Orn told me quietly.

I scraped some kernels of corn and cooked them with sugar and fed them

to Huoy to give her energy.

Her contractions were strong but irregular. Her cervix was like a bottleneck

facing downward from her womb, and it did not widen. She had the pains,

but her labour did not advance. One part of her was trying to expel the childand another part was fighting to retain it. A war was going on, with her body

as the battlefield. When the contractions came, she felt no urge to push. It

was too early for that, but she tried anyway. She wept. ‘It hurts, sweet, it

hurts,’ she said. I stood by her head and pressed her belly downward, trying

to force the baby along, while Seng Orn attended the birth canal. Seng Orn

could see the top of the child’s head but she didn’t even have forceps. We

lacked the most basic tools.

I rubbed Huoy’s limbs again. She was wet from perspiration and from

clenching. Even when she didn’t have labour pains, she was crying.

The unthinkable was happening.

  Seng Orn pulled me aside for a conference.

  ‘Caesarean?’ she whispered.

  ‘Cannot!’ I hissed. ‘The chhlop’s outside. Do you want to die too? We will

all  die!  Huoy  and  the  baby  too!  We  have  no  instruments!  We  have  no

equipment!’

  ‘Craniotomy?’ she suggested.

I took a deep breath and shook my head, then took another deep breath.

‘No,’ I said. ‘Cannot.’

‘I’m hungry, sweet,’ Huoy said feebly from the bed, and I turned back

toward her.

It was 4.00 a.m. I had saved one can of rice for this; it was all the food we

had left. I cooked it in the kitchen and tried to feed it to Huoy, spoonful by

spoonful, but she could not eat much of it. She was in too much pain.

At first light Hok came to the door. For all the coolness between us, he was

still my brother and I trusted him. We went together to try against the odds to

get Huoy on a train to Battambang.

We ran to the Khmer Rouge headquarters in Phum Phnom. To the centre

of enemy operations. And the cadre laughed at me. I was barefoot, in torn

clothes,  and  they  could  not  comprehend  why  I  was  so  upset  and  why  I

frantically asked permission to do what few war slaves did – to ride the train

to Battambang. They sent me to the boss of the railroad station, who said he

didn’t have the authority, and sent me back to Khmer Rouge headquarters. I

ran both ways, panicking as the hours slipped past, my universe falling apart.

They could not understand why I insisted my wife have a Caesarean section.

They did not know what it was.

By the time I came back to the house, it was midmorning. The chhlop

loitered nearby, pretending not to notice.I had accomplished nothing.

I had failed.

  Huoy lay sunken and tired on the bench. She clutched the kapok pillow to

her chest. Her arms and legs were thin as sticks. Her belly was still round, the

child still inside.

  She spoke in weak voice.

  ‘Why were you gone so long? I’ve been waiting for you. Do you have

some medicine for me?’

‘No more, sweet,’ I said. ‘I have no more.’

‘Do we have food to eat?’ she asked.

‘No more. We have no more food,’ I said. ‘You’re going to be all right,

sweet. Wait for a little while, and maybe I’ll bring you to Battambang, to a

big hospital for an operation.’

  ‘How long? I’m tired now. I’m very tired.’

I took up the stethoscope and the blood-pressure cuff. Her blood pressure

had dropped. Her heartbeat was slow and very, very feeble.

‘Do we have anything to eat?’ said Huoy. She spoke in a whisper, like a

child.

  ‘The neighbours are looking for food for you,’ I said.

‘I need food! I need food. I need medicine. Sweet, save my life. Please

save my life. I’m too tired. I just need a spoonful of rice.’

Before she died, she asked me to cradle her. I swung her onto my lap, held

her in my arms. She asked me to let her kiss me. I kissed her, and she kissed

me. She looked up at me with her great round eyes, and they were full of

sorrow. She didn’t want to leave.

  ‘Take care of yourself, sweet,’ she said to me.

  Then the room was full of people.                                          30



                                        Grief


 




People say I went crazy after Huoy died. They are probably right. I did not

feel like myself, and there were long periods that I do not even remember.

I  remember  crying  and  crying  and  pounding  my  fists  on  the  floor  and

beating my head against the wall, and the people in the house restraining me.

I  remember  insisting  that  I  help  bathe  Huoy’s  body  and  prepare  it  for

burial, a ritual normally performed by women. I took one of my own blue

shirts, one that she had particularly liked, and put it on her next to her skin, to

remind her of me. Then I took a pale green silk blouse and a silk dress and

put those on her, and then another blouse and another dress on top of that, so

she  would  have  a  change  of  clothes  in  paradise;  then  put  her  everyday

mismatched shower sandals on her feet, because those were the only shoes

she had; and put the kapok pillow she liked so much on her chest for her to

hold on to; and tenderly brushed her hair; and put on her finger the gold ring

she used to wear. And when the old ladies in the house tried to interfere, I

wouldn’t let them.

  They tried to stop me from going to the burial because I was out of my

mind, but I followed my brother Hok and a neighbour as they carried the

body on a plank, with a sheet of corrugated metal from the house wrapped

around her as a coffin. I showed them where to dig, beneath the big leaning

sdao tree on the hillock in the middle of the rice fields. And when they dug

the hole deep in the ground and put her in, I knelt and prayed to the gods and

wept, while the onlookers talked about how hard it was for a woman to cross

the sea.The next thing I remember, the sun was setting and I was back in the house

shaving my head, and people were looking at me and shaking their heads in

disapproval. In Cambodia, it is traditional for widows to shave their heads to

demonstrate grief and respect when their husbands die. No man had ever

shaved his head for his wife, but I had, and people told me I was crazy, and I

shouted at them to mind their own business.

It is said, though I do not remember, that in the days following the burial I

went to the common kitchen and asked the staff, ‘Where’s my wife? She’s

supposed to be waiting for me here.’ The kitchen staff did not know what to

say.

And when the kitchen served meals, as it did sometimes, now that it was

too late, I took my bowl and went home and sat by the back door of the house

without eating, watching the sun go down. I looked at the leaning sdao tree

and the ruined pagoda on the mountainside beyond, and I thought about how

I had been unable to save her.

A doctor, specially trained in delivering children, unable to save his own

wife in childbirth.

  There was an emergency procedure, a craniotomy, that I could have tried

that might have saved Huoy, if I had done it early enough. But I didn’t have

the right equipment for a craniotomy. And even if it worked, it would have

sacrificed the child.

If I had sacrificed the child I might have saved the mother. But even if I

saved the mother, the chhlop would have found out about the operation, and

the soldiers would have taken all of us away.

If I had had the right equipment, I would have done a Caesarean. That was

the operation of choice. But I didn’t have the equipment. I didn’t have any

equipment! Right? Right? I couldn’t have saved her except in an operating

room!

If I had just tried with a knife I could have gotten the child out. But it

would have killed Huoy. No blood supply, no surgical tools, no antibiotics!

She was so weak! I just couldn’t do it. ‘All right!’ I shouted, out loud. ‘It’s

my fault! I panicked! I admit it!’

And an echo rang accusingly, ‘My fault! My fault! My fault! My fault!’

I thought: I shouldn’t be blaming myself like this. The greatest single cause

of her death was malnutrition. Without food, her body weakened, and the

hormones that start labour were released at the wrong time. But if I had used

all my medical skills I wouldn’t have to blame myself like this. Even if I triedand failed it would have been better than this. Even if I tried and they caught

me.

Her whispered words came back to me, like a message from the wind:

‘Why were you gone so long? I’ve been waiting for you.’

  She waited for me to come back before allowing herself to die. And she

didn’t even blame me for failing her.

The  wind  brought  me  her  last  words,  again  and  again:  ‘Take  care  of

yourself, sweet.’

  She had taken care of me when I was sick. She had saved my life. But

when it was my turn to save her, I failed.

  When the sun set I walked along the canal and over the dykes of the rice

fields to the hillock and knelt at the foot of the grave. I offered her the bowl,

which was still full, and told her to eat first, and I put the bowl down and

began to pray.

I prayed to the gods. ‘Just let her go to paradise. If my wife has done

anything wrong, send me to hell in her place. If she has ever sinned, I will

take the responsibility. Release her. Let her go to paradise. And allow us to

be together in our next lives.’

In the fading light the landscape turned to shadows, all but the white ruins

of the temple on the hillside above. ‘Huoy, if I survive, I am going to leave

Cambodia. I have to get out, but I will come back to you one day. I will have

a proper ceremony for you, with many, many monks presiding, and I will

build a stupa for you next to the temple and put your remains in it, to honour

you.

‘I ask your forgiveness. If I did something wrong, don’t be angry at me,

sweet. We will be together in the next life. The next life won’t be short like

this one. We will live a long, long time together, and we will be a happy old

couple.’

I prayed to the soul of our unborn child, to this little girl or boy whom we

had hoped so much to bring into the world. ‘In this life you were unlucky,

because you never had the chance to see your mother’s face. You never had a

chance  to  drink  your  mother’s  milk.  But  you  were  lucky  not  to  see  the

suffering. You were lucky, because now you can see your mother. In the next

life we will all have a chance to be together again. In the next life there won’t

be so much suffering, and you will grow up to be healthy and strong.’

To Huoy’s mother I prayed, ‘Ma, live in paradise with Huoy and the child.

Take care of them, and let them take care of you. And watch over me. I missyou, Ma.’

I prayed to my father, and to my own mother, and then to Huoy again. I ate

the rice, and before leaving I said, ‘Sweet, I’m going home. I’ll see you again

tomorrow.’

People saw me going out to the grave every evening with food and they

said I was crazy. I do not say they are wrong, just that they hadn’t been

through what I had. No couple had been as close as Huoy and me. There was

a night when I got back home from praying and lay down to sleep, and when

I woke up someone was knocking on the door. Huoy’s voice was calling to

me. I opened the door and she was there, dressed in white, with a white veil.

  ‘Please come often to visit me,’ she said.

  She turned away from me and began to walk along the canal. It was still

dark outside, but I could see her. I called after her to wait, wait, but although

I followed her and she was walking very slowly, it was impossible to keep up

with her. As she walked, the ends of her long veil floated in the air and

bounced gracefully, like wings lifting her up and carrying her along. I ran

after her, but she disappeared from sight.


Huoy had died on June 2, 1978. Not long after that there were unmistakable

signs that the regime was breaking up.

By June the leaders of villages near us were being purged. Their positions

were taken by Khmer Rouge from eastern Cambodia. Uncle Phan, the leader

of Phum Ra, ran away before it could happen to him. We never saw him

again. His wife was demoted to the rank of ordinary labourer, and then Pen

Tip pointed her out and the soldiers took her into the woods.

In late June, when the common kitchen reopened for a day, I showed up to

eat and noticed Chev and Uncle Seng sitting at a table by themselves. Chev,

the smiler, was noticeably subdued. So was Uncle Seng. They too had been

replaced by men from eastern Cambodia and assigned to the front lines as

workers.  It  was  a  long  step  down  for  Chev,  formerly  the  head  of  my

cooperative, the man who had sent me to prison twice and ordered my father

and brother killed.

Our  new  village  leader  was  named  Mao.  Like  Chev,  he  was  a  smiler,

dangerous and insincere. ‘Comrade Chev and Comrade Seng,’ Mao told them

in a soothing voice, ‘wait here for a while. We want you to go to a meeting.’

  From the fear on their faces Chev and Seng knew who they were going to

be meeting with. Soldiers watched their every move, and there was no chancefor them to escape.

The following day the common kitchen was closed again and I roamed far

from the village to search for food. Tha, my twelve-year-old stealing partner,

went with me.

We were walking through the dry stubble of a rice field when a soldier saw

us and yelled for us to stop. He asked us what we were doing and I told him

that  we  were  looking  for  wild  foods.  ‘You  must  go  this  way,’  he  said,

pointing his hand toward a path through the woods. In his other hand he was

holding a long, curved knife.

We walked down the path, wondering at the reason for the order, when

suddenly we found the answer. Ahead of us, in a clearing, was a pit filled

with slowly burning rice husks.

  Chev hung over the pit with his wrists tied to a tree branch above. Rice

husks covered him to his chest, but we could see where he had been stabbed

and slashed by the knife.

We stopped. Chev was still alive. He groaned, turned his head and his eyes

bored into mine. He recognized me. I looked back at him steadily for a long

moment, without saying anything. I thought, Chev, you are dying but I have

survived. Then the boy asked me to come along and I turned my back on

Chev, leaving him to his appointment with the King of Death.

We didn’t see Uncle Seng, but we knew that his fate was the same as

Chev’s. He had been punished for being part of a failing regime.

It was kama. Men aren’t always able to take revenge, but the gods are. The

gods understand justice. They had punished Chev for killing, and they had

punished  Uncle  Seng  for  not  stopping  the  killing.  And  they  had  sent  me

walking along the forest path to be a witness.

Well, Pen Tip, I thought, you tried your best to kill me. But some day

kama will catch up to you too. Because good comes to those who do good,

and bad comes to those who do evil.

The boy and I got out in the rice fields again. People were everywhere,

bending over, picking up grains of rice. We joined them, scanning the hard,

reddish ground.


One day I came back from foraging in my half-crazed state and found the

house ransacked. I knew who had done it. Mao’s wife, corrupt and greedy,

was  looking  for  Huoy’s  jewellery.  I  went  to  Mao’s  house.  My  medical

instruments and Huoy’s papers and some of my papers were there on thetable. He asked me if I was a doctor. I told him no. And I do not even know

why I told him no, whether it was habit, or whether I was no longer a doctor

in my own mind. I thought, Maybe I should have told him yes, so he could

kill me.

  None of my identification cards he had found listed me as a doctor. He

hadn’t found anything valuable of Huoy’s either. Some items of clothing, her

birth certificate, her diplomas, other pieces of paper. Then my mind cleared

and I saw what I wanted, a large folding ID card from Huoy’s days as a

teacher. In one corner was a small black-and-white photograph of her, taken

in 1973 in a period when she had worn her hair short.

  ‘You can have everything there,’ I told Mao. ‘I don’t mind that you take it

from me. But just let me have that photograph of my wife.’

He looked at the ID card, which was lying flattened on the table. It was the

size of a piece of notepaper, but with two vertical creases, and Huoy’s photo

on an outside corner.

He took Huoy’s past in his hands, ripped it down the crease, and handed

the photograph to me. As if he needed to keep the rest.                                          31



                                        Retreat


 




When the drought ended and the rains began, the Khmer Rouge got us to

replant the common gardens and the rice fields. Soon there was food to eat

again. But for me, there was no satisfaction, only bitterness. There was food,

but it was too late for Huoy.

I let my whiskers grow and didn’t mend the rips in my clothing. People

told me I looked old, like a man of fifty.

In the daytime I worked on the fertilizer crew again, but without energy. If

the soldiers had taken me away I would have thanked them, for making my

reunion with my wife that much sooner. At night, after visiting Huoy’s grave,

I became a thief. I stole compulsively, like a gambler, to feel alive.

  With my stealing partner, Tha, I led gangs of hungry men to the common

garden on the mountain. We raped the garden, taking whatever we wanted,

ready  to  fight  any  guards  who  showed.  We  harvested  rice  fields  as  they

ripened,  using  our  bare  hands  and  feet.  I  built  up  a  huge  supply  of  rice,

wrapping it carefully, storing it under the manure pile in the fertilizer shed. I

gave food to Tha, who supported his family; to Sangam, my colleague in the

fertilizer shed; to a distant cousin named Ngor Balam, whom I had met just

recently; to my brother Hok, who had located my brother Pheng Huor’s three

children and taken them in; and to others.

  Still, stealing food wasn’t enough. To test my skills and to test my fate, I

stole  a  small,  hand-powered  rice  mill  from  its  shed  during  the  evening

political meeting, while Mao was giving a speech. With the mill, I could

remove the husks from paddy rice many times faster than before. But I stillwasn’t satisfied. I resented any restrictions. I wanted to eat whenever I was

hungry. So I put rice and water in my field cooking pot, put the lid on and

made a hole for it in the ground before building a fire on top. I squatted in

front  of  the  fire,  pretending  to  warm  my  hands,  when  Mao  came  by  the

fertilizer shed on an inspection tour. He squatted next to me and warmed his

hands while we talked about the proper mixtures of animal dung and hillock

earth. When he left, I pulled the fire apart and took the pot out. The rice was

cooked perfectly.

As  I  got  bolder,  I  also  got  careless.  During  a  political  meeting  I  was

accused of having a fishnet and failing to contribute the fish to the common

kitchen. The truth was that I did have a fishnet, though it was safely hidden. I

also had a good idea who was behind the accusation.

My reply was reckless. I said if an eyewitness came forward and he could

prove  I  had  a  fishnet,  I  would  gladly  surrender  my  life  to  Angka.  If  no

eyewitness came forward, I didn’t want to hear any more about the matter.

And I slammed my fist on the ground for emphasis.

  Even as I slammed my fist I knew I had gone too far. Without Huoy to tell

me to hide my emotions, my anger was getting the better of me. Luckily for

me,  Mao  let  me  off  with  a  lecture.  He  said  that  displays  of  anger  were

capitalist and individualist. He told me to tame myself and show obedience to

Angka. I apologized meekly.

  Soon after that my hidden accuser, Pen Tip, called me to his house. I was

better prepared this time, my anger cool and contained.

  Pen Tip had done well by the change in village leadership. He had not only

helped  target  Uncle  Phan’s  wife  for  execution  but  had  become  Mao’s

unofficial right-hand man, and this brought him even more power than ever.

If the stories were true, a woman from the village complained to Pen Tip for

sending her to the front lines while he lived comfortably in the village. The

next night Pen Tip was one of the men who gang-raped her and then killed

her. Whether this had actually happened I cannot say, since I was not there.

But the story fit his character.

  When I showed up he was sitting on a split-bamboo bench and swinging

his legs, like a child. He raised and lowered his eyebrows. His glance slid

past me to one side and then the other. He looked at the floor and at the

ceiling but never directly at me.

  Pen Tip said he knew I was a doctor and hoped I wouldn’t get in any

trouble. I asked him calmly what he was trying to do to me now.  ‘Uh, last night Angka sent two chhlop to your house,’ he said. ‘They saw

you take a lot of rice and hide it in a plastic bag in your garden. Did you do

this, or not? If you did, just give the rice back and Angka will forgive and

forget. But if you say you didn’t, ah, Angka will investigate and you will be

responsible. But since you are my friend, I wanted to tell you first. I wanted

to, uh, warn you.’

I thought quickly. It was the same as the incident with the fishnet: he was

having me watched, but his watchers were not thorough. The night before, I

had filled a large bag with freshly milled rice, but I buried it in my usual

place, below the fertilizer pile, rather than in my garden. What could I do?

Mao lived next door. I needed to get rid of Pen Tip, but this was not the time

or the place.

It was hot in the house. Pen Tip swung his legs from the bench, waiting.

‘I’m sorry,’ I said sarcastically. ‘If Angka sent two chhlop last night and

they saw me hide rice in my garden, why wasn’t I arrested? Why wasn’t I

taken away? Because I didn’t hide any rice. That’s why. And I’m sorry your

people didn’t do a good job for you, Pen Tip. It must be hard to find reliable

chhlop. I sympathize.’

  Pen Tip grew angry. As I left the house he told me that Angka would send

someone to check on me.

He didn’t waste any time. That afternoon, when I was at the fertilizer shed,

his wife walked to my house carrying a woven plastic rice bag and buried it

in my garden. Fortunately, one of my neighbours saw her and ran to tell me.

It was no use asking Mao for justice, because Pen Tip was his protégé, so I

ran to Khmer Rouge headquarters in Phum Phnom. This time they listened to

me. They understood false evidence and purges, since this was something

they faced themselves. A cadre came to my house, dug up the rice and called

Pen Tip and his wife in for questioning. It was all very polite on the surface

and typically Cambodian. Nobody lost their tempers, everybody kept face

and nothing was decided.


Pen Tip and I would have gone on making moves and counter-moves until

one of us was killed. But by late 1978 our struggle began to look small and

petty compared to other events on the horizon, and we put a temporary halt to

it.

The first clue that something was happening came from Comrade Ik, the

old man on horseback. He called a meeting in December while the harvestwas still in progress. Several hundred of us sat on a dirt floor to listen to him

while his horse stood under a nearby tree.

The old man told us that we still had to struggle to accomplish Angka’s

goals. We were to plant and harvest two or three crops of rice a year. He said

nothing at all about the realities – that there had never been a second or third

crop, that most of the first crop had been taken from us, that only token work

continued  on  the  dam  project.  Comrade  Ik  seldom  admitted  the  regime’s

failings. So it came as a complete surprise when he added at the end of his

speech:

  ‘Recently, our enemies have dared attack us on our borders. We are not

worried  about  the  fighting.  We  have  nothing  to  fear.  We  have  already

defeated  the  American  imperialists,  and  this  time  the  enemy  is  small  in

comparison.  What  is  important  to  remember  is  that  we  must  fight  on  all

battlefields. Not just the military battlefields, but also the battlefields of the

rice paddies and the canals. We must continue to work. Our soldiers will

guard the border, don’t worry. They will protect us. But if you see enemies

coming here, let Angka know. And if the enemy says something to you, don’t

believe it. You must believe only Angka.’

The old man hit his fist on his skinny chest and yelled, ‘Long live the

Kampuchean revolution!’ We rose to our feet and echoed each phrase three

times. ‘Long live the great solidarity!’ and then ‘Long live the revolutionary

military forces!’ Tears of joy ran down the faces of men around me, and it

had  nothing  to  do  with  the  slogans.  What  the  old  man  hinted  at  we  had

guessed. The ‘enemy’ was invading. It could have been any enemy and it

could  have  been  any  border,  but  for  us  war  slaves  there  was  only  one

conclusion. The Khmer Serei – the Free Khmers or freedom fighters – had

finally launched their attack from their sanctuaries along the Thai border.

I was happy for the news. I could feel the change in my body – a stirring of

hope, a strengthening. Now I had something to live for. I thought: Oh Huoy,

if you had only lived, we would have a chance to see freedom together.

  About  a  week  later  Sangam  and  I  were  pulling  an  oxcart  loaded  with

fertilizer  out  to  the  fields  when  we  heard  the  dull  noise  of  faraway

explosions. We looked up. Two jets tore across the sky like silver darts, just

above the horizon. They were the first planes of any kind we had seen for

years.

The jets travelled rapidly to the east. Behind them, columns of smoke rose

from the bombs they had dropped. We stood there admiring the sight.  ‘They should hurry up and come for us,’ Sangam remarked.

  ‘The sooner the better,’ I said.

The invaders, however, did not hurry. We did not see any more planes, and

the Khmer Rouge did not tell us any more news.

In  early  January  1979  a  freight  train  pulled  into  the  Phnom  Tippeday

station from Phnom Penh. In its boxcars and on its roofs sat Khmer Rouge

soldiers with bandages and casts and crutches. The wounded soldiers set up

camp and hobbled around, cooking over fires. There were angry looks and

loud arguments between them and the soldiers stationed near our village.

A few days later, long, single-file lines of civilians began to arrive from the

south, from a roundabout route to Phnom Penh, led by cadre driving massive

roofed oxcarts. The civilians were healthier and better dressed than we were.

Like the wounded soldiers, they were part of a disciplined retreat. They had

plenty of food: cloth tubes filled with rice hanging around their necks like

thick necklaces; live chickens; bags of dried, salted fish; sacks of rice on the

oxcarts. The oxcarts parked along the railroad tracks, and soon the evening

air was filled with the smoke of hundreds of campfires.

Both the civilians and the wounded soldiers were under orders not to talk

to us ‘new’ people. They seemed to be afraid. Every day some of them were

tied up and led away at gunpoint, never to return. An amputee on crutches

was led away for the crime of ‘failing to protect the fatherland’.

  Paranoia was everywhere. In our village, day or night, those who looked

too pleased were taken away. One wrong word, one joyful glance, and Mao

ordered executions of entire families. The soldiers were in a frenzy. To them

it was our fault that the ‘enemy’ was coming.

It was a time to be especially careful. Pulling the oxcart along paths where

we had gone many times before, Sangam and I came to a hillock piled high

with corpses. The bodies were jumbled together in the awkward postures of

death, arms or legs stiffly raised in rigor mortis. The victims had been killed

by blows to the back of the head. Their flesh had turned black from the heat,

and their bodies had swollen so much it burst their clothes. The smell was

awful. Vultures plucked at them. A few days later we saw another mass-

execution site, hundreds of bodies piled in a pit in the forest.

I went to the leaning sdao tree and prayed to Huoy for protection. I began

sleeping near her grave, and then in the fertilizer shed, and in a different place

each night, afraid of Mao, afraid of Pen Tip. I stopped stealing. The night

wasn’t safe for stealing anymore.I packed everything needed for a quick getaway and stored it under the

manure pile. I told Sangam and my brother Hok and Ngor Balam to get ready

if  they  wanted  to  go  with  me.  Balam  was  a  tall,  older  man,  formerly  an

airlines executive in Phnom Penh. He was only distantly related to me on my

father’s side, but we were of the same clan and trusted each other. We agreed

to go together to the Thai border, to meet up with the Khmer Serei.

Before we could leave another wave of newcomers arrived. This time they

did not come from the east, like the first wave, or from the south, like the

second, but from the northwest, from villages outside Battambang City. They

too walked in long, single-file lines, carrying their possessions in knapsacks

and on shoulderboards, some of the women with baskets on their heads. They

were better clothed than we were. They did not dare talk to us. The third

wave  converged  on  the  first  two  waves  and  briefly  overlapped  and  then

separated as the newer evacuees retreated toward the Cardamom Mountains.

We had lived in the Phnom Tippeday area for more than three years. It had

been our universe, and our jail. Now we saw it as others did, as a patch of

rather  unimportant  territory  in  the  far-ranging  manoeuvres  of  war.  We

guessed that the ‘enemy’ was approaching on two fronts, from the east, the

direction of Phnom Penh, and from the northwest, near Battambang City.

Mao disappeared, taking with him all the oxen and water buffalo, sacks of

rice and salt, supplies of dried fish and other food from the common kitchen,

all  the  kitchen  utensils,  his  family  and  his  personal  possessions.  In  his

absence no one gave orders in the village. I thought it was time for us to

leave, but Balam and Hok persuaded me to wait. Mao reappeared, and for a

few days more we had meals in the common kitchen. We went out into the

fields to harvest the rice, and we went to political meetings at night. We

listened to the same old tired speeches about ‘launching an offensive’ against

the  forces  of  nature  and  ‘struggling  to  achieve  true  independence-

sovereignty.’ Like a record player playing the same song over and over. We

listened quietly, because we were afraid, and planned our escapes.

Mao and the other Khmer Rouge leaders left again, secretly, at night. Pen

Tip proclaimed himself temporarily in charge. He told everyone in the village

it  was  time  to  evacuate.  And  the  people  obeyed.  They  packed  their

possessions on shoulderboards and baskets and homemade knapsacks, but

there was much grumbling among them.

I packed all my possessions, including the medical textbooks that had been

hidden for years. Sangam, Hok and Balam, plus their wives and children andme, fourteen of us in all, tried to walk northwest toward Battambang City, but

soldiers blocked our way. We turned around and trudged after the rest of the

villagers.

By this time the whole Phnom Tippeday region was on the move. Several

villages camped together in the rice fields, guarded by soldiers. Far to the

southwest, beyond the uncompleted dam, the first rumblings of artillery could

be heard. In the following days the sounds of artillery came from the south

and the east, and then mostly from the east. Judging from the direction, the

heaviest fighting was somewhere near the town of Muong, where National

Route  5  and  the  railway  converged.  We  heard  no  small-arms  fire,  which

meant that the fighting wasn’t yet nearby.

We waited ten days, and then the ‘enemy’ attacked from the northwest.

  When the chattering of automatic rifles and machine guns broke out, I was

with my group. Artillery shells landed and exploded on the hillocks and in

the  rice  fields  to  either  side,  and  smoke  and  dust  spewed  up  where  they

landed. We picked up our luggage and ran with a strength we never knew we

had.  Everyone  around  us  was  running.  Trees  fell,  and  water  buffalo

stampeded with their eyes bulging and the whites showing around their irises.

Dust  filled  the  air,  there  was  a  mad  tinkling  of  ox  bells,  and  those  with

oxcarts stood up like charioteers, shouting at their oxen and whipping them to

make them go faster.

We poured toward the railroad tracks, but Khmer Rouge in their black

uniforms  sprinted  toward  the  jungles,  outrunning  all  of  us.  It  was  almost

enough to make me stop and laugh to see them run away so fast, after all their

boasts about what good soldiers they were.

  When  the  shooting  finally  stopped,  we  were  in  an  area  called  Boeung

Reaing, where Huoy and I had dug canals on the front lines. There were

thousands of ‘new’ people around us, confused and leaderless. We didn’t

know where the Khmer Rouge were. We were afraid to move, afraid to take

the initiative. So we stayed where we were, hoping that the freedom fighters

would come to us.

  While waiting, we spread out into the rice fields, which lay unharvested

and  inviting  in  all  directions.  The  skies  were  clear  and  hot.  Everywhere,

within an hour, men, women and children were harvesting rice. We threshed

it with our bare feet, milled it with mortar and pestle or with sticks in holes in

the ground. The shooting and the stampede had vanished from our minds.

Food was our first priority, safety our second. The rich rice of Battambangwas everywhere for the taking. Nobody could punish us for taking rice. There

was rice for all.

And  after  we  filled  our  bellies  and  stored  rice  for  future  days,  we

sharpened our hatchets and knives and started looking at the Khmer Rouge

who had reappeared, while muttering among ourselves. The Khmer Rouge

knew our minds, and were afraid, and joined their comrades in large groups.

I looked around and saw Pen Tip. He had an oxcart, with large spoked

wheels and a narrow high-sided bed piled with bags and possessions. Pulling

the cart were two oxen. The cart and the ox belonged to the community, but

Pen Tip had appropriated them for himself. Few others had oxen, or carts, or

anything they could not carry themselves.

  Pen Tip wore new black clothing, the same as the soldiers. He wore his

krama in classic Khmer Rouge style, like a scarf, with the two ends hanging

down on his chest. He was talking to his brothers-in-law, who stayed at his

side to protect him, and rolling his cigarette around in the fingers of one

hand. He blinked his eyes, looked this way and that. His facial features were

constantly in motion.

The time had come to deal with Pen Tip, I said, and Sangam ran his thumb

along the blade of his hatchet and agreed. He was a strong old man, and it

was comforting to have him on my side.

But before I could make my move, the Khmer Rouge leaders returned and

issued an order. They told it to people like Pen Tip, and Pen Tip relayed it to

us. He said we were supposed to go to a village far off to the east, in the

forest. I had never even heard of the place, but the crowd, accustomed to

obeying orders, lifted its luggage and began its trudge. The opportunity for

revenge had been lost. Dust rose from the passage of feet and oxen. The road

became  a  twisting,  braided  maze  of  paths.  As  the  sun  sunk  behind  us,  I

brought my group to a halt. Pen Tip was nowhere in sight. I had no intention

of following his orders. I told the group that we were going to cut north,

toward the railroad. They agreed.

We set out on our new course. Before long, someone from Phum Ra came

up and told me that he had seen Pen Tip split off and go northwest.

I smiled grimly. I had expected something like that from him. Pen Tip

wanted to escape from the Khmer Rouge too. He knew they were a losing

cause. It was time for him to change allegiances and collaborate with the

Khmer Serei instead. But he also knew that he could not head directly toward

the liberation forces without being noticed. So he had issued the orders to therest of us and then tried to lose himself in the crowd.

We walked toward the railroad, arriving at a village of houses on stilts set

among shade trees and fruit trees.

  Thousands of the uprooted had come to the village before us. It was not a

sanctuary so much as a no-man’s-land, with no soldiers around. We decided

to stay there too.

  While we waited, hoping the war would pass us by, there were rice fields

to forage. Every day we went out to the fields and harvested as much as we

wanted. There was a big river too, and we went there to bathe. We did not yet

have our freedom, but we didn’t move for six or seven days, because here we

could satisfy even more basic needs. For water and rice.

  Then  the  liberation  army  pushed  on  farther  and  the  Khmer  Rouge

retreated,  and  Pen  Tip  showed  up  with  them,  in  his  oxcart.  Blinking

nervously and looking from side to side, Pen Tip told everyone from Phum

Ra to move on to the Khmer Rouge camp a short distance away. He spotted

me in the crowd and shouted, ‘Samnang, you move on to the military camp.

Our leaders are waiting there.’

‘Pen Tip, you go first,’ I said sarcastically, and spat on the ground.

His  eyebrows  raised.  He  pointed  in  the  direction  of  the  Khmer  Rouge

camp. ‘The leaders are waiting. The front lines are retreating. Uh, you have to

move. Angka will provide rice over there.’

My hand went to my waist, but the hatchet I usually kept in my waistband

wasn’t there. I had left it with my luggage.

  ‘You go first,’ I repeated. ‘Nobody trusts you, Pen Tip. Nobody believes

what you’re saying. Before, you told people who had no oxcarts, who carried

all their belongings on shoulder-boards, to go someplace very far away. But

you didn’t go there yourself. You went in a different direction, and you had

an oxcart to carry your luggage.’

  Dozens of people from Phum Ra had clustered around to watch. They all

understood what was happening, which was indirect and ritualized and very

Cambodian.  This  was  a  declaration  of  war,  like  slapping  someone  with

gloves to provoke a duel. I was ‘breaking his face.’

  Pen Tip looked worried and glanced away. ‘You, uh, you don’t have to

talk that way. Um, I’m not that kind of person.’ He twisted the bamboo-leaf

cigarette in his fingertips. ‘No, you don’t have to talk that way, Samnang.

Words like that are for temple boys.’

  ‘Because you are a temple boy. You never told people the truth, or treatedthem correctly. You always lie to innocent people.’

  Pen Tip said, ‘If you don’t want to go, you are responsible for yourself.

Angka told me to tell you to go. I’m just trying to help you by passing on the

information.’

I stared at him but he wouldn’t meet my eyes.

  Then he drove away.


When the adrenaline finally drained and I calmed down, I still felt good. I

had acted properly. In Cambodian society, which is inhibited and indirect,

you must publicly insult someone first before moving on to the next phase.

Only in this way can you, the accuser, keep face yourself. To attack someone

physically  without  establishing  the  basis  for  the  fight  is  low-class  and

unethical, like the behaviour of the Khmer Rouge.

  Anyway, I thought, we will have the showdown soon enough. I can use my

hatchet then, to defend myself or to attack. Pen Tip is small and he will be

easy to defeat.

But after I bathed in the river and lay down and thought about it some

more, I realized my mistake. What was wrong with me? How could I have

made such an error? Pen Tip wouldn’t give me the pleasure of a one-on-one

duel. Not when he had re-established himself with the Khmer Rouge. He

would get soldiers to take me away.

I told my group to pack quickly. We would leave as soon as it got dark,

before Pen Tip could make his move.

  When the last light left the sky we waded across the river, making several

trips until we had all the baggage and all the children on the far side. We

walked on. Soon we came to the railroad tracks, dimly reflecting the starlight.

We camped beyond the tracks on a hillock. I lay awake, thinking about Pen

Tip, gripping my hatchet.

At dawn the others went off into the rice fields to build up our supplies

while I made a reconnaissance. I looked all around for Khmer Rouge and the

liberation soldiers, but I saw nothing and heard nothing.

No sounds of artillery. No trains coming along the tracks. No planes in the

empty blue skies.

It was quiet around us. I didn’t like it. The previous day there had been

gunfire to the east, the north and the west, none of it nearby.

  Sangam and his wife decided to go east toward Phnom Penh, along the

railroad tracks. I decided to take my group north to National Route 5, andfrom there westward toward Thailand. We wished each other luck and parted

on excellent terms. Sangam had been an honest, reliable friend.

Now our group was down to twelve, all of us related. I was the leader.

Ngor Balam and his wife had two children and a nephew. Hok and his wife

had an infant daughter, whom they carried, plus the three children of my late

brother Pheng Huor – two girls, named Im and Ngim, and the little boy, Chy

Kveng. All of the children in the group were sturdy and well behaved. Even

Chy Kveng could walk all day without being carried. But having so many

children made us vulnerable and slow.

We walked along oxcart paths, through rice fields and jungle, choosing the

paths that led in the right direction. Every hour or so I checked our bearings

by climbing trees. From the treetops, the Phnom Tippeday ridge was in sight,

the ruined wat and the stupa together making one white dot in the distance.

  Because of the children and our frequent stops to gather food, we made

slow  progress.  I  was  nervous  and  alert,  going  out  on  frequent,  short

reconnaissance  trips  and  then  returning.  When  we  met  other  civilians  we

asked them if they had seen soldiers, but they all said no.

  Soft, hot dust covered our feet and ankles as we walked. We came to a

canal, bathed in it, kept going and came to a deserted village. Bananas and

green mangoes hung invitingly in the trees, and yams grew in the gardens.

We helped ourselves. Later that day we came to another deserted village,

with papaya and jack-fruit trees, and ate again. The next day we saw a pig

rooting for yams in a field. We three men in the group chased after the pig

and caught it. When we cooked it, other travellers appeared, and we shared it

with them gladly. Everyone ate his fill and sat around, talking and relaxing.

  With all the good food and the companionship I began to feel better.

We could eat what we wanted and when we wanted.

We could say whatever we chose.

We were free to criticize, to speak out, to show anger. We didn’t have to

be silent if someone else did something stupid or committed an injustice.

The long darkness was almost over.

As we walked through the forest toward the highway, I began to sing.                                          32



                                      Liberation


 




We  made  it  to  National  Route  5,  only  to  find  the  Khmer  Rouge  still  in

control. They told us we couldn’t walk toward Battambang. Discouraged, we

began walking eastward, toward Phnom Penh. We walked slowly, with the

strange sensation of asphalt pavement under our feet. The road was crowded

and the soldiers didn’t bother us.

The sounds of battle came from virtually all directions, but far away.

It was early March 1979. One day passed, and then the next and the next.

We stayed on the lookout for opportunities, but there were none. We were

patient and careful. As an old Cambodian saying puts it, the last wave sinks

the boat. There was no sense in being careless when freedom was so near.

We walked as slowly as possible, making less than a mile a day, passed by

people hurrying back to Phnom Penh. Our group was not conspicuous or in

any way remarkable. We were just another ragged bunch of refugees, the

men with luggage bobbing up and down on their shoulderboards, the women

carrying baskets on their heads, the children staying close for protection.

We didn’t walk at night, even to step off the road to relieve ourselves. On

either side of the road were punji pits with sharpened bamboo stakes at the

bottom. There were also mines, in holes next to the road and near the bridges.

The rain had washed the layer of dirt from the metal detonating buttons,

which were about the size of kneecaps, so most of the mines were visible.

Even so, an ox stepped on a mine, killing several people we had known from

Phum Ra and wounding others.

  West of Muong we were caught in a storm, with lightning and thunder anddrenching rain. Other travellers crowded into a hut near the highway, but not

us. We just sat on the road, without shelter, all night long. After four years

under the Khmer Rouge, being cold and wet didn’t bother us much. We were

toughened by what we had lived through.

We passed some soldiers digging trenches and creating barricades with

concertina wire, and then we got to the town of Muong, where the highway

and the railway met. Tens of thousands of civilians were there ahead of us.

The railway station and a row of Chinese merchants’ shophouses were still

intact. Everything else was in ruins. Behind the railroad station were rusted

boxcars with their wooden sides ripped out for use as firewood. Automobiles

lay in heaps, their engines removed, vines growing up through the cavities.

Houses had been turned to rubble. Part of the wat was destroyed, and there

were no Buddha statues in it. The bridge over the river was a mass of twisted

metal. A temporary wooden bridge had been erected beside it for foot traffic.

We wanted to stay in Muong, but the next day the Khmer Rouge pushed us

on, steadily retreating. Our group was the last to leave the town, and the

slowest in walking.

East of Muong, the Khmer Rouge ordered all civilians to turn off National

Route  5  onto  a  dirt  road  leading  toward  the  Cardamom  Mountains.  For

military  purposes  they  wanted  to  control  the  population,  but  they  had  no

interest in us except for that. They didn’t give us any food or water. There

was no water anywhere. The weather was hot. A few weaker people died of

dehydration.  The  desperate  put  their  lips  to  the  ground  and  drank,  where

urine had filled up the footprints of oxen and water buffalo.

It was on this dirt road that the revenge killings began. First the Khmer

Rouge called a mass meeting. They fired their mortars at the civilians who

showed up for it, killing hundreds. They had always looked down on ‘new’

people. They blamed us for the invasion, just as they blamed us for all their

failings.

  Then the people retaliated. We saw only the aftermath, the bodies of a

Khmer Rouge and his pregnant wife and his children, lying in bloody pieces

on the forest floor. And the next day another Khmer Rouge body, and the day

after that another. It was unsafe for the Khmer Rouge to travel, except in

large numbers.

My family was running low on food. A man who was camping near us told

me about an underground rice warehouse on the other side of National Route

5. He described how he had managed to reach the site, find rice and return. Idiscussed going to the rice warehouse with Hok and Balam. They didn’t want

to take the risk. I did. And at first light on April 17, 1979, I set out on another

stage of my journey.


About eighty men and women joined together to go to the warehouse. A few

of the men had been there before and acted as our guides. We walked through

jungle, waded across canals, followed dirt roads and oxcart paths. Several

times  we  passed  massacre  sites,  where  Khmer  Rouge  had  slaughtered

civilians or civilians had killed Khmer Rouge.

  Around  8.00  a.m.  we  got  to  National  Route  5.  It  was  deserted,  a  long

stretch of paved road with no one in sight. The rumble of artillery fire came

from far away, like distant thunder. We crossed the highway and re-entered

the jungle.

I  carried  only  essentials:  a  bamboo  shoulderboard  with  two  empty  rice

bags lashed to it; my metal field cooking pot, filled with rice, hanging from

my belt; and my hatchet, which fit snugly against my waist, secured by my

krama. I was barefoot, in torn trousers and a torn shirt. Hidden from sight in

my waistband were my Zippo lighter, my Swiss calendar watch and a few

pieces of gold.

We came to a large rice field that cut into the jungle like a bay. The far end

of the rice field opened up onto an even larger area of rice fields the likes of

which  I  had  seldom  seen:  utterly  flat,  stretching  out  for  mile  after  mile,

almost  without  hillocks.  I  sensed  we  were  near  the  rice  warehouse.

Somewhere beyond, perhaps ten or fifteen miles, lay the great inland lake

Tonle Sap.

The bottoms of the paddies were covered with water. We left the forest and

began walking on top of the dykes. We were about a hundred yards from the

trees when the firing broke out, from the jungle to our right. A few were hit

and crumpled to the ground before they could react. The rest of us dove for

the shelter of the earthen dykes, which were about two feet high and a foot or

more thick – thick enough, I hoped, to stop bullets from AK-47s. Goddamn

Khmer Rouge! Opening fire on unarmed civilians who had just gone out to

find food.

Then, from the jungle on the left side, came voices. ‘Yo dee! Yo dee! Yo

dee!’

I didn’t know what ‘yo dee’ meant. I had never heard the words before.

I lifted my head for a second and looked where the voices were comingfrom. Uniformed men were running toward us into the rice field, pausing to

crouch and fire when they reached the safety of a dyke. They waved their

arms, signalling us to come toward them. They fired at the Khmer Rouge, but

not at us.

  ‘Yo! Yo dee! Yo dee!’

  Bullets whizzed by, making little fountains of mud and water when they

struck the paddies. I stayed alongside a dyke and dragged myself forward

with my forearms, pulling my shoulder-board alongside. My body was half

underwater. In front, all I could see was water and mud and the feet of the

next person worming his way ahead.

The liberators were ahead of us and to the left. The dykes between lay on

the diagonal, high enough to provide cover most of the distance except when

crossing their tops, which were exposed to fire. A man ahead of me crawled

up one side of a dyke and was hit. He stayed where he was, moaning, blood

spurting from his legs. I scrambled up one side of the dyke, rolled down the

other, unhurt, and kept on going. No one helped the wounded man.

‘Yo dee!’

The freedom fighter was just ahead at the corner of two dykes, alternately

firing his rifle and beckoning for us to come. Between him and me was the

length of one rice paddy. I pulled myself along in the shadow of the dyke; an

eel couldn’t have gotten any lower in the mud. Then it was up and over the

dyke next to him.

I lay directly behind him in the mud and water, as close to the dyke as

possible, panting from the exertion.

  Gradually, my breathing eased.

I was safe.

A little piece of rice straw floated on the water, a few inches in front of me.

I turned to look at the soldier. He was crouching at the intersection of the

dykes in classic military posture, his left arm supporting the rifle, firing and

waving people on with his right. He wore a light green uniform and a green

plantation-style helmet. He turned toward me for a moment. He was a young

man with a light bone structure and pale yellow skin and slanting eyes. There

was a red star on the front of his helmet.

He was Vietnamese.

  What were the Vietnamese doing here?

  Everybody knew the Khmer Serei were coming. We knew all about the

Khmer Serei. In Tam, an honest general who had lost a crooked election toLon Nol in the early 1970s, was their leader. Nobody said anything about the

Vietnamese.

  Even  the  Khmer  Rouge  hadn’t  mentioned  the  Vietnamese.  They  only

talked about the ‘enemy.’

Why were Vietnamese communists shooting at their fellow communists,

the Khmer Rouge?

Why weren’t they shooting at me?

‘Yo dee!’ the young soldier yelled again. ‘Yo. Yo dee!’ He removed the

banana-shaped  ammunition  clip  in  his  AK-47,  changed  it  for  a  new  one,

aimed,  squeezed  out  a  burst.  The  bullet  casings  ejected  to  the  right  and

splattered into the water.

As he finished the burst, a Cambodian civilian in rags came rolling over

the dyke behind him, his legs a bloody red. He fell on top of me, wiggled to

an empty spot farther down the dyke and lay there, groaning.

I hugged the dyke.

  Slowly, gradually, the firing tapered off. In the paddy next to ours another

Vietnamese soldier advanced cautiously, ducked behind a dyke, advanced

again.

The shooting had stopped.

  ‘Dee,’  said  the  soldier  next  to  me,  motioning  to  the  dozen  of  us

Cambodians in the paddy. He crawled off toward the forest and we crawled

after him, except for the man with the leg wounds, who had died. The soldier

rolled  over  a  dyke  and  we  followed  his  example,  except  for  the  women

among us, who climbed over awkwardly on their hands and knees.

  After crawling and rolling the length of several more dykes we were out of

the line of fire. We stood up and walked rapidly behind the far side of a

hillock. There, safe from bullets, a man with dark skin and wide features – a

Cambodian – waited for us. He was holding an AK-47 but wore ordinary

civilian clothes.

He told us in Khmer, ‘We have come to liberate you. Don’t worry. Don’t

be afraid.’

  More survivors from my foraging group, forty to fifty in all, arrived behind

the hillock, escorted by Vietnamese. Some of them asked if we could go back

into the field to help wounded relatives, but the Cambodian liberation soldier

said no. ‘The Khmer Rouge are still in the forest beyond. Leave it to our

Vietnamese friends to get your relatives.’

  More Cambodian liberation soldiers appeared from the safety of the junglenearby. They had not engaged in any fighting. More Vietnamese returned wet

and muddy from the battle in the rice field. The Vietnamese were tense and

angry. They waved pistols in our faces, motioning us to raise our hands. They

asked, ‘Pol Pot? Pol Pot?’

I didn’t know what ‘Pol Pot’ meant, but I quickly told the Cambodian

soldier that we were civilians and were just looking for something to eat. A

few of us who could speak Vietnamese told the Vietnamese soldiers the same

thing. We all had our hands raised and everyone was talking at once. It was

obvious that the Cambodian soldiers and the Vietnamese soldiers were not on

good terms. The Cambodian soldiers were outnumbered and were submissive

but  resented  it.  The  Vietnamese  looked  down  on  them  and  on  us.  After

translating, the Cambodian soldiers said we could put our hands down, but

the Vietnamese went from one of us to the next, pointing their weapons and

asking through interpreters whether we were Khmer Rouge.

The Vietnamese took our kramas and used them to tie our elbows behind

our  backs.  Then  they  searched  us,  confiscating  knives  and  hatchets  and

pouches of tobacco. They marched us off into the jungle and along a path.

I thought: Well, it’s happening again. They say they are liberating us but

they have tied us up. Just like the Khmer Rouge.

  They brought us to a Vietnamese military camp with tents in straight rows.

The commanding officer emerged from his tent wearing a white T-shirt and

holding a pistol in his hand. Through an interpreter he asked who of us spoke

Vietnamese. One man volunteered and was taken a short distance away for

questioning. Then the commander asked the rest of us through the interpreter

where the Khmer Rouge were based, how many of them there were and what

kinds of weapons they had. None of us knew, and we were too afraid to say

anything. Nearby, the interrogators were using their fists to beat the man who

had volunteered.

  They tied us back to back in groups of three, using our kramas as rope. The

man who had volunteered was brought back and tied behind me. Lower-

ranking  Vietnamese  went  around  to  the  groups  of  three,  asking  the  same

questions about the Khmer Rouge through interpreters. When they came to

me I said I didn’t know, I was only looking for food, and they punched me in

the stomach, knocking the wind out of me. They punched the man behind me,

the one who had already been beaten, and the Cambodian soldiers who had

been  doing  the  interpreting  did  nothing  to  stop  it.  I  noticed  that  the

Vietnamese did not hit everyone, just those of us who were light-skinned,which is to say those of us whose ancestry was partly or wholly Chinese. But

I  do  not  know  whether  the  Vietnamese  hated  Chinese-Cambodians  and

wanted to punish us, or whether they thought we more observant, more likely

to be good sources of information than the dark-skinned ethnic Khmer.

In the midafternoon they untied the groups of three but left each person

with his elbows tied behind his back. They led us across a rice field and

through the jungle to National Route 5. We walked westward, our bare feet

on the hot asphalt, and across a fallen-down bridge, where they let us take a

break. They untied the dark-skinned ones, but the light-skinned ones like me

they kept tied up, and I thought they were marking me for special treatment.

We walked along the road toward Battambang, the tied and the untied

together, and only one Vietnamese guard in front. I motioned for a dark-

skinned man to untie my arms, and he did, and I walked along with my arms

free. Then I untied someone else. A few refused to be untied because they

were afraid of the guard, but he didn’t look back and didn’t seem to care. We

stopped at the entrance to a Vietnamese military base with a tank out front,

and the soldiers living in a village of traditional Cambodian houses on stilts.

Our  guard  went  in  to  report,  then  came  back  and  told  us,  though  an

interpreter,  while  pointing  his  finger,  ‘Go  this  way.  Everybody.  Go  this

direction. Go to Battambang.’

We walked numbly down the road.

I had no shoulderboard, no hatchet. Only my field cooking pot, which was

still full of rice, and my torn and muddy clothes, and the hidden contents of

my waistband pockets.

  Some of the survivors from our foraging group rested while others walked

on at their own pace toward Battambang. Soon those who were ahead and

those who were behind were strung far apart along the road, out of sight.

I walked until the dirt turnoff road for Phnom Tippeday, and stopped. It

was late afternoon.

I pulled out my calendar watch. The date was April 17, 1979.

I had been under the Khmer Rouge exactly four years.

I thought: No, the Khmer Rouge took over Phnom Penh on the morning of

April 17, 1975. It’s 6.00 p.m. now. A little over four years. Four years and

eight hours.

I tried to grasp the meaning of the time that had passed, but there was

nothing to hold on to.

  Phnom Penh was forever ago but fresh as yesterday.So much had happened.

  Everyone had died. Huoy, my parents, everyone.

I was alive, but the price was too high.

The gods had made a horrible mistake.                                          33



                                    Battambang


 




In the morning I walked down the red clay road to Phnom Tippeday, to visit

Huoy’s grave.

It was a long, straight road, with channels cut into its surface by the rains,

and grass growing high and thick on either side. The wind and the birds made

the only sounds; there was not another human being in sight. I crossed the

railroad tracks and took a shortcut across the fields, scurrying from hillock to

hillock, stopping to look around, afraid of being caught by a Khmer Rouge

patrol  or  a  Vietnamese  patrol,  afraid  of  losing  the  liberty  I  had  gained.

Arriving under the big sdao tree, I felt safe again. Every detail of the place

was familiar to me, and permanently fixed in my memory: the grave aligned

with the temple on the mountain, the tree arching protectively overhead, the

patchwork pattern of the dykes and paddies.

  Kneeling, I told her that this would be my last visit for a long, long time.

Someday I would come back for her and take her to another resting place,

next to the temple on the mountain. I asked her to protect me until my return.

  Huoy’s spirit answered. She said she would watch over me and guide me.

She promised to stay with me wherever I went.

I was comforted. It was important to know that her spirit was with me,

even when our physical beings were far apart. But when I got up there was

nobody  else  in  sight.  My bonheur  vanished,  and  my  loneliness  and  fear

returned.

I walked quickly through Phum Ra, which was even more desolate than

before. In our house, the doors were torn off the hinges and the thatch torn offthe walls. Everywhere, panels of thatch and pieces of corrugated metal and

trash and rusted bowls lay scattered in the streets. The warehouse near the

common kitchen was wide open at the doors, empty except for a few grains

of rice on the floor.

On the way out of the village I found a pair of green Vietnamese sneakers,

canvas on top, rubber on the bottom. I put them on and wiggled my toes

experimentally. They fit. And I walked away as fast as possible, with the

strange feeling that my feet were no longer in contact with the ground.

I returned to the National Route 5 intersection and camped. An ominous

rumbling of artillery came from the southeast, the direction my family had

been. There was no going back for them, nothing to do but watch and wait.

  Signs had appeared along the highway, scrawled on paper or wood and

fastened to trees. Such-and-such a person announced that he had survived and

had gone east, to Phnom Penh. So-and-so wrote that she had lost her husband

and her younger children; her older children, if they were still alive, should

follow her west, to Battambang. Handwritten signs, messages of hope and

despair.

  Refugees wandered along the road in both directions, stopping to read the

signs, then shuffling on again, tired and numb and traumatized. When I asked

if they had seen my family they said no, but their minds were someplace else,

and their eyes stared through me to some distant place beyond.

As the days passed and my family did not appear, I grew restless and

walked long distances on the road, up and back. I read the signs, talked with

refugees, looked for familiar faces. It reminded me of looking for Huoy and

my parents after the evacuation of Phnom Penh. But the traffic on National

Route 1 in 1975 was nothing like the traffic on National Route 5 in 1979.

In 1979 there were no cars being pushed, or motorcycles. There were no

television  sets,  radios,  electric  fans  or  cartons  of  books  being  carried.  If

people  had  any  possessions  at  all  they  carried  them  in  small  bundles  on

shoulderboards,  on  their  backs,  or  balanced  on  their  heads.  They  trudged

along in barefoot groups, two or three or five skinny people in rags and then

another few coming along a hundred yards later. Most had facial sores. In

1975 women had cared how they looked, but in 1979 there were only torn

clothes, and the women had no sense of fashion or pride in their appearance.

In 1975 when friends met they asked, ‘Have you eaten yet?’ or ‘How many

children do you have?’ In 1979 they stared at you with haunted eyes and

asked, ‘Who survived in your family?’  Another difference was this: in 1975 everyone was afraid of the Khmer

Rouge. In 1979 the fear had turned to anger.

  Three  thin,  ragged  Cambodian  men  walked  down  the  highway.  They

escorted a fourth man, who was sturdier and well fed, his arms tied behind

his back so tightly his chest stuck out.

The three young men were beating the fourth with their fists and shouting,

‘Say it! Say it: “I’m Khmer Rouge.” ’

‘I’m Khmer Rouge,’ the prisoner said in a faint voice as they paraded him

toward the spot where I was standing.

‘Say it louder! Say, “I killed a lot of people.” ’

‘I  killed  a  lot  of  people,’  the  sturdy  man  repeated.  He  wore  culottes,

nothing more.

Like flies to a meal, people emerged from the roadside and ran toward the

prisoner. I ran toward him too. ‘One time each!’ his captors yelled to us.

‘You must take turns! Please! Each person can hit him only once!’ The crowd

pressed in. Even the women took their turns hitting him with their fists.

  ‘Stand  aside,’  I  said.  The  crowd  parted  to  give  me  room.  I  stepped  in

quickly and kicked high and hard between the prisoner’s legs. He crumpled,

his face contorted in agony, and his guards jerked him to his feet.

In an angry, buzzing cluster, the crowd proceeded along the road, with the

Khmer Rouge in the middle. His face was bloody and swollen. Every time he

fell they hauled him to his feet again. Vietnamese soldiers stepped in to save

him, but the crowd pushed them away so fiercely that the soldiers retreated.

Then farther down the road a man rushed in swinging a hatchet and killed the

Khmer Rouge.

  Someone cut the head off and mounted it on top of a bamboo pole. They

wrote  a  sign  with  charcoal  on  wood,  and  fixed  the  sign  to  the  pole  and

jammed the pole in the ground beside the road for everyone to see.

The sign read, ‘Khmer Rouge – Enemy Forever.’


Day after day Vietnamese trucks drove along the highway, some of them

carrying troops and others pulling artillery pieces. Many tanks drove along

too, their metal treads clanking on the pavement. What the Vietnamese were

doing in Cambodia still puzzled me. It didn’t make sense, the early teachers

of the Khmer Rouge fighting their pupils, communists fighting communists.

The explanation was missing. But one thing was perfectly clear, and that was

the overwhelming Vietnamese military power. They seemed to have endlessequipment. Their troops were serious and disciplined. Nobody in Southeast

Asia could defeat them. Not the Khmer Rouge. Not the Khmer Serei, if they

even existed, and by now I doubted it. How foolish we had been to believe

that the Khmer Serei were coming to free us. How ignorant we had been!

Kept in the dark and inventing wishful stories about freedom fighters, and

passing the stories on as fact.

But there was nothing to be done about it. The country has been occupied

by foreigners, I thought sourly. The regime that tortured me is overthrown,

and another regime that tied me up and punched me is in power.

  Historically,  Vietnam  was  our  enemy.  In  the  nineteenth  century  it  had

annexed Cambodian territory in the lower Mekong River delta, and when I

was growing up it was often said that Vietnam wanted to take the rest too.

But as far as I was concerned they were welcome as long as they stayed only

a short while. They had hastened the end of the Khmer Rouge regime, though

the regime had been falling apart anyway. Better to have them around than

the  Khmer  Rouge.  The  Vietnamese  didn’t  bother  the  refugees  on  the

highway. They let us forage for food wherever we wanted.

I went on several foraging trips with some Vietnamese soldiers who had

camped  beside  the  highway.  With  me  was  a  Cambodian  man  who  spoke

Vietnamese.  We  helped  the  soldiers  catch  domesticated  ducks,  and  in

exchange they shared with us the oxen and pigs they shot with their rifles.

We always went out with the same three soldiers. They were about twenty

years old, healthy and polite. We didn’t ask them personal questions, and

they didn’t ask us. But one evening over a campfire I asked them why the

Vietnamese troops who freed me had tied me up and hit me in the stomach.

They explained that it was hard to know which Cambodians to trust. ‘Some

Khmer Rouge have pretended to be civilians and then killed Vietnamese. So

we have to be careful,’ one of them said, through my acquaintance, who

translated.

I  was  sceptical.  It  didn’t  explain  the  hostility  of  the  soldiers  who  had

interrogated  me,  or  the  bad  feelings  between  them  and  their  Cambodian

counterparts.  Still,  the  young  soldier  had  regarded  the  question  as  a

reasonable one and had given me an answer. It was the kind of conversation

that had been impossible with the Khmer Rouge. Through my acquaintance I

asked why Vietnam had invaded Cambodia.

  ‘Because Pol Pot killed a lot of people,’ one of them said. ‘We came to

liberate you from Pol Pot’s hands.’Pol Pot. Ever since liberation I had been hearing the name. Pol Pot was

said to be the head of Angka, the leader of the anonymous Organization. But

I was sceptical about that too. It was hard to believe that one man, whoever

he was, deserved all the blame for ruining the nation.

  Besides,  I  had  my  own  theories.  To  me,  the  fault  didn’t  lie  with  an

individual man but with an outside country: China. For four years I had been

looking at Chinese trucks, Chinese-made weapons, Chinese-made uniforms. I

had  heard  Chinese-style  propaganda  music.  Almost  everything  about  the

Khmer Rouge, from the jargon about ‘independence-sovereignty’ to sending

the city people to learn from the peasants in the countryside, was an imitation

of Mao Tse-tung’s Cultural Revolution. Without China, the Khmer Rouge

could never have come to power, or stayed in power as long as they did. So I

nodded my head up and down at the young Vietnamese soldier, pretending to

agree with him, and kept my own opinion inside.


While waiting for my family I went to get rice. A little over an hour’s walk

from my campsite was an underground rice storage warehouse similar to the

one I had tried to go to earlier. A huge crowd gathered outside, at the top of a

staircase leading down to a concrete-lined subterranean chamber. Inside, piles

of rice sacks were visible in the dim light. The rice was free, and everyone

took as much as they wanted. Women piled rice onto baskets they carried on

their  heads,  and  men  staggered  away  with  rice  on  shoulderboards  or

rucksacks. I tied a sack to either end of a shoulderboard, which bent the ends

of the shoulderboard downward like a bow. Everyone was happy. A few

people loaded oxcarts high with rice sacks and drove off to Battambang to

sell them.

  Finally the Vietnamese pushed the Khmer Rouge toward the Cardomom

Mountains. I walked back to the town of Muong and found my family there.

They had all survived, though the group numbered two fewer than before.

  What  had  happened  was  that  just  before  liberation  the  Khmer  Rouge

forced all the civilians farther into the jungle. During the retreat my brother

Hok, the fifth son in the family, ran into Hong Srun, the fourth son, whom

none of us had seen since Tonle Batí. The reunion was happy but brief. The

Vietnamese attacked, shells landed nearby and everybody fled. In the chaos

Hong Srun went off, taking two of Pheng Huor’s children with him. Only

Ngim, the daughter aged nine, stayed with Hok.

  Thinking that I (the third son) had probably died, the group threw most ofmy luggage away. They dumped my medical books, which I had carried at

such cost and buried in so many places. They threw away my glasses, most of

my  clothing  and,  without  realizing  it,  a  cushion  of  mine  with  eighteen

hundred US dollars inside it and a blanket with pieces of gold sewn into the

hem. Fortunately they kept a few small items, including the photograph of

Huoy.

I brought them back to my camping place to wait for Hong Srun and the

other two children so all of us could travel to Battambang together. Hong

Srun didn’t show up, and about the first of May I decided to take the family

to  Battambang  to  wait  for  him  there.  I  wrote  a  sign  to  Hong  Srun  and

fastened it to a tree. In the early morning we started walking westward on

National Route 5, and by dusk we had arrived in the second-largest city in the

nation.

  Battambang was a city of squatters living in the empty shells of houses.

We stayed in a house on the edge of town with about twenty other people and

slept on the floor. There wasn’t a single piece of furniture.

  During the Khmer Rouge regime everything wooden or metal in the houses

of  Battambang  had  been  taken  away  –  the  beds  and  tables,  the  window

frames, the corrugated metal used on some of the roofs. Most of the temple

buildings and all the sacred objects in them had been destroyed. Hulks of cars

lay  in  the  side  streets,  without  tyres  or  windshields.  A  steam  shovel  sat

rusting and immobilized in front of the central market. When we got there,

the central market and all the indoor stores, restaurants and shops were closed

on order of the Vietnamese, who were officially opposed to the return of a

market economy.

  Unofficially, however, the Vietnamese tolerated small business enterprises

on the street. The medium of exchange was rice. Shoppers walked around

with their wallets – with large quantities of rice wrapped in their kramas or

piled in baskets on their heads.

  With rice you could negotiate a fare on a bicycle-powered pedicab, or on

one of the horse-drawn taxis clip-clopping through the streets. You could buy

live fish, fresh meat, vegetables, fruit, hot soup or noodles, old clothes, tape

cassettes. You could have your hair cut and have a bicycle or a radio or a

watch repaired. The only thing you could not buy with rice was rice itself –

you had to buy that with gold. The year before, when Huoy was starving, I

had traded two damleung for two cans of rice flour. In Battambang City one

damleung bought a sack containing 1,750 cans of rice, much too heavy tocarry. That’s how much prices had fallen. That’s how much food there was

once the Khmer Rouge were out of power.

  Something  like  the  normal  Cambodian  way  of  life  was  returning  to

Battambang.  The  vendors  squatting  under  cloth  awnings,  the  women

shoppers looking critically at the food and pinching it to see if it was fresh.

Bargaining, gossiping, trading news – it was almost like the old days. But

much was missing too.

In the evenings a band played in an empty lot. A generator powered the

loudspeakers  and  lit  up  strings  of  brightly  coloured  bulbs.  Hundreds  of

people gathered to dance and watch, like insects drawn to the lights. The

women wore their best clothing, but they had no makeup, and their hair was

still short from Khmer Rouge days. The men left their shirttails out, like field

workers  who  had  forgotten  their  manners.  They  danced  the romvong,

stepping around in time to the music and slowly waving their hands in the air.

They were unable to stop themselves from rejoicing. They danced until dawn,

shutting from their minds the past of suffering and hunger and the deaths of

relatives. I thought it was too soon to rejoice, but I didn’t blame them for

what they did.

To  me,  Battambang  was  a  place  to  gather  strength  before  moving  on.

Balam and I went on a walking tour of the town, and it helped me realize that

the sooner we left, the better. First we went to an information centre the

Vietnamese had set up. A flagpole extended from the information building,

and from it hung an enormous red flag. It reminded me of the plain red flags

that used to be flown on the front lines. It was even more like the official

Khmer  Rouge  flag,  which  was  red  with  a  gold  three-towered  emblem  of

Angkor Wat in the middle. This flag was identical, except that its emblem of

Angkor Wat had five towers instead of three.

  ‘Communists,’ I whispered to Balam, who nodded.

We went into the information office. On one side was a bulletin board

covered with notices from survivors looking for their lost relatives. On the

other side were photographs of Vietnamese and Cambodian soldiers shaking

hands and smiling and a chart showing the structure of the new provincial

government.  In  the  middle,  at  a  wooden  table,  sat  a  woman  answering

questions in both Khmer and Vietnamese. Behind her hung a photograph of a

pile of human bones, taken at a Khmer Rouge mass grave – a reminder that

the  Khmer  Rouge  had  been  murderers  and  that  we  were  supposed  to  be

grateful that the Vietnamese had kicked them out.  Standing guard in the building were Vietnamese soldiers and Cambodian

‘Self-Defence  Forces.’  The  Vietnamese  soldiers  wore  new  olive-green

uniforms.  They  were  fully  armed  and  clearly  in  charge.  The  Cambodians

wore whatever they could find – long- or short-sleeved shirts, black or brown

trousers. Some went barefoot. Their weapons ranged from AK-47s to rusty

carbines to nothing at all. They were known as ‘Heng Samrin’ soldiers, after

the leader of the puppet regime. I had never heard of Heng Samrin before,

any more than I had heard of Pol Pot. Certainly Heng Samrin was a man of

no previous standing in the nation.

  Balam  and  I  left  the  information  office  without  asking  the  only  real

question that interested us, and that was the quickest route out of Cambodia.

Even more than the differences between the Vietnamese and Heng Samrin

soldiers, the red flag told us everything we needed to know about the future

of the country. One glance and my mind was made up. Time to leave, before

the communists put me in prison again.

  Balam and I continued our tour of the city, watching and listening, keeping

our mouths shut.

We saw a temple with many people praying inside and weeping for their

lost relatives.

We saw a former elementary school surrounded with barbed-wire fence,

and  Khmer  Rouge  prisoners  dressed  in  their  black  uniforms  inside.  The

people outside the fence pointed at the Khmer Rouge who had made their

lives a misery, and shouted threats at them.

We saw Vietnamese soldiers, always in twos and threes, never alone. Heng

Samrin soldiers came up to us to ask if we wanted to trade gold for medicine,

while their Vietnamese bosses pretended to loiter nearby. The Vietnamese

wanted  gold,  but  they  were  indirect  and  clever  about  it.  Through  their

Cambodian front men, you could buy anything – generators, outboard boat

motors, rice by the truckload.

It was a city full of intrigue. I trusted nobody. A man I had known slightly

in Phum Ra came up to me and whispered that he was a member of the

Khmer Serei. He asked me to join the freedom fighters on the Thai border. I

didn’t  believe  him  and  sent  him  away,  though  later  it  turned  out  he  was

telling the truth.

One  afternoon  I  went  bathing  in  the  river,  and  another  man  washing

himself in the river recognized me. He was Dr. Dav Kiet, a classmate of mine

from medical school. Kiet was working in the hospital in Battambang. Heasked me to join him on the staff, since there was a shortage of doctors.

Standing  on  the  river-bank,  I  pointed  at  my  skinny  arms  and  at  the  ribs

protruding from my chest and told him that my health didn’t allow it.

The  next  morning  a  chauffeur-driven  Mercedes  appeared  at  the  house

where my family was staying. The man in the back seat of the Mercedes

came up the steps, took his shoes off at the door, walked in and asked for Dr.

Ngor Haing. He was the governor of Battambang.

I was wearing a torn sarong, nothing else. The governor and I shook hands.

We sat cross-legged on a mat. He asked me about my family, about my old

life in Phnom Penh, about what had happened in the Khmer Rouge years.

Finally he got to the point and told me that Dr. Dav Kiet had suggested that I

work in the hospital.

The governor said I could work part-time if I was worried about my health.

If there was anything wrong with me, the hospital would give me medicines.

Not wanting him to lose face, I promised I would go to work as soon I felt

better. Actually, I didn’t want to work at the hospital at all.

The governor came again the next day and again I resisted. But by then I

had realized why. It was not just that I wasn’t feeling well, or that I didn’t

like the Heng Samrin regime. It was because I was afraid of going back to

work in obstetrics and gynaecology. I wanted to forget how Huoy had died. I

wanted to seal it out of my head. And it wouldn’t be easy if I was delivering

babies in the same hospital I had wanted to take Huoy to when she was in

labour.

All the same, it would have been unwise to ignore the governor. I decided

to see the hospital for myself. Dav Kiet took me on a tour.

The  hospital  was  in  terrible  shape.  For  a  short  while  around  1977  a

distinguished Western-trained doctor – the man I’d wanted to take Huoy to –

had been allowed to practise there, but then the Khmer Rouge killed him and

let the hospital slide into ruin. The laboratory wasn’t functioning. There was

hardly  any  medicine  or  surgical  equipment.  The  patients  flowed  into  the

hospital endlessly, a river of the malnourished and ill. We walked into the

delivery  room  and  saw  a  woman  in  her  seventh  month  of  pregnancy  in

labour. She had broken her water many hours before, but the labour was

making no progress. The mother was growing feeble, and though the doctors

and nurses were doing their best, there was nothing they could do. They

didn’t have the equipment. The woman was in the same situation as Huoy.

Black, black clouds closed in on me, and I had to get out of the delivery roomfast.

Kiet took me around to meet all the doctors and nurses and they were all

very respectful to me, even though my clothes were torn and my hair and

beard were long and wild-looking. They emphasized that they were offering

me  a  job  in  a  hospital  run  entirely  by  Cambodians.  There  were  no

Vietnamese there. All I had to say was yes, and my lost career and my former

social status would be returned to me as though the revolution had never

happened.

I told them no.

The next day the governor came back.

I told him yes, because I was afraid. It was either go to work in the hospital

or leave for the border at once.

I began working at the hospital but my mind was not there.

I thought about Huoy all the time. If she had lived, we could have been

crossing the border by now. But she had not, and because of it I could not

work in this hospital. If I could not save my own wife, how could I save

others? What good was I? What good were any of the doctors? The woman in

the delivery room had died in childbirth. Just like Huoy. If I saw people

laughing, I turned away. I never smiled. At night, Ngim tried to cheer me, but

it was no use. I had lived too long. The gods had made a cruel mistake. It

would have been better that I had died with Huoy, so our souls could be

together.

  Pen Tip arrived in Battambang. I sent him a message through a mutual

acquaintance. The message was for him to visit me at the hospital with his

black notebook. He would know what that meant – a black notebook listing

the deeds and misdeeds of his life, like the records kept by the King of Death.

  Pen Tip’s message back to me was that he had never done me wrong. He

claimed he didn’t know why I was angry.

I was too tired and discouraged from my hospital work to go after Pen Tip.

And then something else happened anyway that absorbed all my attention.

The governor sent a note to all the doctors asking us to attend a two-day

conference.  We  would  stay  at  his  residence  the  first  night  and  go  to  the

second half of the conference the next day.

I thought: Why can’t we go home to our own homes the first night? Where

are they really going to take us? Out in the woods, with soldiers? Does this

regime hate doctors too?

I went to talk to two of my colleagues in the hospital.  ‘Brothers,’ I said cryptically, ‘in the west, the dam is broken and the waters

are flooding out. Are you going or staying?’ They understood my meaning.

There was nothing to the west but the Thai border.

  These doctors were not ready to go, but they arranged for me to be on duty

the night before the conference was to begin. That would give me an excuse

to miss the first day of the conference. I would have a day’s head start before

the governor knew I was missing.

I  talked  it  over  with  my  family.  My  brother  Hok  decided  to  stay  in

Battambang a while longer and wait for Hong Srun, who still had not arrived.

Balam decided to take his wife and children and come along with me. I told

Balam to start walking west on National Route 5 before dawn on May 14. I

would catch up to him by noon.

  ‘Uncle,’ Ngim said to me, ‘I want to go with you.’

I told her no, she had to stay with Hok. But Ngim pleaded, and I told her

only if Hok gave permission. To my surprise, Hok did.

  Ngim and I were very fond of each other. She was a sturdy, active girl with

a strong mind, like her mother. She wasn’t afraid of anybody.

I told Ngim to put her clothes in my knapsack. She would have to carry the

knapsack for the first few hours, until I caught up with her and Balam.

I worked the night of May 13–14 at the hospital, willing the hands of the

clock to move faster. In the morning I got off work, changed into civilian

clothes and began walking toward the Thai border.                                          34



                                The Danger Zone


 




On the road out of town, a man saw me and called out, ‘Luk! Luk!’ – the old

form of address to a social superior. He clicked his heels and came to military

attention.

  ‘The devil’s victim!’ I exclaimed, pleased and astonished. It was Sok, my

driver from prerevolutionary days. I clapped him on the shoulder, told him he

didn’t have to call me luk anymore.

  ‘Where’s the boss lady?’ Sok asked, meaning Huoy. I told him that she had

died.  Sok  nodded  gravely,  as  though  death  was  to  be  expected.  Then  he

invited me to his house for a meal. I protested that I didn’t have time. ‘I’m

going to the border, but if you want, you can come with me,’ I said.

‘Too many in my family group, boss. I will go later, but right now you

must come to my house for something to eat.’ He pulled me by the wrist

toward a little hut nearby.

I had always wondered what had happened to Sok in the evacuation of

Phnom Penh. It turned out that after he had driven off to get his family in my

Mercedes, the Khmer Rouge blocked the streets. He was unable to come back

to pick up Huoy as he had planned. He had always regretted it, and ever since

then he had wondered what had happened to Huoy and me.

On this morning he gave me the best of his family’s food, rice and pieces

of grilled chicken. He treated me with great respect. I would have liked to

bring him to the border, but he was right. With him was an extended family

of aunts, cousins, babies and grandparents – an enviable number of survivors

– and they were not ready to go.I resumed walking on the road behind schedule but in good spirits. About

two in the afternoon I caught up with my family group. There were only

seven of us now: Balam, his wife, their two children and their nephew, my

niece Ngim and me. We ate in the shade of a kapok tree by a pond. Ngim

gave me my knapsack, and then we started walking again.

  With us heading westward on National Route 5 were travellers pushing

wooden-wheeled  handcarts  and  a  few  others  driving  oxcarts,  the  axles

squeaking and squealing. Carrying our luggage on our backs, as we were,

seemed harder, but once we left the road it would make more sense. Where

we were going, it was best to travel light.

  Toward sunset, Heng Samrin soldiers stopped us at a checkpoint. For our

own protection, they said, we should sleep in a village nearby. Unwillingly,

we  went  off  to  the  village  and  lay  down.  Some  of  my  gold  was  in  my

waistband and the rest was in Huoy’s purse, which I kept under my legs.

Most people wrapped their gold in the bundles they used as pillows, but this

was a mistake: in the middle of the night, the Heng Samrin soldiers came up

and took all the pillows at gunpoint. That was what they meant by protection.

The next day we reached Sisophon, the last major town before the border.

There, the Heng Samrin soldiers took what they wanted in broad daylight.

From me they took a shirt and a pair of trousers. From others they took

clothes, canteens, rice and whatever else they could use.

  West of Sisophon was an enormous stretch of flat, dry, barren rice fields.

In places it was a mile from one tree to the next. In the shade of an especially

large tree, Heng Samrin soldiers had set up a checkpoint with sandbags and

machine guns. Vietnamese soldiers sat nearby in the shade, a little too casual,

a little too relaxed. When we got there the Heng Samrin soldiers accused us

in loud voices of trying to leave the country. There wasn’t much we could say

to this, because ahead of us there was nothing except for the Thai border.

They  turned  us  around,  started  us  walking  back  the  way  we  had  come.

Predictably, someone made an offer, and the soldiers told us to come back.

The cynical charade ended and the bargaining began.

I ended up paying one chi (a little less than one tenth of an ounce) of gold

for my group to pass through. If all the soldiers wanted was gold, we figured

we were lucky.

In that part of the country the road and the railroad tracks followed parallel

courses, side by side. In the railroad’s prime, before the civil war, trains ran

all the way to the Thai border and beyond, to the Thai capital, Bangkok.Now, after years of war and decay, the trains stopped short of the border at a

village called Nimitt and then reversed. As we walked along the highway, the

westbound train passed us, carrying passengers in the boxcars and on the

roofs, most of them heading for the border like us. Later the eastbound trains

came back with a cargo of smuggled Thai goods. We reached Nimitt on foot

as the sun was about to set.

  Nimitt was a one-street hamlet surrounded by rice fields. It had no market

and no stores. It had no soldiers, either, because the smugglers and border

guides paid the military to stay away. It was a nasty little jumping-off point

for trips to the Thai border and a transshipment centre for black-market goods

coming the other way.

  Several  hundred  travellers  like  us  were  in  Nimitt  trying  to  get  out  of

Cambodia. The guides fanned out among us, competing openly for business.

‘Come join my group. I guarantee your safety!’ shouted one. ‘No! Over here!

I offer cheaper rates!’ said another. Most of the guides were dark-skinned

ethnic Khmer, and some of them were barefoot.

I  would  have  preferred  to  follow  other  travellers  over  the  mountains,

without hiring a guide. But the trails weren’t yet established, and I didn’t trust

the other refugees. Still, there was no hurry to choose among guides. My

group made a fire, cooking rice rations and boiling water to last us through

the coming days. After we had eaten, Balam and I went off to look the guides

over.

To his surprise, Balam recognized one of them, a skinny old man of mixed

Khmer and Chinese blood who had lived in Phnom Penh before the Khmer

Rouge takeover. He recognized Balam too, though he could not remember his

name.

‘My good friends,’ the old man assured us, ‘I bring groups every night to

the border. I know the area very well and everybody trusts me. If I bring you

to the border, the bandits in the jungle won’t take money from you. I will

arrange everything. I will pay them off. And I’m the only one who can do it.

I’m not saying I’m perfect, but if you trust me, go with me. I go to the border

every night, and there’s never any problem. But if you don’t trust me, by all

means go with somebody else.’

I kept quiet. Word for word, his sales pitch was what I had expected to

hear. That he had experience, that we had nothing to worry about, that he had

plenty of customers even without us and so on. If I were a guide, it was

exactly what I would have said myself. I watched and listened for somethingto believe in but didn’t find it.

And yet I trusted the other guides even less. Their eyes gave them away.

They had a calculating way of looking at our luggage rather than our faces.

They let their glances rest on the women’s crotches. They thought they had

X-ray eyes, looking for hidden gold.

  After  four  years  of  living  under  the  Khmer  Rouge,  my  ability  to  read

people’s characters was highly developed. I walked around, listening to each

of the guides, assessing them silently. I paid attention to their tones of voice,

to their posture, to anything that emanated from their character, but above all

to their eyes.

At last I went back to the old man Balam knew from Phnom Penh. There

was, I thought, about a 10 per cent chance that he would treat us properly. I

chose him because he was part Chinese like me and because his remembering

Balam might work in our favour. The rest of the guides I trusted about 2 per

cent.

The bargaining began behind closed doors in a crowded room in the old

guide’s house. At first he asked for a damleung of gold apiece. He came

down to four fifths of a damleung, and then Balam and I conferred. Ngim and

Balam’s youngest son were both nine years old. ‘The children go at half

price,’ I told the guide, who gave in.

‘But you pay me now,’ he added, letting his glance travel the length of my

body.

The total for the group was 4.8 damleung (about 5.75 ounces) of gold,

worth around $2,000 US.

I left Balam in the crowded room and walked outside. I had gold in several

forms: in thin twenty-four-karat sheets, rolled into small tubes and hidden in

my belt; in gold chains of twenty-two- or twenty-four-karat purity; and some

other small twenty-four-karat bars and pieces. I returned to the group, which

was  sitting  around  the  fire.  Ngim  heated  food  for  me  and  we  talked

nonchalantly. My krama hung around my neck like a scarf. When enough

time had passed, I bent forward slightly so that the end of my krama fell

across the top of my trousers. I dug into my waistband pocket, pulled out the

gold pieces, palmed them, then casually tied them into the end of my krama.

Ngim and Balam’s wife noticed, but nobody else did. After eating I walked

back to the guide’s house to give him the gold.

By 1.00 a.m. everyone who was going with the guide had assembled in a

long line stretching from his house. It was a starry night, a crescent moonhanging in the western sky, and quiet, except for the crickets. We began to

walk much more slowly than I would have liked, on a footpath, then on an

oxcart path, through rice fields and jungle. Our route would take us north and

then west, away from the roads and villages and into unpopulated territory.

How far it was to the border, we did not know.

  When grey and then pink light had appeared in the east, the line stopped.

Balam’s wife turned around and whispered to me over Ngim’s head, ‘Khmer

Rouge. Pass it on.’

I turned around and repeated the message to the person behind me.

A loud surly voice came from up front. ‘Why do you want to leave the

country? Why? You are betraying the nation!’

  Nobody answered.

The sun rose. The line shuffled slowly forward. Ahead I saw four or five

Khmer Rouge, dressed in black, holding rifles. They collected bits of gold

from travellers in payment.

My gold was hidden in various place – small bits in my waistband for

bribes like this, some in my green Vietnamese sneakers, a few chi taped

under Ngim’s armpit. Most of it I had given Balam’s wife, to hide in her

underwear.

  Everyone in my family group was ahead of me. I stepped out of line for a

moment, stepped in again at the front of the group. Slowly the line shuffled

forward.

The Khmer Rouge checked my knapsack.

I gave them two chi of gold.

‘Open your mouth,’ they said. They looked in my mouth for gold, frisked

me and threw my knapsack in a pile. Behind me, they looked in Ngim’s

mouth with the flashlight and threw her basket in the pile. Then they went to

Balam. When they were looking in his luggage I picked up my knapsack and

Ngim’s basket. When they took Balam’s bag away, he followed my example

and stole it back when they weren’t looking.

The soldiers broke bamboo shoulderboards to see whether gold was hidden

inside. They stirred cooking pots to see if anything was hidden in the rice.

They confiscated Montagut shirts, always a favorite with the Khmer Rouge.

But real Khmer Rouge wouldn’t have let us go. And real Khmer Rouge

soldiers wouldn’t have been interested in gold. These were pretenders, Heng

Samrin soldiers who had dressed in black uniforms. There were undoubtedly

Vietnamese soldiers nearby, watching and waiting.We had entered a danger zone in far northwestern Cambodia. My trust in the

leader had dropped from 10 per cent to zero. In the daylight I saw he hadn’t

even accompanied us himself. He was using employees.

An  hour  after  the  fake  Khmer  Rouge,  another  gang  of  the  same  kind

stopped us. They yelled and threatened. They raised their rifles to shoot us,

and the wild glare in their eyes nearly convinced me that they were real. But

it was another bluff. They had everyone put the luggage in a huge pile and

clawed through it, looking for gold. They found a lot of gold in the false

bottoms of tea kettles. After they had searched the luggage they frisked the

men but not the women. I gave them another two chi and they let my group

go,  but  they  made  others  without  gold  turn  around  and  go  back  toward

Nimitt.

The trail led up into the rain forest of the Dangrek Mountains. Hardwood

trees of the species called chhoeu teal and khlong and theng towered high

overhead; I recognized them from my family’s lumber business long ago.

Vines as thick as my wrist hung from the branches, and lianas sprouted from

the trunks.

  Except for the singing of birds, and the scurrying of lizards through the

underbrush,  it  was  quiet  in  the  forest.  Where  there  were  boulders  on  the

hilltops, we jumped from rock to rock. Where bamboo grew in dense groves

on the slopes, we parted it with our hands and passed through. The trail led

up and down.

At the bottom of a valley we came to a river. Green scum floated on the

surface of the water, which was a chocolate brown underneath. We waded

across. On the other side we drank clean water from our makeshift canteens.

An old woman with her palms together in the sompeah begged me for a

drink. I poured her a capful of water, but no more.

  Walking again, the line of travellers filled the path and twisted out of sight,

around the bends. A sudden muffled explosion, like an artillery shell, came

from ahead. We kept on walking. A few minutes later word came back that a

mine had gone off and that many people had been killed.

The line stopped. We stood where we were, suddenly afraid to move to the

side of the path and sit down.

  Then the word came back that the guides had all deserted us.

We waited for an hour, and then the line started moving forward again. I

told Ngim to walk exactly in my footsteps.

We  walked  cautiously  around  a  bend  and  came  upon  the  site  of  theexplosion. It was a blood-spattered scene, an arm hanging from a tree branch,

part of a leg caught in bamboo. Ten or more dead lay by the side of the path,

and many more were wounded. I made a tourniquet, removed some large

pieces of shrapnel from wounds, tied makeshift bandages and advised the

relatives on preventing infection. With no medical supplies, there was little

more to do. It was a terrible way to die, or to be maimed, after living through

the Khmer Rouge years and coming so close to freedom.

The mines appeared on either side of the path, sometimes in the middle.

They had coin-size detonator buttons, white or rusted in colour. From the

detonator buttons, trip lines made of nearly invisible white nylon thread led to

tying-off points such as trees or rocks nearby.

We crept forward, around curves, up and down, and then we heard another

explosion ahead. When we came down the side of the hill to a river we saw

the burials already under way. The seriously wounded were being carried off

in hammocks slung from bamboo poles; a few with puncture wounds from

the  shrapnel  sat  around  in  shock.  This  time  the  mine  had  been  rigged

underwater. Ngim was a good swimmer, but I made her put her arms around

my neck, and I swam across as she held on to me.

  Whether the Vietnamese or the Khmer Rouge planted the mines didn’t

matter much to us. All we knew was that we had to keep our eyes on the trail,

searching for white threads. Dry leaves fell across the trail and drifted in the

wake of footsteps, making spotting them more difficult.

  There was a third mine explosion far ahead. When we got there, there was

a crater across the path, and flies buzzing around the blood. Nearby were

graves with thorns piled on top to keep the wild animals away.

We kept on walking. It was hot and dusty. People had stopped beside the

path to beg for food or water, but I gave only sips of water, and only to old

ladies.

As the daylight faded we examined an area next to the trail for mines and

settled down for the night. We made no fire; it was too risky looking for

firewood. The mosquitoes covered our arms and legs; we spent most of the

night slapping them. Moonlight filtered through the treetops high above.

The next morning we started walking again, following everyone else and

hoping that whoever was in the lead knew where to go. I didn’t think they

did. The morning sun was on our left, meaning that we were going south. Our

original plan had been to go north and west – the morning sun should have

been to our right, or else over our backs. But I was tired and mistrusted myown sense of direction too.

In midmorning the line stopped. It went forward again, and then everyone

was made to gather in a clearing. Eight newcomers had joined us. They had

hunting rifles, and they spoke a language that we guessed was Thai.

I do not know for a fact that these first men or those who came later were

Thai citizens. Probably some were Cambodians who spoke Thai from living

near the border. What I do know is that they made me glad that Huoy was not

with me.

  They made the women remove their clothes and underclothes, but allowed

them  to  change  into  sarongs  to  protect  their  modesty.  With  swift,  expert

hands,  the  thieves  felt  the  brassieres,  the  straps  and  seams  and  hems  of

dresses and trousers. They found the bulk of my gold in the underwear of

Balam’s wife.

  Then they started body searches. Mouths. Ears. Hair. Finger violations of

the women.

  Then  they  searched  the  men.  Same  thing.  They  found  the  gold  in  my

waistband but not the gold in my sneakers.

  Then they separated the men from the women, and the rapes began. In full

view. The prettiest young women were raped again and again. The bandits

who were not taking their turns kept their hunting rifles pointed at the rest of

us. There was nothing we could do.

  They didn’t rape Balam’s wife and didn’t search or molest Ngim.

We walked half a mile farther, then stopped when we saw more armed

men. No rapes this time. When they finished searching us, we picked up what

remained of our baggage and trudged on for another half mile, where we had

to stop again.

  From one tollgate we went to the next, and the next, and the next, until we

were dazed. Sometimes the thieves spoke Thai and sometimes they spoke

Khmer. They confiscated canes and the bamboo sticks from hammocks, in

case there was gold hidden inside. They removed bandages looking for gold.

They tore the clothes off a pretty girl seventeen years old. She had no gold to

hide, but she struggled anyway, to protect herself. And because she resisted,

they dragged her into the woods and shot her in the head.

  Counting from Nimitt, including the two times we were searched by fake

Khmer  Rouge,  we  passed  through  thirty-seven  tollgates.  I  lost  my

Vietnamese sneakers with the gold inside and the Zippo cigarette lighter I had

carried with me since leaving Phnom Penh. At the last tollgate, when we hadlittle left, they took knives, hatchets, shoes, hats, new clothes.

  Everybody  was  numb.  We  were  unable  to  accept  that  it  had  really

happened, that our women had been raped, that our possessions were gone. In

all our years under the Khmer Rouge, we had never been bodily searched,

and few women had been abused.

In a daze we trudged past the swollen corpse of an ox that had stepped on a

mine. There had been few mines since the thieves had set on us.

The landscape flattened. The vegetation changed from rain forest to a dry,

open forest with little underbrush. The leaves of the hardwood trees nearly

touched high overhead, but the tree trunks were far apart.

A Thai civilian stood alone in the path waiting for us to arrive. He was an

intelligence  officer  for  the  Thai  government.  He  asked  us  in  good  but

accented  Khmer  about  the  Vietnamese,  the  Khmer  Rouge  and  conditions

walking toward the border. He said there were Thai soldiers ahead but not to

worry. He added that the Thai Red Cross and United Nations agencies were

there too.

We walked on and came to the Thai soldiers. They checked us for weapons

and let us through. If there was a marker at the border, we didn’t see it.

As the sun was sinking we came to a city of tents and makeshift huts. The

colour  blue  was  everywhere  –  the  relief  agencies  were  giving  away  blue

plastic tarps, and the refugees used them for the roofs and awnings of their

shelters.

This was Nong Chan, a border camp. I was surprised that so many had

come before us.

We found a place by the river and sat down.

I thought: We have survived. They have taken our gold, but it does not

matter. From now on, no more killings, no more rapes. We will block the past

out of our minds.

The nightmare is over.

We are safe. We are free.

  Ngim sat down next to me, smiling happily. She had been a good girl, and

I had decided to adopt her as a daughter.

I sat there thinking about the future. About starting life over again, and

going back to work as a doctor.

  Then I thought: Yes, but I will never forget these past four years. And

someday, somehow, I will tell the outside world what has happened.There were still a few bits of gold taped under Ngim’s arm. I removed them,

and Balam and I went to exchange the gold for Thai money from a man with

a scale. For the piece of gold I offered we got four hundred Thai baht in

paper currency, which was then worth about twenty American dollars. We

spent  the  money  on  rice,  dry  salted  fish,  fish  sauce  and  vegetables  from

market sellers nearby. When we finished we still had money left over.

  Balam and I drifted back toward the family but stopped when we saw a

man with a pushcart. There was a red, blue and white insignia on the side of

his cart and ice and bottles of Pepsi-Cola inside.

  ‘Siep baht! Siep baht!’ the vendor yelled to the bystanders. The word siep

sounded like the words for ‘ten’ in Mandarin and Teochiew Chinese. I asked

some Cambodians and they said yes, the price was ten baht.

  ‘Brother,’ I said eagerly to Balam, ‘we’ve got to buy some. You drink first.

Go ahead.’

‘It’s too expensive,’ said Balam, a man of cautious instincts.

  ‘No. I haven’t had ice or Pepsi for four years.’

  ‘Don’t waste your money,’ said Balam.

  ‘This isn’t a waste. This is living! Come on, brother, come on!’

I held up two fingers. The vendor nodded that he understood, then asked

me a question in Thai. The other Cambodians translated:

  Did I want him to pour it into a plastic bag, with a straw?

‘Tell him I want two bottles,’ I said. ‘I want the two coldest bottles he has.’

He reached into the bottom of his cart and pulled up two glistening bottles.

The label on the bottles was in the Thai alphabet, which is a little different

from the Cambodian alphabet, but I recognized the name Pepsi-Cola all the

same.

  ‘The very coldest,’ I repeated. ‘Two bottles.’

He opened the bottles and we lifted them to our lips.

  After a few swallows I had to stop, the liquid was so cold. I could feel it

going down my throat, cold and refreshing, all the way to my stomach. There

was energy in my limbs. I felt revitalized, exhilarated. I took a deep breath

and lifted the bottle to my mouth again.

The Pepsi was like a drug. It made me stronger. Maybe it was the sugar

and  caffeine  pouring  into  my  malnourished  body,  but  I  think  it  was

something else. To me, Pepsi meant that we had finally made it to the West.

I finished the bottle and licked my lips.

  ‘Brother,’ I said, ‘it’s very, very tasty, isn’t it?’ Balam nodded but didn’tsay anything. He was too busy drinking. ‘Two more!’ I shouted at the vendor.

He poured the Pepsi into plastic bags for us this time, and put in plenty of

ice. He put a straw in the mouth of each plastic bag, then tied them off with a

rubber band, to make a carrying loop. I gave him twenty more baht.

I sipped at the straw. ‘How good!’ I exclaimed. ‘Like real, real, Pepsi-

Cola!’

Before the revolution there had been Pepsi-Cola, Coca-Cola and other soft

drinks in Phnom Penh. I took them all for granted. I hadn’t really liked any of

them much.

But  this  was  different.  Nothing  had  ever  tasted  this  good  before.  And

nothing has ever tasted that good since.

I  kept  murmuring  ‘How  tasty’  as  I  walked  back  to  the  camp  with  my

cousin. And, actually, I wanted more.                                          35



                                    The Locket


 




Cambodia  has  two  traditional  enemies:  Vietnam  to  the  east  and  Thailand

(formerly Siam) to the west. Over the centuries we have had wars and border

disputes with both of them.

At the bottom of our differences is race. ‘Pure’ Khmers have dark brown

skins.  Vietnamese  and  Thais  have  pale  yellow  skins.  To  most  Asians,

including our neighbours, the lighter the skin colour, the higher the status.

They look down on Cambodians for having darker skins than themselves.

Cambodians, who are shy by nature, sometimes outwardly appear to accept a

lower status while inwardly resenting it.

  Speaking  different  languages  and  belonging  to  competing  nations  have

added  to  the  friction.  So  does  having  long  memories.  Every  Cambodian

schoolchild knows that a Siamese invasion caused the downfall of the ancient

Cambodian empire at Angkor. Every Cambodian knows the legend of the

Vietnamese who used Cambodians’ heads for cooking stones.

But of our two neighbours, we dislike the Thais less. Culturally we have

much in common with them. We practise the same kind of Buddhism, called

the ‘Lesser Vehicle’; our Buddha sculptures, temples and religious services

are almost exactly the same. Most Vietnamese practise the ‘Greater Vehicle’

of Buddhism, whose temples, Buddha sculptures and services are noticeably

different.  The  Khmer  and  Thai  languages  have  many  similar  words,  but

Khmer and Vietnamese have few that are similar. The rural people of both

Cambodia and Thailand build their houses on stilts, but the Vietnamese build

on the ground.The  result  is  that  Cambodians  and  Thais  have  mixed  feelings  for  each

other. Sometimes we are hostile, sometimes we are friendly, and most of the

time we are a combination of both.

On  the  Thai-Cambodian  border,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Khmer  Rouge

regime, the Thais were of mixed minds to us. Kindhearted Thai civilians

brought gifts of clothing and food to refugees. (When they gave clothing to

Ngim, I had to teach her how to put her palms together in the sompeah to

give them proper thanks – she had forgotten her manners in the dark Khmer

Rouge years.) But other Thais continued to rape, rob and terrorize the border

camps.  The  Thai  government  was  just  as  contradictory.  It  allowed

international agencies to come to our aid, but on a few occasions its military

treated us brutally. We never knew what to expect.

  Sitting  in  the  Nong  Chan  border  camp,  malnourished,  dressed  in  rags,

Balam and I searched our brains for the names of people who could help us.

One of them was a Thai gentleman named Chana Samuthawanija, who had

been ambassador to Phnom Penh during the Lon Nol regime. Balam had then

been a wealthy airline owner and a man of high social standing, and he had

gotten to know Chana socially. Balam recalled that Chana spoke Khmer but

didn’t read it, so I wrote a letter for Balam in French. We sent it off with a lot

of other letters and appeals and soon forgot about it.

A few weeks later, in June 1979, our names were called over a loudspeaker

system.  We  went  to  see  what  it  was  about  and  found  that  a  vehicle  was

waiting  to  take  the  entire  family  group  to  Bangkok,  Thailand’s  capital.

Bewildered, we got in and were driven several hours to the Lumpini transit

centre,  a  former  army  barracks  with  long,  warehouse-like  buildings,  in

Bangkok. Nobody explained to us what we were doing in Lumpini or why we

had been taken there.

Nor did we know how close we had come to tragedy at Nong Chan. The

day after we left it, 110 buses drove in, part of an unannounced programme

staged by the Thai military. Buses came to the other border settlements too.

More than 45,000 Cambodians climbed in, believing they were being taken to

different refugee camps where the conditions were better. Instead, the buses

took them around the northern slope of the Dangrek Mountains to another

part  of  the  Thai-Cambodian  border  near  an  ancient  temple,  called  Preah

Vihear. There, with rifles and whips, Thai soldiers forced the refugees down

a steep cliff and back onto Cambodian soil. At the bottom of the cliff was a

minefield. Hundreds died in the mine explosions, thousands of dehydrationand disease in the following days. Of the survivors, some headed back across

Cambodia for the border camps where they had been before – to be robbed

and raped by Thais again on the way.

  Balam and I didn’t hear anything about the Preah Vihear incident until

later. At the time, we were looking around the Lumpini centre and trying to

figure out what was going on. It was a confusing place, with many languages

being spoken at the same time. In addition to the Cambodian refugees there

were also Vietnamese and Laotians, including hilltribe people from Laos. I

stared in disbelief at the women of the Laotian hilltribes. They wore strange

headdresses and nursed their babies at enormous breasts. When they wanted

to urinate they just squatted in full sight of everybody, lifted up their dresses

and peed on the ground.

  From time to time lists of names were read over the loudspeaker system,

and people rushed forward with their luggage to begin their trips to Western

countries like America and France. I was sitting with my back to a wall,

wearing a sarong, watching the goings-on. Ngim had washed my trousers, the

only pair I had left after the border thieves. I kept an eye on my trousers as

they were drying, so nobody would steal them. Toward midmorning there

was  a  big  commotion  with  police  whistles  and  the  gate  opening  and  the

guards saluting. A few minutes later the loudspeakers called out Balam’s

name and mine.

  ‘Cousin, we are lucky!’ I exclaimed to Balam. ‘Today we are going to the

United States. Ngim, please hand me my trousers.’

  ‘Praise  the  gods,’  Balam  said,  raising  his  eyes  to  the  sky.  ‘They  have

guided us out of hell and they are leading us to good fortune.’

  When we were fully dressed, Balam and I pushed our way through the

crowd to the loudspeaker announcer. There Balam recognized a well-dressed

man  with  a  round  face  and  a  benign,  wise  expression.  ‘It’s  Ambassador

Chana,’ Balam whispered. All around Chana, men and women were bowing

and sompeahing.  We  joined  them.  At  last  we  realized  who  had  been

responsible for getting us away from the border and bringing us here.

  ‘No, please, get up,’ Chana was saying in Khmer to the people who were

bowing.  He  was  not  fluent  in  the  language,  but  we  had  no  trouble

understanding him. Then he looked in our direction and began talking to us.

  ‘Balam,  doctor,  don’t  worry,’  he  said.  ‘You  are  alive.  Don’t  think  too

much about the past. You have survived. The past is over. I will take care of

you. If you need anything, just ask.’  Chana was almost in tears. His old friend Balam was a wreck of a man,

skinny, dressed in rags, his hair prematurely grey. He looked at me and saw

another  wreck.  He  turned  to  his  wife,  who  stood  next  to  him,  and  said

something in Thai. She reached into her purse and pulled out two stacks of

money several inches thick. She gave one to Balam, the other to me. We

accepted the money with our heads bowed.

  Then we did some fast talking.

  ‘Ambassador,’ I said, after Balam and I had come to agreement, ‘you have

a very good heart. You brought us from the border and now you have helped

us again by giving us money. We thank you both very, very much.’ I paused

to see if he followed me. He did.

  ‘You  have  already  given  us  the  ultimate  gift,’  I  continued.  ‘You  have

saved our lives. We accept your gift of money, but we wish to give it back to

you. It is too much for us. We wish you to have it, so you will have savings

for your old age.’

  Chana sincerely meant for us to take the money and he tried to press it on

us, but we resisted, and finally his wife accepted it back. There was a deep

and unspoken meaning to the exchange, and everyone there understood it.

Balam and I still had our dignity. We initially accepted the money to give

Chana face, then returned it to keep face ourselves and to show our respect

for him.

As it turned out, Chana had been in Peking talking to Sihanouk when our

letter arrived. When Chana looked at it upon his return, he was mystified – he

didn’t read French any more than he read Khmer, and he had to get the letter

translated. But he was well aware of the desperate circumstances Cambodians

were in, and he was probably more sympathetic to Cambodian refugees than

anyone at his level of government. A few days after coming to see us, Chana,

who was not only a diplomat but a major general in the Thai national police,

sent  passes  to  Balam  and  me.  The  passes  allowed  us  to  leave  and  enter

Lumpini whenever we liked. But I didn’t use mine.

I was still depressed. Black clouds closed in, blocking out the sun. I didn’t

want to talk to the other refugees, or explore Bangkok. All I could think of

was my family and Huoy.

I remembered something Huoy told me during the Lon Nol regime. She

said I should sell the gasoline trucks, buy an airplane ticket out of Cambodia

and go wherever I wanted. That was just like Huoy. She didn’t even ask me

take her along. She told me to leave the country for my sake. She wantedwhat was best for me.

If I had listened to Huoy and left the country before the Khmer Rouge

takeover, and taken her along, she would have been alive today. We would

have been living happily together as man and wife. If I had listened to her,

and if I had shown more leadership, I could have saved my entire family. But

I hadn’t, and they died.

If only I had listened.

  Besides Ngim and my cousin Balam, I had one other relative in Lumpini.

He had a Chinese name, Lo Sun-main. We were not related by blood – he

was actually my brother Hok’s brother-in-law – but we had been friends in

Phnom Penh, and now that there were so few of us alive we felt a strong

kinship. Sun-main saw that I was depressed. He tried to keep my spirits up.

He talked with me and brought me food. He said the food came from a rich

uncle of his who lived in Bangkok.

He kept trying to get me to meet this uncle, but I resisted. My excuse was

that I had nothing but rags to wear. And it was true that my hair was in my

eyes, my spiky beard was an inch long, and I didn’t want to lose face by

meeting strangers looking that way. But my real reason was that I wanted to

remain in my misery and punish myself for my failures.

  Finally the uncle, Lo Pai-boon, came to visit Lumpini. He was about fifty

years old, with thin hair combed straight back. His wife was plump and wore

her hair long. They brought food and fruit to me – to this doctor-relative they

had  been  hearing  about.  When  they  saw  me  they  broke  into  tears.  They

bribed the gate guards and drove me home in their car.

  Uncle Lo had emigrated from Cambodia to Thailand as a child. He had

worked hard, as overseas Chinese usually do, and he was now the owner of a

large textile shop. He couldn’t remember much of the Khmer language. I

didn’t speak much Thai. But we both knew the Chinese Teochiew dialect,

and  we  had  no  trouble  communicating.  It  was  irrelevant  that  I  was  a

Cambodian national and he was a Thai. Our backgrounds were close enough

to connect us like a bridge.

  While I was sitting in his house in my torn clothes, he summoned a tailor,

who came in and measured me from head to foot. When the tailor left, the

neighbours started coming in with gifts and Uncle Lo introduced me as a

close relative and a doctor. In a few hours the tailor returned with five pairs

of trousers and five shirts, freshly made. Uncle Lo and his wife took me to a

shoe store, and then food shopping. From there they took me to the bestChinese restaurant in Bangkok. He and his wife sat on either side of me,

heaping food on my plate. It was the most delicious meal I had eaten in more

than four years.

Before he drove me back to Lumpini, Uncle Lo gave me 3,000 baht, which

was then worth $150 US. And he wasn’t done. He invited me back a second

time, gave me prescription eyeglasses and more clothes and more money, and

did the same for Balam.

  With  these  two  great  gifts  from  Thai  men  –  my  full  freedom  from

Ambassador Chana, and the clothes and money from Lo Pai-boon – I began

to come out of my depression. But there was one more thing I needed to do

before regaining self-respect.

I took the ID card photograph of Huoy from my luggage. I put all the

money  from  Uncle  Lo  in  my  pocket,  and  I  showed  the  pass  Chana  had

written to the guards at the Lumpini gate.

In Bangkok’s Chinatown district, I had Huoy’s picture photographically

copied onto a small heart-shaped piece of porcelain, then hand-coloured. I

took the porcelain to a goldsmith and ordered a gold locket to fit. When the

locket was done, I hung it around my neck on a chain.

The locket was a talisman. Its heavy, reassuring weight was always there,

under my shirt, over my heart. I truly believed that Huoy would guide and

protect me as long as I wore it. I never took it off. She was with me, day and

night.

I began to feel better. Something like a normal human being. My grieving

wasn’t over; and at night my dreams took me back to prison to be tortured

again and again and again. But most days my mind was clear. I began to pay

more  attention  to  this  remarkable  place,  Lumpini  transit  centre,  whose

occupants had all escaped from communist regimes.

  Camped next to me on mats was a Vietnamese family of ethnic Chinese

background. Speaking in Mandarin Chinese, the lovely young daughter told

me how her family had escaped Vietnam by boat. It was a dramatic story:

hundreds  of  people  crowded  into  small  boats,  storms  approaching,  waves

breaking over the sides, everybody frantically bailing – and then Thai pirates.

She didn’t say much about the pirates except that they robbed the refugees of

gold, but I knew what had happened to her by what she didn’t say and by

watching her expression. It made me glad that I hadn’t sailed from Kampot to

Thailand with Huoy.

  There were also Chinese-speaking Laotians, merchants from the lowlandtowns and cities. They said that when the Pathet Lao communists took power

in 1975, the soldiers and the high-ranking officials from the old regime were

sent to ‘re-education’ camps in the countryside. There they were forced to

work long hours and sit through boring propaganda meetings. It was like the

front lines in Cambodia except that far fewer died, because the Pathet Lao

communists were not as cruel and not as fanatical. But the Pathet Lao attempt

to reorganize the countryside into collectives was no more successful than the

Khmer Rouge attempt, and most of the educated people and many of the

peasants decided to leave. They crossed the Mekong River to Thailand, some

of them swimming at night, others hiring boats or bribing officials to let them

leave in broad daylight.

Unlike  the  lowlanders,  the  Laotian  hilltribes  didn’t  speak  any  of  the

languages I did, so I never got their story directly. But I learned that the men

had been guerrillas for a CIA-backed army that fought in the mountains of

Laos against the North Vietnamese. Their war didn’t end with the takeover in

1975. The Vietnamese kept attacking. The hilltribes fought back as long as

their supplies held out, then left when there was no other choice. The men

were  sturdy  and  tough,  with  black  baggy  trousers  that  went  down  to  the

middle of their shins. Their children were dirty and usually had snot running

out of their noses. They were from different tribes, the H’mong and Yao and

others.  Some  of  the  women  wore  headdresses  with  coins  jangling,  while

others wore cloth wrapped around their heads like turbans, and necklaces

made of silver.

  With the Vietnamese and Cambodians and Laotians, the lowlanders and

highlanders,  the  city  people  and  rural  people,  the  French-speaking

intellectuals  and  the  peasants  who  had  never  worn  shoes  in  their  lives,

Lumpini  was  like  Indochina  in  miniature.  The  teenagers  were  always

fighting,  just  like  the  adults  in  their  home  countries,  and  the  Vietnamese

teenagers  were  the  most  aggressive  of  all.  Speaking  different  languages,

belonging  to  different  races  and  cultures,  we  didn’t  think  of  ourselves  as

‘Indochinese’  or  as  ‘Indochinese  refugees’.  Besides  suffering  under

communism, we had little in common.

But it was an interesting place. I started working as a volunteer in the

medical clinic with a Vietnamese doctor, a very nice man who was a refugee

like me. Speaking in French, we agreed that the Vietnamese were in the best

physical shape of the refugees, the Cambodians in the worst shape, and that

the  most  serious  health  problem  in  Lumpini  was  mental  depression.  Nomatter where the refugees came from, most were traumatized from the loss of

their families and their ways of life.

  Working in the clinic, I began to make a lot of friends. Even the Thai

guards started coming to see me for their medical problems, usually venereal

disease.  The  guards  liked  me.  They  said  I  could  leave  or  enter  Lumpini

anytime I wanted, with or without a pass. So finally I did.


The  streets  of  Bangkok  were  jammed  with  buses,  cars,  trucks  and  three-

wheeled samlor taxis whose noisy diesel engines gave off clouds of greasy

exhaust. Motorcycles swooped and darted through the traffic with suicidal

daring.  Water  taxis  roared  through  an  old  network  of  canals,  and  ferries

travelled back and forth across the Chao Phraya River. It was not a clean city.

The air was smoggy and the water in the canals was black and disgusting. But

I liked Bangkok. It was exciting and energetic. Everywhere there were high-

rise  buildings  and  skyscrapers  and  overpasses.  The  noise  of  traffic  and

construction came from all directions, at all hours of the day and night. I had

never seen so many televisions, radios, refrigerators, restaurants, bars and

soccer fields. The people were well dressed. Their standard of living was

high.

  Bangkok was like the dream city Chea Huon had talked about at the dam

site,  but  instead  of  being  a  fantasy  for  the  future,  it  was  real  and  in  the

present. There was plenty of food. The roads were paved with asphalt. The

houses had electric lights. Cranes and bulldozers did the heaviest work. Many

families owned cars or motorcycles. Most important, the Thais were free.

They  did  not  have  an  ‘Angka’.  Nobody  made  them  go  to  propaganda

meetings  or  treated  them  like  slaves.  They  organized  themselves.  And

because they were free they were far more productive than we war slaves had

ever been.

I went to the Royal Palace. It looked like the royal palace in Phnom Penh,

with spires and multicoloured tile roofs. I visited temples. There were a lot of

them, clean and well maintained, with many Buddha statues and monks in

saffron robes. I stopped by the open-air street-corner shrine in front of the

Erawan Hotel. At this shrine, a few feet from a busy intersection, where the

cars and motorcycles and samlors impatiently rev their engines and then take

off like road racers before the traffic light turns green, a scene of intense

religious worship went on day and night. Musicians played their instruments,

classical dancers danced serenely, and people crowded in to light sticks ofincense and pray. The ancient and the modern lived right next to each other,

and both were doing well.

I envied the Thais. How I envied them! They had kept their traditional

culture intact, while ours had been destroyed. Our temples were wrecked, our

monks were killed, our books ripped apart for cigarette paper. The Thais had

their  past,  and  they  were  assured  of  a  prosperous  future.  For  most

Cambodians, the future was going to mean searching in the forest for wild

food, living in huts without electricity and obeying orders from soldiers. We

didn’t have a modern, bustling capital like Bangkok. Compared to it, Phnom

Penh had been a quiet town in the provinces.

  Back in Lumpini I began to talk with my friends. We had all noticed the

same thing. Until coming to Bangkok few of us had known that a city so

modern existed in all of Asia, much less in the country next door. We had

always been told the reverse, that Cambodia was far ahead of its neighbours.

All our leaders had told us so, from Sihanouk through Lon Nol to the Khmer

Rouge.

It was a strange contrast, we agreed: two nations with similar cultures and

resources, one of them a great success, the other a total disaster. We could

understand how Thailand had succeeded, but why had Cambodia failed? We

had answers, but they were inadequate to our sorrow. And probably we will

ask ourselves the question as long as we live, and never be satisfied by the

explanations.


This much I do know: the destruction of Cambodia could have been avoided.

What led to it was politics.

By politics I do not just mean the Khmer Rouge. The Khmer Rouge dealt

the  worst  blow  to  Cambodia,  but  they  did  not  destroy  it  by  themselves.

Outside countries lent a hand, most of them without realizing the effects their

policies would have. It is a complicated story, going back many years.

To  begin  with,  France,  our  former  colonial  ruler,  didn’t  prepare  us  for

independence. It didn’t give us the strong, educated middle class we needed

to govern ourselves well. Then there was the United States, whose support

pushed  Cambodia  off  its  neutral  path  to  the  right  in  1970  and  began  the

political unbalancing process. Once Lon Nol was in power, the United States

could have forced him to cut down on corruption, and it could have stopped

its own bombing, but it didn’t, until too late. The bombing and the corruption

helped push Cambodia the other way, toward the left. On the communist side,China gave the Khmer Rouge weapons and an ideology. The Chinese could

have stopped the Khmer Rouge from slaughtering civilians, but they didn’t

try. And then there is Vietnam. Even in the 1960s and early 1970s, when the

Vietnamese communists used eastern Cambodia as part of their Ho Chi Minh

Trail network, they were putting their own interests first. They have always

been glad to use Cambodia for their own gain.

But sad to say, the country that is most at fault for destroying Cambodia is

Cambodia itself. Pol Pot was Cambodian. Lon Nol was Cambodian and so

was Sihanouk. Together the leaders of the three regimes caused a political

chain  reaction  resulting  in  the  downfall  and  maybe  the  extinction  of  our

country.

On  the  outside  these  leaders  were  totally  different.  Sihanouk  the  royal

populist. Lon Nol the right-wing dictator. Pol Pot the ultra-communist. On

the inside they were all like Chea Huon, with fantasies about the development

of the country. They also shared a typically Cambodian trait: an excessive

pride in being Cambodian. I do not mean a normal, healthy, patriotic pride,

but a feeling of racial superiority over everybody else. Our neighbours look

down at us for being dark-skinned, and sometimes we do feel inferior, but at

the same time, secretly, on the inside, we Cambodians also feel better than

them, and when we have a chance we try to prove it.

  Sihanouk told us again and again that we were an ‘island of peace,’ the

envy of the world. He said we were a much more civilized people than the

Vietnamese  and  the  Thais.  What  he  told  us  made  us  feel  good  about

ourselves, but he never encouraged us to travel outside Cambodia to make

our  own  comparisons.  If  we  had,  we  might  have  seen  how  pitiful  our

economy was, how weak our military was, how inefficient our bureaucracy

was.  If  we  had  known,  and  if  Sihanouk  had  truly  been  interested  in

development, we might have been able to do something about it.

  Sihanouk’s successor was the incompetent Lon Nol. He wanted to purify

everything about Cambodia – the race, the culture, the religion. He blamed

the Vietnamese for Cambodia’s problems and believed the Vietnamese were

racially inferior. That is why he allowed his soldiers to massacre Cambodians

of  Vietnamese  origin.  That  is  why  he  attacked  North  Vietnamese  troops

along the Vietnam-Cambodian border, even though the North Vietnamese

army was the toughest in Asia. Even more than Sihanouk, Lon Nol was a

dreamer.

  After Lon Nol came Pol Pot. The government swung from the extremeright to the extreme left, but on the inside the leaders were the same. Like

Lon  Nol,  Pol  Pot  was  a  racist  with  fantasies  of  restoring  Cambodia  to

greatness. He wanted to eliminate everybody who was not a pure Khmer of

the  countryside  –  the  city  intellectuals  and  professionals,  the  Chams

(Cambodia’s Moslem minority), the ethnic Vietnamese, even to some extent

the ethnic Chinese. The Khmer Rouge boasted of their superiority. Others

were ‘beneath’ them, like lower forms of life. That is why the Khmer Rouge

didn’t think twice about killing or torturing. That is why beginning in 1977

Pol Pot made the incredible mistake of attacking Vietnamese territory and

massacring their civilians. Like Lon Nol before him, Pol Pot actually thought

he could win.

  Sihanouk, Lon Nol, Pol Pot – each leader had a vision of Cambodia as a

proud and independent country, different from its neighbours, better than any

of them. Their visions were wrong. From one leader to the next, the condition

of the country grew worse. By 1979 Cambodia was utterly destroyed. Next

door in Thailand were paved roads, beautiful temples and more rice than the

people could eat. As a refugee, the more I saw of Thailand, the angrier I

became. It was the anger of a man who finds out he has been lied to all his

life.                                          36



                                      Saloth Sar


 




In  1928  in  Kompong  Thom  Province,  in  north-central  Cambodia,  a  boy

named Saloth Sar was born. He was of mixed Khmer and Chinese blood, like

me.  His  parents  were  well-to-do  farmers  who  owned  their  own  land.

However, his family had a rather unusual connection to Phnom Penh. One of

his  aunts  was  a  concubine  in  the  harem  of  King  Monivong,  Sihanouk’s

predecessor. Another cousin had an even more glamorous position, as the

ranking  harem  wife.  Through  them,  Saloth  Sar’s  older  brother  got  a  job

working in the protocol section of the royal palace.

  When he was about five years old, Saloth Sar was sent to Phnom Penh to

be raised by his brother. He often visited the palace and learned to speak the

royal language, a kind of ‘high’ Khmer with many complicated words and

titles. He became a monk for several months, as most Cambodian boys did.

He studied for six years in a temple school.

He was not a good student. He failed the exams that would have allowed

him to enroll in the best schools. He went back to his family and then off to

school  in  Kampong  Cham  Province.  At  age  nineteen  he  finished  his

secondary  education  and  returned  to  Phnom  Penh  to  study  carpentry.  He

made friends with students and graduates of the elite Lycée Sisowath, where I

myself studied about twenty years later, and where Huoy taught a few years

after that. One of his best friends was a bright young man and organizer of

student protests named Ieng Sary.

  Through connections, Saloth Sar got a scholarship to go to Paris, where he

studied at a technical school, École Française de Radio-électricité. A yearlater Ieng Sary arrived in Paris, taking an apartment in the Latin Quarter.

They  met  French  communist  intellectuals,  and  before  long  the  two

Cambodians started their own communist study circle. Others joined them,

including a good-looking and rebellious young woman named Khieu Thirith,

who was studying English literature at the Sorbonne. She married Ieng Sary.

Later her sister Khieu Ponnary married Saloth Sar. The relationship between

the four of them, the two sisters who married the two close friends, created

the nucleus of the organization later known as the Khmer Rouge.

In Paris, Saloth Sar is said to have kept a photograph of Joseph Stalin in

his room. He contributed articles to a Khmer-language magazine for radicals,

signing  himself  ‘Original  Khmer’.  For  a  man  of  mixed  race,  this  was  a

strange  pseudonym  –  probably  an  early  sign  of  the  racial  fanaticism  that

marked his career. Certainly he was far more involved in politics than in his

studies. After he failed three exams at the technical school, his scholarship

was withdrawn. He returned to Cambodia, with a stop in Tito’s Yugoslavia

on the way.

By the time of his return, war was under way in Vietnam, with the French

colonial  forces  battling  Ho  Chi  Minh’s  Vietminh  guerrillas.  Saloth  Sar

enlisted in an underground organization called the Indochinese Communist

Party (ICP), which had been founded while he was in Paris. The membership

was a mixture of Vietnamese and Cambodians. When he joined his cell in

eastern  Cambodia,  he  was  dismayed  to  find  that  Vietnamese  controlled

everything and expected the Cambodians to serve them. He worked in the

kitchen and hauled human wastes from the privies. It was the same kind of

menial work that Huoy and I did much later under the Khmer Rouge, but

unlike us, Saloth Sar wasn’t grateful for the easy work assignments. The

Original  Khmer  resented  the  Vietnamese,  and  the  jobs  they  gave  him

reinforced his lifelong grudge.

In 1953, without direct help from the Indochinese communists, Sihanouk

won  independence  from  France.  The  next  year  he  went  to  the  Geneva

conference  as  the  leader  of  a  sovereign  state.  France  agreed  to  give

independence to its last two Indochinese colonies, Laos and Vietnam. A line

was drawn across Vietnam at the seventeenth parallel, temporarily separating

it into a communist north and a noncommunist south. Later, when the South

Vietnamese insisted that the separation was permanent, the stage was set for

the  war  of  the  1960s  and  1970s,  when  the  northern  communists  tried  to

reunify the country.For the Cambodian communists, a long, hard period had begun. Sihanouk

outmanoeuvred  them  at  every  turn.  He  abdicated  as  king,  ran  for  prime

minister as a prince and was elected easily. His foreign policy of left-leaning

neutralism won him the friendship of China and the USSR, who gave him

their aid and ignored the Cambodian communists of the ICP. Domestically,

Sihanouk created an illusion of political freedom. He allowed the communists

to  participate  in  an  aboveground  leftist  political  party,  the  Pracheachon

Group. He coopted their most respected communist intellectuals, inviting two

of them from the Paris study circle to serve in his cabinet. At the same time,

without any publicity, he conducted a ‘war in the shadows’. His secret police

murdered communists without trials and without announcements before or

afterward. Sihanouk even had the head communist, a man who knew all the

rural networks, working for him as a spy.

In Phnom Penh the communists’ situation was bad but not hopeless. The

police didn’t seem to know the identities of low-echelon party members like

Saloth Sar. Saloth Sar and his relative-by-marriage Ieng Sary taught in an

aboveground  school,  Kampuchea  Bot.  It  was  a  good  school,  with  high

standards. (I myself took a math course there, during a vacation, while I was

living in Takeo. I do not remember either man.) The wives of the two men

taught at government schools, contributing most of their salaries to a French-

language newspaper, L’Observateur, which was owned by a communist. The

newspaper editor was one of their study circle friends with a cabinet post,

Khieu Samphan, who had a reputation for integrity and independent thought.

Like Sihanouk, what the communists did in public and what they did in

private were totally different. In their underground lives as party members

they  held  clandestine  meetings  to  indoctrinate  new  recruits  and  organize

factory workers. In their aboveground lives they were hardworking members

of bourgeois society. They all had mixed Khmer and Chinese blood. They

were all intellectuals and city dwellers. And that is what is oddest about them,

that they were bourgeois, well educated, mixed-race and urban. Fifteen years

later  these  same  people  were  the  leaders  of  an  anti-city,  anti-intellectual,

racist  revolutionary  movement.  In  those  fifteen  years  they  were  totally

transformed.

In 1960 they met in empty railroad cars near the Phnom Penh train station

to form what came to be called the Communist Party of Kampuchea (CPK).

Unlike the old Indochinese Communist Party, the CPK was totally free of the

Vietnamese. Not long after, their overall leader, the man who had been a spy,defected openly to Sihanouk, and his successor was assassinated. Suddenly

there was room at the top for younger, ambitious men. In 1963 Saloth Sar

was elected party secretary, or leader. He had matured since student days into

a man who was confident, secretive and highly manipulative. He seldom used

his real name. His pseudonym among party members was ‘Brother Number

One’.

  Within a few months, Brother Number One, Ieng Sary and most of the

other  ranking  communists  left  Phnom  Penh  when  Sihanouk  started  a

crackdown.  A  few  stayed,  like  Khieu  Samphan,  who  was  forced  out  of

Sihanouk’s cabinet but kept his seat in the National Assembly and became

well known for his spartan way of life. When I was a schoolboy I used to see

Khieu Samphan riding a bicycle around the city instead of driving a car.

Idealistic intellectuals like my teacher Chea Huon admired him and joined the

party at about this time. Then in 1967 there was another crackdown. Khieu

Samphan escaped from Phnom Penh by hiding in a farmer’s cart, but Chea

Huon wasn’t as lucky. I visited him in jail, not knowing anything about his

secret life or about the ‘war in the shadows’. Few did.

  When they left Phnom Penh the Khmer Rouge leaders set up camp in the

mountainous areas near the Vietnamese border. They had few weapons and

no vehicles to speak of. When they wanted to travel they either walked or

rode on elephants. They recruited dark-skinned mountain people, who had

always been oppressed by lowlanders and who were happy to fight Phnom

Penh. Life was hard and unglamorous. The mountain forests were infested

with malaria and snakes. They never had enough to eat.

By the mid-1960s the second war in Vietnam was fully under way. The

North Vietnamese used eastern Cambodia as part of their Ho Chi Minh Trail,

but  they  gave  the  Khmer  Rouge  only  token  supplies  for  the  use  of  the

territory. China and the USSR didn’t send aid either; they were still backing

Sihanouk.

The Khmer Rouge would have been nothing but a half-forgotten, ragged

band  of  guerrillas  in  the  hills  if  it  hadn’t  been  for  the  1970  coup.  When

Sihanouk  was  overthrown,  and  then  unexpectedly  joined  them  as  a

figurehead, the Khmer Rouge became politically significant overnight. They

got weapons from the Chinese and the North Vietnamese. They got training

from North Vietnamese and from Cambodian communists who had lived in

North Vietnam for many years. Peasants joined them because they thought

they were joining Sihanouk. The Khmer Rouge began growing rapidly. Inthis vulnerable period the North Vietnamese did most of their fighting for

them.

The  Khmer  Rouge  never  trusted  Sihanouk,  and  they  kept  him  almost

totally  out  of  touch  with  their  operations.  He  spent  most  of  his  time  in

Peking, more than fifteen hundred miles away, attended by people like Penn

Nouth – the lawyer who had obtained my brother Pheng Huor’s release from

prison a few years before.

In  1973  the  governments  of  North  Vietnam  and  China  arranged  for

Sihanouk to visit the ‘liberated zone’ of Cambodia. Sihanouk travelled down

the Ho Chi Minh Trail. He dressed for the photographers in black clothes

with rubber-tyre sandals so he would look like one of the Khmer Rouge. He

spent  a  month  attending  banquets  and  ceremonies  in  his  honour,  and  the

whole  time  he  thought  that  the  leader  of  the  Khmer  Rouge  was  Khieu

Samphan, because that was what the Khmer Rouge wanted everyone to think.

To Sihanouk, Saloth Sar was an unimportant figure in the second or third

ranks of leadership. Later, Sihanouk recalled that Saloth Sar was the most

polite  of  the  Khmer  Rouge  and  the  only  one  who  spoke  to  him  in  the

flattering  ‘high’  Khmer  of  the  royal  palace.  It  was  a  game  of  deceptions

inside  deceptions:  Sihanouk  was  the  figurehead  who  assumed  that  Khieu

Samphan  was  the  real  leader;  but  in  reality,  Khieu  Samphan  was  only

fronting for Saloth Sar, or ‘Brother Number One’.

The  Khmer  Rouge  were  experts  at  deception.  Resenting  the  North

Vietnamese but unable to get rid of them for the moment, they decided to

purge their own ranks of the communist Cambodians who had lived in North

Vietnam  and  recently  returned.  The  Khmer  Rouge  scattered  these  men

around the country, then invited them to attend ‘meetings’ from which they

never returned. Everything was secret. It was like the ‘war in the shadows’.

The deaths were never announced, and it was only when most of the veterans

had already been liquidated that the rest suspected that their lives were in

danger.

The Khmer Rouge soldiers’ code of behaviour was a deception too, though

it served a practical purpose. It showed the common people that the Khmer

Rouge  behaved  better  than  the  officials  of  the  Lon  Nol  regime,  and  this

helped the Khmer Rouge win popular support. But once the Khmer Rouge

had  that  support,  they  began  to  take  away  the  peasants’  rights  in  the

‘liberated’ zones. They put the peasants in cooperatives with mass acreage to

farm. They made them listen to long, boring propaganda speeches and madethem give their private property to Angka. And they took away for execution

those  who  disagreed.  Few  escaped  to  tell  their  stories,  and  few  of  us  in

Phnom Penh knew how brutal the communists really were. We only heard the

good things, like how the Khmer Rouge never stole a single grain of rice.

The Khmer Rouge were never military geniuses, but they were brave. Half

a  million  pounds  of  bombs  fell  on  their  territory,  some  of  the  heaviest

bombing  the  world  has  ever  seen,  but  it  didn’t  stop  them.  When  they

attacked, they used human waves. They didn’t care how many they lost –

they just kept attacking and attacking, even when it was impossible to win. It

was  easy  to  find  replacements  for  the  soldiers  they  lost  –  the  American

bombing had displaced so many families that peasant boys from all around

Cambodia  were  trying  to  join.  To  convince  their  new  recruits  that  the

sacrifices  were  necessary,  the  Khmer  Rouge  told  them  that  they  were

supermen, the best in the world, the only ones who could defeat the American

imperialists.  The  young  soldiers  believed  it.  These  were  the  brainwashed

teenagers I first saw on April 17, 1975, when they took over Phnom Penh.

Six days after the takeover, on April 23, 1975, the commander-in-chief

arrived by jeep in the capital. There was no parade for him, no celebration.

The rank and file did not even know who he was. He kept his identity a

secret. Saloth Sar, previously known as the ‘Original Khmer’ and ‘Brother

Number One,’ took his final pseudonym: Pol Pot.

You know what happened next. He decided to put the rest of the country

into collectives, just like the liberated zones, only he deceived us about his

plans So the ‘temporary’ exodus from Phnom Penh became a permanent one,

and  gradually  we  ‘new’  people  were  resettled  in  rural  cooperatives  and

deprived of our religion, our rights, our families and our personal property,

just as the peasants in the liberated zones had been.

Pol Pot and his inner circle were very confident. They thought they could

take a war-torn, bankrupt, agricultural country and turn it into an industrial

power without any help from the outside world or from technical ‘experts’.

They adopted the idea from Mao Tse-tung, whom they admired, and possibly

also from Stalin, who had tried something similar in the Soviet Union. Being

proud and ignorant in a typically Cambodian way, they decided to push the

idea to its farthest extremes. They planned to exploit the latent energies of the

people by making us work harder and ‘freeing’ us from responsibilities like

cooking  meals  and  raising  children.  Unfortunately  Pol  Pot  the  maker  of

policy was the same as Saloth Sar the mediocre student. He did not realizethat  Mao’s  Cultural  Revolution  was  already  a  disaster  and  that  Stalin’s

attempts had set the Soviet economy back by decades. He did not examine

the idea to see if it was practical. It was senseless to build huge canal systems

and dams without using engineers, but then Pol Pot was like that. He tried to

make reality fit politics instead of the other way around.

  During this period Pol Pot made no move to help his own family. At least

one  and  perhaps  both  of  the  concubines  related  to  him  died  in  the

countryside. His younger brother died of starvation. His older brother, who

had taken care of him in his early days in Phnom Penh, survived the Khmer

Rouge years without ever knowing that Saloth Sar and the head of Angka

were one and the same.

If the reports are true, Pol Pot kept a string of houses in Phnom Penh. He

moved from one to the next, never announcing where he was staying, to

avoid assassination. He kept the lowest of low profiles, seldom appearing in

public.  Until  September  1977  he  didn’t  announce  that  ‘Angka’  was  the

Communist Party of Kampuchea or that he was the nation’s leader. He had

no children, none of the family life that most people think of as normal. His

wife’s hair turned white; she went insane, and she was placed under special

care.

  Many have wondered whether Pol Pot himself was insane. If this were

true,  it  would  help  explain  the  madness  of  his  regime.  And  certainly  his

secrecy, tying and lack of common sense point to psychological problems. I

myself  think  he  suffered  from  paranoid  delusions.  But  Cambodians  who

knew  him  personally  had  a  far  different  impression.  They  saw  a  neatly

groomed, soft-spoken man who smiled often, just like Chev. They say he had

tiny,  soft,  almost  feminine  hands.  Most  of  all,  they  remember  something

special about his character. They said he was easy to trust.

  With Pol Pot keeping a low profile, the unofficial ‘first couple’ in Phnom

Penh were Ieng Sary, now minister of foreign affairs, and his wife, Thirith,

the minister of social affairs. They had bodyguards, chauffeurs, cooks and

maids. They had soap, shoes, medicines, all the things that we war slaves

didn’t. They ate the best food in the country, in a special ‘common kitchen’

with the other top leaders. Ieng Sary became fat. His oldest daughter became

a ‘doctor’ in Phnom Penh, though she had no real training, while real doctors

like me were unable to practise in the countryside.

The Khmer Rouge leaders lived in a section of Phnom Penh that had been

cleaned up and restored for their use. Their public behaviour was quiet andrestrained. They hardly ever drank liquor. They bathed frequently and wore

clean  clothes.  They  spoke  in  soft  voices  and  hardly  ever  showed  either

happiness or anger. They didn’t do their own killing.

  Except for their part of Phnom Penh, the city was empty. Where the open-

air stalls had been next to the central market, banana trees were planted.

Where the French cathedral had been there was only a flat field; every stone

had been removed, and to outward appearances the cathedral might never

have existed. The hulks of cars lay broken and rusting in piles around the

city, and weeds grew everywhere.

  Meanwhile, in an apartment in the Royal Palace, Sihanouk lived under

house arrest. His story is strange and pathetic.

  Sihanouk returned from Peking in September 1975 for a short visit, seeing

only relatives. As the ceremonial President of Democratic Kampuchea, he

then travelled to the United Nations, where he dismissed as ‘rumours’ the

reports  of  violence  and  executions  in  Cambodia.  Accepting  his  public

statements,  not  knowing  that  Sihanouk  privately  believed  that  the  reports

were true, hundreds of foreign-trained Cambodians returned home to serve

their country. Most were executed.

  Sihanouk returned to the Royal Palace and house arrest. A year later he

resigned from his ceremonial post. The Khmer Rouge kept him and his wife

alive in their guarded apartment but sent five of his children and eleven of his

grandchildren  out  into  the  countryside,  where  all  of  them  died  or  were

murdered.

  Khieu Samphan, his only visitor, gave Sihanouk a high-quality Grundig

radio  set.  Cut  off  from  all  other  contact,  unable  to  leave  the  apartment,

Sihanouk listened to the propaganda songs, the boasts about ‘mastering’ the

rice  paddies,  the  false  statistics  of  Radio  Phnom  Penh.  He  tuned  to  the

broadcasts  of  the  Voice  of  America  and  the  Deutsche  Welle.  He  tape-

recorded the foreign news programmes, listening to them again and again,

trying to piece together what was happening in Cambodia. But nobody knew

what was happening in Cambodia, not even the Khmer Rouge.

The Khmer Rouge headquarters, known as the Centre, issued orders and

collected reports from all over the countryside, but many of the orders were

not  carried  out,  and  the  production  reports  were  falsified  to  meet

expectations. At every level of the regime, cadre learned quickly that real

results  weren’t  as  important  as  praising  Angka,  appearing  zealous  and

echoing the ‘correct line’.In fact, conditions varied immensely from one cooperative to the next and

from one zone to the next because the leaders in each place operated more or

less as they chose. The Northwest Zone, where Huoy and I lived, had some of

the  worst  leaders  and  worst  conditions.  In  other  parts  of  the  country  the

leaders were more pragmatic. As long as they stayed in power, few people

under them died from starvation or execution. But these leaders could not

count on staying in power.

To Pol Pot, the zone leaders and most other high-ranking party members

were  rivals  and  potential  enemies.  It  didn’t  matter  that  the  men  under

suspicion were fellow veterans of a long and difficult revolutionary struggle.

One  of  the  first  to  go  was  Hou  Youn,  who  had  been  a  member  of  the

communist study circle in Paris in the early 1950s and who advocated a less

extreme  reorganization  of  the  countryside.  Then  came  Hu  Nim,  another

member of the study circle and later the Democratic Kampuchea minister of

information; and Nhim Ros, commander of the Northwest Zone. The purge of

the Northwest Zone was ‘vertical,’ as many of them were, reaching down to

lower and lower subordinates. Chea Huon learned of the purge in time and

fled. But Chey and Uncle Seng were too late.

In  most  purges  the  leaders  and  their  subordinates  were  not  simply

executed. First they were tortured and made to ‘confess’ to crimes they had

never  committed.  In  Phnom  Penh  the  headquarters  for  torture  was  a  few

blocks from my old bachelor apartment, on the premises of a school I knew

as  Lycée  Tuol  Svay  Prey.  It  was  renamed  S.21,  though  it  became  better

known as Tuol Sleng, meaning ‘Hill of the Poison Tree’, the name it was

given by the next regime.

Unlike  the  rural  prisons  I  was  sent  to,  the  S.21  torturers  kept  detailed

records. Their false ‘confessions’ and photographs of the victims exist to this

day. Another difference with the prisons I went to was the S.21 population.

Most of the twenty thousand who died there were not ‘new’ people but actual

Khmer Rouge. Imagine what it was like for them to write out the first, honest

version of their biographies – and then, after a few sessions, confess to spying

for the CIA or Hanoi, confess to anything at all to stop the interrogators from

beating them again or reattaching the electric prods. Before they died they

must have asked themselves, like a scream that echoed inside their heads,

‘Why?’ Why was Angka doing this, when they had obeyed its rules? And

they never knew why, any more than the rest of us did.

  Nobody was safe from the purges – nobody but Pol Pot and a few hetrusted, like Ieng Sary and his wife.

A colleague of theirs named So Phim was a member of the innermost

circle of power – the Standing Committee of the Central Committee of the

Communist Party of Kampuchea and commander of the Eastern Zone. And

So Phim was as ruthless as any zone leader could be. He executed monks. He

slaughtered whole villages of Moslem Chams. Unluckily for him the Eastern

Zone was next to the Vietnamese border. When Pol Pot ordered him to carry

out border raids on the Vietnamese, So Phim obeyed, but he was not entirely

successful. After all, the Vietnamese are difficult to defeat. But in Pol Pot’s

suspicious mind, So Phim failed because he was a Vietnamese agent. Four

hundred Eastern Zone cadre were ordered to Phnom Penh, then imprisoned

and tortured in S.21. And So Phim must have asked himself, ‘Why?’ He must

have asked ‘Why?’ again when his midlevel military leaders were called to

meetings and never came back. When he himself was called to a ‘meeting’,

he refused. Two brigades loyal to the Centre attacked.

  Desperately, So Phim went into hiding and contacted Pol Pot by radio. He

could not believe that Pol Pot was issuing these orders. It had to be somebody

else’s fault. He trusted Pol Pot. Everybody did. They had been comrades for

twenty years. Pol Pot agreed to meet face-to-face with him, two old friends

ironing  out  their  problems.  But  instead  of  Pol  Pot  showing  up  for  the

meeting,  boatloads  of  soldiers  appeared,  firing  their  weapons.  So  Phim

committed suicide. His wife and children were shot as they were preparing

his body for burial. Only a few of his aides escaped into the jungle. One of

them was a division commander named Heng Samrin.

Pol Pot created enemies, and it is hard to say why. Perhaps he needed

someone  to  blame  when  reality  didn’t  match  his  politics.  Or  perhaps  he

created enemies to destroy, like a man who is truly paranoid. Eventually he

created  so  many  enemies  that  the  regime  started  falling  apart.  With  the

government unable to meet any of its production goals, he needed more and

more enemies to blame, and finally he created his ultimate enemy: Vietnam.

At first the Vietnamese weren’t interested in fighting the Khmer Rouge.

They were busy with their own problems, reuniting the North and South, ‘re-

educating’ the masses, reviving their shabby economy. But the Khmer Rouge

kept attacking their border, slaughtering their civilians, raping their women,

killing infants. And eventually the Vietnamese decided to solve two problems

at one blow: get rid of the Cambodian regime that was causing the nuisance,

and  bring  fertile  new  territory  under  Vietnamese  control.  Vietnam  isoverpopulated.  It  has  about  sixty  million  people  and  a  hard  time  feeding

them. Cambodia is underpopulated. It has perhaps a tenth that many people

and is capable of producing far more rice and fish than it consumes.

The Vietnamese invaded on December 25, 1978, with fourteen divisions

and air support. Nothing could stop them.

On the night of January 5, 1979, when the sounds of combat could be

heard in Phnom Penh, Pol Pot asked his house prisoner Sihanouk to talk with

him. When they met, Pol Pot saluted him with his palms together in the

sompeah, the very gesture his regime had outlawed. Then Pol Pot knelt as he

had been taught in the Royal Palace as a child, bringing his left foot forward,

then bending his right knee toward the floor. In his soft, ingratiating voice he

apologized to Sihanouk for not being able to receive him sooner. He said he

had been busy. He hoped Sihanouk understood. He was sure the Vietnamese

would be defeated, but he wanted Sihanouk to help on the diplomatic front.

Would  he  mind  going  to  the  United  Nations,  to  hold  on  to  Democratic

Kampuchea’s seat? Sihanouk, astonished, had the presence of mind to agree.

He  left  the  country  by  plane,  going  first  to  Peking.  The  next  day  the

Vietnamese entered Phnom Penh.

As the Vietnamese advanced the Khmer Rouge retreated toward the caches

of food and ammunition they had prepared in the mountains. They burned

rice fields and rice warehouses to deprive the Vietnamese of food to eat. And

as the two armies moved farther and farther west, civilians began to travel,

and they saw with their own eyes the condition the country was in.

  Cambodia did not exist anymore. Atomic bombs could not have destroyed

more of it than civil war and communism. Everything that had been wrecked

by the civil war of 1970–75 was unrepaired and further eroded – the flattened

villages,  the  blown-up  bridges,  the  roads  cut  with  trenches,  the  washouts

caused  by  the  rains.  Mile  after  mile  of  rice  paddies  lay  abandoned  and

untended,  pockmarked  with  bomb  craters.  The  canals  and  dams  the  war

slaves built were eroding to shallow ditches and useless mounds of clay. The

towns  and  the  cities  were  empty  and  abandoned.  The  temples  had  been

destroyed. Rubbish and piles of rusting cars lay in heaps. There were no

telephones or telegraphs, no postal services. In Phnom Penh itself there was

little or no water and electricity and little functioning machinery of any kind.

No typewriters. Not even pens and paper. There had been deaths in almost

every  family  in  the  country.  Widows  and  orphans  wandered  about  the

countryside, dazed, too hurt to cry.How many survived nobody knew. The prewar population estimates had

been vague – six or seven million, maybe as high as eight million. Amnesty

International  cites  estimates  that  a  million  or  more  died  in  the  civil  war,

before the communist takeover, and that between one and two million died

under the Khmer Rouge. If that is true, the combination of civil war and

revolution  killed  somewhere  between  a  quarter  and  a  half  of  Cambodia’s

population.

  Among people and groups important to me, the ratio of deaths to survivors

was much higher than for the country as a whole. Of 50,000 monks, less than

3,000 survived and returned to their former temples. Of 527 graduates of the

medical  school  in  Phnom  Penh  (my  thesis,  accepted  in  early  1975,  was

number 527, so there were at least that many graduates), about 40 survived.

Of the 7,000 people living in my home village, Samrong Yong, before the

war, about 550 survived, from what I have been able to discover.

Of  the  41  people  in  my  immediate  family,  including  my  parents,  my

brothers and sisters and their spouses and children, plus Huoy and her mother

and me, only 9 survived. That is a death rate of 78 per cent and a survival rate

of 22 per cent.

  When  the  Vietnamese  invaded  it  was  time  to  heal  the  country.  But

communists are better at waging war than waging peace. The invaders and

their ‘National United Front for the Salvation of Kampuchea’ had no plans

for  reconstruction.  The  Front’s  puppet  leader,  Heng  Samrin,  had  been  a

Khmer Rouge until the year before. His foreign minister, a one-eyed twenty-

seven-year-old named Hun Sen, had also been a Khmer Rouge until defecting

to the Vietnamese to avoid being purged. Six months after the ‘liberation’ of

Phnom Penh, Hun Sen finally met with international agencies to consider

accepting emergency aid. The outside world was eager to help, but most of

the aid that eventually got through to Phnom Penh was seized by the new

regime and never reached the common people.

The  Vietnamese  looted  factories  of  equipment,  warehouses  of  rice  and

homes of furniture. And as they pushed the Khmer Rouge farther back, they

tightened  their  control  over  civilians  in  the  ‘liberated’  territories.  For

example, in Siem Reap Province, near the ancient ruins of Angkor, a man

named Dith Pran accepted a job as major of a small town because he wanted

to help his people. But the Vietnamese checked on his political background

and found that he had once worked for an American newspaper. To them this

was worse than if he had worked for the Khmer Rouge. Dith Pran lost his job.He was afraid for his life, and later he left for Thailand.

Or take another example of tightened control, the hospital in Battambang

City. At first, after the invasion, Cambodian doctors ran the hospital entirely

by themselves. I joined the staff at the end of this period. When the Heng

Samrin governor called a meeting, I left for Thailand. It turned out that my

suspicions were right. After the meeting Vietnamese ‘advisers’ took over the

hospital administration. Some of the remaining doctors left for Thai refugee

camps. Others who were more prepared to collaborate joined the staff. One of

them was Pen Tip.

In the countryside the Vietnamese tried to collectivize agriculture. They

said that oxcarts and oxen, water buffalo and ploughs belonged to those who

had taken care of them under the Khmer Rouge regime, not to those who had

owned them originally. They said that land belonged to the government, not

to individuals. They pushed peasants to farm in ‘mutual aid teams’ of ten to

thirty  families  each.  The  peasants  hated  this.  They  wanted  to  farm

individually, as they had for centuries, before the Khmer Rouge.

The worst problem was a shortage of food. The Vietnamese controlled all

the rice mills. They sent some rice to Vietnam, kept some for themselves and

gave the rest to the Heng Samrin troops. By the middle of 1979 civilians

couldn’t get enough to eat. It was hard to raise crops. In some parts of the

country there were no ploughs or oxen to plough with; in others there was no

rice seed. A drought killed many of the fields that had been planted. For

many Cambodians it was back to watery rice again.

  Steadily,  throughout  1979,  the  Vietnamese  pushed  the  Khmer  Rouge

farther  and  farther  west.  Every  time  Pol  Pot’s  forces  planted  food,  the

Vietnamese attacked before it could be harvested. Here was kama: the Khmer

Rouge, the cause of so much hunger and starvation, now had nothing to eat

except the leaves of the forests. Khmer Rouge units fought each other for

food and medicine. Cadre deserted, and some died from starvation.

  Meanwhile, the faint trails I had followed to Thailand became highways.

Thousands and tens of thousands and even hundreds of thousands of feet

walked  along  the  paths.  With  the  increased  numbers  came  safety  from

robbers  and  rapists.  With  rumours  of  free  rice  on  the  Thai  border,  soon

confirmed by broadcasts over the Voice of America, the masses began the

march  to  the  west.  The  people  were  hungry,  and  they  were  tired  of

communism. They wanted freedom. They wanted rice. And all of Cambodia

was on the move, fleeing, marching, stumbling, spilling over the border intoThailand.                                          37



                                  Okay, Bye-Bye


 




The van pulled up to the Lumpini gate and I climbed in, my heart beating

fast. Except for the Thai driver there was only one person inside, and he was

American. There was no way to avoid him. Nowhere to hide.

You might think that after being tortured three times and walking out of

Cambodia I had nothing left to fear. Not true. From earliest childhood I had

learned to be shy toward white people. I wasn’t really afraid of them, but I

deferred to them automatically. Most Cambodians did. We called them long-

noses. Even as a medical student I had never talked with a long-nose unless

there was a reason. I could communicate well enough in French, but I always

felt more comfortable when the conversations were over.

On the Thai-Cambodian border and in the Lumpini processing centre in

1979, Cambodian refugees were shy toward Westerners. We were shy and

passive because it was part of our culture and because we had come from a

regime where saying the wrong thing meant death. Why take risks? Why talk

to Americans when everyone knows they all work for the CIA? If we say the

wrong thing, word will reach the top and then we will be in trouble. That was

what Cambodians said, on the border and in the refugee camps.

We were also afraid of losing face. It was one thing to be able to speak

French well, another to speak English badly. We were afraid the foreigners

would  look  down  on  us  for  making  mistakes  in  their  language.  Many

Cambodians  put  off  learning  English,  or  didn’t  try  out  the  few  words  of

English they had reluctantly learned.

For me it was different. I had learned a bit of English under the KhmerRouge regime. In Lumpini a kindly Burmese lady volunteer named Chhoi

Hah Muul taught me a bit more. I knew how to count. I knew the pronouns,

some  basic  nouns  and  verbs  and  common  phrases,  in  all  probably  five

hundred words. It was enough to understand what the man in the van was

saying.  His  name  was  John  Crowley.  He  worked  for  the  Joint  Voluntary

Agency,  or  JVA,  which  handled  refugee  resettlement  matters  for  the  US

embassy. Together we were going to Sakeo, a refugee camp for Cambodians

that had just opened within Thailand, away from the border. I was going to be

his interpreter.

The  van  drove  through  the  crowded  streets  of  Bangkok.  John  Crowley

noticed that I was nervous. He asked if I was okay, if I wanted to stop for

something to eat or drink. I told him no thanks, but I was encouraged, and

looked at him out of the corner of my eye. He was about my age. Moustache,

reddish-brown hair, big nose, white skin. His courteous tone of voice and his

relaxed body posture all signalled that he wasn’t going to order me around.

By the time we got to the outskirts of the city, I felt better. John Crowley

didn’t care about race one way or the other. He was treating me like a fellow

human being.

He asked me about my family.

‘My wife she got died,’ I told him in English. ‘My, my père, he got died.

Dey killing too many.’

  ‘You lost most of your family.’

‘Too  many.  Too  many,’  I  assured  him.  John  Crowley  was  actually

listening to me. He worked with the American government. If I could make

him  understand  what  had  happened,  then  maybe  he  could  help  other

foreigners  understand.  But  squeezing  the  meaning  of  four  years  into  a

conversation in a language I barely knew was impossible. I just couldn’t . . .

I lifted my right hand to show him the stump of my little finger. ‘Dey . . .’

and I made a chopping motion.

  ‘The Khmer Rouge cut off your finger,’ John Crowley guessed.

‘T’ree time,’ I said, nodding. ‘T’ree time. Vun, de finger. Two’ – I had to

think for the right word – ‘fire’ – and pointed to the underside of my feet.

‘T’ree’ – but I had forgotten the English word for water. Why couldn’t I

remember  it  when  I  needed  it?  It  was  very  important  to  get  him  to

understand.

  ‘You were tortured three times,’ he said.

I nodded.  ‘Jesus,’ he said.

We  were  driving  through  the  flat  countryside  east  of  Bangkok.  John

Crowley gazed out the window, sighing heavily. I looked out the window too,

trying  to  see  what  he  was  looking  at.  In  the  rice  fields,  farmers  were

harvesting  with  tractors.  The  Thais  were  far  ahead  of  us  Cambodians  in

agriculture. They were ahead of us in everything.

  ‘Sakeo more far?’ I asked him.

  ‘Sorry?’

  ‘Combien de kilometres d’ici à Sakeo?’

  John Crowley shook his head; he didn’t understand French. I tried English

again. ‘How far more Sakeo?’

This  time  he  leaned  forward  and  asked  the  driver  in  fluent  Thai,  then

leaned back and told me in English that it was another hour and a half. He

didn’t look down on me for not speaking good English. Still, I had asked him

the distance to Sakeo and he had given me the travelling time.

‘My English not too good,’ I said.

‘Hey, I can understand you perfectly,’ he said. ‘Don’t worry. Look at it this

way: your English is better than my Khmer. I don’t speak any Khmer at all.’

‘I teach you.’

The tiny shock of surprise showed as he reconsidered the refugee sitting

next to him. ‘You want to teach me Khmer?’ he asked. ‘Well, okay, I could

use it. When do you want to start?’

‘I ready.’

He shrugged and smiled. ‘I’m ready too.’

I turned around to face him on the seat.

‘ “Muoy,” ’ I said to him, holding up one finger. ‘ “Muoy.” Dat mean

“vun” in language Khmer.’

  ‘Muoy,’ he repeated.

  ‘“Bpee,” ’ I said. ‘Dat mean “two.” ’

  ‘Bpee,’ he said. ‘Bpee.’

  ‘“Bei.” Dat mean “t’ree.” ’

‘Bei.’ His intonation was nearly perfect; he already knew how to make

similar sounds in Thai. When he had learned the numbers he pointed out the

window at things he saw, a water buffalo, an ox, a tree, and asked me for the

Khmer words. The Thai driver looked back at us in the rearview mirror, too

polite to say anything. Thais do not like to learn Khmer; they think it is below

them. But John Crowley seemed as though he had always wanted to learnKhmer and was glad to have the chance.


When the gate lifted and we drove into the Sakeo camp, I got out of the

comfortable, air-conditioned van and back into the world I had left a few

short months before. The camp was dominated by Khmer Rouge who had

been driven over the Thai border by hunger and the Vietnamese. They had

surrendered  their  weapons  to  Thai  soldiers  and  allowed  themselves  to  be

trucked to this resting place, this dumping ground, administered by the Thai

government  and  the  UNHCR  –  the  office  of  the  United  Nations  High

Commissioner for Refugees.

  About two thirds of the camp population were Khmer Rouge and their

families. The rest were ‘new’ and ‘old’ people unable to escape from their

control. Behind us the camp gate lifted to admit a truck carrying fresh arrivals

from the border. Dazed, weak civilians climbed down from the back of the

truck.  Among  them  was  an  old  man  I  recognized  from  Tonle  Batí.  He

supported himself with one hand on a bamboo staff and the other on the

shoulder of his daughter-in-law, whom I also remembered. When I greeted

them  they  looked  at  me  with  astonishment.  There  I  was,  well  fed,  well

dressed, wearing glasses and a watch, accompanying this tall American. They

poured out their story. Except for the two of them, everyone in the family had

died. Time after time they had almost lost their own lives too. I translated for

John Crowley as well as I could, then reached in my wallet and gave them a

few hundred Thai baht, worth five dollars. They looked at me as if I were a

god.

This was John Crowley’s first visit to a Cambodian refugee camp. He had

been sent there to see the refugees’ condition firsthand, since he would be

working in refugee resettlement. Other Westerners crowded into the camp,

worried-looking  UN  officials,  doctors  and  nurses,  more  than  a  dozen

journalists with their cameras and television cameras. Around them was a sea

of sick and dying Cambodians, and a few dirty but healthy children who

followed the Westerners everywhere, repeating the only English words they

knew: ‘Okay, bye-bye. Okay, bye-bye.’

As we walked past the camp hospital, two mit neary in black came out

carrying a corpse between them on a stretcher. The hospital wasn’t large

enough to take care of the living or the dead. There were too many sick and

not enough room. Patients lay on the ground outside with IV bags suspended

above them from nails driven into trees. They lay in hammocks made of clothbunched at the ends and tied to trees. They were too tired to brush away the

flies. Some of them were just waiting for death. If they had to defecate, they

just lay there and did it, sunk in the apathy of the late stages of starvation.

There were mothers so weak they ignored their babies, and babies so weak

they didn’t cry. There were children with bright round eyes and hollow faces;

when I waved my hand in front of them to test their reactions, they didn’t

blink.

  John  Crowley  was  upset.  All  the  Westerners  were,  even  the  newsmen.

They had never seen such suffering. But I had seen even worse, and I knew

what it was to suffer myself.

  Sakeo was like the death march from Phum Chhleav, I decided, except that

the people of Sakeo didn’t have to go any farther. They had already arrived.

Yes, I thought bitterly, it was like the death march, but with doctors and

international aid and photographers to record it. Most of them would live, and

the ones who died would have the dignity of burial.

I had no sympathy for the Khmer Rouge of Sakeo. For them my heart was

like stone. Let them die. Enemies forever. My sympathy was for the innocent

civilians, like the old man from Tonle Batí, and others like him. It was not

their fault that they were trapped in a place like this. I looked from the Khmer

Rouge  to  the  long-nose  officials  of  the  UNHCR  and  felt  disgust.  The

UNHCR  was  supposed  to  protect  refugees.  That  was  the  reason  for  its

existence. But it had done nothing when the Thai government pushed forty-

five thousand innocent Cambodians over the border and onto the minefields

of Preah Vihear. Now it was setting up a camp to take care of Khmer Rouge.

It did nothing for the victims and everything for the criminals. What was
                                                                              6
wrong with the UNHCR? Why couldn’t it help the right refugees?

The Westerners just didn’t seem to understand much about Cambodians.

Even John Crowley had to ask me which people were Khmer Rouge. But at

least he knew there was a difference, and he was trying to learn to spot it with

his own eyes.

I could tell the Khmer Rouge at a glance. They were the well-fed ones,

with healthy, round cheeks. They wore black clothes that were not ripped,

and new kramas made of silk or cotton. But even without the clothes and the

healthy bodies, their expressions gave them away. They looked at me with

narrowed eyes and curled-back lips, and they turned disdainfully away. They

didn’t want anything to do with a Cambodian accompanying a white-skinned

devil.  Luckily, John Crowley didn’t want to talk with them either. He asked me

to bring him to the kind of refugees he would be working with, the civilians.

We walked around and found some who had been rice farmers and small

traders  before  the  revolution.  They  told  me  their  stories  in  Khmer,  and  I

translated into my broken English as best as I could. John Crowley listened

carefully and asked questions.

By the time the van brought us to Aranyaprathet, a town on the Thai side

of the border, it was late at night. Many years before, my father had driven to

Aranyaprathet in his old Ford truck to get the bronze Buddha statue. Maybe it

had been a nice town then. In 1979 it was a rather menacing place serving

border smugglers, thieves and the Westerners who were helping the refugees.

Under the streetlights a few heavyset men watched us, standing next to their

elongated  motorcycle-taxis,  decorated  with  chrome  and  powered  by

automobile engines. We drove in the van from one hotel to another. They

were all full. Finally we found a room with two beds for four hundred baht or

twenty US dollars, more than double the usual price. John Crowley took one

bed, I took the other and the Thai driver went off in the van to look after

himself.

  Lying on that hotel bed, I felt tired but content. It was the first time since

Phnom Penh that I had been on a real mattress with sheets. How nice that the

driver had to go off, instead of me.

I thought: John Crowley has helped me. He hasn’t looked down on me, or

patronized  me.  He  has  treated  me  as  an  equal.  So  friendly  and  informal.

Maybe all Americans are like that. If that’s how they are, the United States

will be a good place for me.

  Yes, how different the foreigners are. They do not care about face. They do

not have to present a mask to society and keep their feelings hidden behind it.

They  do  not  care  so  much  about  social  rank.  A  Cambodian  would  have

treated me either better than himself or worse. Probably, a Cambodian would

have sent me off with the driver and kept the hotel room with two beds for

himself.

  Yes, to be treated as an equal, I thought, as I stared at the hotel room

ceiling. That’s what I want. And no more being shy toward Westerners.

  Back in Bangkok, I had an interview at the JVA about going to America.

Unfortunately  my  caseworker  wasn’t  John  Crowley  but  a  strong-willed

woman whom Cambodian refugees called ‘The Tiger.’ The Tiger looked at

me with obvious suspicion. Since my name didn’t appear on any Americanembassy lists, she decided I had bribed my way off the border. I gave her

General Chana’s phone number, and she spoke with him, but whenever she

looked at me she frowned. To her I was an ‘operator,’ a guy who was always

finding a way around the rules.

Of course, she was partly right. I was an operator. With Chana’s pass I was

constantly going in and out of Lumpini. I had even started to show up at JVA

parties. And why not? I wanted to be free – to go where I wanted, to do what

I  wanted,  to  live  on  my  own  terms.  That’s  why  I  had  escaped  from

communism.

The Tiger made me an offer. She would let me go to the United States if I

worked with refugees first, as a doctor. She said there was a big influx of

Cambodians on the border and that the Thais were going to open more camps

like Sakeo. I told her okay. The only part of the arrangement I didn’t like was

being apart from Ngim, who would stay with Balam. I told Ngim I would

rejoin her as soon as possible.

  Ngim said she understood, and hid her sorrow.


The  Cambodians  came  to  places  that  had  barely  existed  before  but  now

would never be forgotten – to Kamput and Mak Moon, Nong Chan and Nong

Samet, Ban Sangae and Camp 007, the smugglers’ paradise. And they kept

coming.  They  carried  sacks  on  their  backs  and  balanced  baskets  on  their

heads.  The  old  supported  themselves  with  canes.  Widows  carried

shoulderboards with the baby in the front basket and their belongings in the

back basket. They made makeshift tents from sackcloth or from blue plastic

tarps and strung them from sticks in the ground or from trees. They sat in

exhaustion with their knees bent and their elbows or forearms resting on their

knees, and their thoughts were far away.

The border was a no-man’s-land. It didn’t belong to Thailand and didn’t

belong to Cambodia. Each settlement was ruled by a military group – south

of Aranyaprathet by the sullen, disciplined Khmer Rouge; north of Aran by

untrained,  corrupt  Khmer  Serei  factions.  The  Khmer  Serei  were  a

disappointment. They collected bonjour,  put  up  tollgates  and  fought  each

other for control of the black-market trade. It was hard to believe that a year

before we had expected them to be our liberators.

In November 1979 the second refugee camp inside Thailand opened, away

from the border. It was north of Aranyaprathet, on a broad slope of scrubby

trees and hillocks with a forested mountain rising beyond. A stream of peoplewalked there from the border, and others arrived by bus or truck. The people

were thin and dazed and looked as though they were trusting themselves to

destiny.

The name of the place was Khao-I-Dang. It was a camp for Cambodians

who  were  opposed  to  the  Khmer  Rouge,  and  it  was  busy  from  the  start.

Westerners rushed around organizing construction and emergency medical

care. Cambodians who were strong enough cut down trees and cleared land

with their hatchets. Thai labourers began building a hospital of bamboo, with

blue plastic spread over the rafters as a temporary roof. I presented a letter

from the JVA to the UNHCR office, got my credentials and began working

before the hospital had walls.

Like Sakeo, Khao-I-Dang had a full-scale emergency at the beginning, but

unlike it, the patients were not Khmer Rouge, which to me made them more

worth saving. Certainly there were more patients than we could handle. We

all worked very hard, going from one sick person to the next. When I glanced

up I saw another clinic being built next door. Everywhere, buildings were

going up, and still refugees were streaming in from the border.

In the first week at Khao-I-Dang so many died that the bulldozers had to

take time out from making drainage ditches to dig a burial pit. In the hospital

patients lay passively with intravenous tubes pouring glucose into their veins.

The children looked twice their age, solemn and sad, with hollow cheeks and

blank stares. The Western doctors took the emergency cases. I treated walk-in

patients, many of whom were suffering from mental problems as much as

from malnutrition or disease. They had seen too much killing, lost too many

relatives. They were depressed and suicidal, and they wanted to go home.

They needed medical care but they also needed counselling, and this was

something  the  Western  doctors  could  not  give  them.  I  talked  to  them  in

Khmer,  consoling  and  encouraging  them.  If  they  did  not  need  any  other

medication I gave them vitamins and iron pills, which seemed to help them

psychologically. I knew from my own case how important it was to overcome

depression.

I remember one patient above all others, a dehydrated twelve-year-old girl

with falciparum malaria. She was an orphan, black staring eyes in a flesh-

covered skeleton. A Western doctor had taken her history and her blood, and

the  lab  was  running  the  tests  on  her.  She  was  lying  on  the  bed  without

focusing. She had rejected her food. There was nobody around her. I sat on

the bed and picked her up in my arms. She was nearly weightless. I talked toher  in  Khmer  and  got  her  to  swallow  a  few  spoonsful  of  food.  She  was

conscious, though not by much, and I knew she was listening. Then her head

jerked back with a spastic gasp of air and it jerked back six or seven more

times and then after one last deep breath her head sagged to one side with her

eyes half open.

I could hardly work the rest of that day. The girl’s death was too close, too

personal. She had lived under the same regime, seen the same clouds in the

same sky. She had lost her family and I had lost mine. When she died I was

holding her in my arms, the same way I had held Huoy.

  Around me were dying Cambodians, Western doctors working hard to save

them  and  cheerful  little  children  peering  through  the  split-bamboo  walls,

calling out, ‘Okay, bye-bye.’


By  December  1979  the  World  Food  Programme,  UNICEF  and  other

organizations were delivering large amounts of rice along the border. Some

of it never reached the refugees. The Khmer Rouge took what they could, and

so did the Khmer Serei warlords, who sometimes sold the rice they stole back

to the UN so it could be distributed a second or third time. But even with the

stealing there was more food on the border than before, partly because of

international  aid  and  partly  because  of  the  black-market  traders.  Each

morning a stream of Thais headed for the border carrying everything from

live chickens to vegetables to soft drinks to soap, radios and bicycles. The

refugees produced bits of gold they had kept hidden for years, and deals were

made. By this time, also, the border camps had better medical care than in the

months before.

In  Khao-I-Dang  itself  the  medical  crisis  eased.  The  patients  who  were

strong  enough  to  survive  their  first  few  days  in  the  hospital  generally

recovered. They regained alertness, filled out in body size, started to talk

again. They got better quickly because they were physically tough – they had

to be, to come this far – and because of Western-style medicine, which had

far better healing properties than the ‘rabbit turds’ and other herbal medicines

of the Khmer Rouge era.

  Western aid poured into Khao-I-Dang. The original bamboo shed where I

worked  became  the  adult  medicine  ward,  run  by  the  American  Refugee

Committee  (ARC),  of  Minneapolis,  Minnesota.  Bamboo-and-thatch  wards

sprang  up  on  both  sides  of  a  street,  specializing  in  paediatrics,  surgery,

obstetrics and gynaecology, feeding and rehabilitation and so on, each onerun by a different foreign voluntary agency. Thirty-seven of these agencies,

most of them from the United States, France or Germany, ran programmes in

Khao-I-Dang.  Ironically  they  had  come  in  response  to  photographs  and

television footage taken in the Sakeo camp of starving Khmer Rouge. But I

was glad they were there, and they surprised me with their energy and their

good hearts. I had never seen people who worked with such determination

and  who  got  so  much  done.  Public-health  workers,  teachers,  journalists,

administrators,  immigration  officers,  politicians  –  the  Westerners  kept

coming and coming.

And the Cambodians kept flowing into the camp. They cut trees down for

firewood  until  the  hillside  was  bare.  They  built  shacks  with  bamboo  and

thatch and palm-leaf panels and the blue plastic tarps. The shacks spread

along a gridwork of red-clay roads with familiar names, like Angkor and

Monivong and Phnom Penh. The population climbed to an official figure of

130,000, though the actual figure was higher. At its peak, Khao-I-Dang was

the largest settlement of Cambodians anywhere in the world.

At night the camp was unsafe. There were revenge killings, robberies and

rapes. Thai villagers came over the fence at night to sell goods, and Thai

soldiers fired at those who wouldn’t give them bonjour. Under the dirt floors

of the shacks were storage holes and tunnels. Most of the families in camp

had something or someone to hide.

  During the day, when the Westerners were there, the camp had a better

character. It was a place for life to begin again, for bargaining at the market,

for praying at the temple. Because of the chance of resettling abroad, most of

Cambodia’s old middle class and elite showed up in Khao-I-Dang. People

who hadn’t seen each other since the fall of Phnom Penh met in the red-clay

streets and asked each other how they had survived. The camp was like a

city. Besides hospitals it had schools, workshops, soccer fields, quasi-legal

markets, cafes, tailor shops, a temple and a tracing centre where people went

to look at notices and photographs of missing relatives.

  Finding our families – that was the most important goal. For us ‘family’

had come to include cousins so remote that the exact connection had been

forgotten or had never even existed. A relative on my father’s side, an older

woman whom I had always called ‘Aunt,’ flew from France to Thailand to

bring money to her daughters, who were refugees in Khao-I-Dang. She could

not get a pass to visit the camp and I became her messenger. A few months

later another of her daughters, who also lived overseas, came to see me. Shegave me money too, some for her sisters, some for myself.

  With the money I hired a young man to take a letter from me to my brother

Hok in Battambang. Hok, his wife and his baby walked into Khao-I-Dang

while it was still legal. Then I sent a message to my other brother, Hong

Srun, in Phnom Penh. Hong Srun had heard of the Thai massacre at Preah

Vihear  and  decided  not  to  come,  but  the  word  spread,  and  more  cousins

showed up on the border.

By this time, about March 1980, the Thai government had ended its open-

door policy. Refugees could not just walk into Khao-I-Dang from the border

anymore.  A  bearded  American  doctor  who  worked  for  one  of  the  relief

agencies decided to help me. A driver took us to the border. We loaded my

cousins  into  the  van,  made  them  lie  down  and  pretend  to  be  sick,  put

bandages on them and rigged up IV bags. At the Khao-I-Dang gate the guard

just waved us through. The Western doctors did most of the smuggling of this

type, because the Thai guards deferred to them.

I worked at the ARC adult medicine ward all day, seven days a week. At

first it was hard for me to understand the Americans’ English. I also found

that  my  techniques  of  treatment  were  not  always  the  same  as  theirs.  In

Cambodia, for example, we had used much higher doses of antibiotics on our

patients than the Americans did. Gradually, however, over the weeks and

months, my confidence returned. The American doctors were both friendly

and skilfull. We saw a lot of oedema or kwashiorkor cases at first, and after

that  malaria  and  tuberculosis,  fungus  infections  and  occasional  cases  of

leprosy. We got overflow cases from surgical recovery, and we did some

minor surgery ourselves. Besides me, the Cambodian staff included another

doctor,  a  couple  of  medical  students  and  some  unusually  talented  young

nurses and translators.

At the end of the afternoon I was the only Cambodian to climb into the van

with the Americans. Twenty-one of us lived together in a rented house on a

dirt  lane  near  the  Shell  gasoline  station  in  Aranyaprathet.  Following  the

Asian custom, we left our shoes and sandals on the stairs to the upper floor.

But on the porch that had been converted into a dormitory men and women

slept on mattresses next to each other and thought nothing of it, which Asians

would never do. In the tiny bedrooms of the house there were some very

noisy  night-time  romances  going  on,  which  was  also  un-Asian;  because

Asians are afraid of losing face, we are much more discreet.

In the evening, before going to sleep, I watched the gecko lizards scuttle upthe walls and perch upside down on the ceiling, without blinking, next to the

fluorescent lights. Automatically I calculated what I would have to do to

catch them. And then I thought, No, I can let you survive now. Things have

changed. No more killing. No more hunting wild animals. It is a time to live

and let live.

The others on the ARC team were very kind. When I tried to tell my story

they  listened,  even  though  it  was  painful  for  them  and  even  though  my

English  wasn’t  good.  They  invited  me  to  all  the  Westerners’  parties  on

Saturday nights and I danced to loud rock music. I even danced with the ARC

leader, a redheaded woman who drove in from Bangkok every week, whose

name was Susan Walker. Dancing Western-style was energetic and sweaty,

the opposite of the Cambodian romvong. I liked it. In Cambodia I had always

been more active than my friends, the first to get angry, the first to laugh, the

last to leave the athletic fields. Now I had found a culture that was up to my

speed. It was good to know these Westerners and to be working with them as

a colleague.

But I was not happy. When I was tired, and we were tired every evening

from work, it was hard to communicate. I stopped trying to keep up with their

rapid English and let my thoughts drift off. I always thought about the past.

In truth, my depression was returning. I had come to Thailand in May

1979. As May and June and July of 1980 went by I heard no news about

going to America. Balam and Ngim were there already. My brother Hok went

there. The Americans I had known when I first came to Khao-I-Dang had

left, and their places were taken by new volunteers. Even some of these had

left. Everyone was going except for me. There was some problem with my

immigration file at JVA, but nobody explained to me what it was.

I was lonely. I met a young Thai woman of Cambodian descent who lived

in Aranyaprathet. She had a round face and a light complexion. In profile she

looked exactly like Huoy. She seemed to like me a lot. We talked about

getting married. Then she saw the chain with the locket of Huoy around my

neck and she asked me to take it off. I explained that I was showing my

respect to Huoy for saving my life, but the woman became suspicious. She

said she was sure Huoy was still alive inside Cambodia. She accused me of

wanting her as a second wife. And her family looked down on me because I

was a refugee. So nothing ever came of it.

It was time to say, Okay, bye-bye. But by August 1980 it seemed that I

would  never  leave  Thailand.  To  me,  and  to  hundreds  of  thousands  lessfortunate than me, Thailand had become a jail. We couldn’t go forward and

we couldn’t go back. We were only a few miles from Cambodia; at night we

could hear the rifle fire as factions of Khmer Serei attacked one another and

the boom of artillery as the Vietnamese attacked the Khmer Rouge. In Khao-

I-Dang security was tight. The fences were guarded. There were no trees left

inside the camp and very little shade. It was a harsh, dusty place except when

it rained, and then the red dust turned into mud. The terror was over, but our

minds had not healed.                                          38



                                    To America


 




It was John Crowley who rescued me. I went into the JVA to talk to The

Tiger’s replacement – by that time actually the replacement’s replacement –

and got nowhere. There were still problems with my case, though what they

were was not explained to me. No, I wouldn’t be going to the United States

anytime  soon.  I  walked  angrily  upstairs  to  John  Crowley’s  office.  John

Crowley wasn’t the boss of the JVA, but he ranked somewhere near the top.

He looked up from his desk. ‘Well, well. Ngor Haing Samnang. What can I

do for you?’ He always used my official name – I had added the ‘Samnang’

when I got to Thailand, and it appeared in all my files.

‘I vant to go America, John.’

He flipped through some papers, ran his finger down a calendar. ‘The next

flight is August sixteenth. That’s in four days. Go back to Aranyaprathet,

pack your stuff and go. You ready?’

  ‘No. Next month I go. I haff too much to do. I haff many tings to buy.’

He looked at me with a faint smile. ‘We have a lot of stores in the United

States, you know. Don’t worry about the shopping.’

  ‘No, no, no. Too expensive in United States. Too, too expensive. I buy

tings here.’ I didn’t tell him the real reason, which had nothing to do with

shopping. Cambodians living overseas were sending money to me to bring to

their relatives in the refugee camps. It was illegal for me to bring money into

the camps, but I felt an obligation to do it, and I had to find someone else to

take my place.

We  bargained  for  time  and  agreed  that  I  would  go  on  the  flight  thefollowing week, on August 23. I thanked him, he shook my hand and wished

me  luck.  I  went  to  the  Trocadero  Hotel  to  get  my  paycheck  from  Susan

Walker,  the  ARC  leader.  Susan  was  like  John.  She  had  never  tried  to

patronize me and I had always respected her for that. She had always treated

me like a fellow human being, and we had a good-hearted farewell.

  Then I went out and bought everything I didn’t think I would be able to

find  in  the  United  States,  like  seeds  for  Asian  vegetables,  rubber  shower

sandals  and  a  radio.  (As  it  turned  out,  the  same  model  radio  was  much

cheaper in the United States, shower sandals were easy to buy and I never did

get around to planting the vegetable seeds.) While in Bangkok I visited my

benefactors, General Chana and Uncle Lo, to thank them for what they had

done. Then I returned to Aranyaprathet to attend a party given in my honour

in  Khao-I-Dang.  The  ARC  medical  team  was  there,  and  so  were  many

refugee friends, and there was music and dancing and happiness and some

crying too.

The  next  night  I  went  to  a  Westerners’  party.  There  was  an  outdoor

showing of an American film starring John Wayne as a cowboy who rode his

horse through the desert and killed a lot of people. It was the first movie I had

seen about America, and I asked one of my ARC medical colleagues, Dr Dale

Fanney, if America was really like that, with so much violence and shooting.

Dale kept a straight face and said I would see for myself when I got to the

United States.

  From Aranyaprathet I went back to Bangkok and ran into John Crowley at

the US embassy. He sighed and shook his head. By then it was about August

28. I had missed my flight.

  ‘Ngor Haing Samnang, you give me a headache.’

‘I sorry, John.’

  From  then  on  everything  was  in  a  crazy  rush.  I  never  did  get  my

predeparture medical inspection. Day after day my name had been announced

over the loudspeakers in the Lumpini transit centre, and my friends had been

cursing me. They all wanted to be in my place, leaving for America, and I

hadn’t even bothered to show up for my medical appointment. Of course I

wanted to leave for America, but on my own terms.

On August 30, 1980, I finally left. Like everyone else, I had a white plastic

handbag with the logo of ICEM (the International Committee for European

Migration),  the  agency  that  ran  the  flights.  Inside  the  handbag  were  my

documents, including a photograph of me holding a card with my T-number,or  transit  number,  which  was  33144,  like  a  prison  convict  holding  his

identification number for the authorities.

It was not my first plane flight. During the Lon Nol regime I flew several

times on DC-3s. Some of the other Cambodian, Vietnamese and Laotians

refugees  had  also  flown  on  military  or  commercial  flights  before  the

communist  takeover.  But  for  most  of  the  refugees  this  was  the  first  time

inside an airplane. We were on a seven-hundred-seat Boeing 747 chartered

from Flying Tiger Airlines. We filled every seat. Row after row, aisle after

aisle, nothing showing over the seat tops but black Asian hair.

As soon as the plane took off from the runway, the airsickness began. Lots

of noisy vomiting, sometimes in the airsickness bags, sometimes not. The

children rushed to the side of the plane to look out the window, old women

began praying in loud voices and H’mong babies squatted in the aisles and

peed. One old Cambodian lady told everyone in a loud voice not to touch the

seat-reclining buttons in the armrests in case it caused the plane to fall into

the ocean.

I was the doctor on the flight and also the one who translated information

into  Khmer  about  fastening  the  seat  belts,  not  smoking  and  using  the

emergency air supply. Someone else did the translating for Vietnamese and

Lao. I got on the loudspeaker several times to remind the Cambodians how to

use the lavatories. I told them not to be afraid. When they got inside the

lavatories they should lock the door, because that would also turn the lights

on. When they were finished with the toilet they should use the flushing

handle. My advice didn’t do much good. Some of the Cambodians were so

rural that they had never seen flush toilets before. I could see the confusion

on their faces. They were afraid to ask questions, afraid to touch anything on

the plane in case it broke and they would be blamed for it. But they were also

afraid to disgrace themselves for soiling their clothes. Slowly, inevitably, as

the hours passed and as their bladders filled, they edged nervously toward the

lavatories. Inside, I am sure, most of them squatted in darkness with their feet

on the toilet seat in Asian style.

The airline made one concession to us, and that was serving rice with all

the meals. The stewardesses rolled their carts down the aisles and gave each

of us a choice of chicken with rice or beef with rice. I peeled the foil off the

food tray and looked at my meal, the chicken in one divider, the rice in

another.  There  was  something  suspicious  on  top  of  the  rice.  I  smelled  it

dubiously, tried a bit of it and didn’t eat any more. It was the first time I hadtasted cheese sauce in my life. Cheese is practically unknown in Asia. People

in the seats around me remarked that the rice wasn’t very good. We were all

worried about the food in America if this was what it was going to be like.

We made a refueling stop at Hong Kong, then headed across the Pacific for

Honolulu. In the cabin, dark except for the overhead rows of little lights, we

stayed awake and thought about America, the country that could build huge

jets but couldn’t do something as simple as cook good rice. We sat in the

darkness and listened to the quiet whooshing sound of the plane and the noise

made by the refugees. Children cried and adults were throwing up, and the

old ladies were still praying.

In  the  daytime  we  had  a  long  stopover  in  Honolulu.  The  second  night

began while we were en route to San Francisco. We were wondering how far

away the continental United States could possibly be.

On the second morning we saw the California coastline and a lot of houses

close together and tiny-looking cars on the roads and then we landed at San

Francisco.  We  stood  in  line  for  a  long  time  to  get  our  I-94  forms  from

immigration, which we put carefully in our white ICEM bags with all the

other forms we were carrying. Then we obediently got onto the most modern

buses I had ever seen. When the driver pulled a handle to open the front door,

the  back  door  opened  too;  when  he  closed  the  front  door,  the  back  door

closed  the  same  way.  I  sat  in  the  front  seat  to  watch.  We  drove  up  the

freeway, across the Bay Bridge, along more freeway on the other side. It

didn’t look anything like the John Wayne cowboy movie. There were streets,

houses and cars beyond number, but nobody was riding horses and nobody

was on foot. I thought: How do people meet and talk if they don’t see each

other in the streets? How can I find a job in a place like this?

  They took us to a former military base up in the hills to recover from the

flight. Cambodians who had arrived a few months before were there to serve

us  Cambodian  food  and  answer  our  questions.  I  asked  how  to  make  a

telephone call, and a man volunteered to make a call for me when he left

because there weren’t any telephones nearby. I asked him to call my cousin

Try Thong to come get me. Try Thong lived in a place called Los Angeles. I

was scheduled to go to Ohio, and wherever that was I knew I didn’t want to

go there.

The man who had offered to call didn’t come back the next day. I paced

back and forth like a caged animal. I didn’t know where I was and didn’t like

being at the mercy of other people. I had helped rescue Try Thong’s sistersand  their  children  from  the  Thai-Cambodian  border  and  sneak  them  into

Khao-I-Dang. It seemed reasonable to expect that Try Thong could rescue

me.

On my third morning in America my name and T-number were called on

the loudspeaker system and I got on a bus that took me back to the San

Francisco airport. At the airport terminal someone told me to sit and wait for

somebody else who would show me where to go. I sat down with my two

large suitcases and a heavy cardboard box full of medical books. Twenty

minutes later a young curly-haired Cambodian working for my sponsoring

organization, US Catholic Charities (USCC), appeared and told me to follow

him. He didn’t use the courteous words that are normal when talking to an

older person in Khmer. He started down a long corridor.

  ‘Luk,’ I called after him anxiously. ‘Please wait. I have to take my luggage

in relays.’

  ‘All right, but hurry up,’ he said. I ran after him with one suitcase, came

back for the next, then the box of books. By the time I caught up to the first

suitcase he was nowhere in sight.

My  own  countryman  had  abandoned  me.  Like  the  guides  who  had

abandoned us on the way to the Thai-Cambodian border.

I had no idea where I was, or what flight I was supposed to take.

I waited.

A lady at a ticket counter nearby saw me sitting alone and discouraged and

asked, ‘Where are you going?’

I said, ‘I don’t know. I a refugee.’ I walked over to the counter and showed

her my papers, my I-94 form, my photograph and T-number from Lumpini.

This was to prove I was legally in America, so she wouldn’t make me leave.

She stared at my papers and didn’t know what to make of them.

  ‘Who’s taking care of you?’ she asked me finally.

I said, ‘Cambodia guy. My plane is a ten-thirty plane.’

  She started making phone calls to see what plane I was supposed to be on.

Another lady came over and I showed her my papers too.

  She studied them.

  ‘Your plane’s already left,’ she decided.

The women called USCC, which had an office somewhere in the airport. I

waited nervously for another hour and then someone from USCC showed up.

We walked down one long corridor and then the next and the next and finally

into the office. Some other refugees were there speaking Vietnamese. Thenthe young Cambodian with the curly hair appeared.

  ‘Where did you go?’ he asked ‘I waited for you.’

I gave him an angry look.

  ‘Luk,’ I replied sarcastically in Khmer, ‘don’t ask me where I am going.

Ask yourself where you are going. Do you know what you are doing, little

boy? Don’t forget, if there were no refugees, you would not have a job here.

And your job is to help refugees.’

The Vietnamese were trying to get me to calm down, but I was just getting

started. I pointed my finger at the young man and shook it right in his face.

‘I told you I had a lot of things to carry, but you didn’t offer to help me!’ I

shouted. ‘You were supposed to take care of me. It was an easy little job, but

you couldn’t even do it. You pretend you’re so important that you can’t even

be  bothered!  You’ve  got  to  remember  something,  motherfucker:  I  know

nothing here. I’m like an animal from the jungle. I’m a refugee. You have an

obligation to help me. You’re Cambodian and I’m Cambodian. We’re from

the same place. You should have helped me, but you didn’t. That’s why the

country fell, because of stupid, arrogant people like you who only think about

themselves!’

I was just getting started, but the American boss showed up. He invited me

into  his  private  office  to  talk.  I  didn’t  have  the  vocabulary  to  tell  him

everything in English that I’d told the young man in Khmer. But he got the

general idea.

At eleven-thirty that evening I landed in the airport at Columbus, Ohio. My

friend and co-sponsor Hay Peng Sy met me there. I knew him when he was a

pilot for Lon Nol and then got to know him better in Lumpini. He had come

to the United States ahead of me and had gotten a job in Columbus as a

caseworker for USCC, which is why USCC was my institutional co-sponsor.

Following the Western custom, Hay Peng Sy had changed his name to Peng

Sy Hay, with his family name last. Similarly, my name was changed from

Ngor Haing Samnang to Haing Samnang Ngor.

We went to his house. The next day we went to the USCC office to do

paperwork and then went out to look for apartments. I didn’t say anything,

because I didn’t want to repay his kindness with ingratitude, but I had no

intention of renting an apartment in Columbus. The place I wanted to be was

called Los Angeles. I didn’t know where Los Angeles was. I didn’t know

whether it was a state or a city, whether it was big or small, on the seacoast or

in the mountains, hot or cold, or whether a lot of Cambodians lived there oronly a few. All I knew was that my niece Ngim was there, Balam was there

and so was my other cousin Try Thong. That was all I needed to know.

I hung around Columbus for a few days, watching the programmes on a

black-and-white TV. It was hard to understand what the TV characters were

saying because they spoke too fast. I took a short trip on a Greyhound bus to

South  Bend,  Indiana,  to  visit  some  Cambodian  friends,  then  returned  to

Columbus.

I had left Thailand with about twelve hundred dollars, my savings from

working as a refugee camp doctor. The money was already slipping away,

with  gifts  and  with  the  trip  to  Indiana.  For  three  hundred  dollars  of  my

remaining money I bought a plane ticket to Los Angeles. My second cousin

Try Thong picked me up at the LA airport. He had left Phnom Penh before

the Khmer Rouge takeover and had been in the United States since then. He

was quite Americanized: instead of reversing the order of his names, he had

changed his name to Phillip Thong. He was a smart fellow, younger than me,

and he was doing well for himself as an accountant.

  From Phillip’s house I called my cousin Balam. Balam and I had drifted

apart when I was working in Khao-I-Dang, but I had counted on staying with

him until I found a place of my own. I was disappointed. Balam said there

wasn’t enough room in his apartment for me. He explained that there was a

maximum-occupancy rule. His landlord didn’t want more than four people

living in a two-bedroom apartment, and there were already more than that,

with Ngim. I thought: Whatever the landlord is like, he isn’t Khmer Rouge. If

we break the rules he isn’t going to kill us. But I kept my mouth shut and

stayed the night with Phillip Thong.

The next day I went over to Balam’s apartment, outside LA’s Chinatown.

Balam helped me find and rent a tiny room around the corner in the same

apartment complex. It was a ten-by-fifteen-foot room with a kitchen in an

outlying  alcove  and  a  small  bathroom.  The  main  room  had  two  sets  of

louvred windows beside the door and a view of the trash cans across the

alley.

The  deposit  was  $150,  the  first  month’s  rent  another  $150.  There  was

already a sofa-bed, which Ngim would use. Balam and I went out to buy a

bed for me, a table and some other furnishings for a total of about $350.

Ngim and I moved in that night. There was no food in the refrigerator. I had

$4 left to my name.                                          39



                                  Starting Over


 




In America it never occurred to me that my life was in any danger or that

there was any risk of starvation. I wasn’t worried about having only four

dollars.

Sure enough, the morning after Ngim and I moved into our tiny apartment

two Cambodians appeared at our door. The woman had been my patient in

Thailand; she brought her husband, whom I had not met before. These two

good-hearted people took us out to eat and showed me around LA. With

money they loaned, I bought food and rice from a store in Chinatown. I

bought bowls, pots and chopsticks from a flea market.

No doubt about it: we were going to get by.

Now that we had a place to live and a supply of food the next question was

deciding how to make a living. I wanted to practise medicine, but to get a US

medical licence I would first have to pass an English-language proficiency

exam  and  then  probably  go  back  to  medical  school  for  refresher  courses

before taking the boards. I was willing to do that, but it didn’t solve the

problem of supporting Ngim and myself in the meantime. I could have gone

on welfare, which would have paid $214 a month plus some extra for Ngim,

but that didn’t seem worth it. I decided to postpone medical school and get a

job.

My  first  job  was  as  a  night  security  guard  for  a  company  outside  of

Chinatown. While looking for something better I took English as a Second

Language  (ESL)  classes  at  Evans  Community  College,  just  a  few  blocks

away. English is not a logical language, and I have always found it difficult.‘Rice’ rhymes with ‘ice’ but not with ‘police.’ The ‘gh’ in the word ‘thought’

is  silent,  but  in  the  word  ‘rough,’  ‘gh’  sounds  like  ‘f.’  How  is  anybody

supposed to understand the rules?

  Slang made English even more mysterious. I used to wonder what it meant

when an American shook my hand and said, ‘You bet.’ Did he want to make

a bet with me? Had I committed myself to making a bet without knowing it

when I shook his hand? Should I have kept my mouth shut? I could make

myself  understood  in  English,  but  I  knew  I  was  never  going  to  feel

completely comfortable. It was much easier for Ngim, who was in elementary

school, because she was younger. She could already speak English almost as

well as an American.

In  November  1980  I  became  a  caseworker  for  the  Chinatown  Service

Centre,  which  was  within  walking  distance  of  my  apartment.  My  office,

called  the  Indochinese  Unit,  provided  a  free  job-placement  service  to

refugees. About half our clients were Vietnamese, a third or more Cambodian

and  the  rest  Laotian.  Usually  my  clients  and  I  could  find  a  language  in

common. If Khmer or Teochiew didn’t work, we tried French or Mandarin or

English or even Thai. Generally we could exchange basic ideas, with the help

of my co-workers if necessary.

  Being a caseworker was satisfying. It didn’t have the status or the money

of being a doctor, but it allowed me to help refugees, which was what I

wanted.  I  translated  between  my  clients  and  their  landlords.  I  filled  out

welfare application forms, enrolled children in public schools, arranged for

adults to attend ESL classes, explained telephone bills and inquired about

relatives in the refugee camps of Thailand. As I gained experience I was

asked  to  buy  a  car.  In  my  new  Volkswagen  I  drove  my  clients  to  the

hospitals, to the welfare office, to job interviews all over LA.

Jobs were the main focus. As refugees we had to start over at the bottom

and  take  whatever  was  available.  I  got  my  clients  jobs  as  dishwashers,

waitresses  and  waiters,  cooks,  cleaners,  landscaping  workers,  common

labourers, assembly line workers in electronics factories, zip code sorters,

baby-sitters and piecework sewers. A few of the more educated ones were

hired as secretaries and bank tellers. The average job paid only $4.00 to $4.50

an hour, but the starting pay wasn’t as important as getting established and

then moving up.

At that time there were six to seven thousand Cambodians in and around

Chinatown  and  about  the  same  number  of  Vietnamese.  The  Vietnameseadapted quite well and generally moved up the career ladders much more

quickly than the Cambodians, who were shy and passive. Often when I set up

job  interviews  the  Cambodians  didn’t  even  show.  They  were  afraid  they

would lose face because they didn’t speak good English. They were afraid to

take  risks.  They  were  unhappy  in  their  personal  lives.  In  Cambodian

households, arguments, excessive drinking, wife-abuse and divorce were all

common.

It  was  clear  that  there  was  a  massive  mental  health  problem  among

Cambodian refugees. I understood it because I had had my share of mental

problems too. We had all been traumatized by our experiences. We had all

lost parents or brothers or children. Many of us had horrible dreams, night

after night. We felt isolated and depressed and unable to trust anyone. What

made it worse was that we were in a culture totally unlike our own.

In Cambodia a way of life had evolved over many hundreds of years. It

was much simpler than America, and that was part of its beauty. In Cambodia

we didn’t have welfare or Social Security. We didn’t have day-care centres or

old-age homes or psychiatrists. We didn’t need them. All we needed were our

families  and  the  monks.  Most  households  had  three  generations  living

together. The grandparents helped raise their grandchildren. The adults in the

middle put the food on the table. When there were problems and arguments

the monks helped take care of them. The monks helped teach the children

proper behaviour and taught them how to read and write in temple schools.

They  also  took  in  orphans  and  old  people  with  nowhere  else  to  go.  In

exchange for conducting religious ceremonies and everything else they did,

we gave the monks alms, and we sent our teenage boys to them to become

monks for at least a short time. The system was not perfect, but it worked.

Everybody had enough to eat. Cambodian society was stable. For generation

after generation we followed our customs, until in 1975 the communists put

an end to our way of life. We lost everything – our families, our monks, our

villages, our land, all our possessions. Everything. When we came to the

United States we couldn’t put our old lives back together. We didn’t even

have the pieces.

In Thailand a smart Cambodian could figure out some of the words on a

street sign and understand part of a Thai conversation because the language

and  alphabet  were  similar.  In  the  United  States  the  language  was  totally

different. Not being able to read the street signs, talk to the people or even

understand the TV programmes left the average Cambodian isolated, whichmade the depression worse.

  There were no real temples to go to. There was a makeshift temple inside

an ordinary house in a run-down section of Long Beach, southwest of LA,

where a lot of Cambodians lived. There was a Thai temple with traditional

architecture and Thai monks. But for most Cambodians these temples were

beyond walking distance. We had to drive to go anyplace, and we had to

organize trips on the weekends, when those who had cars were free.

  Almost  everything  was  different  about  America.  Men  who  used  to  be

wealthy merchants and officers in the Lon Nol regime stayed on welfare.

They didn’t want to lose face among their friends by taking low-status jobs

like driving taxis or working in warehouses. Men who had been brave in

combat became timid, afraid of the blacks and Hispanics on the streets. They

went into supermarkets and only saw what was not as good as Cambodia, that

the vegetables were not as fresh, that there were few tropical fruits, that there

was no bargaining over prices. They noticed that much of American daily life

is impersonal. Shopping. Driving on the freeways. Watching TV. They found

they could go for days at a time without talking to anybody.

I  missed  Cambodia  too.  The  food  and  the  bargaining  and  the  market

gossip. Praying in the temples and walking along the boulevards in the warm,

quiet evenings. Most of all I missed Huoy. But I saw many good things about

America. It was much cleaner than Cambodia. There weren’t as many flies.

The tap water was safe to drink. People were more educated. Ngim liked

America  too.  She  was  getting  excellent  grades  in  school.  Her  classmates

couldn’t pronounce her name easily, so we chose a new name, ‘Sophia.’ It is

Western but also Eastern, a name that came to Cambodian culture through

Sanskrit.

I  had  a  job,  a  car,  a  niece  I  was  raising  as  a  daughter.  Life  was  very

comfortable. I never had to worry about chhlop spying on me, or soldiers

tying me up and taking me away. When I woke up in the morning, I felt no

terror. I knew for sure that I would live through the day and through the week

and for many years ahead.

Once, as I was driving along in my VW and stopped at a light, I saw a dog

being walked on a leash. The owner stopped to pat the dog, the dog wagged

its tail and I remembered what I told Huoy about dogs in America living

better than people on the front lines. It was true: dogs did live better. America

was a prosperous place. Then the light changed to green and I drove off to

my next appointment, amazed at my good fortune.By March 1982 I had lived in America for a year and a half. I spent most of

my time with fellow Cambodians. Through my work I helped refugees adjust

to their new lives, and indirectly this helped them recover from the trauma of

their old lives. But we didn’t talk much about what had happened under the

Khmer Rouge. We kept our memories bottled up inside.

One day in March two acquaintances of mine dropped by the Chinatown

Service Centre to see me. They were Sisowath Sourirath, of the minor branch

of the Cambodian royal family, and Jean Fernandez, the younger brother of a

general in the Lon Nol regime. We were all getting by, but none of us had

regained the status or the wealth we had had in Cambodia. Jean Fernandez

was selling life insurance. Sisowath was working for the Catholic Welfare

Bureau in Long Beach. He had helped me fill out an application to buy a set

of  encyclopedias,  but  the  encyclopedia  company  had  turned  me  down

because my credit wasn’t good enough. When Sisowath and Jean came in

that day they said they were applying for something else now, for roles in a

Hollywood film about Cambodia. They said I had to apply. I told them no

thanks.

  They tried to get me interested in the film, but I really wasn’t listening.

Clients were walking into the office and I had to help them find jobs. My

clients  were  real  people  with  real  problems,  and  I  didn’t  have  time  for

daydreams.

But rumours of the film swept through the Cambodian communities in LA

and Long Beach. Everybody had heard about it. A lot of people dreamed

about being in a Hollywood movie, and many had applied. For them, I think,

that was the real America, the money and the opportunity they’d wanted to

believe  in  back  in  the  refugee  camps.  I  knew  how  their  minds  worked.

Everybody who applied for a part in the movie secretly thought he was going

to be a star and get rich overnight. They wanted to forget about the other

America – working in a regular job to pay for rent and food and gasoline

while never getting ahead, or only getting ahead slowly.

I didn’t want anything to do with movies. In Cambodia acting had been a

low-paid profession without any particular status. I had been a doctor. I had

owned a Mercedes and part of a medical clinic. Maybe I wasn’t a doctor now,

and maybe I wasn’t wealthy, but everybody knew that I used to be. There

was no need for me to stoop to a low-class job like acting.

  Some Cambodians who lived in Oxnard, up the coast from LA, invited me

to a wedding party. I really didn’t want to go. It was an hour and twentyminutes each way on the freeway, plus the money for gas. It rained the whole

way up there, the windshield wipers of my Volkswagen slapping back and

forth. When I walked in the door, Jean Fernandez and other friends greeted

me.  Most  of  the  wedding  guests  were  Cambodian.  The  most  obvious

exception was a black American woman who said her name was Pat Golden.

She was from the movie studio. She asked me to sit for a photograph and

give her my name and phone number. But a live band was playing and the

guests were dancing the romvong, gracefully and slowly waving their hands

to the music. It had been a long time since I had danced the romvong and I

told her no.

  She didn’t let me get away. Every time I left the dance floor she came up

to me. She had already taken Jean Fernandez’s picture. She had taken nearly

everyone’s picture. An old man who was drunk pushed me forward and told

me to go ahead, it wasn’t going to cost me anything.

I told Pat Golden I had come there to have fun and I hoped she wouldn’t

bother me.

  ‘Keep cool,’ she said, patting me on the shoulder. She wore casual clothes,

blue jeans and a white shirt, but she looked well dressed in them. She had a

low,  husky  voice  and  a  gap  between  her  front  teeth  and  a  very  strong,

confident character. She said there were no forms to fill out. All she wanted

to do was take my picture and get my phone number.

I told her, ‘Okay. I let you take pictures if you give me vun for a souvenir.’

The living room was crowded and she had me stand in the hallway, outside

the bathroom door. She asked me to take my glasses off. She pressed the

button on the Polaroid, and the flash went off and a shiny piece of paper

ejected from the front of the camera. She took another picture, gave me one,

and I stared at it to see what would develop. It just looked like me without my

glasses. Not a handsome guy, not young, not a movie-star type.

Two  weeks  passed,  then  a  month,  then  two  months  and  three  months

without a word from her.

In the fourth month she called me on the telephone. She wanted to set up

an interview about forty miles away from where I lived. I told her yes without

meaning it. My friends had told me that she had asked other Cambodians too.

They  drove  in  from  San  Diego,  Santa  Ana,  LA  and  Long  Beach  for  the

interview. But not me.

The next morning Pat Golden called me at the office and asked me why I

didn’t come. I told her sorry, I was busy. There was a pause and I decided tobe more honest. I said I didn’t want to go because I didn’t think I’d get the

job. She said, ‘We haven’t made any decisions yet. Please come.’ She was

very persistent.

  She wanted to interview me that night in Long Beach, twenty-five miles

away. ‘Is five o’clock okay?’ she said. I said, ‘No, I work in office hours.’

‘Six?’ she said. ‘No,’ I said, ‘the freeway to Long Beach is too crowded then.

How about seven?’

I got there at eight. She was waiting. I said I was sorry, that I had been

busy. She didn’t reproach me. She was conciliatory and polite – just like a

Cambodian. She was a very smart woman and she knew something about our

culture. She knew if she got angry at me I would use it as an excuse to leave.

  Other Cambodians were there ahead of me. Pat Golden interviewed Long

Boret’s daughter – Long Boret was Lon Nol’s prime minister at the time of

the Khmer Rouge takeover – and finally called me in.

  She said, ‘Okay, Haing, if you were with some Americans and you had to

convince  the  Khmer  Rouge  that  the  people  you  were  with  were not

Americans, how would you do it?’

I improvised a scene for her.

  After it was over, she said, ‘Thanks. I’ll let you know in a week.’

I said, ‘I don’t believe you. If you say one week, maybe a month and a

half.’

  ‘No, this time I’m serious,’ she said. And a week later she called me in for

a second interview. This time it was in a studio in Burbank.

  Then  there  was  a  third  interview,  also  in  the  Burbank  studio.  At  each

interview there were fewer Cambodians than before.

A young bearded Englishman was at the fourth interview. He was Roland

Joffé, the director of the film. Roland Joffé asked me about my story – how

long  I  had  lived  under  the  Khmer  Rouge,  what  happened  when  I  was

captured, how I got to the refugee camps in Thailand. I talked for an hour. He

watched me with intense blue eyes and listened carefully.

  Roland Joffé was at the fifth interview. This time he had a video camera

for the screen test. He set up a hypothetical situation: a Cambodian doctor

was  very  fond  of  an  American  nurse.  The  night  before,  the  radio  had

announced that all foreigners had to leave Cambodia. How would the doctor

tell the nurse she had to leave Cambodia to save her own life?

Pat Golden played the American lady.

I played the Cambodian doctor.  Roland  Joffé  changed  the  situation.  The  American  lady  believed  the

Khmer  Rouge  wouldn’t  hurt  her,  because  she  was  foreign,  but  that  they

would almost certainly kill me. How would I explain to her that Cambodia

was my country, that I would stay no matter what?

I acted the part to Pat Golden.

  Roland Joffé brought the camera in closer and closer but it didn’t make me

nervous. I knew if I really put myself in the situation and believed what I was

saying to Pat Golden, the camera didn’t matter.

  ‘Now,’ Roland Joffé said to me, ‘you have taken the American woman to

the airport, to see her off. What are your last words before she goes away?’

  ‘You haf to leave right now,’ I told Pat Golden. ‘You haf to listen me.

Situation now very hard. You foreign people. Khmer Rouge don’t like you.

For me no problem. I’m Cambodian people.’ I wept on her shoulder and

wiped my eyes and told her over and over again that she had to go and I

would miss her.

  When I finished they said thank you very much.

In interview six I went in front of the camera again. Roland set up another

scene with Pat Golden playing my Cambodian wife. I had to tell her to leave

because the Khmer Rouge were going to kill everybody. I broke down and

cried again, only this time it was hard to stop.

As soon as I finished one scene Roland Joffé had me do another. All of the

scenes were sad, except for the last one. In this one I was a doctor. A patient

of mine was about to die. I operated on him, tried my best and against the

odds the operation was successful. What did I do when I learned the good

news? What did I say?

I acted it out for him.

Joffé said he would let me know, but he didn’t know when that might be.

I went back to work and tried not to think about the screen tests. Seven

thousand Cambodians had applied for jobs in the movie.

  Three more months passed before Pat called again, from New York. She

wanted to know what kind of passport or visa I was holding. I said it was a

resident  alien  card,  with  my  photo  and  thumbprint.  She  asked  whether  it

would cause a problem if I had to go to Thailand with the company. No

problem for me, no problem for my niece either.

  She  called  back  a  few  weeks  later.  What  was  I  getting  paid  at  the

Chinatown Service Centre? Four hundred dollars a week, I said. She said,

how about if she gave me eight hundred dollars a week?No problem, I said.

  She called again with detailed questions about my visa and said, ‘How

about a thousand dollars a week?’

  ‘Don’t worry about the money,’ I said. ‘Give me what you want. I just

want the job.’

And  it  was  true.  I  had  changed  my  mind.  If  I  could  be  in  the  film,  I

decided, in any capacity, I could help tell the story of Cambodia. And that

was important because it was a story nobody really knew. Most Americans

didn’t even know where Cambodia was. They had heard of Vietnam, but not

Cambodia.  Even  in  LA,  non-Cambodian  Asians  didn’t  know  what  had

happened under the Khmer Rouge regime. If we told them they just nodded

their heads and pretended to believe us so we wouldn’t lose face.

And really, the reason I hadn’t wanted the job earlier didn’t have anything

to  do  with  losing  face,  or  with  not  being  offered  a  part,  or  with  looking

foolish in front of the camera. I hadn’t wanted to bring back the suffering.

There were too many reminders already.

  Ever since coming to the United States I’d had nightmares. If I thought too

much in the daytime about what had happened, I had dreams that night. Huoy

died in my arms over and over and over. I saw my father tied to the tree and

trying to tell me something, but afraid to speak.

It didn’t take much to set off my nightmares – the sound of water dripping

from the faucet was enough. It put me back in prison, looking up at water

dripping from a hole in a bucket.

  Almost every night I woke suddenly and sat up to make the dreams fade.

Outside  the  louvred  windows  the  streetlights  were  shining  on  the  hard

pavement of the alley and reflecting off the metal and glass of parked cars. In

LA there was always a background noise of traffic on distant streets and

maybe a siren or honking horns. I felt more alienated than ever, and not sure

how much better America was than what I had left behind, because I hadn’t

really left it behind, and I couldn’t enjoy the best of America. So I decided to

go back to the refugee camps and confront my past. To try to get rid of my

nightmares.

Before we left for Thailand all the Cambodians who had been chosen for

the  film  got  together  for  a  party.  Pat  Golden  was  there.  All  the  other

Cambodians knew what part they were playing, but when I asked Pat she just

told me not to worry, I wasn’t going to have to learn anything by heart. It

sounded to me as though my part was pretty small. The other Cambodiansbegan teasing me and saying that I had the co-starring role, but I just laughed

and told them not to believe it.

  When I got to Thailand I was given a script, but still nobody told me what

part was mine. Then when Roland Joffé called a rehearsal I found that I was

going to play Dith Pran.

‘Oh my god,’ I said to myself, slapping my hand to my forehead. ‘How big

I am.’                                          40



                                The Killing Fields


 




‘This is a story of war and friendship, of the anguish of a ruined country and

of one man’s will to live.’ So began a 1980 article in The New York Times

Magazine. The author was Sydney Schanberg, the Times’s correspondent in

Cambodia during the Lon Nol years.

  Schanberg  wrote  about  the  relationship  between  himself  and  his

Cambodian assistant Dith Pran. They were not equals. Schanberg was the

boss. By nature he was angry and unsatisfied, always demanding more of

people around him. However, he did not speak Khmer or know much about

Cambodian culture. He needed Dith Pran to be his eyes and ears and nose. He

depended on Pran when they ran into obstacles to their reporting or when

they got into situations that threatened their lives. Pran, in turn, depended on

Schanberg for guidance. The two men were very different, but they liked

each other and they were close.

  During  the  communist  takeover  Pran  saved  Schanberg  and  some  other

Western  journalists  from  execution  by  the  Khmer  Rouge.  With  the

communists in control of the city, all the Westerners and a few Cambodians

including Pran retreated to the French embassy. Pran was forced to leave the

safety  of  the  embassy  and  join  the  rest  of  the  Cambodians  out  in  the

countryside, while the Westerners were allowed to leave for Thailand and

freedom.  For  almost  four  years,  while  the  Khmer  Rouge  controlled  the

country, Schanberg heard nothing of Dith Pran. He felt terribly guilty: Pran

had saved his life, but he, Schanberg, hadn’t been able to save Pran. Finally

the Vietnamese invaded, Pran escaped from Cambodia and the two men metagain in a Thai refugee camp.

The article moved the hearts and the conscience of people who hadn’t

known much about Cambodia or who hadn’t thought about the revolution

there in human terms. Out of the magazine article grew the movie The Killing

Fields. The movie’s producer was an Englishman, David Puttnam, who had

made Chariots of Fire and other films. The director was another Englishman,

Roland Joffé, whose background was in theatre and in film documentaries.

The lead actors were two Americans, Sam Waterston as Sydney Schanberg,

John  Malkovich  as  the  cynical  photographer  Al  Rockoff  .  .  .  and  me,  a

Cambodian, as Dith Pran.

  Studying the script I made a surprising discovery. I was Dith Pran. This is

not  to  say  that  our  stories  were  identical.  Pran  was  a  journalist;  I  was  a

doctor. He worked with Westerners; I worked with Cambodians. His wife

and children left Phnom Penh on a helicopter before the fall; Huoy and my

family stayed. When he lived in the countryside, Pran was beaten by the

Khmer Rouge; but he never went to prison and never suffered as much as I

did.

But the differences were much less important than the similarities. I was

him and he was me because we were Cambodian men of about the same age

and because we had been under the hammer of the same terrible events: the

civil war, then the revolution, then the foreign occupation and finally pouring

into the refugee camps and going to America. Surviving the Khmer Rouge

years  was  the  most  important  fact  of  our  lives,  the  very  centre  of  our

identities. And we had both survived without quite knowing why.

  Turning the pages of the screenplay I marvelled at our life paths, which ran

parallel and sometimes crossed. Dith Pran had seen the senseless, barbaric

civil  war.  As  a  journalist  he’d  gone  to  some  of  the  same  briefings  and

battlefields  as  my  friend  Sam  Kwil.  He’d  seen  the bonjour  and  the

deteriorating conditions in the hospitals, the wounded patients piled on the

floors. In the screenplay he and Sydney Schanberg visited Preah Keth Melea

Hospital. In real life I had treated patients in Prea Keth Melea before the fall.

Pen Tip was on the radiology staff there.

Both Dith Pran and I had an opportunity to leave Phnom Penh on the

American helicopters. We didn’t go because we didn’t know what the Khmer

Rouge  were  really  like.  Pran  went  into  the  French  embassy  with  the

foreigners; I drove past the French embassy on my Vespa on my trip back

into Phnom Penh and saw the foreigners on the lawn.In the countryside Dith Pran and I were rice farmers, like all the other

‘new’ people. We both pulled ploughs by hand, planted and harvested rice,

dug canals and built earthen dams. We ate bowls of watery rice and gathered

wild foods. We lived with the daily terror. When the Vietnamese invaded, we

both escaped to Thailand through the minefields. Of the more than half a

million Cambodians on the border, Dith Pran and I were two of the very

luckiest. I had Chana to give me my freedom and Uncle Lo to give me money

and clothes. Dith Pran had Sydney Schanberg.

But I had never met Dith Pran. I asked Roland Joffé how Pran walked and

spoke and what his facial expressions were like. I asked him to introduce us.

It seemed to me that playing the Dith Pran part meant imitating the real man

as much as possible.

  Roland was evasive. ‘Haing, don’t worry what he looks like or how he

would have done things,’ he advised. ‘Just be yourself.’ Roland encouraged

the idea that Dith Pran and I were the same person on the inside. And I never

did meet Dith Pran until the filming was over.

  Roland knew that I had never acted before. He didn’t try to make acting

seem difficult or mysterious. He made it as easy for me as possible.

He sent a tall, bearded American to the Bangkok airport to meet me. The

American  was  very  friendly  and  polite.  He  said  his  name  was  Sam

Waterston. A few days later, with the help of John Crowley, who was pleased

and  surprised  to  see  me,  Sam  and  I  got  our  passes  to  visit  the  Thai-

Cambodian border. Roland assigned Sam to write newspaper stories about

the border, just like a real journalist. Since I spoke Khmer and reasonably

good  Thai,  I  was  Sam’s  translator  and  guide.  Roland  was  re-creating  a

relationship like the real Sydney Schanberg and Dith Pran.

Sam and I drove along the road to Aranyaprathet. In three years little had

changed. I showed him my favourite market stalls and restaurants and the

ARC house where I had lived. We drove south of Aran to a Khmer Rouge

border camp that had been attacked by Vietnamese a few days before. Cadre

followed us wherever we went, never letting us out of their sight. Nothing

had  changed  about  the  Khmer  Rouge  –  the  disdain  on  their  faces,  the

atmosphere of menace, the thatched-roof houses with no walls.

I translated for Sam while he interviewed Khmer Rouge officers and wrote

their answers in his notebook. Sam asked them if they had enough food, if

their families were with them and so on. The Khmer Rouge kept telling Sam

that all they wanted was to go back into Cambodia to fight the Vietnamese.  Throughout the interview I kept a detached, neutral presence, at least on

the outside. While Sam asked the questions and took notes, I stayed as calm

as a monk. Inside, my emotions were different. I thought of grabbing the

cadre by their shirts and shouting, ‘Fools! You want to fight the Vietnamese?

Look around you at the consequences of your fighting – at the orphans, the

handicapped, the civilians with no homes!’ I thought of grabbing a rifle and

spraying them with bullets. But I didn’t do anything like that, and I kept my

emotions hidden.

  From the Khmer Rouge camp we went to Khao-I-Dang, where many of my

old friends were still working in the hospital clinics, living in their huts and

hoping to be resettled in the West. Again, I was Sam’s eyes and ears and

nose, helping him understand what was there. Sam was a cultivated, educated

man, but he had never been to Southeast Asia before.

  When we returned to Bangkok, Roland sent Sam and me to Chieng Mai, in

northern Thailand, near the opium-producing region of the Golden Triangle.

With us were John Malkovich and a British actor named Julian Sands, who

was going to play the journalist Jon Swain.

It was almost like a vacation. Our only assignment was to get to know each

other. The four of us went sightseeing together. I negotiated with the taxi

drivers, ordered the food at restaurants, explained the culture. They asked me

about Thailand and Cambodia. They wanted to know why Cambodians wear

kramas  and  Thais  don’t.  They  asked  about  food,  Buddhism,  corruption,

history. Sam asked the most questions. Most of the time he and I spoke in

French, since that was easier for me, and he could speak it fluently.

One evening after we had gotten to know each other, Sam and I sat down

in a bar. After a few drinks I began to tell him things about life under the

Khmer Rouge that I had never told anybody else. Things that had always

bothered me. About leaving the patient to die on the operating table the day

the communists took over. About watching Huoy die and being unable to

save her. About my Aunt Kim, who had risked my life by telling the chief of

Tonle Batí my real identity. I told Sam that to the best of my knowledge, one

of Aunt Kim’s sons had been a hard-core Khmer Rouge officer. This same

son had slipped past Immigration and was living in the United States. What

was I supposed to do about that – a cousin who was probably a war criminal?
7

Sam was easy to talk to. He was wise and polite, a real gentleman. We

became friends. In a totally different way I also became friends with JohnMalkovich, who was very naughty and funny. John was always telling dirty

jokes  and  making  sly  remarks  about  the  young,  beautiful  Chieng  Mai

prostitutes. He got me to teach him to curse in Khmer. For me it was the best

of both worlds: I could behave like a gentleman with Sam Waterston or a

rascal with John Malkovich.

  When  we  returned  to  Bangkok,  Roland  started  us  doing  improvisation

scenes to prepare us for the cameras. Right from the start I felt comfortable

acting with Sam and John and Julian. Being friends in real life made acting

with  them  seem  easy  and  natural.  Of  course,  that  was  what  Roland  had

planned all along.

  Roland  was  the  centre  of  this  multimillion-dollar  movie  project.  His

partner was David Puttnam, the producer. Just by watching them with other

people, you could tell that the two of them cared a great deal about telling the

story truthfully. They went to great lengths to get details exactly right. They

had negotiated for months with the Thai government to set up the filming

locations in several parts of the country. They always had good food – Asian

food for the Asians, Western food for the Westerners. Throughout filming

they were friendly and approachable. Roland knew the names of most of the

Cambodians in the cast, even the bit actors he hadn’t yet worked with. His

light blue eyes seemed to penetrate into everything. The Cambodians on the

set called him ‘Buddha’ because he was so calm and so smart.

The filming began with a scene of Sam and John sitting in an outdoor cafe

in Phnom Penh in the Lon Nol years. A man held the clapper in front of the

camera and announced, ‘Take One, Scene One,’ and then clapped the hinge

shut. The assistant director called out, ‘Ready,’ and the cameraman answered,

‘Ready.’  Then  the  assistant  director  said,  into  his  walkie-talkie,  ‘Stop  all

truck movements.’ When the background movement had stopped he said to

the rest of us, ‘Go!’ and then, ‘Roll it!’ and finally, ‘ACTION!’ in a loud

voice. The camera made its quiet whir, and Sam and John began the scene,

making small talk, deciding what to order and then rushing into the street

when a grenade exploded. Roland knelt on the ground off-camera. He had

removed the little zoom lens he kept on his belt and was looking through it.

Between takes he came in to advise the actors and change their positions a

bit. Then the scene began again.

  ‘Take Two, Scene One.’

  ‘Ready . . .’

  Roland told me that when I went on-camera I didn’t have to speak everyword exactly from the script as long as what I said included the key words

and phrases. When I spoke in Khmer I could say whatever I wanted as long

as it was appropriate to the scene. He made the camera crew responsible for

the blocking and the lighting, so the actors didn’t have to worry about it.

When it came time for me to go on-camera I was with my friends Sam and

John, who knew just what to do. All I had to do was react to them and live

out my part. There was no time to wonder what this meant, living out the

part. Around me, everyone else was already doing it.

  Roland told me to remember situations from my own life that were similar

to the movie, and then use those emotions in the scenes. This made sense to

me. I prepared for the rice field scenes by remembering how I had felt and

walked  and  worked  on  the  front  lines.  When  I  ate  watery  rice  or  caught

lizards in the movie, I remembered what hunger was like in the countryside.

The rural scenes were the easiest, because I had been in identical situations.

From there it was a small step to similar situations, and from there another

step  to  situations  that  were  externally  different  but  had  some  thread  in

common with my own experience. For example, when Dith Pran argues with

his wife about leaving Cambodia, that was me, not listening to Huoy telling

me to leave the country. During the Khmer Rouge takeover scene, when Dith

Pran pleads to the guerrillas to spare the lives of the Western journalists and

he puts his palms together like a man praying and keeps asking them even

when it appears hopeless, that was me in prison, begging the Khmer Rouge to

believe I was not a doctor. Or if that was not exactly what I did in prison, that

was what I felt like doing in prison, which still gave me an emotion to work

with. When Dith Pran carries a young boy toward the minefield, that was me,

carrying my young niece Ngim.

  Gradually I began to build on the skills I had learned. With advice from

Sam, and with pushes from Roland, who refused to accept my limitations, I

did things I did not know I could do.

In the central scene of the movie, Dith Pran has to say goodbye to the

Western journalists, leave the safety of the French embassy and go off into

the countryside. It is a sad scene because the journalists have failed to protect

him and he knows he has to go even though he will probably die. I prepared

for it by remembering what it had been like to say good-bye to Huoy on the

front lines. Every time we said good-bye it hurt, because we knew we might

never see each other again. I dwelt on that sadness until it grew and the

feeling took over, and then just before the cameras started rolling I reachedinto my memory and remembered how I felt when she died. On the set I tried

to  hold  in  my  emotions  as  I  shook  hands  with  one  Western  journalist,

embraced Sydney Schanberg and slowly walked downstairs, but the sadness

and grief were beyond control. Between takes the wardrobe man handed me

tissues without looking at me. ‘Roland,’ I said after the sixth take, ‘I don’t

think I can do this again.’ Roland paid no attention. He shot the scene a

seventh time and this time everything was right. When I came off the set the

cast and crew looked at me in absolute silence. The kind of silence that is

louder than applause. I kept on walking, because in my mind I was still on

my way out of the French embassy, heading toward death in the countryside.

  What was strangest was going out to shoot these scenes during the day,

believing in the part I was playing, and then going back to a luxurious hotel.

The cast and crew ate well, lived well and were very sociable in the evenings.

It was like a huge party. Then the next morning I would wake up and wonder

all over again whether the Khmer Rouge were going to tie me up and take me

away.

  Usually I could cross from the hotel to the film role and back again. But

sometimes on location my defences fell apart and I slipped back into the

hunger and terror of the Khmer Rouge years. There was a scene where Dith

Pran made an incision in the neck of a live ox for the blood, for nutrition. (I

had never done that in real life, but I had cut the tail off a live ox – pretty

much the same thing.) He is caught by the Khmer Rouge, beaten and kicked.

In the shooting of the scene I wore padding under my clothes to protect parts

of my back and my legs. Unfortunately the bamboo stick that was supposed

to be used in the scene broke and was replaced by a heavy wooden stick. And

unfortunately the actors playing the Khmer Rouge guards didn’t hit me where

the padding was. For a moment it was too real – the shock, the pounding of

my blood in my ears, knowing that I was going to die.

  Then there was the chhlop. She was a young girl who lived in a small

refugee camp just outside Aranyaprathet. The casting people found her and

the  wardrobe  people  gave  her  just  the  right  appearance,  the  baggy  black

clothes, the short hair parted in the middle with the ends tucked behind the

ears, but she needed coaching. She was a shy young girl, and whenever she

could she clung to her older sister like a baby to its mother. I told her in

Khmer how to look at me like a real chhlop, full of anger and power. She

should tilt her head back to stare ‘down’ on me and her lower lip and jaw

should protrude to signal her disdain. But most of all, she had to get the eyesright. ‘Look hard at me,’ I said. ‘Don’t blink. Just stare at me. Like you want

to eat me. Like I’m Enemy Number One.’

  When filming started the young girl was transformed. Only she didn’t just

resemble Khmer Rouge. There was something deep inside her character that

she hadn’t learned from me.

  ‘Just like Khmer Rouge!’ I shouted to Roland Joffé. ‘She is Khmer Rouge

– 100 per cent!’

  Roland looked at me and came over to try to get me to calm down, but I

was  still  pointing  at  the  girl  and  shouting.  Maybe  he  misunderstood  me.

Maybe he thought I meant that she was Khmer Rouge in the technical sense,

a girl who had worked for the Khmer Rouge administration. I don’t know.

Maybe that’s what I meant too. All I know was that a lot of people had come

over to restrain me. ‘You can tell by the eyes! Look at her eyes!’ I was

shouting.

  Roland was fascinated. He did take after take, to watch her. Off-camera

she went to her big sister and shyly hid behind her. On-camera she became a

different person, resentful, surly, arrogant. It was like turning an electric light

switch on and off. For Roland, who understood more about Cambodians than

the other Westerners on the set, the girl was the solution to the mystery. The

mystery was how the Cambodians, the most shy and gentle people in the

world, had turned into mass killers. This is Roland’s explanation: Cambodian

children bury their anger deep. They are not allowed to be aggressive toward

elders. They have to keep their heads lower than the adults’ when walking

past them. When sitting, they have to be careful not to point their feet. The

anger stays suppressed when they become adults, because the society is so

rigidly concerned with keeping face. When anger has a chance to come out, it

is uncontrollable.

I saw it more simply. To me, when the little girl was ‘acting’ she became

her real self. Whether she had been in the Khmer Rouge or not, hers was a

soul I had seen many times before. She had little schooling or religion. Little

to train her away from the worst trait of Cambodians. The little girl was kum-

monuss.

  Besides acting the part of Dith Pran, I felt it was my duty to help Roland

make  the  film  as  accurate  as  possible.  Roland  agreed  to  many  of  my

suggestions. For example, the film shows Khmer Rouge putting plastic bags

over people’s heads, which is something not in the script. We did scenes of

life on the front lines of transplanting rice, of pulling a plough by hand, andRoland was as interested as I was in making them authentic. He refused,

though,  when  I  asked  him  to  show  the  Khmer  Rouge  whipping  the  men

pulling the plough. I felt the film should be more violent, to show what the

Khmer  Rouge  were  really  like,  but  Roland  did  not  agree.  In  terms  of

historical  authenticity,  I  was  right;  in  terms  of  knowing  what  the  movie

audiences would tolerate, he was. If the film had shown how bad things really

were under the Khmer Rouge, Westerners would have refused to see it.

We were in Thailand for four and a half months. It was a stressful time for

me. I lost weight. My nightmares were even more frequent than before. I

didn’t have much chance to see old friends, like General Chana, Uncle Lo,

John  Crowley,  Susan  Walker  and  the  Cambodians  I  knew  in  the  refugee

camps. I missed my niece Sophia. But the cast and crew of The Killing Fields

were excellent companions.

Before we left Thailand we had a big cast party in Bangkok. Everyone

came prepared to have a good time. I did too. But I showed up in black

trousers, black tunic and black rubber-tyre sandals. In Khmer Rouge costume.

To remind them that we were doing more than just making a movie.                                          41



                                      Celebrity


 




In the final version of The Killing Fields there is a scene, filmed in Thailand,

where Sam Waterston and I, playing Sydney Schanberg and Dith Pran, visit

Lon Nol troops and their US military advisers. The Khmer Rouge launch an

attack. Sam and I jump into a foxhole. The camera shifts to a close-up, filmed

in England, of the two of us in the foxhole and me shouting, ‘Sydney, look!

Khmer  Rouge!’  Without  pause  the  movie  shifts  back  to  footage  shot  in

Thailand. It is all so perfectly matched that the viewer would never know the

difference.

  Similarly, the evacuation of the US embassy in Phnom Penh, filmed with

actors  in  Thailand,  is  spliced  with  shots  of  huge  US  Marine  helicopters,

filmed in San Diego.

It surprised me, but that’s how movies are – put together from footage shot

in different times and places, with reshootings, audio dubs, titles and music

added in. The actors are only part of the illusion.

The first and longest session of shooting had taken place in Thailand from

March to August 1983. In November 1983 we had another two weeks of

shooting in San Diego and in Canada. In April 1984 I went off to Thailand

for a few weeks to film the escape to the border. In August and September I

was in England to shoot a few scenes, like the close-up in the foxhole, and do

some audio dubbing.

I didn’t mind the travelling. It was an opportunity to see new places and to

be reunited with the cast and crew.

Each time I returned from filming to my four-hundred-dollar-a-week job inLos  Angeles.  Each  time  I  came  back  I  felt  guilty.  My  colleagues  at  the

Chinatown  Service  Centre  were  wonderful  people  –  some  of  them

Vietnamese, some Cambodian, some Chinese from Taiwan and Hong Kong.

The work we did was important and practical. We had goals to reach. Each

month we tried to place a certain number of refugees in jobs. Each time I left

made it harder on the others.

Each time I went off, my supervisor granted me a leave of absence. She

was very kind. And only she and the overall boss of the centre knew the real

reason for my travels. I didn’t tell anybody else in LA, except Sophia. To my

friends and colleagues I explained vaguely that I was going off to work with

refugees. Part of my reason for not telling them was to protect myself in case

the movie wasn’t any good. There was no sense in getting them excited and

then disappointing them later. But the underlying reason for not telling them

was that I had developed a habit of secrecy under the Khmer Rouge. It was

still hard to trust people. I didn’t even tell Balam, who lived a few doors

away, or my brother Hok, who lived outside LA, or my cousin Phillip Thong.

It was like leading a double life.

  Around November 1984, while sitting in my cubicle at the office, a call

came in from the Warner Brothers studio in Burbank. David Puttnam and

Roland Joffé were there, and they wanted me to go to a prerelease screening

of the film in San Diego. I sat with my Cambodian clients for the rest of the

afternoon, explaining to them about registering for welfare and food stamps. I

drove home at the usual time, and then a limousine pulled up outside my

apartment. The limousine took me through the freeway traffic to the Burbank

airport and onto the runway next to a small private jet. David and Roland and

a few others were already aboard. The jet took off over the lights of LA, the

hostess served champagne, and I sat back to marvel over the direction my life

was taking.

  During the shooting of the film I had never allowed myself to believe that I

was different from anyone else. David and Roland had always been down-to-

earth and unpretentious. Sam was always pleasant and courteous to everyone.

Those  men  set  the  tone.  Working  with  them,  I  didn’t  daydream  about

becoming a ‘star.’

I had never even wanted to be an actor. I knew who I was. In my mind I

was  still  a  doctor  from  Cambodia.  But  now,  as  the  plane  flew  down  the

southern California coastline, I began to reconsider who I was and what I was

doing. It was impossible not to compare my miserable life as a war slave withthis. Surely this was as luxurious as life got, travelling around in limousines

and private jets.

I  thought:  The  gods  saved  my  life.  They  have  given  me  opportunities

beyond anything I dreamed of. Maybe they have some purpose for me to

fulfill.

We got to the theatre, but the screening was almost over. We only saw the

last half hour of the movie. The audience filled out forms rating the picture in

different categories, excellent, good, fair or poor. The forms I saw were all

marked ‘excellent’ for both me and Sam Waterston. People crowded around

me  asking  for  autographs.  Nobody  had  ever  asked  me  for  an  autograph

before.

In the following weeks there were prerelease screenings in LA. Because of

one thing or another I always got there late. This was irritating, because I had

never  seen  the  entire  film  in  sequence,  just  rough  cuts  of  the  scenes  in

Roland’s editing room in England. The audiences clapped long and hard. As I

was leaving the screening at the University of Southern California, a woman

student threw both her arms around me and began hugging and kissing me.

She said she wanted to marry me. She had never even met me before.

In December the film had its world premiere, in New York. Once again I

missed the showing of the film. It was a confusing and hectic visit, signing

autographs, having my picture taken, being led from one set of hot television

lights to the next for interviews. My name was called out at a banquet, and

people stood up and clapped. I shook hands with thousands of strangers. The

whole time, I was asking myself, Why me? Why am I being treated this way?

I just got to this country. What’s going on?

For me the only good part of the New York opening was finally being able

to  meet  the  real  Sydney  Schanberg  and  Dith  Pran.  The  real  Sydney  was

shorter than Sam Waterston. He had greying hair, a grey beard and enormous

round eyes. I liked him right away, and Dith Pran too. Pran was shorter than

me. He was gentle and peaceful, not hyperactive like me. He was working as

a photographer at The New York Times, where Sydney was working too. Pran

and I spoke in English first, out of courtesy to the others, and then switched

to Khmer as soon as we could. We had a lot to talk about.

I asked him what the Khmer Rouge had done to him in real life, because I

knew the movie script had changed some of the details. He said he had been

caught for stealing rice. Khmer Rouge soldiers beat him. They were planning

to  send  him  away  for  execution  but  the  village  chief  stopped  them  andarranged for him to be sent to re-education classes, where he later ‘confessed’

his crimes to save his life. During those years his wife and children were

safely in the United States, but of course he never heard from them, and he

lost most of the rest of his family to executions and starvation. After the

Vietnamese invaded he became mayor of a small town for a while to help the

people.  But  the  Vietnamese  discovered  he  had  an  ‘unclean’  political

background from working with the American press. It got dangerous for him,

and he escaped to Thailand, arriving in October 1979.

Pran and I agreed, in all seriousness, that we would have liked the movie to

show more violence, to reflect what had really happened in Cambodia. Then

we started joking about who had the worse time. He said he had eaten mice,

snails and lizard. ‘You had lizard?’ I said. ‘Very tasty. That’s like T-bone

steak here. The best meal I ever ate was termites and red ant eggs.’ He said he

was sorry, he had never eaten insects like that. In fact my experiences were

worse than his under the Khmer Rouge, but it didn’t matter. Meeting him was

almost like discovering a twin. I knew we would be friends for life.

  Then  came  the  London  opening,  in  January.  Sydney  Schanberg,  Sam

Waterston, Dith Pran and I were all there, dressed in tuxedoes. The Duchess

of Kent sat across the aisle from me, wearing diamond and pearl jewellery.

For the first time I had a chance to see the complete film with all the scenes

in  order.  When  the  film  began  the  audience  was  still  chattering  and

whispering.  There  was  laughter  when  John  Malkovich,  playing  the  wild

photographer Al Rockoff, explained that the ice bandage on his forehead to

help his hangover was made from a sanitary napkin. Then as the horror of the

civil war sunk in, the laughter subsided and the audience grew quieter and

quieter.

At  the  scene  of  the  American  withdrawal,  when  my  wife  left  on  a

helicopter, I began to cry. I cannot explain it. Maybe it was seeing it on a big

screen for the first time, the size and the fullness of it. Maybe because it was

like losing Huoy.

A lady in the seat behind me handed me tissues.

I cried again at the French embassy scene, seeing myself leave the Western

journalists to go out into the countryside.

I couldn’t control myself. The tears came rolling out and the lady kept

giving me tissues. I cried when the Khmer Rouge put a plastic bag over a

prisoner’s head. I cried when I sucked the blood of an ox and when I fell into

the mass grave of bones while trying to make my escape.I cried at the ending when Sydney and Pran, or Sam and I, were reunited in

a refugee camp in Thailand. The ending was filmed in Khao-I-Dang, right in

front of the ARC ward, where I had worked as a doctor.

But I wasn’t the only one crying. So was the Duchess of Kent. When the

final credits came on the screen, the people in the audience sat numbly in

their seats, some of them still dabbing at their eyes. When the lights came on,

Sydney, Pran, Sam and I were introduced. The audience gave us a standing

ovation and long, long applause.

The Western media began running stories about The Killing Fields. Until

that time relatively few people knew what had happened in Cambodia during

the Khmer Rouge years – intellectuals and Asia experts had, maybe, but not

the  general  public.  The  film  put  the  story  of  those  years  in  terms  that

everybody  could  understand,  because  it  was  a  story  about  the  friendship

between two men.

To my surprise, much of the media’s attention focused on me. Through the

movie I had become a sort of symbol for Cambodia and its suffering. Or

rather Pran and I became a symbol together, because people were always

confusing our names. That I was a refugee who had never acted before made

the film more newsworthy than if an experienced actor had played the Dith

Pran part.

I kept going back to my job as a counsellor at the Chinatown Service

Centre. By now my role in the movie was no secret. I kept having to leave to

be interviewed, to travel and even to accept awards. First I won a Golden

Globe award for best supporting actor. Then in March 19851 went to London

again  to  accept  two  British  Academy  Awards,  for  Most  Outstanding

Newcomer and Best Actor.

  Sophia came along on that trip to London. She was an excellent student,

with  a  straight-A  average.  She  was  very  smart,  just  like  her  mother  and

father, but she had grown up too fast for my liking. She hadn’t liked her

straight black Asian hair, so she had it permed. She had often seemed restless

and unhappy at home in Los Angeles. I didn’t know why. Maybe it was

because she was a teenager, or maybe because it was difficult for her to have

me away so much. Maybe it was also difficult because I was traditional and

Cambodian in my thinking. I was strict with her, just as my father had been

strict with me. It was the only way I knew to raise children. But she seemed

happy to be travelling, to see new sights.

We  came  home  from  London.  We  had  moved  from  our  one-roomapartment in the alleyway to a two-bedroom apartment upstairs in the same

building complex, with a view overlooking the skyscrapers of downtown LA.

Our living room was already cluttered with trophies and certificates. I put the

British Academy Awards on the table and didn’t think much about them.

  From everything the people at Warner Brothers told me, the American

Academy Awards mattered most. The Oscars, they called them. I had been

nominated in the category of Best Supporting Actor, but my reaction was to

downplay  the  chance  of  winning.  One  of  the  other  nominees  was  John

Malkovich, for his role in the movie Places in the Heart. I knew how good

John was. I had watched scenes from The Killing Fields over and over again

in the editing room, and each time I saw some small perfect detail in his

performance that I had not noticed before. Besides, I was still upset at Roland

Joffé for not letting me meet Dith Pran before filming started. If I had, I could

have changed my performance to be more like Dith Pran.

Two  days  before  the  Oscar  awards,  television  crews  showed  up  at  the

Chinatown Service Centre and at my apartment. They began following me

around  with  their  cameras.  I  wondered  if  they  were  following  John

Malkovich too. I missed John and his dirty jokes. Nobody else had ever made

me laugh as much as he had.

The day of the Oscars I called my supervisor at work and asked permission

to take the day off. I was too restless to work. I told Sophia to take a holiday

from school too. TV crews waited outside the apartment. They followed me

when I went to rent my tuxedo and filmed it for the news. I wondered what

was so special about somebody trying on a tuxedo.

  When I got home there were three long black limousines parked on the

street outside. Dith Pran had arrived in one, Pat Golden in another and Ed

Crane from Warner Brothers Publicity in the third. They all came into my

apartment. Everybody in the neighbourhood, which was predominantly Asian

and lower middle class, had turned out to stare at the limousines and the TV

crews.

Pat Golden, Ed Crane, Sophia and I got into one of the limos to ride to the

ceremony together. My neighbours waved me off and wished me well. The

Oscars were being held in the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion, which was not far

away. The traffic was bumper to bumper. It took an hour to get there. We

could have walked there faster from my apartment. I felt like walking, to get

rid of my energy.

By  the  time  we  got  past  the  camera  teams  and  the  police  lines  theceremony  had  started  and  the  first  awards  had  already  been  handed  out.

Inside the auditorium sat rows and rows of dazzling women and well-dressed

men. The usher took Sophia and me to some empty seats in the second row

on the far left side of the stage. It seemed like only a few minutes later that a

very short woman named Linda Hunt came onstage to present the award for

Best Supporting Actor. She had won an award the year before, for her role in

the movie The Year of Living Dangerously.

  She  said,  ‘Good  evening,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  five  actors  we’re

about to celebrate have each taken different paths. I know that none of them

thinks of this evening as their final goal. The goal, if any, lies in the work and

in a private sense of challenge and achievement. To be chosen the best for a

piece of work is a welcome prize, and to know that you have done it in the

way that is best for you is every way as sweet.’ She read off the names of the

nominees. When she came to my name the television cameras panned around

the  audience  but  couldn’t  find  me  because  the  usher  had  taken  us  to  the

wrong seats. On the television monitors, a picture of me from The Killing

Fields appeared.

I looked down the row of seats and saw Sam Waterston near the centre

aisle. I cannot remember what went through my mind except for being glad

that Sam was there. He had helped me a lot. I was extremely nervous.

  ‘And the winner is . . .

. . . Haing S. Ngor of The Killing Fields!’

I walked past Sam and pumped his hand and tried to get him to come up on

the stage with me, but he motioned me on. When I got on the stage my mind

went blank. I was holding the trophy in my hand and standing at the lectern.

The stage lights and TV cameras were on me, but I couldn’t think what to

say. I had practised a speech in the limousine but couldn’t remember a word

of it.

  ‘This is unbelievable,’ I said finally, and then it came back to me. ‘But so

is my entire life. I vish to thank all members of Motion Picture Academy for

this great honour. I thank David Puttnam, Roland Joffé for giving me this

chance to act for the first time in The Killing Fields. And I share this award to

my friend Sam Waterston, Dith Pran, Sydney Schanberg and also Pat Golden,

director of casting – lady who found me for this role.’

  There was laughter and applause from the audience, laughter because of

my accent and grammatical mistakes, applause because I wasn’t going to let

them stop me. ‘And I thank’ – more laughter and applause – ‘and I thankWarner Brothers for helping me tell my story to the world, let the world

know what happened in my country. And I thank God-Buddha that tonight I

am even here. Sank you. Sank you very much.’

The audience was on its feet clapping and shouting, and a few were wiping

their tears. I lifted the trophy over my head. There are no words to describe it.

I felt as if I were floating in the air. My feet were off the ground.

I walked off the stage and the usher guided me to where I should have

been, in the same row on the opposite side of the stage. Another usher was

escorting  Sophia  there  too.  In  front  of  us,  in  the  first  row,  was  John

Malkovich. He looked at me with his sly grin.

  ‘Ach anh neh,’ he said, pointing at the trophy. ‘Rar boh anh teh.’

  Sophia’s head snapped around and her jaw dropped open. I was sure I

hadn’t heard him right, so I smiled back at John and edged into my seat. It

was good to see him.

  ‘Ach anh neh. Rar boh anh teh,’ he repeated, still grinning, still pointing at

the Oscar. This time it sunk in. When we were in Thailand I had taught John

how to curse in Khmer.

He had just told me, ‘Kiss my ass. It’s mine.’                                          42



                                        Kama


 




Until my name was announced and I went up on stage, I did not think I would

win the Oscar. A man who had never acted before, who had just moved to the

United States, who could not yet speak English fluently – the odds were too

much against it. Even Hollywood movies do not have endings so unlikely.

Nobody would believe them if they did.

But it had happened. I had won against the odds. I had the trophy to prove

it, a tall, heavy, gold-plated figure of a man with a featureless and enigmatic

face.

Or rather, I had won again. In the country of the real killing fields the odds

against me had been worse.

  When the miracles pile up one after the next it is hard not to think about

kama.

  Sometimes people are chosen to fulfill a mission they are unaware of. They

are instruments of destiny, serving a purpose larger than themselves. So it

had  been  for  me.  The  gods  had  known  everything  in  advance  and  I  had

known nothing. They had planned for me to suffer, planned for me to serve,

planned for me to be rewarded. It was kama. Without knowing it, I fulfilled

their mission. I had helped tell the story of Cambodia to the outside world.

The  morning  after  the  Academy  Awards  I  came  into  the  Chinatown

Service Centre at 8.00 a.m. as usual, turned right, walked to the end of the

hall into the Indochinese Unit’s office, and sat at my little cubicle under the

fluorescent lights. I didn’t get much work done. Everyone wanted to touch

the trophy. Journalists and TV crews crowded into the room, the phone keptringing and the day was lost to interviews and congratulations.

In the following weeks I didn’t get much work done either. There were

appearances on network television shows, more interviews, trips to the Far

East and to Europe to promote the film. Dith Pran and I went to the White

House to meet President Reagan. Life was crazy-busy. In June 1985 I took

another leave of absence from the Chinatown Service Centre. This time when

the leave was up I didn’t go back.

I have a new job now, as a spokesman for Cambodians and as an organizer

of aid to refugees. Much of my time is spent travelling, making speeches,

taking part in conferences and talking with people in and out of government.

In Los Angeles I work with the Khmer Humanitarian Organization, which

helps  Cambodians  in  refugee  camps  and  in  the  United  States,  and  with

another  organization  called  United  Khmer  Humanitarianism  and  Peace,

which supports a makeshift temple in a house and is trying to build a real

temple in traditional Cambodian style. Several times a year I go to the Thai-

Cambodian border, where I am helping start a medical training centre. There,

in a bamboo-and-thatch building, the staff and I will teach public health skills

to villagers who are going back inside Cambodia to resettle.

Like me, my friend Dith Pran makes public appearances and works with

organizations  that  help  Cambodians.  He  and  I  are  close  friends.  We  do

whatever we can to help heal Cambodia’s wounds. There are many of us,

volunteering,  speaking  out,  working  at  all  levels,  and  there  is  a  kinship

between us because we all have lived through the same terrible events.

I  am  sometimes  asked  what  winning  the  Oscar  means  to  me.  To  me

personally it means being able to admit that my acting in The Killing Fields

was good. It means opening my heart and letting the praise flow in after

shutting  it  out  for  so  long.  The  recognition  was  sweet.  I  do  not  deny  it

anymore.

To me professionally, as a spokesman, the Oscar opens doors. Until the

film came out the tragedy in Cambodia was not well known thoughout the

world. Because of the film and the Oscar I am able to go and talk to almost

anyone. Dith Pran can too. Many Cambodians have discovered open doors.

This is good, that people listen to us now and become more aware of our

country and our problems. Nobody listened before.

  And, of course, the Oscar opens doors for me as an actor. It has brought

me other acting roles, and not just in Hollywood. Between the time of the

Academy Awards and the writing of this book I have played in two Chinese-language  movies  filmed  in  Asia,  a  French-language  documentary  about

Cambodia,  an  advertisement  for  a  pharmaceutical  company,  episodes  of

Hotel and Miami Vice, a miniseries called In Love and War and a pilot for a

TV programme.

I enjoy acting. It gives me an opportunity to use my natural gifts. It allows

me to meet new people and explore many different locations. But acting is

only a means to an end. It gives me the money and the free time to do my real

job, which is helping Cambodians. In the future, perhaps I will make my

living some other way. I have not given up my dream of working again as a

doctor.

  Whatever  happens,  I  am  not  worried  about  my  future.  I  have  always

survived. I still drive my 1980 VW. I still wear the clothes that Uncle Lo had

made for me when I was living in Lumpini. I live in the same apartment I

lived in before I won the award. I will probably move somewhere else, but

there is no hurry. Whether I go on with acting, or become a doctor again, or

return  to  my  old  job  at  the  Chinatown  Service  Centre  is  not  terribly

important.

  What is more important than what I do, or what Dith Pran does, or what

any Cambodian does, is the fate of the country we came from. Cambodia is

now called the People’s Republic of Kampuchea. Heng Samrin, the former

Khmer Rouge commander, is still the puppet leader. The hand inside the

puppet  is  still  Vietnamese.  Vietnamese  ‘advisers’  give  the  orders,  and

150,000 well-armed Vietnamese troops make sure the orders are carried out.

  Quietly and without formal announcements the Vietnamese have colonized

Cambodia. They take huge amounts of fish from Tonle Sap, our inland sea,

and truck it to Vietnam. They take our rubber and rice and other natural

resources.  They  encourage  Vietnamese  nationals  and  Cambodians  of

Vietnamese  descent  to  settle  throughout  Cambodia.  Vietnamese  men  take

Khmer  women  to  be  their  wives,  whether  the  women  want  it  or  not.

Vietnamese crimes against Cambodians go unpunished. In the schools there

is little study of Cambodian culture. Vietnamese and Russian languages are

taught, and the brightest students are sent off to Hanoi or to Moscow for

higher education.

  Though the Vietnamese do not tie people up and throw them into mass

graves, the way the Khmer Rouge did, their system of ‘justice’ has much in

common  with  that  of  the  Khmer  Rouge.  They  arrest  people  for  making

remarks against the regime, for listening to unauthorized radio broadcasts andfor marrying without permission. They do not give the prisoners hearings or

trials. The prisons are filthy and excrement-filled. Torture is common. The

interrogators  beat  their  victims,  whip  them  with  chains  and  rubber  hoses,

attach electrodes to their skin and suffocate them with plastic bags. I know

this from refugee accounts, but you do not have to take my word for it. You

can read it in the reports of Amnesty International.

The Vietnamese use forced labour, not to build canals and dams like the

Khmer Rouge, but to cut roadside trees to deprive anti- government guerrillas

of ambush cover. The new war slaves clear land, build barriers and lay mines,

particularly near the Thai border. In the labour camps malaria is widespread,

and so is loss of legs from accidentally stepping on mines. Amputees are a

common sight.

The war still goes on in Cambodia. When the Vietnamese army goes out in

force in the daytime it can travel wherever it likes, but as soon as its troops

pass or as soon as night falls, the countryside belongs to the resistance forces.

Night-time curfews are imposed in all the cities. It is a guerrilla war without

fixed lines and with many different participants. The resistance forces get

most of their assistance from mainland China. The Vietnamese get assistance

from the USSR. So in a sense the war in Cambodia is a war between the two

communist sponsors, China and Russia. Cambodia is a pawn in their struggle

for power and influence in Asia.

The resistance has three factions. Over time the thieves and warlords of the

Khmer Serei were joined by more and more Cambodians who were serious

and  patriotic.  They  formed  the  two  anti-communist  factions:  the  Khmer

People’s National Liberation Front (KPNLF) and the National United Front

for  an  Independent,  Neutral,  Peaceful  and  Cooperative  Cambodia

(FUNCINPEC  in  its  French  initials).  Sad  to  say,  both  factions  have

leadership problems. The head of FUNCINPEC is Prince Sihanouk, who lost

credibility for siding with the Khmer Rouge in the 1970s and who lives now

in China and North Korea. The head of the KPNLF is Son Sann, a frail old

gentleman without  much military experience. Their Thailand headquarters

both have had problems – public quarrels and power struggles and many,

many reports of bonjour. But both the KPNLF and FUNCINPEC have good

men in their organizations, particularly those who get out in the field and do

the actual working and sweating and fighting. I admire these men very much.

The third and strongest resistance faction is the Khmer Rouge, who are

now well fed and well armed once again. The Khmer Rouge claim they arenot communist anymore, just nationalists who want to drive the Vietnamese

out of Cambodia. They also claim that Pol Pot has ‘retired’. Pol Pot has been

seriously ill, but as long as he is alive he is likely to stay in command. After

all, he has had years of practice pretending that someone else is in charge.

His successor will probably be Son Sen, who was minister of defence when

the  Khmer  Rouge  ruled  Cambodia  and  who  oversaw  the  prison  system,

including the prisons where I was tortured. Son Sen’s wife was minister of

culture, responsible for the slaughter of the monks and the elimination of

Buddhism as a religion in Cambodia. The other contender for the leadership

position is Ta Mok, a notorious military commander who killed his main

rivals to get the job of Southwest Zone commander while Pol Pot was still

ruling the country.

In 1982 the three resistance factions’ backers – China, the five ASEAN or

noncommunist countries of Southeast Asia, plus the United States – forced

the  Khmer  Rouge,  the  KPNLF  and  the  FUNCINPEC  to  form  a  coalition

government-in-exile. This coalition, which is called Democratic Kampuchea,

the same as the old Khmer Rouge regime, serves a certain practical purpose.

It has enabled the combined resistance forces to keep Cambodia’s seat at the

UN. The diplomatic presence has helped keep pressure on Vietnam to get out

of Cambodia. Each year a resolution passes the UN General Assembly by an

overwhelming majority calling on Vietnam to leave. Militarily, by working

together, the three factions have made the occupation of Cambodia expensive

for Vietnam. They have not been able to defeat the Vietnamese, but neither

have the Vietnamese been able to defeat them. Someday this combination of

military stalemate and diplomatic pressure might lead to a conference that

will pave the way for a political solution. The first signs of yielding to the

pressure have already appeared.

  Morally, this coalition government is another matter. It is a terrible, terrible

thing  to  have  to  accept  the  Khmer  Rouge  into  a  partnership  to  drive  the

Vietnamese out. Like the sign said on National Route 5, ‘Khmer Rouge –

Enemy Forever’.

  Reluctantly I agree that it is necessary to fight on the same side as the

Khmer Rouge until the Vietnamese leave the country. But I do not think it is

necessary to wait to put the Khmer Rouge leaders on trial for their crimes.

They have committed genocide against their own people and they should pay

the  price.  Currently,  an  organization  called  the  Cambodia  Documentation

Commission is trying to arrange for the trial of top Khmer Rouge leaders                                      8
before an international tribunal.  I  support  this  effort  completely.  Besides

serving justice, the removal of the top Khmer Rouge leaders would have a

practical  effect  on  diplomacy:  it  would  take  away  Vietnam’s  excuse  for

staying in Cambodia, which is to protect the country against the return of Pol

Pot.

The previous phases of the war have left more than three hundred thousand

people along the Thai-Cambodian border and in the remaining refugee camps

inside Thailand. The Thais have closed most of the camps and would like to

close the rest. The Western countries have tired of accepting Cambodians for

resettlement. Unable to go forward, unwilling to go back, the people of the

border live in huts. They eat handout food because they do not have the land

or the security to grow their own. The boys become soldiers before they are

men.  In  the  hospitals  and  clinics,  Cambodian  staff  and  a  few  Western

volunteers continue the job of medical treatment. The case load never ends:

malaria,  tuberculosis,  dysentery,  rifle  wounds.  You  see  men  who  have

stepped on mines hobbling about on low-cost artificial legs. You see refugees

suffering from depression, from the trauma of losing their families and from

the powerlessness of their existence as refugees. When I am in the refugee

camp hospitals and I see that almost nothing has changed, I feel powerless

too. Because nothing I have done, from my medical work to my acting in The

Killing Fields to my fundraising, has been able to change the basic conditions

along the border. At times like this, when patients fill every bed and the

breeze barely filters through the split-bamboo walls, my Oscar award means

nothing to me at all.


The  Cambodian  holocaust  ripped  through  our  lives,  tossing  us  randomly,

leaving none of us the way we were. You can blame who you want, the

outside powers for interfering, or our own internal flaws like corruption and

kum, but when the talking is over we still do not know why it had to happen.

The country is still in ruins, millions have died and those of us who survived

are not done with our grieving.

Of the Cambodians I knew, most died. That is the overall pattern. But it is

hard to get information. I do not know what happened to Uncle Kruy the bus

driver; to my doctor friends Pok Saradath and Dav Kiet; to Chea Huon, my

former teacher and later Khmer Rouge leader; to Sangam, my friend from the

fertilizer crew, and to many others.

This I do know: Pen Tip, who tried so many times to kill me, is now inmedical school in Phnom Penh. I am sure he has many friends among his new

masters, the Vietnamese.

My Aunt Kim, who told the chief of Tonle Batí that I was a doctor, has

settled in a certain city in the United States. With her came her sons Haing

Seng, who had the argument with me in Tonle Batí, and Haing Meng, who to

the best of my knowledge (or as Americans say, allegedly) was a Khmer

Rouge  officer  who  managed  to  slip  through  his  Immigration  interviews

without being caught. He has changed his name; I do not know where he is.

Of my other relatives, my brother Hong Srun is still in Cambodia with two

of my older brother’s children. My youngest brother, Hok, lives with his wife

and child outside LA. My cousins Balam and Phillip Thong still live in LA

and are doing well. I also have cousins in Macao and France and one niece in

France, the only surviving daughter of my sister Chhai Thau.

As for my niece Sophia, she was not happy living with me. Perhaps I was

too traditional and Cambodian to understand what she was going through as

an  American  teenager.  I  came  home  from  one  of  my  travels  to  find  an

envelope addressed to me. I never read the letter inside. She has never come

back.

All the arguments I had with my father, all my quarrels with my brother,

and now this – this last, painful blow in my family’s troubled history.

I miss Sophia.

I live, for now, in my two-bedroom apartment with a balcony outside and a

view of the towers of downtown Los Angeles in the distance. The walls are

covered with awards I have received and pictures from The Killing Fields.

Higher than the rest, in the position of honour, is a photograph of Huoy,

enlarged from the ID picture I begged from the chief of Phum Ra so long

ago.

I still wear the locket of Huoy on a gold chain around my neck. Her spirit

still guides me. She would allow me to get married and raise a family, but so

far I have not. It is not easy for me to find someone to take her place.

  Someday, when Cambodia is free, I will return to the leaning sdao tree on

the hillock in the rice fields. With me will be Buddhist monks. We will hold a

ceremony  and  build  a  monument  for  her  next  to  the  temple  on  the

mountainside. We will pray for Huoy and her mother and my parents and

family, and for all those who lost their lives. Then maybe their souls will be

at peace. And maybe mine will be too.

I remember walking with her along the riverfront in Phnom Penh, in theevening. The lights reflected off the surface of the water, and the wind blew

through her hair. We strolled along without cares, talking about the future.

How bright the future seemed then – working hard and prospering, having

children, staying close to our families. How bright it all seemed. But our lives

did not turn out the way we planned. Her life ended too soon. And I will

never be forgiven by my memories.                                      Epilogue



                                by Roger Warner


 




Fifteen years have passed since this book was originally published.

With this new edition comes a chance to explain how this book came

to be written and to tell the story of Dr Haing Ngor’s later life.

In  1980,  when  I  was  a  young  freelance  journalist,  an  American

magazine  assigned  me  to  write  about  the  refugees  from  Vietnam,

Cambodia, and Laos pouring into Thailand. In the dusty Thai border

town of Aranyaprathet, I stayed a night in a house full of American

doctors  and  nurses  who  were  working  at  Khao-I-Dang,  the  nearby

refugee camp for Cambodians.

The  house’s  only  Asian  resident  was  a  man  who  emanated  a

powerful negative aura. Though I didn’t catch the name I learned that

he was a Cambodian doctor and a refugee from the Pol Pot regime.

My attempt to get him to tell me about his experiences didn’t get very

far. He didn’t speak much English. He was tired of trying to explain

what he had gone through to barangs or foreigners who didn’t know

much about his country, and he seemed exhausted and depressed.

That evening I went out on the town with American doctors and nurses

from the house. When we came back to the dormitory room where

everyone  slept  on  mats,  there  was  the  Cambodian,  staring  at  us

through the mesh of his mosquito net, his eyes like burning coals.

The next morning the Cambodian doctor and I went our separate

ways.  He  left  for  the  US  soon  after,  and  I  stayed  in  Thailand  for

several years, getting to know people involved in the refugee effort,such as John Crowley and Susan Walker (mentioned in Chapter 37

and 38). Another notable westerner was Father François Ponchaud, a

Khmer-speaking missionary in pre-revolutionary Cambodia, who had

returned  to  work  quietly  in  the  refugee  camps.  Ponchaud’s

masterpiece, Cambodia  Year  Zero,  was  the  first  knowledgeable

exposé of the Khmer Rouge regime and a great influence on me and

on others who were trying to understand the Cambodian holocaust.

At the time I wasn’t ready to write my own book about Cambodia.

There  were  plenty  of  other  topics  to  write  about,  from  the  CIA’s

clandestine war in nearby Laos (eventually the subject of a book of

mine)  to  the  archaeological  ruins  at  Angkor  (another  book)  and

various assignments for magazines. But freelance journalism was as

frustrating back then as it is today, because of the highly selective

interest of faraway editors; because of the low pay; and because the

magazine article format was too short for my liking.

  When The Killing Fields film came out in 1984, I was back in the

States.  Surprisingly,  perhaps,  I  didn’t  connect  the  actor  playing  the

part of Dith Pran in the film with the doctor I had met in 1980. But

several months later, after Susan Walker told me that Haing Ngor had

been  one  of  her  employees  at  Khao-I-Dang,  I  began  to  wonder

whether the co-star of the film could be the same traumatized man I

remembered from Aranyaprathet.

  After the Academy Awards, a literary agent called to invite me to

meet Haing Ngor in Manhattan, on the 25th floor of a skyscraper with

a  spectacular  view  of  Central  Park.  Haing  looked  uncomfortable  in

these  surroundings.  Discovering  that  we  had  stayed  in  the  same

house in Thailand and knew some of the same people helped him

agree to this project.

  We spent about a year discussing his story, at his apartment in LA,

at my home in Massachusetts, and in a trip to the Thai-Cambodian

border.  It  was  always  fascinating.  He  had  never  learned  to  speak

English particularly well. His accent was thick, and his grammar and

vocabulary were limited in comparison to his obvious intelligence and

his phenomenal ability to remember events. Whenever he got stuck

trying to explain himself, he would switch to French, which he spoke

much more fluently than I did. And if I didn’t understand his French, he

stood up and acted out the scenes, playing the part of the differentpeople  involved.  One  way  or  another,  he  always  got  his  meaning

across.

  Successful collaborations are greater than the sum of their parts. I

had  been  looking  for  a  way  to  write  a  book  about  the  refugees  of

south-east Asia. Haing had been looking for someone to help him tell

his own story as a vehicle for telling the larger story of his country. We

became energized by working together and obsessed with getting the

details right. On our trip to Thailand, we waded out into the paddies to

transplant rice; threshed and winnowed harvested rice; and foraged

for edible foods in the forest. We looked through Ponchaud’s book and

other  sources  to  find  Khmer  Rouge  speeches  and  slogans  that

matched his memories.

  Haing was honest and outspoken in this book, as he was in life. To

many of his countrymen, Haing Ngor seemed uncouth for speaking his

mind  and  allowing  himself  to  show  anger;  but  that  same  ferocity

helped  him  transcend  Cambodian  culture  and  connect  with  people

from around the world.

I was very fond of Haing. He was talented, courageous, flawed, and

hot-tempered. He could also be cunning, devious, and exasperating,

but generally he admitted his mistakes and he knew the difference

between wrong and right. After much reflection, I have decided that

the best way to pay tribute to him is to be truthful about his later years.

It is what he would have wanted.


                                        *  *  *

 

Haing Ngor never found peace in his later life.

He was like his country: scarred, and incapable of fully healing.

  Haing’s friends – and he made and discarded many sets of friends –

were  always  suggesting  ways  for  him  to  become  happier  or  more

successful.  They  wanted  him  to  marry  and  settle  down,  volunteer

more  time  to  human  rights  causes,  take  accent-removal  classes  to

improve his marketability as an actor, and so on. And he would go out

on a few dates with an especially worthwhile woman, or accept some

speaking engagements, or take a few classes, and then move on to

something else that caught his attention.

He lived as though he had attention deficit disorder, though nobodycould  ever  figure  out  whether  his  restlessness  came  from  early

childhood or from the traumas he endured under the Khmer Rouge

regime.

‘He was impossible,’ one of his best friends told me, the fondness

mixed with aggravation. ‘He was tormented,’ said another. There are

psychological terms like post-traumatic stress disorder and survivor’s

guilt  that  apply  to  Haing  Ngor,  but  they  did  not  do  justice  to  his

complex nature.

He  never  returned  to  practising  medicine.  He  got  enough  acting

work  to  make  a  good  living  without  having  to  get  recertified  as  a

doctor, or having to show up at an office job for regular hours. This

suited him, because he liked the variety of going off on movie shoots,

but the absence of a steady professional life didn’t help his personal

life.

He was deeply conflicted about women. On the one hand he usually

wore the heavy gold locket with the photo of Huoy under his shirt, a

talisman  of  his  loyalty  to  her  memory.  On  the  other  hand  he  had

dozens  of  love  affairs.  Married  and  unmarried  Cambodian  women

competed for his attention, and he sought them out. Some of them

cared about him deeply and could have changed his life for the better

if he had let them. Others were attracted because he was a celebrity

or  because  they  were  after  his  money.  He  enjoyed  the  flirting  and

intrigue, but he left many women disappointed and their boyfriends or

husbands furious at him without creating lasting security in his own

life.

In the early 1990s, a few years after the original publication of this

book,  the  political  situation  in  Cambodia  began  to  change  for  the

better. With the fall of the Soviet empire, the Vietnamese communists

lost their financial backing and withdrew from their neighbours Laos

and  Cambodia.  In  Cambodia  a  new  political  leader  emerged,  Hun

Sen,  of  the  Cambodian  People’s  Party  or  CPP.  Hun  Sen  was  no

Buddha. He had lost an eye in combat while a battalion commander

for the Khmer Rouge, and he left the Khmer Rouge just ahead of a

purge. Still, the outside world judged him better than most of the other

politicians, and with a lot of machinations Cambodia was reinvented

as a constitutional monarchy, with Sihanouk as the ceremonial head

of state and eventually with Hun Sen as the prime minister and soleday-today ruler.

As  the  country  became  more  accessible  to  the  outside  world,  a

news media expedition was organized, inevitably billed as a ‘Return to

the Killing Fields’. At the centre of this media circus was Diane Sawyer

of ABC News (who arrived in Phnom Penh clutching a copy of this

book, with page corners turned down and many passages underlined),

and her calm and congenial field producer Neal Shapiro, who later

became the head of NBC News. Sydney Schanberg was there for The

New York Times; and I was there for the magazine of the Sunday

Times of London. There were Cambodian and American human rights

spokes-people with us, and the stars were to be Haing and Dith Pran.

The trip was a disappointment. Haing demanded to be put up in a

different hotel from everybody else, and was late for all his interviews.

Dith Pran (whom I like personally) didn’t behave much better. Haing

was evasive about returning to Huoy’s grave site, or about going to

see Pen Tip, who was in Phnom Penh. There were trips to Tuol Sleng

(the  Khmer  Rouge  extermination  centre  on  the  outskirts  of  Phnom

Penh),  to  Angkor  Wat,  and  to  mass  grave  sites;  and  there  were

meetings to discuss human rights issues, at which Haing spoke loudly

and unconvincingly and sometimes got his facts wrong.

In hindsight, it was clear that Haing was under tremendous strain

and anxiety during his initial return to Cambodia. He was caught in a

crossfire of Cambodian relationships and expectations that were more

important  to  him  than  his  status  as  a  spokesman  to  the  west.

Gradually, it has also become clear that even western journalists like

me  who  ought  to  know  better  came  to  this  story  with  unconscious

expectations. Somehow the presence of television cameras made us

expect that Haing and Pran would have cathartic encounters with the

piles of skulls at mass grave sites, as if they were actors in a scripted

docudrama  and  we  journalists  were  there  to  record  their  tears,

everybody playing their preassigned roles. Haing wasn’t buying into

that, but he was too evasive to tell anybody whatever it was that he

was going through. He was too busy being his own difficult self to be a

bridge between Western and Cambodian cultures.

  After that trip, I only saw Haing a few times. Through mutual friends

I  heard  that  he  returned  to  Cambodia  more  often  as  the  Hun  Sen

regime opened its doors and a gold rush of crony capitalism began.Rumours about Haing’s business and personal life started circulating

and they were not favourable. Cambodian gossip can be vicious, and

political  disagreements  can  be  the  hidden  reason  behind  personal

attacks.  Haing  supported  the  CPP  because  he  felt  it  had  the  best

chance of preventing the Khmer Rouge returning to power. Some of

the most malicious gossip came from backers of the other political

factions, the KPNLF and FUNCINPEC. For both political and personal

reasons, Haing was becoming controversial among his countrymen.

He  was  speaking  his  mind  and  not  caring  much  what  anybody

thought.

  During this period he made good on some of his promises to Huoy.

He held a Buddhist ceremony for her in Phnom Penh and he built a

little memorial shrine to her in his home village, Samrong Yong. To the

best of my knowledge, he did not make the pilgrimage to her burial

site under the leaning sdao tree to recover her bones and then re-inter

them in a stupa in the ruined wat on the hillside above. It may have

been too dangerous for him to travel south-west of Battambang at that

time.

  There were two bright spots in his life. The first was The Dr Haing S.

Ngor Foundation, which he organized with the help of Jack Ong, a

Chinese-American actor and minister he met in Sri Lanka, on the set

of  a  film  called The  Iron  Triangle.  Under  Jack  Ong’s  steady

management,  Haing  started  giving  talks  to  Amnesty  International

chapters, and to schools in southern California. He always told young

people to remember their heritage, to stay in school, and not to join

gangs. In Cambodia, the foundation opened an orphanage in Phnom

Penh,  built  a  schoolhouse  in  Samrong  Yong,  and  donated  medical

and  humanitarian  supplies.  Haing  found  the  charitable  work  deeply

satisfying.

The other bright spot in Haing Ngor’s life in the early and mid-1990s

was his reunion with family members, especially his niece Ngim or

Sophia. When Sophia left their shared apartment in LA she went to

New York. She got herself into SUNY, the State University of New

York.  After  eighteen  months  of  not  speaking  to  each  other,  they

reconciled; and Haing was so glad to have Sophia back in his life that

he gave her his Oscar award trophy, his most treasured possession

after his gold locket with the picture of Huoy. Sophia continued withher college studies, graduated, and met a young lawyer named Adam

Demetri. When Adam respectfully asked Haing for Sophia’s hand in

marriage, Haing said yes. The Demetris were like a daughter and son-

in-law to him, and his times with them were among the most calm, the

most settled, he’d had since before the Khmer Rouge takeover.

The rest of his family relations were more volatile. Haing was the

third son in his family. The fourth son, Ngor Hong Srun, changed his

name  during  the  Khmer  Rouge  years,  as  many  Cambodians  did.

Under his new name, Chan Sarun, he became chief of the forestry

and wildlife department in Cambodia’s Hun Sen regime. Haing Ngor

and Chan Sarun didn’t advertise their family connection, and many

otherwise well-informed Cambodians were unaware of it.

In about 1991, Haing Ngor and a friend bought a lumber mill. There

was a lot of construction in Cambodia then, and the mill was a good

investment,  except  that  from  the  beginning  it  required  payments  of

bonjour. For most Cambodians, of course, bonjour is just part of doing

business, but Haing had always disliked making payments to corrupt

officials or policemen and it was too late for him to change his beliefs.

Inevitably, this brought him into conflict with his brother, the chief of

the forestry department.

The details of their disagreements are unclear to me, but in general

political  terms  the  deforestation  of  Cambodia  under  the  Hun  Sen

regime has been dramatic. The disappearance of vast tracts of jungle,

the smuggling of prime hardwoods abroad, the involvement of Thai

and Indonesian criminal figures, and the enrichment of some (but not

all) Cambodian officials became such a hot issue that the World Bank

and other institutions threatened to cut off aid to the Hun Sen regime

unless  there  were  reforms  in  forest  management.  According  to  a

London-based organization, Global Witness:


    In  1995  the  Royal  Government  of  Cambodia  (RGC),  whilst

    involved in supposedly open discussions with various foreign aid

    donors  regarding  forestry  issues,  secretly  awarded  32  forest

    concessions.  These  concessions  covered  6,464,021  hectares,

    which amounts to 35 per cent of Cambodia’s total land area. The

    fact that the concessions were awarded contrary to Cambodia’s

      Constitution has been conveniently forgotten during the ensuing    debate about the fate of these companies.

      All but two of the companies had no experience in running a

    forest concession, they were merely investors taking advantage

    of the political instability at the time and their connections to those

    in  power.  The  companies  have  failed  to  make  the  promised

      investments  and  provide  the  government  with  significant

    revenues, whilst at the same time they, and their protectors, have

    become rich and the forests have been decimated.

 

In response to the international pressure, Hun Sen himself promised

forestry  reforms.  Chan  Sarun  lost  his  job,  and  Global  Witness  was

appointed to monitor compliance. But the fundamental reforms were

never made. In 2003, the letter cancelling Global Witness’ monitoring

contract  was  signed  by  none  other  than  Chan  Sarun,  who  had

reappeared with a promotion to the cabinet-level position of Minister of

Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.

  This  brief  sketch  of  Chan  Sarun’s  story  may  seem  tangential  to

Haing  Ngor’s  story.  The  point  is  that  Haing  found  himself  in  a

politically  as  well  as  personally  uncomfortable  situation.  He  had

returned  to  his  country  after  helping  reveal  to  the  world  the  agony

Cambodia had gone through during the Khmer Rouge regime. He had

returned as a well-to-do celebrity, believing that he was part of the

solution, part of the rebuilding effort, only to find that he and his family

were  part  of  the  problem.  In  the  new  Cambodia,  the  violence  and

fanaticism of the Khmer Rouge had gone, but systematic bonjour had

returned. Among the wealthy elite, almost everybody was complicit to

one degree or another through their families or people they knew and

loved.

To many barangs, or foreigners, the clearest proof of Cambodia’s

incomplete recovery was the failure to put the surviving Khmer Rouge

leaders on trial for genocide. Haing Ngor was an outspoken supporter

of war crimes trials. He gave time and money to Cambodian human

rights groups, but he had supported the Hun Sen regime as the best

way of preventing the Khmer Rouge return to power. However, Hun

Sen, the former mid-level Khmer Rouge operative, never went all-out

to  crush  his  former  bosses  militarily,  when  the  old  Khmer  Rouge

leaders had been reduced to controlling a small western part of thecountry.  Many  of  Hun  Sen’s  closest  political  allies  and  military

commanders were former Khmer Rouge, too.

  From  time  to  time  Haing  sat  down  with  a  journalist  he  knew  in

Phnom Penh, a young and gifted American freelancer named Nate

Thayer,  who  spoke  the  Khmer  language  and  who  had  assigned

himself the difficult task of making contact with Khmer Rouge leaders

in the forests. (Thayer’s later interview with Pol Pot was one of the

great  scoops  in  late  20th  century  journalism.)  Haing  questioned

Thayer  at  length,  never  smiling,  drilling  for  information  about  the

Khmer  Rouge  that  hadn’t  been  distorted  by  the  gossip  mill  or  by

propaganda  of  one  sort  or  another.  But  Haing  wasn’t  just  worried

about  a  possible  Khmer  Rouge  return  to  power  by  force.  ‘He  was

struggling with a contradiction,’ Thayer told me later.

  What Haing was starting to fear, Thayer and I believe, was that he

might have made a serious mistake throwing in his lot with the Hun

Sen  regime  when  he  returned  to  Cambodia.  So  many  cadre  were

defecting from the Khmer Rouge and quietly joining the infrastructure

of the Hun Sen regime that the idea that the regime could prevent a

Khmer Rouge return was, in Thayer’s view, ‘farcical.’ Furthermore, by

declaring his support for Hun Sen’s CPP earlier, Haing had alienated

the other political factions, the KPNLF and FUNCINPEC, ‘who hated

him with a vitriolic passion’, as Thayer put it.

  ‘Toward the end, he had enemies everywhere, and nobody he could

trust,’ says Thayer. ‘He got stepped on big-time and he turned inward.

He became very low profile.’

By early 1996, Haing’s movie roles had started drying up. The last

major role he had had was as a North Vietnamese in Oliver Stone’s

film, Heaven and Earth, released to cinemas in 1993.

He had enough money, because of his investments in Cambodia,

and  he  was  often  doing  informal  business  deals  with  friends  who

wanted to get around one kind of government bureaucracy or another.

But he wasn’t particularly adept at business, and there were people

angry with him because of deals that fell through. He had his enemies,

but he also had friends, and there were people who admired him for

speaking out. Most importantly, he was good to Sophia, who didn’t

want anything to do with the politics of any of her uncles, and who only

wanted a happy, normal family life.In February, 1996, Sophia travelled to Cambodia with Haing to visit

her  younger  brother  and  older  sister,  who  had  survived  the  Khmer

Rouge years. (Ever the peacemaker, Sophia visited her uncle Chan

Sarun,  too.)  Sophia’s  younger  brother  (Haing’s  father’s  favourite

grandson in Chapter 5) wanted to come to the US, and Haing helped

arrange a visa by using his influence at the US embassy in Phnom

Penh.

The next day Haing returned to LA, with Sophia scheduled to follow

a  few  days  later.  Sophia  telephoned  once  and  got  him  on  his  cell

phone. When she called him again there was no answer. Worried, she

telephoned a neighbour in the little apartment building and was told

that Haing Ngor had been murdered.

  Sophia flew to LA, where she was joined by Adam, who flew in from

New York. She went to the morgue and identified his body, and then

to  his  apartment.  There  were  policemen  all  over  the  place,  regular

LAPD cops who didn’t speak Khmer and who didn’t have the slightest

idea how to gather information from Asian immigrants without scaring

them  into  silence.  The  TV  stations  and  newspapers  theorized  that

Khmer Rouge hit men had assassinated Haing, which was unlikely; if

Khmer Rouge loyalists had wanted to kill Haing Ngor, it would have

been easy for them to do it in Phnom Penh, where there were political

murders every few months. But the other Cambodian factions were

angry at him, too. The most likely explanation for Haing Ngor’s murder

seemed to be kum. Delayed revenge by a fellow Cambodian for a

failed romance, or a business deal gone sour.

  There was a funeral ceremony for Haing at the Rose Hill cemetery

in early March, 1996. Sam Waterston spoke; a good-sized crowd of

Cambodians  and  Hollywood  people  were  there.  Haing  Ngor  was

buried in the tuxedo he had worn when he won his Oscar award.

The question of justice for Haing Ngor was not going to be simple.

A myth had sprung up in the Cambodian community that Haing had

a vast fortune, and Cambodians began coming out of the woodwork

laying claims to his estate. There was even a Cambodian woman with

a  Las  Vegas  marriage  certificate  claiming  to  be  Haing  Ngor’s  wife.

Sophia had never heard of the woman before and asked her if she

was Haing’s wife, why hadn’t she shown up for the funeral?

The  Cambodians  hoping  to  get  rich  from  Haing’s  estate  weredisappointed. At the end of his life, most of Haing’s assets had been in

Cambodia, and his brother Chan Sarun took them over. In the US,

with  the  court’s  consent,  Haing’s  American  holdings  went  to  pay

lawyers for defending his estate against the frivolous claims.

  When  the  quarrelling  was  over,  there  was  no  money  left  in  the

estate, not a single cent.

In Los Angeles, an investigation led to arrests in the killing of Haing

Ngor. A trial got underway.

  According to the prosecutor, Haing had spent most of his last day,

an unusually cold Sunday 25 February 1996, in Long Beach with a

friend. They had lunch, went to the friend’s house, watched basketball

on  TV,  laughed  and  joked  with  other  friends,  and  had  dinner.

Snapshots  taken  then  show  a  small  bright  spot  on  the  inside  of

Haing’s  shirt  collar,  perhaps  a  link  of  the  gold  chain  that  held  the

locket of Huoy, perhaps not. Haing left Long Beach around 7.40 p.m.

and drove to his apartment building east of L.A.’s Chinatown. He was

driving an older-model gold Mercedes. He pulled into the alleyway off

Beaudry Street, parked the Mercedes in its space in the carport, shut

the engine off and opened the door.

The prosecutor said that Haing had driven right past three members

of an Asian street gang, the Oriental LazyBoyz: Tak Sun Tan, also

known as ‘Rambo’, Jason Chan, known as ‘Cloudy’, and Indra Lim,

‘Solo’. They were addicted to crack cocaine and they had just finished

smoking the last of it in the alley as he drove past. They wanted more

crack, and to buy more crack they needed money. As the prosecutor

told the jurors:


      As Dr Ngor turns off his engine, the three defendants approach

    him.  They  are  planning  to  rob  him.  To  get  money  for  more

    cocaine. And defendant Chan has a gun. A 9mm semi-automatic

    handgun. And he’s ready to use it.

      The defendants first demand Dr Ngor’s watch. He gives it to

    them. No problem. But then the defendants see Dr Ngor’s gold

    chain. The chain with the locket, and the picture of his wife. The

    picture that means everything to him. The defendants demand the

    chain. The gold would give them plenty of money to buy more

    cocaine. But Dr Ngor refuses. After all he had been through, Dr    Ngor is not going to surrender his wife’s picture, the only thing he

    had left, to these three gangsters. He just isn’t gong to do it.

      So Jason Chan, Cloudy, high on cocaine, shoots him. He aims

    his gun at Dr Ngor and he pulls the trigger. The gun fires. The first

    bullet passes through Dr Ngor’s right leg. It misses the bone and

    comes out the other side of his leg. It is non-fatal. But the second

    bullet is much more lethal.

        Defendant Chan fires his second bullet directly into the side of

    Dr Ngor’s chest. The bullet passes through Dr Ngor’s left lung,

    then tears into his heart and severs his aorta, one of the main

    blood vessels of the heart. Blood pours into his chest. The bullet

    continues on, blasting a hole in Dr Ngor’s right lung. Dr Haing

    Ngor is dying.

      As Dr Ngor gasps for breath, the defendants snatch the chain

    from his neck. They then flee on foot, running down the alleyway

    from the murder scene. In their haste to escape, they overlook

    $2,900 in a jacket on the back seat of Dr Ngor’s car.

      Dr  Ngor,  although  mortally  wounded,  tries  to  pursue  the

    defendants. But he is too weak. He manages to get part way out

    of his car, then collapses on the pavement, alone.

 

  Sophia sat in the courtroom every day, along with Jack Ong, the

executive director of the Dr Haing S. Ngor Foundation. The trial lasted

five months, with separate juries for each defendant. The judge ruled

that  a  statement  Jason  Chan  made  to  the  police  was  inadmissible

evidence, but even so, the three defendants were found guilty of first-

degree murder and second-degree robbery. Chan, the gunman, got

life without parole and the other two got twenty-five years to life. They

all had had previous convictions.

  When  the  verdicts  were  announced  in  the  courtroom,  the  police

detectives and the prosecution team were jubilant. Sophia and Jack

Ong  were  relieved,  and  glad  that  it  was  over,  but  they  had  quiet

doubts. Maybe it was true that the defendants were high on crack and

had  killed  Haing  as  the  prosecutor  said.  Maybe  it  was  a  bungled

robbery,  and  the  gang  members  had  fled  the  scene  without  even

searching Haing’s pockets. At least there had been due process and a

trial, which usually happens in America, and hardly ever happens inCambodia.

But the unsettled feeling lingered.

The doubt was partly due to another announcement from Cambodia

the same day the Haing Ngor murder trial ended. Pol Pot had died in

the  forests  near  the  Thai  border.  The  old  Khmer  Rouge  leader,

responsible  for  the  death  of  numberless  Cambodians,  drifted  off

peacefully, surrounded by a few followers.

  Was the timing coincidence or kama? It wasn’t easily explained, a

mass murderer dying in peace while Haing Ngor died at a murderer’s

hand. If it was kama, it was the complicated kind, to be resolved in

future incarnations, as the souls of these men came into the world

again, burdened by their deeds in previous lives.

  Few Cambodians believed that Haing Ngor was killed in a drug-

related robbery.

If the attack on Haing was a robbery, they asked, why had the gang

members failed to go through his pockets? Did they miss the $2,900 in

his coat pocket on the back seat of the car because they surprised

themselves when they shot Haing, and decided to run away?

And  finally:  How  did  the  gang  members  know  that  Haing  had  a

heavy gold chain? He always wore it next to his skin, under a T-shirt

and a collared shirt. He never wore it as an ornament on the outside of

his shirt. Normally the gold chain and locket weren’t in sight, so how

had the killers known they were there?

  ‘There  are  some  questions  we  don’t  have  answers  to,’  the  lead

detective on the case for the Los Angeles police department admitted.

The gold chain and locket were never recovered.        For more survivor stories and information documenting

        Khmer Rouge atrocities, please visit the Digital Archive of

                      Cambodian Holocaust Survivors at:

                        http://www.cybercambodia.com/dachs

              and the Documentation Center of Cambodia at

                                http://www.dccam.org




                For more information on Dr Haing S. Ngor,

              and to learn how to make donations to schools

                and other worthwhile causes in his memory,

        please visit the website of the Haing S. Ngor Foundation,

                a charity based in Los Angeles, California:

                            www.haingngorfoundation.org                                      Endnotes

 



1.  In  Cambodia,  as  in  most  Asian  Countries,  the  family  name  goes  first,

followed by the individual’s name. So I am Ngor Haing in Asia but Haing

Ngor in the West.


2. In Cambodia, if we feel close to older people we call them ‘Uncle’ or

‘Aunt,’ whether or not they are actually related. If I felt close to a male my

own age, I would call him ‘brother.’


3. Below Phnom Penh, the continuation of the Tonle Sap River is known as

the Bassac.


4. Note that two unrelated words have a similar sound: Angkor was the great

Cambodian empire of centuries ago, but Angka was the name of the Khmer

Rouge ruling organization.


5. Long afterward I learned that the army officers were driven away into the

countryside. In a ‘rest’ break they climbed down from the trucks, but the

trucks suddenly drove away, and Khmer Rouge in concealment opened fire.

Almost all the Lon Nol officers died.


6. As I later learned, the UNHCR had a few good people in Thailand. My

favourite was Mark Brown, an energetic, capable Englishman who was at

Sakeo and later at Khao-I-Dang. But my first impression was basically right.

As a whole the UNHCR was extremely disappointing – a timid, incompetent

bureaucracy that didn’t do its job. It paid retail prices for huge truckloads of

food  and  allowed  corruption  to  flourish.  It  didn’t  protect  the  safety  of

refugees on the border or even in the refugee camps inside Thailand. Whenthe UNHCR won the 1981 Nobel Peace Prize, I couldn’t believe it. I thought

it  had  to  be  a  mistake.  So  did  most  people  who  had  seen  the  UNHCR’s

performance in Thailand. Since then, many of its functions have been taken

over by the UN Border Relief Organization, or UNBRO, which does a much

better job.


7.  Since  then,  I  have  attempted  to  get  the  US  government  to  start  an

investigation. It is a delicate business. On one hand, the Immigration and

Naturalization Service (INS) presumably wants to catch people who lied to it

and who are war criminals. On the other hand, INS officials could use an

investigation as an excuse for stopping all Cambodian refugees from coming

to  the  United  States.  As  this  is  written,  about  twenty  thousand  innocent

people who want to come to the United States are stuck in Khao-I-Dang

because the INS has falsely accused them of Khmer Rouge associations. The

INS has tightened its rules so much that Dith Pran himself could not come to

the United States if he were a refugee today.


8. The Cambodia Documentation Commission, headed by David Hawk, a

former  executive  director  of  Amnesty  International  USA,  is  a  group  of

Cambodian  refugees,  legal  scholars  and  human-rights  specialists  that  has

documented human-rights violations under Khmer Rouge rule. It is seeking

to bring those responsible to justice in the World Court, under the terms of

the  UN  Convention  on  the  Prevention  and  Punishment  of  the  Crime  of

Genocide.