than one which is spread over a long time and so diluted. What, for example,

would be the effect of the Oedipus of Sophocles, if it were cast into a form as

long as the Iliad? Once more, the Epic imitation has less unity; as is shown

by this, that any Epic poem will furnish subjects for several tragedies. Thus if

the story adopted by the poet has a strict unity, it must either be concisely

told and appear truncated; or, if it conforms to the Epic canon of length, it

must seem weak and watery. [Such length implies some loss of unity,] if, I

mean, the poem is constructed out of several actions, like the Iliad and the

Odyssey, which have many such parts, each with a certain magnitude of its

own. Yet these poems are as perfect as possible in structure; each is, in the

highest degree attainable, an imitation of a single action.

If,  then,  tragedy  is  superior  to  epic  poetry  in  all  these  respects,  and,

moreover, fulfills its specific function better as an art—for each art ought to

produce, not any chance pleasure, but the pleasure proper to it, as already

stated—it plainly follows that tragedy is the higher art, as attaining its end

more perfectly.

  Thus much may suffice concerning Tragic and Epic poetry in general; their

several kinds and parts, with the number of each and their differences; the

causes that make a poem good or bad; the objections of the critics and the

answers to these objections… .                                Loved this book ?

                      Similar users also downloaded


Plato

The Complete Plato

Plato (428/427–348/347 BCE) was a Greek philosopher and mathematician of the Classic Age who
founded the Academy of Athens. Noted as a student of Socrates, Plato has distinguished himself as one
of  the  founders  of  Western  philosophy  by  recording  the  teachings  of  his  master  and  his  own
philosophies in 35 dialogues and 13 letters (some are disputed as spurious). However, this collection
features only 25 authentic works from the reproduced source.

Benjamin Jowett is credited for translating these works into English. While there are many websites
online where one may find digital copies of his translations, the source of the copies reproduced for this
publication may be found at the online library of the University of Adelaide in South Australia, usable
under the freedoms specified by a Creative Commons License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-sa/2.5/au/).


Plato

The Republic

The Republic is a Socratic dialogue by Plato, written in approximately 380 BC. It is one of the most
influential works of philosophy and political theory, and Plato's best known work. In Plato's fictional
dialogues the characters of Socrates as well as various Athenians and foreigners discuss the meaning of
justice and examine whether the just man is happier than the unjust man by imagining a society ruled
by philosopher-kings and the guardians. The dialogue also discusses the role of the philosopher, Plato's
Theory of Forms, the place of poetry, and the immortality of the soul.


Vatsyayana

The Kama Sutra

The Kama Sutra, is an ancient Indian text widely considered to be the standard work on human sexual
behavior in Sanskrit literature written by the Indian scholar Vatsyayana. A portion of the work consists
of practical advice on sex. Kāma means sensual or sexual pleasure, and sūtra are the guidlines of yoga,
the word itself means thread in Sanskrit.
The Kama Sutra is the oldest and most notable of a group of texts known generically as Kama Shastra).
Traditionally, the first transmission of Kama Shastra or "Discipline of Kama" is attributed to Nandi the
sacred bull, Shiva's doorkeeper, who was moved to sacred utterance by overhearing the lovemaking of
the god and his wife Parvati and later recorded his utterances for the benefit of mankind.


Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche

Beyond Good and Evil

Beyond Good and Evil (German: Jenseits von Gut und Böse), subtitled "Prelude to a Philosophy of theFuture"  (Vorspiel  einer  Philosophie  der  Zukunft),  is  a  book  by  the  German  philosopher  Friedrich
Nietzsche, first published in 1886.
It takes up and expands on the ideas of his previous work, Thus Spoke Zarathustra, but approached
from a more critical, polemical direction.
In Beyond Good and Evil, Nietzsche attacks past philosophers for their alleged lack of critical sense
and their blind acceptance of Christian premises in their consideration of morality. The work moves
into the realm "beyond good and evil" in the sense of leaving behind the traditional morality which
Nietzsche subjects to a destructive critique in favour of what he regards as an affirmative approach that
fearlessly confronts the perspectival nature of knowledge and the perilous condition of the modern
individual.


Musashi Miyamoto

The Book of Five Rings

Miyamoto Musashi's Go Rin no Sho or the book of five rings, is considered a classic treatise on
military strategy, much like Sun Tzu's The Art of War and Chanakya's Arthashastra.

The five "books" refer to the idea that there are different elements of battle, just as there are different
physical elements in life, as described by Buddhism, Shinto, and other Eastern religions. Through the
book Musashi defends his thesis: a man who conquers himself is ready to take it on on the world,
should need arise.


Homer

The Iliad & The Odyssey

While Homer's existence as a historical person is still a topic of debate, the writings attributed to the
name have made their mark not only on Greek history and literature, but upon western civilization
itself. Homer's epic poems, The Iliad and The Odyssey, laid the foundation upon which Ancient Greece
developed not only its culture, but its societal values, religious beliefs, and practice of warfare as well.

This  publication  features  the  Samuel  Butler  translation,  and  while  it  strays  from  the  poetic  style
reproduced by more well known translators like Robert Fagles and Robert Fitzgerald, the vision of the
epics as if they were prose found in modern novels take their best form under Butler's most capable
hand.

The source text reproduced for this publication is derived from the online library of the University of
Adelaide  in  South  Australia  under  the  freedoms  specified  by  a  Creative  Commons  License
      (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.5/au/).


Niccolò Machiavelli

The Prince

Il Principe (The Prince) is a political treatise by the Florentine public servant and political theorist
Niccolò Machiavelli. Originally called De Principatibus (About Principalities), it was written in 1513,
but not published until 1532, five years after Machiavelli's death. The treatise is not representative of
the work published during his lifetime, but it is the most remembered, and the work responsible for
bringing "Machiavellian" into wide usage as a pejorative term. It has also been suggested by some
critics that the piece is, in fact, a satire.Sun Tzu

The Art of War

The Art of War is a Chinese military treatise that was written during the 6th century BC by Sun Tzu.
Composed of 13 chapters, each of which is devoted to one aspect of warfare, it has long been praised as
the definitive work on military strategies and tactics of its time.
The Art of War is one of the oldest books on military strategy in the world. It is the first and one of the
most successful works on strategy and has had a huge influence on Eastern and Western military
thinking, business tactics, and beyond. Sun Tzu was the first to recognize the importance of positioning
in strategy and that position is affected both by objective conditions in the physical environment and
the subjective opinions of competitive actors in that environment. He taught that strategy was not
planning in the sense of working through a to-do list, but rather that it requires quick and appropriate
responses to changing conditions. Planning works in a controlled environment, but in a competitive
environment,


Marcus Aurelius

Meditations

The writings of Marcus Aurelius on Stoic philosophy.


Laozi

Tao Te Ching

The Tao Te Ching is fundamental to the Taoist school of Chinese philosophy and strongly influenced
other schools, such as Legalism and Neo-Confucianism. This ancient book is also central in Chinese
religion, not only for Taoism but Chinese Buddhism, which when first introduced into China was
largely interpreted through the use of Taoist words and concepts. Many Chinese artists, including poets,
painters, calligraphers, and even gardeners have used the Tao Te Ching as a source of inspiration. Its
influence has also spread widely outside East Asia, aided by hundreds of translations into Western
languages.                                www.feedbooks.com

                                  Food for the mind