                                      Book IX


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div id="section99" class="section" title="1">


1


We  have  treated  of  that  which  is  primarily  and  to  which  all  the  other

categories of being are referred-i.e. of substance. For it is in virtue of the

concept of substance that the others also are said to be-quantity and quality

and the like; for all will be found to involve the concept of substance, as we

said in the first part of our work. And since ‘being’ is in one way divided into

individual thing, quality, and quantity, and is in another way distinguished in

respect of potency and complete reality, and of function, let us now add a

discussion of potency and complete reality. And first let us explain potency in

the strictest sense, which is, however, not the most useful for our present

purpose. For potency and actuality extend beyond the cases that involve a

reference to motion. But when we have spoken of this first kind, we shall in

our discussions of actuality’ explain the other kinds of potency as well.

We have pointed out elsewhere that ‘potency’ and the word ‘can’ have

several senses. Of these we may neglect all the potencies that are so called by

an equivocation. For some are called so by analogy, as in geometry we say

one  thing  is  or  is  not  a  ‘power’  of  another  by  virtue  of  the  presence  or

absence of some relation between them. But all potencies that conform to the

same type are originative sources of some kind, and are called potencies in

reference to one primary kind of potency, which is an originative source of

change in another thing or in the thing itself qua other. For one kind is a

potency of being acted on, i.e. the originative source, in the very thing acted

on, of its being passively changed by another thing or by itself qua other; and

another  kind  is  a  state  of  insusceptibility  to  change  for  the  worse  and  to

destruction by another thing or by the thing itself qua other by virtue of an

originative source of change. In all these definitions is implied the formula if

potency  in  the  primary  sense.-And  again  these  so-called  potencies  arepotencies either of merely acting or being acted on, or of acting or being

acted on well, so that even in the formulae of the latter the formulae of the

prior kinds of potency are somehow implied.

  Obviously, then, in a sense the potency of acting and of being acted on is

one (for a thing may be ‘capable’ either because it can itself be acted on or

because something else can be acted on by it), but in a sense the potencies are

different. For the one is in the thing acted on; it is because it contains a

certain  originative  source,  and  because  even  the  matter  is  an  originative

source, that the thing acted on is acted on, and one thing by one, another by

another;  for  that  which  is  oily  can  be  burnt,  and  that  which  yields  in  a

particular way can be crushed; and similarly in all other cases. But the other

potency is in the agent, e.g. heat and the art of building are present, one in

that which can produce heat and the other in the man who can build. And so,

in so far as a thing is an organic unity, it cannot be acted on by itself; for it is

one and not two different things. And ‘impotence’and ‘impotent’ stand for

the privation which is contrary to potency of this sort, so that every potency

belongs to the same subject and refers to the same process as a corresponding

impotence. Privation has several senses; for it means (1) that which has not a

certain quality and (2) that which might naturally have it but has not it, either

(a) in general or (b) when it might naturally have it, and either (a) in some

particular way, e.g. when it has not it completely, or (b) when it has not it at

all. And in certain cases if things which naturally have a quality lose it by

violence, we say they have suffered privation.

<

div id="section100" class="section" title="2">


2


  Since some such originative sources are present in soulless things, and

others in things possessed of soul, and in soul, and in the rational part of the

soul,  clearly  some  potencies  will,  be  non-rational  and  some  will  be  non-

rational and some will be accompanied by a rational formula. This is why all

arts,  i.e.  all  productive  forms  of  knowledge,  are  potencies;  they  are

originative  sources  of  change  in  another  thing  or  in  the  artist  himself

considered as other.

And each of those which are accompanied by a rational formula is alike

capable of contrary effects, but one non-rational power produces one effect;e.g. the hot is capable only of heating, but the medical art can produce both

disease and health. The reason is that science is a rational formula, and the

same rational formula explains a thing and its privation, only not in the same

way; and in a sense it applies to both, but in a sense it applies rather to the

positive fact. Therefore such sciences must deal with contraries, but with one

in virtue of their own nature and with the other not in virtue of their nature;

for the rational formula applies to one object in virtue of that object’s nature,

and to the other, in a sense, accidentally. For it is by denial and removal that

it exhibits the contrary; for the contrary is the primary privation, and this is

the removal of the positive term. Now since contraries do not occur in the

same thing, but science is a potency which depends on the possession of a

rational formula, and the soul possesses an originative source of movement;

therefore, while the wholesome produces only health and the calorific only

heat  and  the  frigorific  only  cold,  the  scientific  man  produces  both  the

contrary effects. For the rational formula is one which applies to both, though

not in the same way, and it is in a soul which possesses an originative source

of  movement;  so  that  the  soul  will  start  both  processes  from  the  same

originative source, having linked them up with the same thing. And so the

things whose potency is according to a rational formula act contrariwise to

the things whose potency is non-rational; for the products of the former are

included under one originative source, the rational formula.

It is obvious also that the potency of merely doing a thing or having it done

to one is implied in that of doing it or having it done well, but the latter is not

always implied in the former: for he who does a thing well must also do it,

but he who does it merely need not also do it well.

<

div id="section101" class="section" title="3">


3


  There are some who say, as the Megaric school does, that a thing ‘can’ act

only when it is acting, and when it is not acting it ‘cannot’ act, e.g. that he

who is not building cannot build, but only he who is building, when he is

building; and so in all other cases. It is not hard to see the absurdities that

attend this view.

For it is clear that on this view a man will not be a builder unless he is

building (for to be a builder is to be able to build), and so with the other arts.If, then, it is impossible to have such arts if one has not at some time learnt

and acquired them, and it is then impossible not to have them if one has not

sometime lost them (either by forgetfulness or by some accident or by time;

for it cannot be by the destruction of the object, for that lasts for ever), a man

will  not  have  the  art  when  he  has  ceased  to  use  it,  and  yet  he  may

immediately build again; how then will he have got the art? And similarly

with regard to lifeless things; nothing will be either cold or hot or sweet or

perceptible at all if people are not perceiving it; so that the upholders of this

view will have to maintain the doctrine of Protagoras. But, indeed, nothing

will even have perception if it is not perceiving, i.e. exercising its perception.

If, then, that is blind which has not sight though it would naturally have it,

when it would naturally have it and when it still exists, the same people will

be blind many times in the day-and deaf too.

  Again, if that which is deprived of potency is incapable, that which is not

happening will be incapable of happening; but he who says of that which is

incapable of happening either that it is or that it will be will say what is

untrue; for this is what incapacity meant. Therefore these views do away with

both movement and becoming. For that which stands will always stand, and

that which sits will always sit, since if it is sitting it will not get up; for that

which, as we are told, cannot get up will be incapable of getting up. But we

cannot say this, so that evidently potency and actuality are different (but these

views make potency and actuality the same, and so it is no small thing they

are seeking to annihilate), so that it is possible that a thing may be capable of

being and not he, and capable of not being and yet he, and similarly with the

other kinds of predicate; it may be capable of walking and yet not walk, or

capable  of  not  walking  and  yet  walk.  And  a  thing  is  capable  of  doing

something if there will be nothing impossible in its having the actuality of

that of which it is said to have the capacity. I mean, for instance, if a thing is

capable of sitting and it is open to it to sit, there will be nothing impossible in

its actually sitting; and similarly if it is capable of being moved or moving, or

of standing or making to stand, or of being or coming to be, or of not being or

not coming to be.

The word ‘actuality’, which we connect with ‘complete reality’, has, in the

main, been extended from movements to other things; for actuality in the

strict sense is thought to be identical with movement. And so people do not

assign movement to non-existent things, though they do assign some other

predicates. E.g. they say that non-existent things are objects of thought anddesire, but not that they are moved; and this because, while ex hypothesi they

do not actually exist, they would have to exist actually if they were moved.

For  of  non-existent  things  some  exist  potentially;  but  they  do  not  exist,

because they do not exist in complete reality.

<

div id="section102" class="section" title="4">


4


If what we have described is identical with the capable or convertible with

it, evidently it cannot be true to say ‘this is capable of being but will not be’,

which would imply that the things incapable of being would on this showing

vanish. Suppose, for instance, that a man-one who did not take account of

that which is incapable of being-were to say that the diagonal of the square is

capable of being measured but will not be measured, because a thing may

well be capable of being or coming to be, and yet not be or be about to be.

But from the premisses this necessarily follows, that if we actually supposed

that which is not, but is capable of being, to be or to have come to be, there

will be nothing impossible in this; but the result will be impossible, for the

measuring of the diagonal is impossible. For the false and the impossible are

not  the  same;  that  you  are  standing  now  is  false,  but  that  you  should  be

standing is not impossible.

At the same time it is clear that if, when A is real, B must be real, then,

when A is possible, B also must be possible. For if B need not be possible,

there is nothing to prevent its not being possible. Now let A be supposed

possible.  Then,  when  A  was  possible,  we  agreed  that  nothing  impossible

followed if A were supposed to be real; and then B must of course be real.

But we supposed B to be impossible. Let it be impossible then. If, then, B is

impossible,  A  also  must  be  so.  But  the  first  was  supposed  impossible;

therefore the second also is impossible. If, then, A is possible, B also will be

possible, if they were so related that if A,is real, B must be real. If, then, A

and B being thus related, B is not possible on this condition, and B will not

be related as was supposed. And if when A is possible, B must be possible,

then if A is real, B also must be real. For to say that B must be possible, if A

is possible, means this, that if A is real both at the time when and in the way

in which it was supposed capable of being real, B also must then and in that

way be real.<

div id="section103" class="section" title="5">


5


As all potencies are either innate, like the senses, or come by practice, like

the power of playing the flute, or by learning, like artistic power, those which

come by practice or by rational formula we must acquire by previous exercise

but this is not necessary with those which are not of this nature and which

imply passivity.

  Since that which is ‘capable’ is capable of something and at some time in

some way (with all the other qualifications which must be present in the

definition), and since some things can produce change according to a rational

formula and their potencies involve such a formula, while other things are

nonrational and their potencies are non-rational, and the former potencies

must be in a living thing, while the latter can be both in the living and in the

lifeless; as regards potencies of the latter kind, when the agent and the patient

meet in the way appropriate to the potency in question, the one must act and

the  other  be  acted  on,  but  with  the  former  kind  of  potency  this  is  not

necessary. For the nonrational potencies are all productive of one effect each,

but the rational produce contrary effects, so that if they produced their effects

necessarily they would produce contrary effects at the same time; but this is

impossible. There must, then, be something else that decides; I mean by this,

desire or will. For whichever of two things the animal desires decisively, it

will  do,  when  it  is  present,  and  meets  the  passive  object,  in  the  way

appropriate  to  the  potency  in  question.  Therefore  everything  which  has  a

rational potency, when it desires that for which it has a potency and in the

circumstances  in  which  it  has  the  potency,  must  do  this.  And  it  has  the

potency in question when the passive object is present and is in a certain

state; if not it will not be able to act. (To add the qualification ‘if nothing

external prevents it’ is not further necessary; for it has the potency on the

terms  on  which  this  is  a  potency  of  acting,  and  it  is  this  not  in  all

circumstances but on certain conditions, among which will be the exclusion

of  external  hindrances;  for  these  are  barred  by  some  of  the  positive

qualifications.) And so even if one has a rational wish, or an appetite, to do

two things or contrary things at the same time, one will not do them; for it is

not on these terms that one has the potency for them, nor is it a potency ofdoing both at the same time, since one will do the things which it is a potency

of doing, on the terms on which one has the potency.

<

div id="section104" class="section" title="6">


6


  Since we have treated of the kind of potency which is related to movement,

let us discuss actuality-what, and what kind of thing, actuality is. For in the

course of our analysis it will also become clear, with regard to the potential,

that we not only ascribe potency to that whose nature it is to move something

else, or to be moved by something else, either without qualification or in

some particular way, but also use the word in another sense, which is the

reason of the inquiry in the course of which we have discussed these previous

senses also. Actuality, then, is the existence of a thing not in the way which

we express by ‘potentially’; we say that potentially, for instance, a statue of

Hermes is in the block of wood and the half-line is in the whole, because it

might be separated out, and we call even the man who is not studying a man

of science, if he is capable of studying; the thing that stands in contrast to

each of these exists actually. Our meaning can be seen in the particular cases

by induction, and we must not seek a definition of everything but be content

to grasp the analogy, that it is as that which is building is to that which is

capable of building, and the waking to the sleeping, and that which is seeing

to that which has its eyes shut but has sight, and that which has been shaped

out of the matter to the matter, and that which has been wrought up to the

unwrought. Let actuality be defined by one member of this antithesis, and the

potential by the other. But all things are not said in the same sense to exist

actually, but only by analogy-as A is in B or to B, C is in D or to D; for some

are as movement to potency, and the others as substance to some sort of

matter.

But also the infinite and the void and all similar things are said to exist

potentially and actually in a different sense from that which applies to many

other things, e.g. to that which sees or walks or is seen. For of the latter class

these predicates can at some time be also truly asserted without qualification;

for  the  seen  is  so  called  sometimes  because  it  is  being  seen,  sometimes

because it is capable of being seen. But the infinite does not exist potentially

in  the  sense  that  it  will  ever  actually  have  separate  existence;  it  existspotentially only for knowledge. For the fact that the process of dividing never

comes to an end ensures that this activity exists potentially, but not that the

infinite exists separately.

  Since of the actions which have a limit none is an end but all are relative to

the  end,  e.g.  the  removing  of  fat,  or  fat-removal,  and  the  bodily  parts

themselves when one is making them thin are in movement in this way (i.e.

without being already that at which the movement aims), this is not an action

or at least not a complete one (for it is not an end); but that movement in

which the end is present is an action. E.g. at the same time we are seeing and

have seen, are understanding and have understood, are thinking and have

thought (while it is not true that at the same time we are learning and have

learnt, or are being cured and have been cured). At the same time we are

living well and have lived well, and are happy and have been happy. If not,

the process would have had sometime to cease, as the process of making thin

ceases: but, as things are, it does not cease; we are living and have lived. Of

these processes, then, we must call the one set movements, and the other

actualities.  For  every  movement  is  incomplete-making  thin,  learning,

walking, building; these are movements, and incomplete at that. For it is not

true that at the same time a thing is walking and has walked, or is building

and has built, or is coming to be and has come to be, or is being moved and

has been moved, but what is being moved is different from what has been

moved, and what is moving from what has moved. But it is the same thing

that at the same time has seen and is seeing, seeing, or is thinking and has

thought. The latter sort of process, then, I call an actuality, and the former a

movement.

<

div id="section105" class="section" title="7">


7


  What, and what kind of thing, the actual is, may be taken as explained by

these and similar considerations. But we must distinguish when a thing exists

potentially and when it does not; for it is not at any and every time. E.g. is

earth potentially a man? No-but rather when it has already become seed, and

perhaps not even then. It is just as it is with being healed; not everything can

be healed by the medical art or by luck, but there is a certain kind of thing

which  is  capable  of  it,  and  only  this  is  potentially  healthy.  And  (1)  thedelimiting  mark  of  that  which  as  a  result  of  thought  comes  to  exist  in

complete reality from having existed potentially is that if the agent has willed

it it comes to pass if nothing external hinders, while the condition on the

other side-viz. in that which is healed-is that nothing in it hinders the result. It

is on similar terms that we have what is potentially a house; if nothing in the

thing acted on-i.e. in the matter-prevents it from becoming a house, and if

there  is  nothing  which  must  be  added  or  taken  away  or  changed,  this  is

potentially a house; and the same is true of all other things the source of

whose becoming is external. And (2) in the cases in which the source of the

becoming is in the very thing which comes to be, a thing is potentially all

those things which it will be of itself if nothing external hinders it. E.g. the

seed is not yet potentially a man; for it must be deposited in something other

than itself and undergo a change. But when through its own motive principle

it has already got such and such attributes, in this state it is already potentially

a man; while in the former state it needs another motive principle, just as

earth is not yet potentially a statue (for it must first change in order to become

brass.)

It seems that when we call a thing not something else but ‘thaten’-e.g. a

casket is not ‘wood’ but ‘wooden’, and wood is not ‘earth’ but ‘earthen’, and

again earth will illustrate our point if it is similarly not something else but

‘thaten’-that other thing is always potentially (in the full sense of that word)

the thing which comes after it in this series. E.g. a casket is not ‘earthen’ nor

‘earth’, but ‘wooden’; for this is potentially a casket and this is the matter of a

casket, wood in general of a casket in general, and this particular wood of this

particular casket. And if there is a first thing, which is no longer, in reference

to something else, called ‘thaten’, this is prime matter; e.g. if earth is ‘airy’

and air is not ‘fire’ but ‘fiery’, fire is prime matter, which is not a ‘this’. For

the subject or substratum is differentiated by being a ‘this’ or not being one;

i.e. the substratum of modifications is, e.g. a man, i.e. a body and a soul,

while the modification is ‘musical’ or ‘pale’. (The subject is called, when

music comes to be present in it, not ‘music’ but ‘musical’, and the man is not

‘paleness’ but ‘pale’, and not ‘ambulation’ or ‘movement’ but ‘walking’ or

‘moving’,-which  is  akin  to  the  ‘thaten’.)  Wherever  this  is  so,  then,  the

ultimate subject is a substance; but when this is not so but the predicate is a

form and a ‘this’, the ultimate subject is matter and material substance. And it

is only right that ‘thaten’ should be used with reference both to the matter and

to the accidents; for both are indeterminates.We have stated, then, when a thing is to be said to exist potentially and

when it is not.

<

div id="section106" class="section" title="8">


8


  From  our  discussion  of  the  various  senses  of  ‘prior’,  it  is  clear  that

actuality is prior to potency. And I mean by potency not only that definite

kind which is said to be a principle of change in another thing or in the thing

itself regarded as other, but in general every principle of movement or of rest.

For  nature  also  is  in  the  same  genus  as  potency;  for  it  is  a  principle  of

movement-not, however, in something else but in the thing itself qua itself.

To  all  such  potency,  then,  actuality  is  prior  both  in  formula  and  in

substantiality; and in time it is prior in one sense, and in another not.

(1) Clearly it is prior in formula; for that which is in the primary sense

potential is potential because it is possible for it to become active; e.g. I mean

by ‘capable of building’ that which can build, and by ‘capable of seeing’ that

which can see, and by ‘visible’ that which can be seen. And the same account

applies to all other cases, so that the formula and the knowledge of the one

must precede the knowledge of the other.

(2) In time it is prior in this sense: the actual which is identical in species

though not in number with a potentially existing thing is to it. I mean that to

this particular man who now exists actually and to the corn and to the seeing

subject the matter and the seed and that which is capable of seeing, which are

potentially a man and corn and seeing, but not yet actually so, are prior in

time; but prior in time to these are other actually existing things, from which

they were produced. For from the potentially existing the actually existing is

always produced by an actually existing thing, e.g. man from man, musician

by  musician;  there  is  always  a  first  mover,  and  the  mover  already  exists

actually. We have said in our account of substance that everything that is

produced is something produced from something and by something, and that

the same in species as it.

This is why it is thought impossible to be a builder if one has built nothing

or a harper if one has never played the harp; for he who learns to play the

harp learns to play it by playing it, and all other learners do similarly. And

thence arose the sophistical quibble, that one who does not possess a sciencewill be doing that which is the object of the science; for he who is learning it

does not possess it. But since, of that which is coming to be, some part must

have come to be, and, of that which, in general, is changing, some part must

have changed (this is shown in the treatise on movement), he who is learning

must, it would seem, possess some part of the science. But here too, then, it is

clear that actuality is in this sense also, viz. in order of generation and of

time, prior to potency.

But (3) it is also prior in substantiality; firstly, (a) because the things that

are posterior in becoming are prior in form and in substantiality (e.g. man is

prior to boy and human being to seed; for the one already has its form, and

the other has not), and because everything that comes to be moves towards a

principle, i.e. an end (for that for the sake of which a thing is, is its principle,

and the becoming is for the sake of the end), and the actuality is the end, and

it is for the sake of this that the potency is acquired. For animals do not see in

order that they may have sight, but they have sight that they may see. And

similarly men have the art of building that they may build, and theoretical

science that they may theorize; but they do not theorize that they may have

theoretical science, except those who are learning by practice; and these do

not  theorize  except  in  a  limited  sense,  or  because  they  have  no  need  to

theorize. Further, matter exists in a potential state, just because it may come

to its form; and when it exists actually, then it is in its form. And the same

holds good in all cases, even those in which the end is a movement. And so,

as teachers think they have achieved their end when they have exhibited the

pupil at work, nature does likewise. For if this is not the case, we shall have

Pauson’s  Hermes  over  again,  since  it  will  be  hard  to  say  about  the

knowledge, as about the figure in the picture, whether it is within or without.

For the action is the end, and the actuality is the action. And so even the word

‘actuality’ is derived from ‘action’, and points to the complete reality.

And while in some cases the exercise is the ultimate thing (e.g. in sight the

ultimate thing is seeing, and no other product besides this results from sight),

but from some things a product follows (e.g. from the art of building there

results a house as well as the act of building), yet none the less the act is in

the former case the end and in the latter more of an end than the potency is.

For the act of building is realized in the thing that is being built, and comes to

be, and is, at the same time as the house.

  Where, then, the result is something apart from the exercise, the actuality is

in the thing that is being made, e.g. the act of building is in the thing that isbeing built and that of weaving in the thing that is being woven, and similarly

in all other cases, and in general the movement is in the thing that is being

moved; but where there is no product apart from the actuality, the actuality is

present in the agents, e.g. the act of seeing is in the seeing subject and that of

theorizing in the theorizing subject and the life is in the soul (and therefore

well-being also; for it is a certain kind of life).

  Obviously, therefore, the substance or form is actuality. According to this

argument, then, it is obvious that actuality is prior in substantial being to

potency; and as we have said, one actuality always precedes another in time

right back to the actuality of the eternal prime mover.

But (b) actuality is prior in a stricter sense also; for eternal things are prior

in substance to perishable things, and no eternal thing exists potentially. The

reason is this. Every potency is at one and the same time a potency of the

opposite; for, while that which is not capable of being present in a subject

cannot be present, everything that is capable of being may possibly not be

actual. That, then, which is capable of being may either be or not be; the same

thing, then, is capable both of being and of not being. And that which is

capable of not being may possibly not be; and that which may possibly not be

is perishable, either in the full sense, or in the precise sense in which it is said

that it possibly may not be, i.e. in respect either of place or of quantity or

quality; ‘in the full sense’ means ‘in respect of substance’. Nothing, then,

which is in the full sense imperishable is in the full sense potentially existent

(though  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  its  being  so  in  some  respect,  e.g.

potentially of a certain quality or in a certain place); all imperishable things,

then, exist actually. Nor can anything which is of necessity exist potentially;

yet these things are primary; for if these did not exist, nothing would exist.

Nor does eternal movement, if there be such, exist potentially; and, if there is

an eternal mobile, it is not in motion in virtue of a potentiality, except in

respect  of  ‘whence’  and  ‘whither’  (there  is  nothing  to  prevent  its  having

matter which makes it capable of movement in various directions). And so

the sun and the stars and the whole heaven are ever active, and there is no

fear that they may sometime stand still, as the natural philosophers fear they

may. Nor do they tire in this activity; for movement is not for them, as it is

for perishable things, connected with the potentiality for opposites, so that the

continuity  of  the  movement  should  be  laborious;  for  it  is  that  kind  of

substance which is matter and potency, not actuality, that causes this.

  Imperishable things are imitated by those that are involved in change, e.g.earth and fire. For these also are ever active; for they have their movement of

themselves  and  in  themselves.  But  the  other  potencies,  according  to  our

previous discussion, are all potencies for opposites; for that which can move

another in this way can also move it not in this way, i.e. if it acts according to

a rational formula; and the same non-rational potencies will produce opposite

results by their presence or absence.

If, then, there are any entities or substances such as the dialecticians say

the Ideas are, there must be something much more scientific than science-

itself and something more mobile than movement-itself; for these will be

more of the nature of actualities, while science-itself and movement-itself are

potencies for these.

  Obviously, then, actuality is prior both to potency and to every principle of

change.

<

div id="section107" class="section" title="9">


9


That the actuality is also better and more valuable than the good potency is

evident from the following argument. Everything of which we say that it can

do something, is alike capable of contraries, e.g. that of which we say that it

can be well is the same as that which can be ill, and has both potencies at

once; for the same potency is a potency of health and illness, of rest and

motion,  of  building  and  throwing  down,  of  being  built  and  being  thrown

down.  The  capacity  for  contraries,  then,  is  present  at  the  same  time;  but

contraries cannot be present at the same time, and the actualities also cannot

be present at the same time, e.g. health and illness. Therefore, while the good

must be one of them, the capacity is both alike, or neither; the actuality, then,

is better. Also in the case of bad things the end or actuality must be worse

than the potency; for that which ‘can’ is both contraries alike. Clearly, then,

the bad does not exist apart from bad things; for the bad is in its nature

posterior to the potency. And therefore we may also say that in the things

which are from the beginning, i.e. in eternal things, there is nothing bad,

nothing defective, nothing perverted (for perversion is something bad).

It is an activity also that geometrical constructions are discovered; for we

find  them  by  dividing.  If  the  figures  had  been  already  divided,  the

constructions would have been obvious; but as it is they are present onlypotentially. Why are the angles of the triangle equal to two right angles?

Because the angles about one point are equal to two right angles. If, then, the

line parallel to the side had been already drawn upwards, the reason would

have been evident to any one as soon as he saw the figure. Why is the angle

in a semicircle in all cases a right angle? If three lines are equal the two

which form the base, and the perpendicular from the centre-the conclusion is

evident at a glance to one who knows the former proposition. Obviously,

therefore,  the  potentially  existing  constructions  are  discovered  by  being

brought to actuality; the reason is that the geometer’s thinking is an actuality;

so that the potency proceeds from an actuality; and therefore it is by making

constructions that people come to know them (though the single actuality is

later in generation than the corresponding potency). (See diagram.)

<

div id="section108" class="section" title="10">


10


The terms ‘being’ and ‘non-being’ are employed firstly with reference to

the categories, and secondly with reference to the potency or actuality of

these or their non-potency or nonactuality, and thirdly in the sense of true and

false. This depends, on the side of the objects, on their being combined or

separated,  so  that  he  who  thinks  the  separated  to  be  separated  and  the

combined to be combined has the truth, while he whose thought is in a state

contrary to that of the objects is in error. This being so, when is what is called

truth or falsity present, and when is it not? We must consider what we mean

by these terms. It is not because we think truly that you are pale, that you are

pale, but because you are pale we who say this have the truth. If, then, some

things are always combined and cannot be separated, and others are always

separated  and  cannot  be  combined,  while  others  are  capable  either  of

combination or of separation, ‘being’ is being combined and one, and ‘not

being’ is being not combined but more than one. Regarding contingent facts,

then, the same opinion or the same statement comes to be false and true, and

it is possible for it to be at one time correct and at another erroneous; but

regarding things that cannot be otherwise opinions are not at one time true

and at another false, but the same opinions are always true or always false.

But with regard to incomposites, what is being or not being, and truth or

falsity?  A  thing  of  this  sort  is  not  composite,  so  as  to  ‘be’  when  it  iscompounded, and not to ‘be’ if it is separated, like ‘that the wood is white’ or

‘that  the  diagonal  is  incommensurable’;  nor  will  truth  and  falsity  be  still

present in the same way as in the previous cases. In fact, as truth is not the

same in these cases, so also being is not the same; but (a) truth or falsity is as

follows—contact  and  assertion  are  truth  (assertion  not  being  the  same  as

affirmation), and ignorance is non-contact. For it is not possible to be in error

regarding the question what a thing is, save in an accidental sense; and the

same holds good regarding non-composite substances (for it is not possible to

be  in  error  about  them).  And  they  all  exist  actually,  not  potentially;  for

otherwise they would have come to be and ceased to be; but, as it is, being

itself does not come to be (nor cease to be); for if it had done so it would

have  had  to  come  out  of  something.  About  the  things,  then,  which  are

essences and actualities, it is not possible to be in error, but only to know

them or not to know them. But we do inquire what they are, viz. whether they

are of such and such a nature or not.

(b) As regards the ‘being’ that answers to truth and the ‘non-being’ that

answers to falsity, in one case there is truth if the subject and the attribute are

really combined, and falsity if they are not combined; in the other case, if the

object is existent it exists in a particular way, and if it does not exist in this

way does not exist at all. And truth means knowing these objects, and falsity

does not exist, nor error, but only ignorance-and not an ignorance which is

like  blindness;  for  blindness  is  akin  to  a  total  absence  of  the  faculty  of

thinking.

It is evident also that about unchangeable things there can be no error in

respect of time, if we assume them to be unchangeable. E.g. if we suppose

that the triangle does not change, we shall not suppose that at one time its

angles are equal to two right angles while at another time they are not (for

that  would  imply  change).  It  is  possible,  however,  to  suppose  that  one

member of such a class has a certain attribute and another has not; e.g. while

we may suppose that no even number is prime, we may suppose that some

are and some are not. But regarding a numerically single number not even

this form of error is possible; for we cannot in this case suppose that one

instance has an attribute and another has not, but whether our judgement be

true or false, it is implied that the fact is eternal.                                        Book X


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div id="section109" class="section" title="1">


1


We have said previously, in our distinction of the various meanings of

words, that ‘one’ has several meanings; the things that are directly and of

their own nature and not accidentally called one may be summarized under

four  heads,  though  the  word  is  used  in  more  senses.  (1)  There  is  the

continuous, either in general, or especially that which is continuous by nature

and not by contact nor by being together; and of these, that has more unity

and is prior, whose movement is more indivisible and simpler. (2) That which

is a whole and has a certain shape and form is one in a still higher degree; and

especially if a thing is of this sort by nature, and not by force like the things

which are unified by glue or nails or by being tied together, i.e. if it has in

itself the cause of its continuity. A thing is of this sort because its movement

is one and indivisible in place and time; so that evidently if a thing has by

nature a principle of movement that is of the first kind (i.e. local movement)

and the first in that kind (i.e. circular movement), this is in the primary sense

one extended thing. Some things, then, are one in this way, qua continuous or

whole, and the other things that are one are those whose definition is one. Of

this sort are the things the thought of which is one, i.e. those the thought of

which is indivisible; and it is indivisible if the thing is indivisible in kind or in

number. (3) In number, then, the individual is indivisible, and (4) in kind, that

which in intelligibility and in knowledge is indivisible, so that that which

causes substances to be one must be one in the primary sense. ‘One’, then,

has  all  these  meanings-the  naturally  continuous  and  the  whole,  and  the

individual and the universal. And all these are one because in some cases the

movement, in others the thought or the definition is indivisible.

But it must be observed that the questions, what sort of things are said to

be one, and what it is to be one and what is the definition of it, should not beassumed to be the same. ‘One’ has all these meanings, and each of the things

to which one of these kinds of unity belongs will be one; but ‘to be one’ will

sometimes mean being one of these things, and sometimes being something

else which is even nearer to the meaning of the word ‘one’ while these other

things approximate to its application. This is also true of ‘element’ or ‘cause’,

if one had both to specify the things of which it is predicable and to render

the definition of the word. For in a sense fire is an element (and doubtless

also ‘the indefinite’ or something else of the sort is by its own nature the

element), but in a sense it is not; for it is not the same thing to be fire and to

be an element, but while as a particular thing with a nature of its own fire is

an element, the name ‘element’ means that it has this attribute, that there is

something which is made of it as a primary constituent. And so with ‘cause’

and ‘one’ and all such terms. For this reason, too, ‘to be one’ means ‘to be

indivisible, being essentially one means a “this” and capable of being isolated

either  in  place,  or  in  form  or  thought’;  or  perhaps  ‘to  be  whole  and

indivisible’; but it means especially ‘to be the first measure of a kind’, and

most strictly of quantity; for it is from this that it has been extended to the

other  categories.  For  measure  is  that  by  which  quantity  is  known;  and

quantity qua quantity is known either by a ‘one’ or by a number, and all

number is known by a ‘one’. Therefore all quantity qua quantity is known by

the one, and that by which quantities are primarily known is the one itself;

and so the one is the starting-point of number qua number. And hence in the

other classes too ‘measure’ means that by which each is first known, and the

measure of each is a unit-in length, in breadth, in depth, in weight, in speed.

(The words ‘weight’ and ‘speed’ are common to both contraries; for each of

them has two meanings-’weight’ means both that which has any amount of

gravity and that which has an excess of gravity, and ‘speed’ both that which

has any amount of movement and that which has an excess of movement; for

even  the  slow  has  a  certain  speed  and  the  comparatively  light  a  certain

weight.)

In all these, then, the measure and starting-point is something one and

indivisible, since even in lines we treat as indivisible the line a foot long. For

everywhere we seek as the measure something one and indivisible; and this is

that which is simple either in quality or in quantity. Now where it is thought

impossible to take away or to add, there the measure is exact (hence that of

number is most exact; for we posit the unit as indivisible in every respect);

but in all other cases we imitate this sort of measure. For in the case of afurlong  or  a  talent  or  of  anything  comparatively  large  any  addition  or

subtraction might more easily escape our notice than in the case of something

smaller; so that the first thing from which, as far as our perception goes,

nothing can be subtracted, all men make the measure, whether of liquids or of

solids, whether of weight or of size; and they think they know the quantity

when  they  know  it  by  means  of  this  measure.  And  indeed  they  know

movement too by the simple movement and the quickest; for this occupies

least time. And so in astronomy a ‘one’ of this sort is the starting-point and

measure (for they assume the movement of the heavens to be uniform and the

quickest, and judge the others by reference to it), and in music the quarter-

tone (because it is the least interval), and in speech the letter. And all these

are ones in this sense—not that ‘one’ is something predicable in the same

sense of all of these, but in the sense we have mentioned.

But  the  measure  is  not  always  one  in  number—sometimes  there  are

several; e.g. the quarter-tones (not to the ear, but as determined by the ratios)

are two, and the articulate sounds by which we measure are more than one,

and the diagonal of the square and its side are measured by two quantities,

and all spatial magnitudes reveal similar varieties of unit. Thus, then, the one

is the measure of all things, because we come to know the elements in the

substance by dividing the things either in respect of quantity or in respect of

kind. And the one is indivisible just because the first of each class of things is

indivisible. But it is not in the same way that every ‘one’ is indivisible e.g. a

foot and a unit; the latter is indivisible in every respect, while the former must

be placed among things which are undivided to perception, as has been said

already-only to perception, for doubtless every continuous thing is divisible.

The measure is always homogeneous with the thing measured; the measure

of spatial magnitudes is a spatial magnitude, and in particular that of length is

a length, that of breadth a breadth, that of articulate sound an articulate sound,

that of weight a weight, that of units a unit. (For we must state the matter so,

and not say that the measure of numbers is a number; we ought indeed to say

this if we were to use the corresponding form of words, but the claim does

not really correspond-it is as if one claimed that the measure of units is units

and not a unit; number is a plurality of units.)

  Knowledge, also, and perception, we call the measure of things for the

same reason, because we come to know something by them-while as a matter

of fact they are measured rather than measure other things. But it is with us as

if some one else measured us and we came to know how big we are by seeingthat  he  applied  the  cubit-measure  to  such  and  such  a  fraction  of  us.  But

Protagoras says ‘man is the measure of all things’, as if he had said ‘the man

who  knows’  or  ‘the  man  who  perceives’;  and  these  because  they  have

respectively knowledge and perception, which we say are the measures of

objects.  Such  thinkers  are  saying  nothing,  then,  while  they  appear  to  be

saying something remarkable.

  Evidently, then, unity in the strictest sense, if we define it according to the

meaning  of  the  word,  is  a  measure,  and  most  properly  of  quantity,  and

secondly of quality. And some things will be one if they are indivisible in

quantity, and others if they are indivisible in quality; and so that which is one

is indivisible, either absolutely or qua one.

<

div id="section110" class="section" title="2">


2


  With regard to the substance and nature of the one we must ask in which of

two  ways  it  exists.  This  is  the  very  question  that  we  reviewed  in  our

discussion of problems, viz. what the one is and how we must conceive of it,

whether  we  must  take  the  one  itself  as  being  a  substance  (as  both  the

Pythagoreans say in earlier and Plato in later times), or there is, rather, an

underlying nature and the one should be described more intelligibly and more

in the manner of the physical philosophers, of whom one says the one is love,

another says it is air, and another the indefinite.

If, then, no universal can be a substance, as has been said our discussion of

substance and being, and if being itself cannot be a substance in the sense of

a one apart from the many (for it is common to the many), but is only a

predicate, clearly unity also cannot be a substance; for being and unity are the

most universal of all predicates. Therefore, on the one hand, genera are not

certain entities and substances separable from other things; and on the other

hand the one cannot be a genus, for the same reasons for which being and

substance cannot be genera.

  Further, the position must be similar in all the kinds of unity. Now ‘unity’

has just as many meanings as ‘being’; so that since in the sphere of qualities

the one is something definite-some particular kind of thing-and similarly in

the sphere of quantities, clearly we must in every category ask what the one

is, as we must ask what the existent is, since it is not enough to say that itsnature is just to be one or existent. But in colours the one is a colour, e.g.

white, and then the other colours are observed to be produced out of this and

black, and black is the privation of white, as darkness of light. Therefore if all

existent  things  were  colours,  existent  things  would  have  been  a  number,

indeed, but of what? Clearly of colours; and the ‘one’ would have been a

particular ‘one’, i.e. white. And similarly if all existing things were tunes,

they would have been a number, but a number of quarter-tones, and their

essence  would  not  have  been  number;  and  the  one  would  have  been

something whose substance was not to be one but to be the quarter-tone. And

similarly if all existent things had been articulate sounds, they would have

been a number of letters, and the one would have been a vowel. And if all

existent things were rectilinear figures, they would have been a number of

figures, and the one would have been the triangle. And the same argument

applies to all other classes. Since, therefore, while there are numbers and a

one both in affections and in qualities and in quantities and in movement, in

all cases the number is a number of particular things and the one is one

something, and its substance is not just to be one, the same must be true of

substances also; for it is true of all cases alike.

That the one, then, in every class is a definite thing, and in no case is its

nature just this, unity, is evident; but as in colours the one-itself which we

must seek is one colour, so too in substance the one-itself is one substance.

That in a sense unity means the same as being is clear from the facts that its

meanings correspond to the categories one to one, and it is not comprised

within any category (e.g. it is comprised neither in ‘what a thing is’ nor in

quality, but is related to them just as being is); that in ‘one man’ nothing

more  is  predicated  than  in  ‘man’  (just  as  being  is  nothing  apart  from

substance or quality or quantity); and that to be one is just to be a particular

thing.

<

div id="section111" class="section" title="3">


3


The one and the many are opposed in several ways, of which one is the

opposition of the one and plurality as indivisible and divisible; for that which

is either divided or divisible is called a plurality, and that which is indivisible

or not divided is called one. Now since opposition is of four kinds, and one ofthese two terms is privative in meaning, they must be contraries, and neither

contradictory nor correlative in meaning. And the one derives its name and its

explanation  from  its  contrary,  the  indivisible  from  the  divisible,  because

plurality and the divisible is more perceptible than the indivisible, so that in

definition plurality is prior to the indivisible, because of the conditions of

perception.

To the one belong, as we indicated graphically in our distinction of the

contraries, the same and the like and the equal, and to plurality belong the

other and the unlike and the unequal. ‘The same’ has several meanings; (1)

we sometimes mean ‘the same numerically’; again, (2) we call a thing the

same if it is one both in definition and in number, e.g. you are one with

yourself both in form and in matter; and again, (3) if the definition of its

primary essence is one; e.g. equal straight lines are the same, and so are equal

and equal-angled quadrilaterals; there are many such, but in these equality

constitutes unity.

  Things are like if, not being absolutely the same, nor without difference in

respect of their concrete substance, they are the same in form; e.g. the larger

square is like the smaller, and unequal straight lines are like; they are like, but

not absolutely the same. Other things are like, if, having the same form, and

being  things  in  which  difference  of  degree  is  possible,  they  have  no

difference of degree. Other things, if they have a quality that is in form one

and same-e.g. whiteness-in a greater or less degree, are called like because

their form is one. Other things are called like if the qualities they have in

common  are  more  numerous  than  those  in  which  they  differ-either  the

qualities  in  general  or  the  prominent  qualities;  e.g.  tin  is  like  silver,  qua

white, and gold is like fire, qua yellow and red.

  Evidently, then, ‘other’ and ‘unlike’ also have several meanings. And the

other in one sense is the opposite of the same (so that everything is either the

same  as  or  other  than  everything  else).  In  another  sense  things  are  other

unless both their matter and their definition are one (so that you are other

than  your  neighbour).  The  other  in  the  third  sense  is  exemplified  in  the

objects of mathematics. ‘Other or the same’ can therefore be predicated of

everything with regard to everything else-but only if the things are one and

existent, for ‘other’ is not the contradictory of ‘the same’; which is why it is

not predicated of non-existent things (while ‘not the same’ is so predicated).

It is predicated of all existing things; for everything that is existent and one is

by its very nature either one or not one with anything else.The other, then, and the same are thus opposed. But difference is not the

same as otherness. For the other and that which it is other than need not be

other in some definite respect (for everything that is existent is either other or

the same), but that which is different is different from some particular thing

in some particular respect, so that there must be something identical whereby

they differ. And this identical thing is genus or species; for everything that

differs differs either in genus or in species, in genus if the things have not

their matter in common and are not generated out of each other (i.e. if they

belong to different figures of predication), and in species if they have the

same  genus  (’genus’  meaning  that  identical  thing  which  is  essentially

predicated of both the different things).

  Contraries are different, and contrariety is a kind of difference. That we are

right in this supposition is shown by induction. For all of these too are seen to

be different; they are not merely other, but some are other in genus, and

others are in the same line of predication, and therefore in the same genus,

and the same in genus. We have distinguished elsewhere what sort of things

are the same or other in genus.

<

div id="section112" class="section" title="4">


4


  Since things which differ may differ from one another more or less, there

is also a greatest difference, and this I call contrariety. That contrariety is the

greatest difference is made clear by induction. For things which differ in

genus  have  no  way  to  one  another,  but  are  too  far  distant  and  are  not

comparable; and for things that differ in species the extremes from which

generation takes place are the contraries, and the distance between extremes-

and therefore that between the contraries-is the greatest.

But  surely  that  which  is  greatest  in  each  class  is  complete.  For  that  is

greatest  which  cannot  be  exceeded,  and  that  is  complete  beyond  which

nothing can be found. For the complete difference marks the end of a series

(just as the other things which are called complete are so called because they

have attained an end), and beyond the end there is nothing; for in everything

it is the extreme and includes all else, and therefore there is nothing beyond

the end, and the complete needs nothing further. From this, then, it is clear

that  contrariety  is  complete  difference;  and  as  contraries  are  so  called  inseveral senses, their modes of completeness will answer to the various modes

of contrariety which attach to the contraries.

This being so, it is clear that one thing have more than one contrary (for

neither can there be anything more extreme than the extreme, nor can there be

more than two extremes for the one interval), and, to put the matter generally,

this is clear if contrariety is a difference, and if difference, and therefore also

the complete difference, must be between two things.

And  the  other  commonly  accepted  definitions  of  contraries  are  also

necessarily  true.  For  not  only  is  (1)  the  complete  difference  the  greatest

difference (for we can get no difference beyond it of things differing either in

genus  or  in  species;  for  it  has  been  shown  that  there  is  no  ‘difference’

between  anything  and  the  things  outside  its  genus,  and  among  the  things

which differ in species the complete difference is the greatest); but also (2)

the things in the same genus which differ most are contrary (for the complete

difference is the greatest difference between species of the same genus); and

(3) the things in the same receptive material which differ most are contrary

(for the matter is the same for contraries); and (4) of the things which fall

under the same faculty the most different are contrary (for one science deals

with one class of things, and in these the complete difference is the greatest).

The primary contrariety is that between positive state and privation-not

every  privation,  however  (for  ‘privation’  has  several  meanings),  but  that

which is complete. And the other contraries must be called so with reference

to these, some because they possess these, others because they produce or

tend to produce them, others because they are acquisitions or losses of these

or of other contraries. Now if the kinds of opposition are contradiction and

privation and contrariety and relation, and of these the first is contradiction,

and contradiction admits of no intermediate, while contraries admit of one,

clearly contradiction and contrariety are not the same. But privation is a kind

of  contradiction;  for  what  suffers  privation,  either  in  general  or  in  some

determinate way, either that which is quite incapable of having some attribute

or that which, being of such a nature as to have it, has it not; here we have

already  a  variety  of  meanings,  which  have  been  distinguished  elsewhere.

Privation, therefore, is a contradiction or incapacity which is determinate or

taken  along  with  the  receptive  material.  This  is  the  reason  why,  while

contradiction does not admit of an intermediate, privation sometimes does;

for everything is equal or not equal, but not everything is equal or unequal, or

if it is, it is only within the sphere of that which is receptive of equality. If,then, the comings-to-be which happen to the matter start from the contraries,

and proceed either from the form and the possession of the form or from a

privation of the form or shape, clearly all contrariety must be privation, but

presumably not all privation is contrariety (the reason being that that has

suffered privation may have suffered it in several ways); for it is only the

extremes from which changes proceed that are contraries.

And this is obvious also by induction. For every contrariety involves, as

one of its terms, a privation, but not all cases are alike; inequality is the

privation of equality and unlikeness of likeness, and on the other hand vice is

the privation of virtue. But the cases differ in a way already described; in one

case we mean simply that the thing has suffered privation, in another case

that it has done so either at a certain time or in a certain part (e.g. at a certain

age or in the dominant part), or throughout. This is why in some cases there is

a mean (there are men who are neither good nor bad), and in others there is

not (a number must be either odd or even). Further, some contraries have

their subject defined, others have not. Therefore it is evident that one of the

contraries is always privative; but it is enough if this is true of the first-i.e. the

generic-contraries, e.g. the one and the many; for the others can be reduced to

these.

<

div id="section113" class="section" title="5">


5


  Since one thing has one contrary, we might raise the question how the one

is opposed to the many, and the equal to the great and the small. For if we

used the word ‘whether’ only in an antithesis such as ‘whether it is white or

black’, or ‘whether it is white or not white’ (we do not ask ‘whether it is a

man or white’), unless we are proceeding on a prior assumption and asking

something such as ‘whether it was Cleon or Socrates that came’ as this is not

a necessary disjunction in any class of things; yet even this is an extension

from the case of opposites; for opposites alone cannot be present together;

and we assume this incompatibility here too in asking which of the two came;

for if they might both have come, the question would have been absurd; but if

they might, even so this falls just as much into an antithesis, that of the ‘one

or many’, i.e. ‘whether both came or one of the two’:-if, then, the question

‘whether’ is always concerned with opposites, and we can ask ‘whether it isgreater or less or equal’, what is the opposition of the equal to the other two?

It is not contrary either to one alone or to both; for why should it be contrary

to the greater rather than to the less? Further, the equal is contrary to the

unequal.  Therefore  if  it  is  contrary  to  the  greater  and  the  less,  it  will  be

contrary to more things than one. But if the unequal means the same as both

the greater and the less together, the equal will be opposite to both (and the

difficulty supports those who say the unequal is a ‘two’), but it follows that

one thing is contrary to two others, which is impossible. Again, the equal is

evidently intermediate between the great and the small, but no contrariety is

either observed to be intermediate, or, from its definition, can be so; for it

would not be complete if it were intermediate between any two things, but

rather it always has something intermediate between its own terms.

It remains, then, that it is opposed either as negation or as privation. It

cannot be the negation or privation of one of the two; for why of the great

rather than of the small? It is, then, the privative negation of both. This is

why ‘whether’ is said with reference to both, not to one of the two (e.g.

‘whether it is greater or equal’ or ‘whether it is equal or less’); there are

always three cases. But it is not a necessary privation; for not everything

which is not greater or less is equal, but only the things which are of such a

nature as to have these attributes.

The equal, then, is that which is neither great nor small but is naturally

fitted to be either great or small; and it is opposed to both as a privative

negation (and therefore is also intermediate). And that which is neither good

nor bad is opposed to both, but has no name; for each of these has several

meanings and the recipient subject is not one; but that which is neither white

nor black has more claim to unity. Yet even this has not one name, though the

colours of which this negation is privatively predicated are in a way limited;

for  they  must  be  either  grey  or  yellow  or  something  else  of  the  kind.

Therefore it is an incorrect criticism that is passed by those who think that all

such phrases are used in the same way, so that that which is neither a shoe

nor a hand would be intermediate between a shoe and a hand, since that

which is neither good nor bad is intermediate between the good and the bad-

as if there must be an intermediate in all cases. But this does not necessarily

follow. For the one phrase is a joint denial of opposites between which there

is an intermediate and a certain natural interval; but between the other two

there is no ‘difference’; for the things, the denials of which are combined,

belong to different classes, so that the substratum is not one.<

div id="section114" class="section" title="6">


6


We might raise similar questions about the one and the many. For if the

many are absolutely opposed to the one, certain impossible results follow.

One will then be few, whether few be treated here as singular or plural; for

the many are opposed also to the few. Further, two will be many, since the

double is multiple and ‘double’ derives its meaning from ‘two’; therefore one

will be few; for what is that in comparison with which two are many, except

one, which must therefore be few? For there is nothing fewer. Further, if the

much and the little are in plurality what the long and the short are in length,

and whatever is much is also many, and the many are much (unless, indeed,

there is a difference in the case of an easily-bounded continuum), the little (or

few) will be a plurality. Therefore one is a plurality if it is few; and this it

must be, if two are many. But perhaps, while the ‘many’ are in a sense said to

be also ‘much’, it is with a difference; e.g. water is much but not many. But

‘many’ is applied to the things that are divisible; in the one sense it means a

plurality which is excessive either absolutely or relatively (while ‘few’ is

similarly  a  plurality  which  is  deficient),  and  in  another  sense  it  means

number, in which sense alone it is opposed to the one. For we say ‘one or

many’, just as if one were to say ‘one and ones’ or ‘white thing and white

things’, or to compare the things that have been measured with the measure.

It is in this sense also that multiples are so called. For each number is said to

be many because it consists of ones and because each number is measurable

by one; and it is ‘many’ as that which is opposed to one, not to the few. In

this sense, then, even two is many-not, however, in the sense of a plurality

which is excessive either relatively or absolutely; it is the first plurality. But

without qualification two is few; for it is first plurality which is deficient (for

this reason Anaxagoras was not right in leaving the subject with the statement

that ‘all things were together, boundless both in plurality and in smallness’-

where for ‘and in smallness’ he should have said ‘and in fewness’; for they

could not have been boundless in fewness), since it is not one, as some say,

but two, that make a few.

The  one  is  opposed  then  to  the  many  in  numbers  as  measure  to  thing

measurable; and these are opposed as are the relatives which are not fromtheir very nature relatives. We have distinguished elsewhere the two senses in

which relatives are so called:-(1) as contraries; (2) as knowledge to thing

known, a term being called relative because another is relative to it. There is

nothing to prevent one from being fewer than something, e.g. than two; for if

one is fewer, it is not therefore few. Plurality is as it were the class to which

number belongs; for number is plurality measurable by one, and one and

number are in a sense opposed, not as contrary, but as we have said some

relative terms are opposed; for inasmuch as one is measure and the other

measurable, they are opposed. This is why not everything that is one is a

number;  i.e.  if  the  thing  is  indivisible  it  is  not  a  number.  But  though

knowledge is similarly spoken of as relative to the knowable, the relation

does not work out similarly; for while knowledge might be thought to be the

measure, and the knowable the thing measured, the fact that all knowledge is

knowable,  but  not  all  that  is  knowable  is  knowledge,  because  in  a  sense

knowledge is measured by the knowable.-Plurality is contrary neither to the

few  (the  many  being  contrary  to  this  as  excessive  plurality  to  plurality

exceeded),  nor  to  the  one  in  every  sense;  but  in  the  one  sense  these  are

contrary,  as  has  been  said,  because  the  former  is  divisible  and  the  latter

indivisible,  while  in  another  sense  they  are  relative  as  knowledge  is  to

knowable, if plurality is number and the one is a measure.

<

div id="section115" class="section" title="7">


7


  Since  contraries  admit  of  an  intermediate  and  in  some  cases  have  it,

intermediates must be composed of the contraries. For (1) all intermediates

are in the same genus as the things between which they stand. For we call

those things intermediates, into which that which changes must change first;

e.g. if we were to pass from the highest string to the lowest by the smallest

intervals, we should come sooner to the intermediate notes, and in colours if

we were to pass from white to black, we should come sooner to crimson and

grey than to black; and similarly in all other cases. But to change from one

genus to another genus is not possible except in an incidental way, as from

colour to figure. Intermediates, then, must be in the same genus both as one

another and as the things they stand between.

But (2) all intermediates stand between opposites of some kind; for onlybetween these can change take place in virtue of their own nature (so that an

intermediate is impossible between things which are not opposite; for then

there would be change which was not from one opposite towards the other).

Of  opposites,  contradictories  admit  of  no  middle  term;  for  this  is  what

contradiction  is-an  opposition,  one  or  other  side  of  which  must  attach  to

anything whatever, i.e. which has no intermediate. Of other opposites, some

are relative, others privative, others contrary. Of relative terms, those which

are not contrary have no intermediate; the reason is that they are not in the

same genus. For what intermediate could there be between knowledge and

knowable? But between great and small there is one.

(3) If intermediates are in the same genus, as has been shown, and stand

between contraries, they must be composed of these contraries. For either

there will be a genus including the contraries or there will be none. And if (a)

there is to be a genus in such a way that it is something prior to the contraries,

the  differentiae  which  constituted  the  contrary  species-of-a-genus  will  be

contraries prior to the species; for species are composed of the genus and the

differentiae. (E.g. if white and black are contraries, and one is a piercing

colour and the other a compressing colour, these differentiae-’piercing’ and

‘compressing’-are prior; so that these are prior contraries of one another.)

But, again, the species which differ contrariwise are the more truly contrary

species. And the other.species, i.e. the intermediates, must be composed of

their genus and their differentiae. (E.g. all colours which are between white

and black must be said to be composed of the genus, i.e. colour, and certain

differentiae.  But  these  differentiae  will  not  be  the  primary  contraries;

otherwise every colour would be either white or black. They are different,

then, from the primary contraries; and therefore they will be between the

primary  contraries;  the  primary  differentiae  are  ‘piercing’  and

‘compressing’.)

  Therefore it is (b) with regard to these contraries which do not fall within a

genus that we must first ask of what their intermediates are composed. (For

things which are in the same genus must be composed of terms in which the

genus is not an element, or else be themselves incomposite.) Now contraries

do  not  involve  one  another  in  their  composition,  and  are  therefore  first

principles; but the intermediates are either all incomposite, or none of them.

But there is something compounded out of the contraries, so that there can be

a change from a contrary to it sooner than to the other contrary; for it will

have less of the quality in question than the one contrary and more than theother.  This  also,  then,  will  come  between  the  contraries.  All  the  other

intermediates also, therefore, are composite; for that which has more of a

quality than one thing and less than another is compounded somehow out of

the things than which it is said to have more and less respectively of the

quality.  And  since  there  are  no  other  things  prior  to  the  contraries  and

homogeneous with the intermediates, all intermediates must be compounded

out  of  the  contraries.  Therefore  also  all  the  inferior  classes,  both  the

contraries and their intermediates, will be compounded out of the primary

contraries. Clearly, then, intermediates are (1) all in the same genus and (2)

intermediate  between  contraries,  and  (3)  all  compounded  out  of  the

contraries.

<

div id="section116" class="section" title="8">


8


That which is other in species is other than something in something, and

this must belong to both; e.g. if it is an animal other in species, both are

animals. The things, then, which are other in species must be in the same

genus. For by genus I mean that one identical thing which is predicated of

both and is differentiated in no merely accidental way, whether conceived as

matter  or  otherwise.  For  not  only  must  the  common  nature  attach  to  the

different things, e.g. not only must both be animals, but this very animality

must also be different for each (e.g. in the one case equinity, in the other

humanity), and so this common nature is specifically different for each from

what it is for the other. One, then, will be in virtue of its own nature one sort

of animal, and the other another, e.g. one a horse and the other a man. This

difference, then, must be an otherness of the genus. For I give the name of

‘difference in the genus’ an otherness which makes the genus itself other.

This, then, will be a contrariety (as can be shown also by induction). For

all things are divided by opposites, and it has been proved that contraries are

in the same genus. For contrariety was seen to be complete difference; and all

difference in species is a difference from something in something; so that this

is the same for both and is their genus. (Hence also all contraries which are

different in species and not in genus are in the same line of predication, and

other than one another in the highest degree-for the difference is complete-,

and cannot be present along with one another.) The difference, then, is acontrariety.

This, then, is what it is to be ‘other in species’-to have a contrariety, being

in the same genus and being indivisible (and those things are the same in

species  which  have  no  contrariety,  being  indivisible);  we  say  ‘being

indivisible’,  for  in  the  process  of  division  contrarieties  arise  in  the

intermediate stages before we come to the indivisibles. Evidently, therefore,

with reference to that which is called the genus, none of the species-of-a-

genus is either the same as it or other than it in species (and this is fitting; for

the matter is indicated by negation, and the genus is the matter of that of

which it is called the genus, not in the sense in which we speak of the genus

or family of the Heraclidae, but in that in which the genus is an element in a

thing’s nature), nor is it so with reference to things which are not in the same

genus, but it will differ in genus from them, and in species from things in the

same  genus.  For  a  thing’s  difference  from  that  from  which  it  differs  in

species must be a contrariety; and this belongs only to things in the same

genus.

<

div id="section117" class="section" title="9">


9


One might raise the question, why woman does not differ from man in

species,  when  female  and  male  are  contrary  and  their  difference  is  a

contrariety; and why a female and a male animal are not different in species,

though this difference belongs to animal in virtue of its own nature, and not

as  paleness  or  darkness  does;  both  ‘female’  and  ‘male’  belong  to  it  qua

animal. This question is almost the same as the other, why one contrariety

makes things different in species and another does not, e.g. ‘with feet’ and

‘with wings’ do, but paleness and darkness do not. Perhaps it is because the

former are modifications peculiar to the genus, and the latter are less so. And

since one element is definition and one is matter, contrarieties which are in

the definition make a difference in species, but those which are in the thing

taken as including its matter do not make one. And so paleness in a man, or

darkness, does not make one, nor is there a difference in species between the

pale man and the dark man, not even if each of them be denoted by one word.

For man is here being considered on his material side, and matter does not

create  a  difference;  for  it  does  not  make  individual  men  species  of  man,though the flesh and the bones of which this man and that man consist are

other. The concrete thing is other, but not other in species, because in the

definition there is no contrariety. This is the ultimate indivisible kind. Callias

is  definition  +  matter,  the  pale  man,  then,  is  so  also,  because  it  is  the

individual Callias that is pale; man, then, is pale only incidentally. Neither do

a brazen and a wooden circle, then, differ in species; and if a brazen triangle

and a wooden circle differ in species, it is not because of the matter, but

because there is a contrariety in the definition. But does the matter not make

things other in species, when it is other in a certain way, or is there a sense in

which it does? For why is this horse other than this man in species, although

their matter is included with their definitions? Doubtless because there is a

contrariety in the definition. For while there is a contrariety also between pale

man and dark horse, and it is a contrariety in species, it does not depend on

the paleness of the one and the darkness of the other, since even if both had

been pale, yet they would have been other in species. But male and female,

while they are modifications peculiar to ‘animal’, are so not in virtue of its

essence but in the matter, ie. the body. This is why the same seed becomes

female or male by being acted on in a certain way. We have stated, then, what

it is to be other in species, and why some things differ in species and others

do not.

<

div id="section118" class="section" title="10">


10


  Since contraries are other in form, and the perishable and the imperishable

are contraries (for privation is a determinate incapacity), the perishable and

the imperishable must be different in kind.

Now so far we have spoken of the general terms themselves, so that it

might be thought not to be necessary that every imperishable thing should be

different from every perishable thing in form, just as not every pale thing is

different in form from every dark thing. For the same thing can be both, and

even at the same time if it is a universal (e.g. man can be both pale and dark),

and if it is an individual it can still be both; for the same man can be, though

not at the same time, pale and dark. Yet pale is contrary to dark.

But while some contraries belong to certain things by accident (e.g. both

those now mentioned and many others), others cannot, and among these are‘perishable’ and ‘imperishable’. For nothing is by accident perishable. For

what is accidental is capable of not being present, but perishableness is one of

the attributes that belong of necessity to the things to which they belong; or

else  one  and  the  same  thing  may  be  perishable  and  imperishable,  if

perishableness is capable of not belonging to it. Perishableness then must

either be the essence or be present in the essence of each perishable thing.

The  same  account  holds  good  for  imperishableness  also;  for  both  are

attributes which are present of necessity. The characteristics, then, in respect

of which and in direct consequence of which one thing is perishable and

another imperishable, are opposite, so that the things must be different in

kind.

  Evidently, then, there cannot be Forms such as some maintain, for then one

man would be perishable and another imperishable. Yet the Forms are said to

be the same in form with the individuals and not merely to have the same

name; but things which differ in kind are farther apart than those which differ

in form.                                      Book XI


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div id="section119" class="section" title="1">


1


That  Wisdom  is  a  science  of  first  principles  is  evident  from  the

introductory chapters, in which we have raised objections to the statements of

others  about  the  first  principles;  but  one  might  ask  the  question  whether

Wisdom is to be conceived as one science or as several. If as one, it may be

objected that one science always deals with contraries, but the first principles

are not contrary. If it is not one, what sort of sciences are those with which it

is to be identified?

  Further, is it the business of one science, or of more than one, to examine

the first principles of demonstration? If of one, why of this rather than of any

other? If of more, what sort of sciences must these be said to be?

  Further, does Wisdom investigate all substances or not? If not all, it is hard

to say which; but if, being one, it investigates them all, it is doubtful how the

same science can embrace several subject-matters.

  Further, does it deal with substances only or also with their attributes? If in

the case of attributes demonstration is possible, in that of substances it is not.

But  if  the  two  sciences  are  different,  what  is  each  of  them  and  which  is

Wisdom? If we think of it as demonstrative, the science of the attributes is

Wisdom, but if as dealing with what is primary, the science of substances

claims the tide.

But again the science we are looking for must not be supposed to deal with

the causes which have been mentioned in the Physics. For (A) it does not deal

with the final cause (for that is the nature of the good, and this is found in the

field of action and movement; and it is the first mover-for that is the nature of

the end-but in the case of things unmovable there is nothing that moved them

first), and (B) in general it is hard to say whether perchance the science we

are now looking for deals with perceptible substances or not with them, butwith certain others. If with others, it must deal either with the Forms or with

the objects of mathematics. Now (a) evidently the Forms do not exist. (But it

is hard to say, even if one suppose them to exist, why in the world the same is

not true of the other things of which there are Forms, as of the objects of

mathematics.  I  mean  that  these  thinkers  place  the  objects  of  mathematics

between the Forms and perceptible things, as a kind of third set of things

apart both from the Forms and from the things in this world; but there is not a

third man or horse besides the ideal and the individuals. If on the other hand

it is not as they say, with what sort of things must the mathematician be

supposed to deal? Certainly not with the things in this world; for none of

these is the sort of thing which the mathematical sciences demand.) Nor (b)

does  the  science  which  we  are  now  seeking  treat  of  the  objects  of

mathematics; for none of them can exist separately. But again it does not deal

with perceptible substances; for they are perishable.

In general one might raise the question, to what kind of science it belongs

to discuss the difficulties about the matter of  the objects of mathematics.

Neither to physics (because the whole inquiry of the physicist is about the

things that have in themselves a principle. of movement and rest), nor yet to

the science which inquires into demonstration and science; for this is just the

subject which it investigates. It remains then that it is the philosophy which

we have set before ourselves that treats of those subjects.

One might discuss the question whether the science we are seeking should

be said to deal with the principles which are by some called elements; all men

suppose these to be present in composite things. But it might be thought that

the science we seek should treat rather of universals; for every definition and

every science is of universals and not of infimae species, so that as far as this

goes it would deal with the highest genera. These would turn out to be being

and unity; for these might most of all be supposed to contain all things that

are, and to be most like principles because they are by nature; for if they

perish all other things are destroyed with them; for everything is and is one.

But  inasmuch  as,  if  one  is  to  suppose  them  to  be  genera,  they  must  be

predicable  of  their  differentiae,  and  no  genus  is  predicable  of  any  of  its

differentiae, in this way it would seem that we should not make them genera

nor principles. Further, if the simpler is more of a principle than the less

simple, and the ultimate members of the genus are simpler than the genera

(for they are indivisible, but the genera are divided into many and differing

species), the species might seem to be the principles, rather than the genera.But inasmuch as the species are involved in the destruction of the genera, the

genera  are  more  like  principles;  for  that  which  involves  another  in  its

destruction is a principle of it. These and others of the kind are the subjects

that involve difficulties.

<

div id="section120" class="section" title="2">


2


  Further, must we suppose something apart from individual things, or is it

these  that  the  science  we  are  seeking  treats  of?  But  these  are  infinite  in

number.  Yet  the  things  that  are  apart  from  the  individuals  are  genera  or

species; but the science we now seek treats of neither of these. The reason

why this is impossible has been stated. Indeed, it is in general hard to say

whether  one  must  assume  that  there  is  a  separable  substance  besides  the

sensible substances (i.e. the substances in this world), or that these are the

real things and Wisdom is concerned with them. For we seem to seek another

kind of substance, and this is our problem, i.e. to see if there is something

which can exist apart by itself and belongs to no sensible thing.-Further, if

there  is  another  substance  apart  from  and  corresponding  to  sensible

substances, which kinds of sensible substance must be supposed to have this

corresponding to them? Why should one suppose men or horses to have it,

more than either the other animals or even all lifeless things? On the other

hand to set up other and eternal substances equal in number to the sensible

and  perishable  substances  would  seem  to  fall  beyond  the  bounds  of

probability.-But if the principle we now seek is not separable from corporeal

things, what has a better claim to the name matter? This, however, does not

exist in actuality, but exists in potency. And it would seem rather that the

form  or  shape  is  a  more  important  principle  than  this;  but  the  form  is

perishable, so that there is no eternal substance at all which can exist apart

and independent. But this is paradoxical; for such a principle and substance

seems  to  exist  and  is  sought  by  nearly  all  the  most  refined  thinkers  as

something that exists; for how is there to be order unless there is something

eternal and independent and permanent?

  Further, if there is a substance or principle of such a nature as that which

we are now seeking, and if this is one for all things, and the same for eternal

and for perishable things, it is hard to say why in the world, if there is thesame principle, some of the things that fall under the principle are eternal,

and others are not eternal; this is paradoxical. But if there is one principle of

perishable and another of eternal things, we shall be in a like difficulty if the

principle of perishable things, as well as that of eternal, is eternal; for why, if

the principle is eternal, are not the things that fall under the principle also

eternal? But if it is perishable another principle is involved to account for it,

and another to account for that, and this will go on to infinity.

If on the other hand we are to set up what are thought to be the most

unchangeable principles, being and unity, firstly, if each of these does not

indicate a ‘this’ or substance, how will they be separable and independent?

Yet we expect the eternal and primary principles to be so. But if each of them

does signify a ‘this’ or substance, all things that are are substances; for being

is predicated of all things (and unity also of some); but that all things that are

are substance is false. Further, how can they be right who say that the first

principle  is  unity  and  this  is  substance,  and  generate  number  as  the  first

product from unity and from matter, assert that number is substance? How

are we to think of ‘two’, and each of the other numbers composed of units, as

one? On this point neither do they say anything nor is it easy to say anything.

But if we are to suppose lines or what comes after these (I mean the primary

surfaces) to be principles, these at least are not separable substances, but

sections  and  divisions-the  former  of  surfaces,  the  latter  of  bodies  (while

points are sections and divisions of lines); and further they are limits of these

same things; and all these are in other things and none is separable. Further,

how are we to suppose that there is a substance of unity and the point? Every

substance comes into being by a gradual process, but a point does not; for the

point is a division.

A further difficulty is raised by the fact that all knowledge is of universals

and of the ‘such’, but substance is not a universal, but is rather a ‘this’-a

separable thing, so that if there is knowledge about the first principles, the

question arises, how are we to suppose the first principle to be substance?

  Further, is there anything apart from the concrete thing (by which I mean

the matter and that which is joined with it), or not? If not, we are met by the

objection  that  all  things  that  are  in  matter  are  perishable.  But  if  there  is

something, it must be the form or shape. Now it is hard to determine in which

cases this exists apart and in which it does not; for in some cases the form is

evidently not separable, e.g. in the case of a house.

  Further, are the principles the same in kind or in number? If they are one innumber, all things will be the same.

<

div id="section121" class="section" title="3">


3


  Since the science of the philosopher treats of being qua being universally

and not in respect of a part of it, and ‘being’ has many senses and is not used

in one only, it follows that if the word is used equivocally and in virtue of

nothing common to its various uses, being does not fall under one science

(for the meanings of an equivocal term do not form one genus); but if the

word  is  used  in  virtue  of  something  common,  being  will  fall  under  one

science.  The  term  seems  to  be  used  in  the  way  we  have  mentioned,  like

‘medical’ and ‘healthy’. For each of these also we use in many senses. Terms

are used in this way by virtue of some kind of reference, in the one case to

medical science, in the other to health, in others to something else, but in

each case to one identical concept. For a discussion and a knife are called

medical because the former proceeds from medical science, and the latter is

useful to it. And a thing is called healthy in a similar way; one thing because

it is indicative of health, another because it is productive of it. And the same

is true in the other cases. Everything that is, then, is said to ‘be’ in this same

way; each thing that is is said to ‘be’ because it is a modification of being qua

being or a permanent or a transient state or a movement of it, or something

else of the sort. And since everything that is may be referred to something

single and common, each of the contrarieties also may be referred to the first

differences and contrarieties of being, whether the first differences of being

are plurality and unity, or likeness and unlikeness, or some other differences;

let these be taken as already discussed. It makes no difference whether that

which is be referred to being or to unity. For even if they are not the same but

different, at least they are convertible; for that which is one is also somehow

being, and that which is being is one.

But since every pair of contraries falls to be examined by one and the same

science, and in each pair one term is the privative of the other though one

might regarding some contraries raise the question, how they can be privately

related, viz. those which have an intermediate, e.g. unjust and just-in all such

cases one must maintain that the privation is not of the whole definition, but

of  the  infima  species.  if  the  just  man  is  ‘by  virtue  of  some  permanentdisposition obedient to the laws’, the unjust man will not in every case have

the  whole  definition  denied  of  him,  but  may  be  merely  ‘in  some  respect

deficient  in  obedience  to  the  laws’,  and  in  this  respect  the  privation  will

attach to him; and similarly in all other cases.

As the mathematician investigates abstractions (for before beginning his

investigation he strips off all the sensible qualities, e.g. weight and lightness,

hardness  and  its  contrary,  and  also  heat  and  cold  and  the  other  sensible

contrarieties, and leaves only the quantitative and continuous, sometimes in

one, sometimes in two, sometimes in three dimensions, and the attributes of

these qua quantitative and continuous, and does not consider them in any

other respect, and examines the relative positions of some and the attributes

of these, and the commensurabilities and incommensurabilities of others, and

the ratios of others; but yet we posit one and the same science of all these

things—geometry)—the same is true with regard to being. For the attributes

of this in so far as it is being, and the contrarieties in it qua being, it is the

business of no other science than philosophy to investigate; for to physics one

would assign the study of things not qua being, but rather qua sharing in

movement; while dialectic and sophistic deal with the attributes of things that

are, but not of things qua being, and not with being itself in so far as it is

being; therefore it remains that it is the philosopher who studies the things we

have named, in so far as they are being. Since all that is is to ‘be’ in virtue of

something single and common, though the term has many meanings, and

contraries are in the same case (for they are referred to the first contrarieties

and differences of being), and things of this sort can fall under one science,

the difficulty we stated at the beginning appears to be solved,-I mean the

question how there can be a single science of things which are many and

different in genus.

<

div id="section122" class="section" title="4">


4


  Since even the mathematician uses the common axioms only in a special

application,  it  must  be  the  business  of  first  philosophy  to  examine  the

principles of mathematics also. That when equals are taken from equals the

remainders are equal, is common to all quantities, but mathematics studies a

part of its proper matter which it has detached, e.g. lines or angles or numbersor some other kind of quantity-not, however, qua being but in so far as each

of them is continuous in one or two or three dimensions; but philosophy does

not  inquire  about  particular  subjects  in  so  far  as  each  of  them  has  some

attribute or other, but speculates about being, in so far as each particular thing

is.-Physics is in the same position as mathematics; for physics studies the

attributes and the principles of the things that are, qua moving and not qua

being (whereas the primary science, we have said, deals with these, only in so

far as the underlying subjects are existent, and not in virtue of any other

character); and so both physics and mathematics must be classed as parts of

Wisdom.

<

div id="section123" class="section" title="5">


5


  There is a principle in things, about which we cannot be deceived, but must

always, on the contrary recognize the truth,-viz. that the same thing cannot at

one and the same time be and not be, or admit any other similar pair of

opposites. About such matters there is no proof in the full sense, though there

is proof ad hominem. For it is not possible to infer this truth itself from a

more certain principle, yet this is necessary if there is to be completed proof

of it in the full sense. But he who wants to prove to the asserter of opposites

that he is wrong must get from him an admission which shall be identical

with the principle that the same thing cannot be and not be at one and the

same time, but shall not seem to be identical; for thus alone can his thesis be

demonstrated to the man who asserts that opposite statements can be truly

made about the same subject. Those, then, who are to join in argument with

one another must to some extent understand one another; for if this does not

happen how are they to join in argument with one another? Therefore every

word must be intelligible and indicate something, and not many things but

only one; and if it signifies more than one thing, it must be made plain to

which of these the word is being applied. He, then, who says ‘this is and is

not’ denies what he affirms, so that what the word signifies, he says it does

not signify; and this is impossible. Therefore if ‘this is’ signifies something,

one cannot truly assert its contradictory.

  Further,  if  the  word  signifies  something  and  this  is  asserted  truly,  this

connexion  must  be  necessary;  and  it  is  not  possible  that  that  whichnecessarily is should ever not be; it is not possible therefore to make the

opposed affirmations and negations truly of the same subject. Further, if the

affirmation is no more true than the negation, he who says ‘man’ will be no

more right than he who says ‘not-man’. It would seem also that in saying the

man is not a horse one would be either more or not less right than in saying

he is not a man, so that one will also be right in saying that the same person is

a  horse;  for  it  was  assumed  to  be  possible  to  make  opposite  statements

equally truly. It follows then that the same person is a man and a horse, or

any other animal.

  While, then, there is no proof of these things in the full sense, there is a

proof which may suffice against one who will make these suppositions. And

perhaps if one had questioned Heraclitus himself in this way one might have

forced him to confess that opposite statements can never be true of the same

subjects. But, as it is, he adopted this opinion without understanding what his

statement involves. But in any case if what is said by him is true, not even

this itself will be true-viz. that the same thing can at one and the same time

both be and not be. For as, when the statements are separated, the affirmation

is  no  more  true  than  the  negation,  in  the  same  way-the  combined  and

complex  statement  being  like  a  single  affirmation-the  whole  taken  as  an

affirmation  will  be  no  more  true  than  the  negation.  Further,  if  it  is  not

possible to affirm anything truly, this itself will be false-the assertion that

there is no true affirmation. But if a true affirmation exists, this appears to

refute what is said by those who raise such objections and utterly destroy

rational discourse.

<

div id="section124" class="section" title="6">


6


The saying of Protagoras is like the views we have mentioned; he said that

man is the measure of all things, meaning simply that that which seems to

each man also assuredly is. If this is so, it follows that the same thing both is

and is not, and is bad and good, and that the contents of all other opposite

statements are true, because often a particular thing appears beautiful to some

and the contrary of beautiful to others, and that which appears to each man is

the measure. This difficulty may be solved by considering the source of this

opinion. It seems to have arisen in some cases from the doctrine of the naturalphilosophers, and in others from the fact that all men have not the same views

about the same things, but a particular thing appears pleasant to some and the

contrary of pleasant to others.

That nothing comes to be out of that which is not, but everything out of

that which is, is a dogma common to nearly all the natural philosophers.

Since, then, white cannot come to be if the perfectly white and in no respect

not-white existed before, that which becomes white must come from that

which is not white; so that it must come to be out of that which is not (so they

argue), unless the same thing was at the beginning white and not-white. But it

is not hard to solve this difficulty; for we have said in our works on physics

in what sense things that come to be come to be from that which is not, and in

what sense from that which is.

But to attend equally to the opinions and the fancies of disputing parties is

childish; for clearly one of them must be mistaken. And this is evident from

what happens in respect of sensation; for the same thing never appears sweet

to some and the contrary of sweet to others, unless in the one case the sense-

organ  which  discriminates  the  aforesaid  flavours  has  been  perverted  and

injured. And if this is so the one party must be taken to be the measure, and

the other must not. And say the same of good and bad, and beautiful and

ugly, and all other such qualities. For to maintain the view we are opposing is

just like maintaining that the things that appear to people who put their finger

under their eye and make the object appear two instead of one must be two

(because they appear to be of that number) and again one (for to those who

do not interfere with their eye the one object appears one).

In general, it is absurd to make the fact that the things of this earth are

observed to change and never to remain in the same state, the basis of our

judgement about the truth. For in pursuing the truth one must start from the

things that are always in the same state and suffer no change. Such are the

heavenly bodies; for these do not appear to be now of one nature and again of

another, but are manifestly always the same and share in no change.

  Further,  if  there  is  movement,  there  is  also  something  moved,  and

everything is moved out of something and into something; it follows that that

that which is moved must first be in that out of which it is to be moved, and

then not be in it, and move into the other and come to be in it, and that the

contradictory statements are not true at the same time, as these thinkers assert

they are.

And if the things of this earth continuously flow and move in respect ofquantity-if one were to suppose this, although it is not true-why should they

not endure in respect of quality? For the assertion of contradictory statements

about the same thing seems to have arisen largely from the belief that the

quantity of bodies does not endure, which, our opponents hold, justifies them

in saying that the same thing both is and is not four cubits long. But essence

depends on quality, and this is of determinate nature, though quantity is of

indeterminate.

  Further, when the doctor orders people to take some particular food, why

do they take it? In what respect is ‘this is bread’ truer than ‘this is not bread’?

And so it would make no difference whether one ate or not. But as a matter of

fact they take the food which is ordered, assuming that they know the truth

about  it  and  that  it  is  bread.  Yet  they  should  not,  if  there  were  no  fixed

constant nature in sensible things, but all natures moved and flowed for ever.

  Again, if we are always changing and never remain the same, what wonder

is it if to us, as to the sick, things never appear the same? (For to them also,

because they are not in the same condition as when they were well, sensible

qualities do not appear alike; yet, for all that, the sensible things themselves

need  not  share  in  any  change,  though  they  produce  different,  and  not

identical, sensations in the sick. And the same must surely happen to the

healthy if the afore-said change takes place.) But if we do not change but

remain the same, there will be something that endures.

As  for  those  to  whom  the  difficulties  mentioned  are  suggested  by

reasoning, it is not easy to solve the difficulties to their satisfaction, unless

they will posit something and no longer demand a reason for it; for it is only

thus that all reasoning and all proof is accomplished; if they posit nothing,

they destroy discussion and all reasoning. Therefore with such men there is

no  reasoning.  But  as  for  those  who  are  perplexed  by  the  traditional

difficulties,  it  is  easy  to  meet  them  and  to  dissipate  the  causes  of  their

perplexity. This is evident from what has been said.

It  is  manifest,  therefore,  from  these  arguments  that  contradictory

statements cannot be truly made about the same subject at one time, nor can

contrary statements, because every contrariety depends on privation. This is

evident if we reduce the definitions of contraries to their principle.

  Similarly, no intermediate between contraries can be predicated of one and

the same subject, of which one of the contraries is predicated. If the subject is

white we shall be wrong in saying it is neither black nor white, for then it

follows that it is and is not white; for the second of the two terms we have puttogether is true of it, and this is the contradictory of white.

We could not be right, then, in accepting the views either of Heraclitus or

of  Anaxagoras.  If  we  were,  it  would  follow  that  contraries  would  be

predicated of the same subject; for when Anaxagoras says that in everything

there is a part of everything, he says nothing is sweet any more than it is

bitter, and so with any other pair of contraries, since in everything everything

is present not potentially only, but actually and separately. And similarly all

statements  cannot  be  false  nor  all  true,  both  because  of  many  other

difficulties which might be adduced as arising from this position, and because

if all are false it will not be true to say even this, and if all are true it will not

be false to say all are false.

<

div id="section125" class="section" title="7">


7


  Every science seeks certain principles and causes for each of its objects-

e.g.  medicine  and  gymnastics  and  each  of  the  other  sciences,  whether

productive or mathematical. For each of these marks off a certain class of

things for itself and busies itself about this as about something existing and

real,-not however qua real; the science that does this is another distinct from

these. Of the sciences mentioned each gets somehow the ‘what’ in some class

of things and tries to prove the other truths, with more or less precision. Some

get the ‘what’ through perception, others by hypothesis; so that it is clear

from an induction of this sort that there is no demonstration. of the substance

or ‘what’.

  There is a science of nature, and evidently it must be different both from

practical and from productive science. For in the case of productive science

the principle of movement is in the producer and not in the product, and is

either an art or some other faculty. And similarly in practical science the

movement is not in the thing done, but rather in the doers. But the science of

the  natural  philosopher  deals  with  the  things  that  have  in  themselves  a

principle of movement. It is clear from these facts, then, that natural science

must be neither practical nor productive, but theoretical (for it must fall into

some one of these classes). And since each of the sciences must somehow

know the ‘what’ and use this as a principle, we must not fall to observe how

the  natural  philosopher  should  define  things  and  how  he  should  state  thedefinition of the essence-whether as akin to ‘snub’ or rather to ‘concave’. For

of these the definition of ‘snub’ includes the matter of the thing, but that of

‘concave’ is independent of the matter; for snubness is found in a nose, so

that we look for its definition without eliminating the nose, for what is snub is

a concave nose. Evidently then the definition of flesh also and of the eye and

of the other parts must always be stated without eliminating the matter.

  Since there is a science of being qua being and capable of existing apart,

we must consider whether this is to be regarded as the same as physics or

rather  as  different.  Physics  deals  with  the  things  that  have  a  principle  of

movement in themselves; mathematics is theoretical, and is a science that

deals with things that are at rest, but its subjects cannot exist apart. Therefore

about that which can exist apart and is unmovable there is a science different

from both of these, if there is a substance of this nature (I mean separable and

unmovable), as we shall try to prove there is. And if there is such a kind of

thing in the world, here must surely be the divine, and this must be the first

and  most  dominant  principle.  Evidently,  then,  there  are  three  kinds  of

theoretical sciences-physics, mathematics, theology. The class of theoretical

sciences is the best, and of these themselves the last named is best; for it

deals with the highest of existing things, and each science is called better or

worse in virtue of its proper object.

One might raise the question whether the science of being qua being is to

be regarded as universal or not. Each of the mathematical sciences deals with

some one determinate class of things, but universal mathematics applies alike

to all. Now if natural substances are the first of existing things, physics must

be the first of sciences; but if there is another entity and substance, separable

and unmovable, the knowledge of it must be different and prior to physics

and universal because it is prior.

<

div id="section126" class="section" title="8">


8


  Since  ‘being’  in  general  has  several  senses,  of  which  one  is  ‘being  by

accident’, we must consider first that which ‘is’ in this sense. Evidently none

of the traditional sciences busies itself about the accidental. For neither does

architecture consider what will happen to those who are to use the house (e.g.

whether  they  have  a  painful  life  in  it  or  not),  nor  does  weaving,  orshoemaking, or the confectioner’s art, do the like; but each of these sciences

considers  only  what  is  peculiar  to  it,  i.e.  its  proper  end.  And  as  for  the

argument that ‘when he who is musical becomes lettered he’ll be both at

once, not having been both before; and that which is, not always having been,

must have come to be; therefore he must have at once become musical and

lettered’,-this none of the recognized sciences considers, but only sophistic;

for this alone busies itself about the accidental, so that Plato is not far wrong

when he says that the sophist spends his time on non-being.

That a science of the accidental is not even possible will be evident if we

try  to  see  what  the  accidental  really  is.  We  say  that  everything  either  is

always and of necessity (necessity not in the sense of violence, but that which

we appeal to in demonstrations), or is for the most part, or is neither for the

most part, nor always and of necessity, but merely as it chances; e.g. there

might be cold in the dogdays, but this occurs neither always and of necessity,

nor for the most part, though it might happen sometimes. The accidental,

then, is what occurs, but not always nor of necessity, nor for the most part.

Now we have said what the accidental is, and it is obvious why there is no

science of such a thing; for all science is of that which is always or for the

most part, but the accidental is in neither of these classes.

  Evidently there are not causes and principles of the accidental, of the same

kind as there are of the essential; for if there were, everything would be of

necessity. If A is when B is, and B is when C is, and if C exists not by chance

but of necessity, that also of which C was cause will exist of necessity, down

to the last causatum as it is called (but this was supposed to be accidental).

Therefore all things will be of necessity, and chance and the possibility of a

thing’s either occurring or not occurring are removed entirely from the range

of events. And if the cause be supposed not to exist but to be coming to be,

the  same  results  will  follow;  everything  will  occur  of  necessity.  For  to-

morrow’s  eclipse  will  occur  if  A  occurs,  and  A  if  B  occurs,  and  B  if  C

occurs; and in this way if we subtract time from the limited time between

now  and  to-morrow  we  shall  come  sometime  to  the  already  existing

condition.  Therefore  since  this  exists,  everything  after  this  will  occur  of

necessity, so that all things occur of necessity.

As to that which ‘is’ in the sense of being true or of being by accident, the

former depends on a combination in thought and is an affection of thought

(which is the reason why it is the principles, not of that which ‘is’ in this

sense, but of that which is outside and can exist apart, that are sought); andthe latter is not necessary but indeterminate (I mean the accidental); and of

such a thing the causes are unordered and indefinite.

  Adaptation to an end is found in events that happen by nature or as the

result of thought. It is ‘luck’ when one of these events happens by accident.

For as a thing may exist, so it may be a cause, either by its own nature or by

accident. Luck is an accidental cause at work in such events adapted to an

end as are usually effected in accordance with purpose. And so luck and

thought are concerned with the same sphere; for purpose cannot exist without

thought.  The  causes  from  which  lucky  results  might  happen  are

indeterminate; and so luck is obscure to human calculation and is a cause by

accident, but in the unqualified sense a cause of nothing. It is good or bad

luck when the result is good or evil; and prosperity or misfortune when the

scale of the results is large.

  Since nothing accidental is prior to the essential, neither are accidental

causes prior. If, then, luck or spontaneity is a cause of the material universe,

reason and nature are causes before it.

<

div id="section127" class="section" title="9">


9


  Some  things  are  only  actually,  some  potentially,  some  potentially  and

actually,  what  they  are,  viz.  in  one  case  a  particular  reality,  in  another,

characterized by a particular quantity, or the like. There is no movement apart

from things; for change is always according to the categories of being, and

there is nothing common to these and in no one category. But each of the

categories belongs to all its subjects in either of two ways (e.g. ‘this-ness’-for

one kind of it is ‘positive form’, and the other is ‘privation’; and as regards

quality one kind is ‘white’ and the other ‘black’, and as regards quantity one

kind  is  ‘complete’  and  the  other  ‘incomplete’,  and  as  regards  spatial

movement one is ‘upwards’ and the other ‘downwards’, or one thing is ‘light’

and  another  ‘heavy’);  so  that  there  are  as  many  kinds  of  movement  and

change as of being. There being a distinction in each class of things between

the potential and the completely real, I call the actuality of the potential as

such, movement. That what we say is true, is plain from the following facts.

When the ‘buildable’, in so far as it is what we mean by ‘buildable’, exists

actually, it is being built, and this is the process of building. Similarly withlearning, healing, walking, leaping, ageing, ripening. Movement takes when

the complete reality itself exists, and neither earlier nor later. The complete

reality, then, of that which exists potentially, when it is completely real and

actual, not qua itself, but qua movable, is movement. By qua I mean this:

bronze is potentially a statue; but yet it is not the complete reality of bronze

qua bronze that is movement. For it is not the same thing to be bronze and to

be  a  certain  potency.  If  it  were  absolutely  the  same  in  its  definition,  the

complete reality of bronze would have been a movement. But it is not the

same. (This is evident in the case of contraries; for to be capable of being

well and to be capable of being ill are not the same-for if they were, being

well and being ill would have been the same-it is that which underlies and is

healthy or diseased, whether it is moisture or blood, that is one and the same.)

And since it is not. the same, as colour and the visible are not the same, it is

the complete reality of the potential, and as potential, that is movement. That

it is this, and that movement takes place when the complete reality itself

exists, and neither earlier nor later, is evident. For each thing is capable of

being sometimes actual, sometimes not, e.g. the buildable qua buildable; and

the actuality of the buildable qua buildable is building. For the actuality is

either this-the act of building-or the house. But when the house exists, it is no

longer buildable; the buildable is what is being built. The actuality, then,

must be the act of building, and this is a movement. And the same account

applies to all other movements.

That what we have said is right is evident from what all others say about

movement, and from the fact that it is not easy to define it otherwise. For

firstly one cannot put it in any class. This is evident from what people say.

Some call it otherness and inequality and the unreal; none of these, however,

is necessarily moved, and further, change is not either to these or from these

any more than from their opposites. The reason why people put movement in

these classes is that it is thought to be something indefinite, and the principles

in one of the two ‘columns of contraries’ are indefinite because they are

privative, for none of them is either a ‘this’ or a ‘such’ or in any of the other

categories. And the reason why movement is thought to be indefinite is that it

cannot be classed either with the potency of things or with their actuality; for

neither that which is capable of being of a certain quantity, nor that which is

actually  of  a  certain  quantity,  is  of  necessity  moved,  and  movement  is

thought to be an actuality, but incomplete; the reason is that the potential,

whose actuality it is, is incomplete. And therefore it is hard to grasp whatmovement is; for it must be classed either under privation or under potency or

under absolute actuality, but evidently none of these is possible. Therefore

what remains is that it must be what we said-both actuality and the actuality

we have described-which is hard to detect but capable of existing.

And  evidently  movement  is  in  the  movable;  for  it  is  the  complete

realization of this by that which is capable of causing movement. And the

actuality of that which is capable of causing movement is no other than that

of the movable. For it must be the complete reality of both. For while a thing

is capable of causing movement because it can do this, it is a mover because

it is active; but it is on the movable that it is capable of acting, so that the

actuality of both is one, just as there is the same interval from one to two as

from two to one, and as the steep ascent and the steep descent are one, but the

being of them is not one; the case of the mover and the moved is similar.

<

div id="section128" class="section" title="10">


10


The infinite is either that which is incapable of being traversed because it is

not its nature to be traversed (this corresponds to the sense in which the voice

is ‘invisible’), or that which admits only of incomplete traverse or scarcely

admits of traverse, or that which, though it naturally admits of traverse, is not

traversed or limited; further, a thing may be infinite in respect of addition or

of subtraction, or both. The infinite cannot be a separate, independent thing.

For if it is neither a spatial magnitude nor a plurality, but infinity itself is its

substance and not an accident of it, it will be indivisible; for the divisible is

either magnitude or plurality. But if indivisible, it is not infinite, except as the

voice is invisible; but people do not mean this, nor are we examining this sort

of infinite, but the infinite as untraversable. Further, how can an infinite exist

by  itself,  unless  number  and  magnitude  also  exist  by  themselvess-since

infinity  is  an  attribute  of  these?  Further,  if  the  infinite  is  an  accident  of

something else, it cannot be qua infinite an element in things, as the invisible

is not an element in speech, though the voice is invisible. And evidently the

infinite  cannot  exist  actually.  For  then  any  part  of  it  that  might  be  taken

would be infinite (for ‘to be infinite’ and ‘the infinite’ are the same, if the

infinite is substance and not predicated of a subject). Therefore it is either

indivisible, or if it is partible, it is divisible into infinites; but the same thingcannot be many infinites (as a part of air is air, so a part of the infinite would

be infinite, if the infinite is substance and a principle). Therefore it must be

impartible and indivisible. But the actually infinite cannot be indivisible; for

it  must  be  of  a  certain  quantity.  Therefore  infinity  belongs  to  its  subject

incidentally. But if so, then (as we have said) it cannot be it that is a principle,

but that of which it is an accident-the air or the even number.

This inquiry is universal; but that the infinite is not among sensible things,

is evident from the following argument. If the definition of a body is ‘that

which is bounded by planes’, there cannot be an infinite body either sensible

or intelligible; nor a separate and infinite number, for number or that which

has  a  number  is  numerable.  Concretely,  the  truth  is  evident  from  the

following argument. The infinite can neither be composite nor simple. For (a)

it cannot be a composite body, since the elements are limited in multitude.

For the contraries must be equal and no one of them must be infinite; for if

one of the two bodies falls at all short of the other in potency, the finite will

be destroyed by the infinite. And that each should be infinite is impossible.

For body is that which has extension in all directions, and the infinite is the

boundlessly extended, so that if the infinite is a body it will be infinite in

every direction. Nor (b) can the infinite body be one and simple-neither, as

some say, something apart from the elements, from which they generate these

(for there is no such body apart from the elements; for everything can be

resolved into that of which it consists, but no such product of analysis is

observed except the simple bodies), nor fire nor any other of the elements.

For apart from the question how any of them could be infinite, the All, even

if it is finite, cannot either be or become any one of them, as Heraclitus says

all things sometime become fire. The same argument applies to this as to the

One  which  the  natural  philosophers  posit  besides  the  elements.  For

everything changes from contrary to contrary, e.g. from hot to cold.

  Further, a sensible body is somewhere, and whole and part have the same

proper place, e.g. the whole earth and part of the earth. Therefore if (a) the

infinite  body  is  homogeneous,  it  will  be  unmovable  or  it  will  be  always

moving. But this is impossible; for why should it rather rest, or move, down,

up, or anywhere, rather than anywhere else? E.g. if there were a clod which

were part of an infinite body, where will this move or rest? The proper place

of the body which is homogeneous with it is infinite. Will the clod occupy the

whole place, then? And how? (This is impossible.) What then is its rest or its

movement? It will either rest everywhere, and then it cannot move; or it willmove everywhere, and then it cannot be still. But (b) if the All has unlike

parts, the proper places of the parts are unlike also, and, firstly, the body of

the All is not one except by contact, and, secondly, the parts will be either

finite or infinite in variety of kind. Finite they cannot be; for then those of

one kind will be infinite in quantity and those of another will not (if the All is

infinite), e.g. fire or water would be infinite, but such an infinite element

would be destruction to the contrary elements. But if the parts are infinite and

simple, their places also are infinite and there will be an infinite number of

elements; and if this is impossible, and the places are finite, the All also must

be limited.

In general, there cannot be an infinite body and also a proper place for

bodies, if every sensible body has either weight or lightness. For it must

move either towards the middle or upwards, and the infinite either the whole

or the half of it-cannot do either; for how will you divide it? Or how will part

of the infinite be down and part up, or part extreme and part middle? Further,

every sensible body is in a place, and there are six kinds of place, but these

cannot exist in an infinite body. In general, if there cannot be an infinite

place,  there  cannot  be  an  infinite  body;  (and  there  cannot  be  an  infinite

place,) for that which is in a place is somewhere, and this means either up or

down or in one of the other directions, and each of these is a limit.

The infinite is not the same in the sense that it is a single thing whether

exhibited in distance or in movement or in time, but the posterior among

these is called infinite in virtue of its relation to the prior; i.e. a movement is

called infinite in virtue of the distance covered by the spatial movement or

alteration or growth, and a time is called infinite because of the movement

which occupies it.

<

div id="section129" class="section" title="11">


11


Of things which change, some change in an accidental sense, like that in

which  ‘the  musical’  may  be  said  to  walk,  and  others  are  said,  without

qualification, to change, because something in them changes, i.e. the things

that change in parts; the body becomes healthy, because the eye does. But

there is something which is by its own nature moved directly, and this is the

essentially movable. The same distinction is found in the case of the mover;for it causes movement either in an accidental sense or in respect of a part of

itself or essentially. There is something that directly causes movement; and

there is something that is moved, also the time in which it is moved, and that

from which and that into which it is moved. But the forms and the affections

and the place, which are the terminals of the movement of moving things, are

unmovable, e.g. knowledge or heat; it is not heat that is a movement, but

heating.  Change  which  is  not  accidental  is  found  not  in  all  things,  but

between contraries, and their intermediates, and between contradictories. We

may convince ourselves of this by induction.

That which changes changes either from positive into positive, or from

negative into negative, or from positive into negative, or from negative into

positive. (By positive I mean that which is expressed by an affirmative term.)

Therefore there must be three changes; that from negative into negative is not

change, because (since the terms are neither contraries nor contradictories)

there is no opposition. The change from the negative into the positive which

is its contradictory is generation-absolute change absolute generation, and

partial change partial generation; and the change from positive to negative is

destruction-absolute change absolute destruction, and partial change partial

destruction. If, then, ‘that which is not’ has several senses, and movement can

attach neither to that which implies putting together or separating, nor to that

which implies potency and is opposed to that which is in the full sense (true,

the not-white or not-good can be moved incidentally, for the not-white might

be a man; but that which is not a particular thing at all can in no wise be

moved), that which is not cannot be moved (and if this is so, generation

cannot be movement; for that which is not is generated; for even if we admit

to the full that its generation is accidental, yet it is true to say that ‘not-being’

is predicable of that which is generated absolutely). Similarly rest cannot be

long to that which is not. These consequences, then, turn out to be awkward,

and also this, that everything that is moved is in a place, but that which is not

is  not  in  a  place;  for  then  it  would  be  somewhere.  Nor  is  destruction

movement;  for  the  contrary  of  movement  is  rest,  but  the  contrary  of

destruction is generation. Since every movement is a change, and the kinds of

change  are  the  three  named  above,  and  of  these  those  in  the  way  of

generation  and  destruction  are  not  movements,  and  these  are  the  changes

from a thing to its contradictory, it follows that only the change from positive

into  positive  is  movement.  And  the  positives  are  either  contrary  or

intermediate  (for  even  privation  must  be  regarded  as  contrary),  and  areexpressed by an affirmative term, e.g. ‘naked’ or ‘toothless’ or ‘black’.

<

div id="section130" class="section" title="12">


12


If the categories are classified as substance, quality, place, acting or being

acted  on,  relation,  quantity,  there  must  be  three  kinds  of  movement-of

quality, of quantity, of place. There is no movement in respect of substance

(because  there  is  nothing  contrary  to  substance),  nor  of  relation  (for  it  is

possible that if one of two things in relation changes, the relative term which

was  true  of  the  other  thing  ceases  to  be  true,  though  this  other  does  not

change at all,-so that their movement is accidental), nor of agent and patient,

or  mover  and  moved,  because  there  is  no  movement  of  movement  nor

generation of generation, nor, in general, change of change. For there might

be movement of movement in two senses; (1) movement might be the subject

moved, as a man is moved because he changes from pale to dark,-so that on

this showing movement, too, may be either heated or cooled or change its

place or increase. But this is impossible; for change is not a subject. Or (2)

some  other  subject  might  change  from  change  into  some  other  form  of

existence (e.g. a man from disease into health). But this also is not possible

except  incidentally.  For  every  movement  is  change  from  something  into

something. (And so are generation and destruction; only, these are changes

into things opposed in certain ways while the other, movement, is into things

opposed in another way.) A thing changes, then, at the same time from health

into illness, and from this change itself into another. Clearly, then, if it has

become  ill,  it  will  have  changed  into  whatever  may  be  the  other  change

concerned (though it may be at rest), and, further, into a determinate change

each time; and that new change will be from something definite into some

other definite thing; therefore it will be the opposite change, that of growing

well. We answer that this happens only incidentally; e.g. there is a change

from the process of recollection to that of forgetting, only because that to

which the process attaches is changing, now into a state of knowledge, now

into one of ignorance.

  Further, the process will go on to infinity, if there is to be change of change

and coming to be of coming to be. What is true of the later, then, must be true

of the earlier; e.g. if the simple coming to be was once coming to be, thatwhich comes to be something was also once coming to be; therefore that

which simply comes to be something was not yet in existence, but something

which was coming to be coming to be something was already in existence.

And this was once coming to be, so that at that time it was not yet coming to

be something else. Now since of an infinite number of terms there is not a

first, the first in this series will not exist, and therefore no following term

exist.  Nothing,  then,  can  either  come  term  wi  to  be  or  move  or  change.

Further, that which is capable of a movement is also capable of the contrary

movement and rest, and that which comes to be also ceases to be. Therefore

that which is coming to be is ceasing to be when it has come to be coming to

be; for it cannot cease to be as soon as it is coming to be coming to be, nor

after it has come to be; for that which is ceasing to be must be. Further, there

must be a matter underlying that which comes to be and changes. What will

this be, then,-what is it that becomes movement or becoming, as body or soul

is that which suffers alteration? And; again, what is it that they move into?

For it must be the movement or becoming of something from something into

something.  How,  then,  can  this  condition  be  fulfilled?  There  can  be  no

learning of learning, and therefore no becoming of becoming. Since there is

not movement either of substance or of relation or of activity and passivity, it

remains that movement is in respect of quality and quantity and place; for

each of these admits of contrariety. By quality I mean not that which is in the

substance (for even the differentia is a quality), but the passive quality, in

virtue of which a thing is said to be acted on or to be incapable of being acted

on. The immobile is either that which is wholly incapable of being moved, or

that which is moved with difficulty in a long time or begins slowly, or that

which is of a nature to be moved and can be moved but is not moved when

and where and as it would naturally be moved. This alone among immobiles I

describe as being at rest; for rest is contrary to movement, so that it must be a

privation in that which is receptive of movement.

  Things which are in one proximate place are together in place, and things

which are in different places are apart: things whose extremes are together

touch: that at which a changing thing, if it changes continuously according to

its nature, naturally arrives before it arrives at the extreme into which it is

changing, is between. That which is most distant in a straight line is contrary

in place. That is successive which is after the beginning (the order being

determined by position or form or in some other way) and has nothing of the

same class between it and that which it succeeds, e.g. lines in the case of aline, units in that of a unit, or a house in that of a house. (There is nothing to

prevent a thing of some other class from being between.) For the successive

succeeds something and is something later; ‘one’ does not succeed ‘two’, nor

the first day of the month the second. That which, being successive, touches,

is contiguous. (Since all change is between opposites, and these are either

contraries or contradictories, and there is no middle term for contradictories,

clearly that which is between is between contraries.) The continuous is a

species of the contiguous. I call two things continuous when the limits of

each, with which they touch and by which they are kept together, become one

and the same, so that plainly the continuous is found in the things out of

which  a  unity  naturally  arises  in  virtue  of  their  contact.  And  plainly  the

successive  is  the  first  of  these  concepts  (for  the  successive  does  not

necessarily  touch,  but  that  which  touches  is  successive;  and  if  a  thing  is

continuous, it touches, but if it touches, it is not necessarily continuous; and

in things in which there is no touching, there is no organic unity); therefore a

point is not the same as a unit; for contact belongs to points, but not to units,

which  have  only  succession;  and  there  is  something  between  two  of  the

former, but not between two of the latter.                                      Book XII


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div id="section131" class="section" title="1">


1


The subject of our inquiry is substance; for the principles and the causes

we are seeking are those of substances. For if the universe is of the nature of

a whole, substance is its first part; and if it coheres merely by virtue of serial

succession, on this view also substance is first, and is succeeded by quality,

and then by quantity. At the same time these latter are not even being in the

full sense, but are qualities and movements of it,-or else even the not-white

and the not-straight would be being; at least we say even these are, e.g. ‘there

is a not-white’. Further, none of the categories other than substance can exist

apart. And the early philosophers also in practice testify to the primacy of

substance;  for  it  was  of  substance  that  they  sought  the  principles  and

elements and causes. The thinkers of the present day tend to rank universals

as substances (for genera are universals, and these they tend to describe as

principles and substances, owing to the abstract nature of their inquiry); but

the thinkers of old ranked particular things as substances, e.g. fire and earth,

not what is common to both, body.

  There  are  three  kinds  of  substance-one  that  is  sensible  (of  which  one

subdivision is eternal and another is perishable; the latter is recognized by all

men,  and  includes  e.g.  plants  and  animals),  of  which  we  must  grasp  the

elements,  whether  one  or  many;  and  another  that  is  immovable,  and  this

certain thinkers assert to be capable of existing apart, some dividing it into

two, others identifying the Forms and the objects of mathematics, and others

positing, of these two, only the objects of mathematics. The former two kinds

of substance are the subject of physics (for they imply movement); but the

third kind belongs to another science, if there is no principle common to it

and to the other kinds.

<div id="section132" class="section" title="2">


2


  Sensible substance is changeable. Now if change proceeds from opposites

or from intermediates, and not from all opposites (for the voice is not-white,

(but it does not therefore change to white)), but from the contrary, there must

be  something  underlying  which  changes  into  the  contrary  state;  for  the

contraries do not change. Further, something persists, but the contrary does

not persist; there is, then, some third thing besides the contraries, viz. the

matter. Now since changes are of four kinds-either in respect of the ‘what’ or

of the quality or of the quantity or of the place, and change in respect of

‘thisness’  is  simple  generation  and  destruction,  and  change  in  quantity  is

increase and diminution, and change in respect of an affection is alteration,

and change of place is motion, changes will be from given states into those

contrary to them in these several respects. The matter, then, which changes

must be capable of both states. And since that which ‘is’ has two senses, we

must say that everything changes from that which is potentially to that which

is actually, e.g. from potentially white to actually white, and similarly in the

case of increase and diminution. Therefore not only can a thing come to be,

incidentally, out of that which is not, but also all things come to be out of that

which  is,  but  is  potentially,  and  is  not  actually.  And  this  is  the  ‘One’  of

Anaxagoras; for instead of ‘all things were together’-and the ‘Mixture’ of

Empedocles  and  Anaximander  and  the  account  given  by  Democritus-it  is

better to say ‘all things were together potentially but not actually’. Therefore

these thinkers seem to have had some notion of matter. Now all things that

change have matter, but different matter; and of eternal things those which

are  not  generable  but  are  movable  in  space  have  matter-not  matter  for

generation, however, but for motion from one place to another.

One  might  raise  the  question  from  what  sort  of  non-being  generation

proceeds; for ‘non-being’ has three senses. If, then, one form of non-being

exists potentially, still it is not by virtue of a potentiality for any and every

thing, but different things come from different things; nor is it satisfactory to

say  that  ‘all  things  were  together’;  for  they  differ  in  their  matter,  since

otherwise why did an infinity of things come to be, and not one thing? For

‘reason’ is one, so that if matter also were one, that must have come to be in

actuality which the matter was in potency. The causes and the principles,then, are three, two being the pair of contraries of which one is definition and

form and the other is privation, and the third being the matter.

<

div id="section133" class="section" title="3">


3


Note, next, that neither the matter nor the form comes to be-and I mean the

last  matter  and  form.  For  everything  that  changes  is  something  and  is

changed by something and into something. That by which it is changed is the

immediate mover; that which is changed, the matter; that into which it is

changed, the form. The process, then, will go on to infinity, if not only the

bronze comes to be round but also the round or the bronze comes to be;

therefore there must be a stop.

Note, next, that each substance comes into being out of something that

shares its name. (Natural objects and other things both rank as substances.)

For  things  come  into  being  either  by  art  or  by  nature  or  by  luck  or  by

spontaneity. Now art is a principle of movement in something other than the

thing moved, nature is a principle in the thing itself (for man begets man),

and the other causes are privations of these two.

  There  are  three  kinds  of  substance-the  matter,  which  is  a  ‘this’  in

appearance  (for  all  things  that  are  characterized  by  contact  and  not,  by

organic unity are matter and substratum, e.g. fire, flesh, head; for these are all

matter, and the last matter is the matter of that which is in the full sense

substance);  the  nature,  which  is  a  ‘this’  or  positive  state  towards  which

movement takes place; and again, thirdly, the particular substance which is

composed of these two, e.g. Socrates or Callias. Now in some cases the ‘this’

does not exist apart from the composite substance, e.g. the form of house

does  not  so  exist,  unless  the  art  of  building  exists  apart  (nor  is  there

generation and destruction of these forms, but it is in another way that the

house apart from its matter, and health, and all ideals of art, exist and do not

exist); but if the ‘this’ exists apart from the concrete thing, it is only in the

case of natural objects. And so Plato was not far wrong when he said that

there are as many Forms as there are kinds of natural object (if there are

Forms distinct from the things of this earth). The moving causes exist as

things  preceding  the  effects,  but  causes  in  the  sense  of  definitions  are

simultaneous with their effects. For when a man is healthy, then health alsoexists; and the shape of a bronze sphere exists at the same time as the bronze

sphere. (But we must examine whether any form also survives afterwards.

For in some cases there is nothing to prevent this; e.g. the soul may be of this

sort-not all soul but the reason; for presumably it is impossible that all soul

should survive.) Evidently then there is no necessity, on this ground at least,

for the existence of the Ideas. For man is begotten by man, a given man by an

individual father; and similarly in the arts; for the medical art is the formal

cause of health.

<

div id="section134" class="section" title="4">


4


The causes and the principles of different things are in a sense different,

but in a sense, if one speaks universally and analogically, they are the same

for all. For one might raise the question whether the principles and elements

are different or the same for substances and for relative terms, and similarly

in the case of each of the categories. But it would be paradoxical if they were

the same for all. For then from the same elements will proceed relative terms

and substances. What then will this common element be? For (1) (a) there is

nothing common to and distinct from substance and the other categories, viz.

those which are predicated; but an element is prior to the things of which it is

an element. But again (b) substance is not an element in relative terms, nor is

any of these an element in substance. Further, (2) how can all things have the

same elements? For none of the elements can be the same as that which is

composed of elements, e.g. b or a cannot be the same as ba. (None, therefore,

of the intelligibles, e.g. being or unity, is an element; for these are predicable

of each of the compounds as well.) None of the elements, then, will be either

a substance or a relative term; but it must be one or other. All things, then,

have not the same elements.

Or, as we are wont to put it, in a sense they have and in a sense they have

not; e.g. perhaps the elements of perceptible bodies are, as form, the hot, and

in another sense the cold, which is the privation; and, as matter, that which

directly and of itself potentially has these attributes; and substances comprise

both  these  and  the  things  composed  of  these,  of  which  these  are  the

principles, or any unity which is produced out of the hot and the cold, e.g.

flesh or bone; for the product must be different from the elements. Thesethings  then  have  the  same  elements  and  principles  (though  specifically

different things have specifically different elements); but all things have not

the same elements in this sense, but only analogically; i.e. one might say that

there are three principles-the form, the privation, and the matter. But each of

these is different for each class; e.g. in colour they are white, black, and

surface, and in day and night they are light, darkness, and air.

  Since  not  only  the  elements  present  in  a  thing  are  causes,  but  also

something  external,  i.e.  the  moving  cause,  clearly  while  ‘principle’  and

‘element’ are different both are causes, and ‘principle’ is divided into these

two kinds; and that which acts as producing movement or rest is a principle

and a substance. Therefore analogically there are three elements, and four

causes and principles; but the elements are different in different things, and

the proximate moving cause is different for different things. Health, disease,

body; the moving cause is the medical art. Form, disorder of a particular

kind, bricks; the moving cause is the building art. And since the moving

cause in the case of natural things is-for man, for instance, man, and in the

products of thought the form or its contrary, there will be in a sense three

causes, while in a sense there are four. For the medical art is in some sense

health, and the building art is the form of the house, and man begets man;

further, besides these there is that which as first of all things moves all things.

<

div id="section135" class="section" title="5">


5


  Some things can exist apart and some cannot, and it is the former that are

substances. And therefore all things have the same causes, because, without

substances, modifications and movements do not exist. Further, these causes

will probably be soul and body, or reason and desire and body.

And in yet another way, analogically identical things are principles, i.e.

actuality and potency; but these also are not only different for different things

but also apply in different ways to them. For in some cases the same thing

exists at one time actually and at another potentially, e.g. wine or flesh or

man does so. (And these too fall under the above-named causes. For the form

exists actually, if it can exist apart, and so does the complex of form and

matter,  and  the  privation,  e.g.  darkness  or  disease;  but  the  matter  exists

potentially; for this is that which can become qualified either by the form orby the privation.) But the distinction of actuality and potentiality applies in

another way to cases where the matter of cause and of effect is not the same,

in some of which cases the form is not the same but different; e.g. the cause

of man is (1) the elements in man (viz. fire and earth as matter, and the

peculiar form), and further (2) something else outside, i.e. the father, and (3)

besides these the sun and its oblique course, which are neither matter nor

form nor privation of man nor of the same species with him, but moving

causes.

  Further, one must observe that some causes can be expressed in universal

terms, and some cannot. The proximate principles of all things are the ‘this’

which  is  proximate  in  actuality,  and  another  which  is  proximate  in

potentiality. The universal causes, then, of which we spoke do not exist. For

it is the individual that is the originative principle of the individuals. For

while  man  is  the  originative  principle  of  man  universally,  there  is  no

universal man, but Peleus is the originative principle of Achilles, and your

father of you, and this particular b of this particular ba, though b in general is

the originative principle of ba taken without qualification.

  Further,  if  the  causes  of  substances  are  the  causes  of  all  things,  yet

different things have different causes and elements, as was said; the causes of

things that are not in the same class, e.g. of colours and sounds, of substances

and quantities, are different except in an analogical sense; and those of things

in the same species are different, not in species, but in the sense that the

causes  of  different  individuals  are  different,  your  matter  and  form  and

moving cause being different from mine, while in their universal definition

they are the same. And if we inquire what are the principles or elements of

substances and relations and qualities-whether they are the same or different-

clearly when the names of the causes are used in several senses the causes of

each are the same, but when the senses are distinguished the causes are not

the same but different, except that in the following senses the causes of all are

the same. They are (1) the same or analogous in this sense, that matter, form,

privation, and the moving cause are common to all things; and (2) the causes

of substances may be treated as causes of all things in this sense, that when

substances are removed all things are removed; further, (3) that which is first

in respect of complete reality is the cause of all things. But in another sense

there are different first causes, viz. all the contraries which are neither generic

nor  ambiguous  terms;  and,  further,  the  matters  of  different  things  are

different. We have stated, then, what are the principles of sensible things andhow many they are, and in what sense they are the same and in what sense

different.

<

div id="section136" class="section" title="6">


6


  Since there were three kinds of substance, two of them physical and one

unmovable, regarding the latter we must assert that it is necessary that there

should be an eternal unmovable substance. For substances are the first of

existing things, and if they are all destructible, all things are destructible. But

it is impossible that movement should either have come into being or cease to

be (for it must always have existed), or that time should. For there could not

be a before and an after if time did not exist. Movement also is continuous,

then,  in  the  sense  in  which  time  is;  for  time  is  either  the  same  thing  as

movement  or  an  attribute  of  movement.  And  there  is  no  continuous

movement except movement in place, and of this only that which is circular

is continuous.

But if there is something which is capable of moving things or acting on

them, but is not actually doing so, there will not necessarily be movement; for

that which has a potency need not exercise it. Nothing, then, is gained even if

we suppose eternal substances, as the believers in the Forms do, unless there

is to be in them some principle which can cause change; nay, even this is not

enough, nor is another substance besides the Forms enough; for if it is not to

act,  there  will  be  no  movement.  Further  even  if  it  acts,  this  will  not  be

enough, if its essence is potency; for there will not be eternal movement,

since that which is potentially may possibly not be. There must, then, be such

a principle, whose very essence is actuality. Further, then, these substances

must  be  without  matter;  for  they  must  be  eternal,  if  anything  is  eternal.

Therefore they must be actuality.

Yet there is a difficulty; for it is thought that everything that acts is able to

act, but that not everything that is able to act acts, so that the potency is prior.

But if this is so, nothing that is need be; for it is possible for all things to be

capable of existing but not yet to exist.

Yet if we follow the theologians who generate the world from night, or the

natural  philosophers  who  say  that  ‘all  things  were  together’,  the  same

impossible result ensues. For how will there be movement, if there is noactually existing cause? Wood will surely not move itself-the carpenter’s art

must act on it; nor will the menstrual blood nor the earth set themselves in

motion, but the seeds must act on the earth and the semen on the menstrual

blood.

This is why some suppose eternal actuality-e.g. Leucippus and Plato; for

they say there is always movement. But why and what this movement is they

do say, nor, if the world moves in this way or that, do they tell us the cause of

its doing so. Now nothing is moved at random, but there must always be

something present to move it; e.g. as a matter of fact a thing moves in one

way by nature, and in another by force or through the influence of reason or

something else. (Further, what sort of movement is primary? This makes a

vast difference.) But again for Plato, at least, it is not permissible to name

here that which he sometimes supposes to be the source of movement-that

which  moves  itself;  for  the  soul  is  later,  and  coeval  with  the  heavens,

according to his account. To suppose potency prior to actuality, then, is in a

sense right, and in a sense not; and we have specified these senses. That

actuality is prior is testified by Anaxagoras (for his ‘reason’ is actuality) and

by Empedocles in his doctrine of love and strife, and by those who say that

there is always movement, e.g. Leucippus. Therefore chaos or night did not

exist for an infinite time, but the same things have always existed (either

passing  through  a  cycle  of  changes  or  obeying  some  other  law),  since

actuality is prior to potency. If, then, there is a constant cycle, something

must always remain, acting in the same way. And if there is to be generation

and  destruction,  there  must  be  something  else  which  is  always  acting  in

different ways. This must, then, act in one way in virtue of itself, and in

another in virtue of something else-either of a third agent, therefore, or of the

first. Now it must be in virtue of the first. For otherwise this again causes the

motion both of the second agent and of the third. Therefore it is better to say

‘the first’. For it was the cause of eternal uniformity; and something else is

the  cause  of  variety,  and  evidently  both  together  are  the  cause  of  eternal

variety. This, accordingly, is the character which the motions actually exhibit.

What need then is there to seek for other principles?

<

div id="section137" class="section" title="7">


7  Since (1) this is a possible account of the matter, and (2) if it were not true,

the world would have proceeded out of night and ‘all things together’ and out

of  non-being,  these  difficulties  may  be  taken  as  solved.  There  is,  then,

something  which  is  always  moved  with  an  unceasing  motion,  which  is

motion in a circle; and this is plain not in theory only but in fact. Therefore

the first heaven must be eternal. There is therefore also something which

moves it. And since that which moves and is moved is intermediate, there is

something which moves without being moved, being eternal, substance, and

actuality. And the object of desire and the object of thought move in this way;

they  move  without  being  moved.  The  primary  objects  of  desire  and  of

thought are the same. For the apparent good is the object of appetite, and the

real good is the primary object of rational wish. But desire is consequent on

opinion rather than opinion on desire; for the thinking is the starting-point.

And thought is moved by the object of thought, and one of the two columns

of opposites is in itself the object of thought; and in this, substance is first,

and in substance, that which is simple and exists actually. (The one and the

simple are not the same; for ‘one’ means a measure, but ‘simple’ means that

the thing itself has a certain nature.) But the beautiful, also, and that which is

in itself desirable are in the same column; and the first in any class is always

best, or analogous to the best.

That a final cause may exist among unchangeable entities is shown by the

distinction of its meanings. For the final cause is (a) some being for whose

good an action is done, and (b) something at which the action aims; and of

these the latter exists among unchangeable entities though the former does

not.  The  final  cause,  then,  produces  motion  as  being  loved,  but  all  other

things move by being moved. Now if something is moved it is capable of

being otherwise than as it is. Therefore if its actuality is the primary form of

spatial motion, then in so far as it is subject to change, in this respect it is

capable of being otherwise,-in place, even if not in substance. But since there

is something which moves while itself unmoved, existing actually, this can in

no way be otherwise than as it is. For motion in space is the first of the kinds

of change, and motion in a circle the first kind of spatial motion; and this the

first mover produces. The first mover, then, exists of necessity; and in so far

as it exists by necessity, its mode of being is good, and it is in this sense a

first principle. For the necessary has all these senses-that which is necessary

perforce because it is contrary to the natural impulse, that without which the

good is impossible, and that which cannot be otherwise but can exist only in asingle way.

On such a principle, then, depend the heavens and the world of nature. And

it is a life such as the best which we enjoy, and enjoy for but a short time (for

it is ever in this state, which we cannot be), since its actuality is also pleasure.

(And for this reason are waking, perception, and thinking most pleasant, and

hopes and memories are so on account of these.) And thinking in itself deals

with that which is best in itself, and that which is thinking in the fullest sense

with  that  which  is  best  in  the  fullest  sense.  And  thought  thinks  on  itself

because it shares the nature of the object of thought; for it becomes an object

of  thought  in  coming  into  contact  with  and  thinking  its  objects,  so  that

thought and object of thought are the same. For that which is capable of

receiving the object of thought, i.e. the essence, is thought. But it is active

when  it  possesses  this  object.  Therefore  the  possession  rather  than  the

receptivity is the divine element which thought seems to contain, and the act

of contemplation is what is most pleasant and best. If, then, God is always in

that good state in which we sometimes are, this compels our wonder; and if in

a better this compels it yet more. And God is in a better state. And life also

belongs to God; for the actuality of thought is life, and God is that actuality;

and God’s self-dependent actuality is life most good and eternal. We say

therefore  that  God  is  a  living  being,  eternal,  most  good,  so  that  life  and

duration continuous and eternal belong to God; for this is God.

  Those who suppose, as the Pythagoreans and Speusippus do, that supreme

beauty and goodness are not present in the beginning, because the beginnings

both of plants and of animals are causes, but beauty and completeness are in

the effects of these, are wrong in their opinion. For the seed comes from other

individuals which are prior and complete, and the first thing is not seed but

the complete being; e.g. we must say that before the seed there is a man,-not

the man produced from the seed, but another from whom the seed comes.

It is clear then from what has been said that there is a substance which is

eternal and unmovable and separate from sensible things. It has been shown

also that this substance cannot have any magnitude, but is without parts and

indivisible (for it produces movement through infinite time, but nothing finite

has infinite power; and, while every magnitude is either infinite or finite, it

cannot,  for  the  above  reason,  have  finite  magnitude,  and  it  cannot  have

infinite magnitude because there is no infinite magnitude at all). But it has

also been shown that it is impassive and unalterable; for all the other changes

are posterior to change of place.<

div id="section138" class="section" title="8">


8


It is clear, then, why these things are as they are. But we must not ignore

the question whether we have to suppose one such substance or more than

one,  and  if  the  latter,  how  many;  we  must  also  mention,  regarding  the

opinions expressed by others, that they have said nothing about the number of

the substances that can even be clearly stated. For the theory of Ideas has no

special discussion of the subject; for those who speak of Ideas say the Ideas

are numbers, and they speak of numbers now as unlimited, now as limited by

the  number  10;  but  as  for  the  reason  why  there  should  be  just  so  many

numbers,  nothing  is  said  with  any  demonstrative  exactness.  We  however

must discuss the subject, starting from the presuppositions and distinctions

we have mentioned. The first principle or primary being is not movable either

in  itself  or  accidentally,  but  produces  the  primary  eternal  and  single

movement. But since that which is moved must be moved by something, and

the first mover must be in itself unmovable, and eternal movement must be

produced by something eternal and a single movement by a single thing, and

since we see that besides the simple spatial movement of the universe, which

we say the first and unmovable substance produces, there are other spatial

movements-those of the planets-which are eternal (for a body which moves in

a circle is eternal and unresting; we have proved these points in the physical

treatises), each of these movements also must be caused by a substance both

unmovable in itself and eternal. For the nature of the stars is eternal just

because it is a certain kind of substance, and the mover is eternal and prior to

the  moved,  and  that  which  is  prior  to  a  substance  must  be  a  substance.

Evidently, then, there must be substances which are of the same number as

the movements of the stars, and in their nature eternal, and in themselves

unmovable, and without magnitude, for the reason before mentioned. That

the movers are substances, then, and that one of these is first and another

second according to the same order as the movements of the stars, is evident.

But in the number of the movements we reach a problem which must be

treated from the standpoint of that one of the mathematical sciences which is

most akin to philosophy-viz. of astronomy; for this science speculates about

substance  which  is  perceptible  but  eternal,  but  the  other  mathematicalsciences,  i.e.  arithmetic  and  geometry,  treat  of  no  substance.  That  the

movements are more numerous than the bodies that are moved is evident to

those who have given even moderate attention to the matter; for each of the

planets has more than one movement. But as to the actual number of these

movements, we now-to give some notion of the subject-quote what some of

the mathematicians say, that our thought may have some definite number to

grasp; but, for the rest, we must partly investigate for ourselves, Partly learn

from other investigators, and if those who study this subject form an opinion

contrary to what we have now stated, we must esteem both parties indeed, but

follow the more accurate.

  Eudoxus supposed that the motion of the sun or of the moon involves, in

either case, three spheres, of which the first is the sphere of the fixed stars,

and the second moves in the circle which runs along the middle of the zodiac,

and the third in the circle which is inclined across the breadth of the zodiac;

but the circle in which the moon moves is inclined at a greater angle than that

in which the sun moves. And the motion of the planets involves, in each case,

four spheres, and of these also the first and second are the same as the first

two mentioned above (for the sphere of the fixed stars is that which moves all

the other spheres, and that which is placed beneath this and has its movement

in the circle which bisects the zodiac is common to all), but the poles of the

third sphere of each planet are in the circle which bisects the zodiac, and the

motion of the fourth sphere is in the circle which is inclined at an angle to the

equator of the third sphere; and the poles of the third sphere are different for

each of the other planets, but those of Venus and Mercury are the same.

  Callippus made the position of the spheres the same as Eudoxus did, but

while he assigned the same number as Eudoxus did to Jupiter and to Saturn,

he thought two more spheres should be added to the sun and two to the moon,

if one is to explain the observed facts; and one more to each of the other

planets.

But it is necessary, if all the spheres combined are to explain the observed

facts, that for each of the planets there should be other spheres (one fewer

than those hitherto assigned) which counteract those already mentioned and

bring back to the same position the outermost sphere of the star which in each

case is situated below the star in question; for only thus can all the forces at

work produce the observed motion of the planets. Since, then, the spheres

involved in the movement of the planets themselves are—eight for Saturn

and Jupiter and twenty-five for the others, and of these only those involved inthe  movement  of  the  lowest-situated  planet  need  not  be  counteracted  the

spheres which counteract those of the outermost two planets will be six in

number, and the spheres which counteract those of the next four planets will

be sixteen; therefore the number of all the spheres—both those which move

the planets and those which counteract these—will be fifty-five. And if one

were not to add to the moon and to the sun the movements we mentioned, the

whole set of spheres will be forty-seven in number.

Let this, then, be taken as the number of the spheres, so that the unmovable

substances and principles also may probably be taken as just so many; the

assertion of necessity must be left to more powerful thinkers. But if there can

be no spatial movement which does not conduce to the moving of a star, and

if further every being and every substance which is immune from change and

in virtue of itself has attained to the best must be considered an end, there can

be no other being apart from these we have named, but this must be the

number of the substances. For if there are others, they will cause change as

being  a  final  cause  of  movement;  but  there  cannot  he  other  movements

besides  those  mentioned.  And  it  is  reasonable  to  infer  this  from  a

consideration of the bodies that are moved; for if everything that moves is for

the sake of that which is moved, and every movement belongs to something

that  is  moved,  no  movement  can  be  for  the  sake  of  itself  or  of  another

movement, but all the movements must be for the sake of the stars. For if

there is to be a movement for the sake of a movement, this latter also will

have to be for the sake of something else; so that since there cannot be an

infinite regress, the end of every movement will be one of the divine bodies

which move through the heaven.

  (Evidently there is but one heaven. For if there are many heavens as there

are many men, the moving principles, of which each heaven will have one,

will be one in form but in number many. But all things that are many in

number have matter; for one and the same definition, e.g. that of man, applies

to  many  things,  while  Socrates  is  one.  But  the  primary  essence  has  not

matter; for it is complete reality. So the unmovable first mover is one both in

definition and in number; so too, therefore, is that which is moved always and

continuously;  therefore  there  is  one  heaven  alone.)  Our  forefathers  in  the

most remote ages have handed down to their posterity a tradition, in the form

of a myth, that these bodies are gods, and that the divine encloses the whole

of nature. The rest of the tradition has been added later in mythical form with

a  view  to  the  persuasion  of  the  multitude  and  to  its  legal  and  utilitarianexpediency; they say these gods are in the form of men or like some of the

other animals, and they say other things consequent on and similar to these

which we have mentioned. But if one were to separate the first point from

these additions and take it alone-that they thought the first substances to be

gods, one must regard this as an inspired utterance, and reflect that, while

probably  each  art  and  each  science  has  often  been  developed  as  far  as

possible  and  has  again  perished,  these  opinions,  with  others,  have  been

preserved until the present like relics of the ancient treasure. Only thus far,

then, is the opinion of our ancestors and of our earliest predecessors clear to

us.

<

div id="section139" class="section" title="9">


9


The  nature  of  the  divine  thought  involves  certain  problems;  for  while

thought is held to be the most divine of things observed by us, the question

how it must be situated in order to have that character involves difficulties.

For if it thinks of nothing, what is there here of dignity? It is just like one

who sleeps. And if it thinks, but this depends on something else, then (since

that which is its substance is not the act of thinking, but a potency) it cannot

be the best substance; for it is through thinking that its value belongs to it.

Further, whether its substance is the faculty of thought or the act of thinking,

what  does  it  think  of?  Either  of  itself  or  of  something  else;  and  if  of

something else, either of the same thing always or of something different.

Does it matter, then, or not, whether it thinks of the good or of any chance

thing? Are there not some things about which it is incredible that it should

think? Evidently, then, it thinks of that which is most divine and precious,

and it does not change; for change would be change for the worse, and this

would  be  already  a  movement.  First,  then,  if  ‘thought’  is  not  the  act  of

thinking but a potency, it would be reasonable to suppose that the continuity

of  its  thinking  is  wearisome  to  it.  Secondly,  there  would  evidently  be

something else more precious than thought, viz. that which is thought of. For

both thinking and the act of thought will belong even to one who thinks of the

worst thing in the world, so that if this ought to be avoided (and it ought, for

there are even some things which it is better not to see than to see), the act of

thinking cannot be the best of things. Therefore it must be of itself that thedivine  thought  thinks  (since  it  is  the  most  excellent  of  things),  and  its

thinking is a thinking on thinking.

But evidently knowledge and perception and opinion and understanding

have always something else as their object, and themselves only by the way.

Further, if thinking and being thought of are different, in respect of which

does goodness belong to thought? For to he an act of thinking and to he an

object of thought are not the same thing. We answer that in some cases the

knowledge is the object. In the productive sciences it is the substance or

essence  of  the  object,  matter  omitted,  and  in  the  theoretical  sciences  the

definition or the act of thinking is the object. Since, then, thought and the

object of thought are not different in the case of things that have not matter,

the divine thought and its object will be the same, i.e. the thinking will be one

with the object of its thought.

A  further  question  is  left-whether  the  object  of  the  divine  thought  is

composite; for if it were, thought would change in passing from part to part

of the whole. We answer that everything which has not matter is indivisible-

as human thought, or rather the thought of composite beings, is in a certain

period of time (for it does not possess the good at this moment or at that, but

its best, being something different from it, is attained only in a whole period

of time), so throughout eternity is the thought which has itself for its object.

<

div id="section140" class="section" title="10">


10


We must consider also in which of two ways the nature of the universe

contains the good, and the highest good, whether as something separate and

by itself, or as the order of the parts. Probably in both ways, as an army does;

for its good is found both in its order and in its leader, and more in the latter;

for he does not depend on the order but it depends on him. And all things are

ordered together somehow, but not all alike,-both fishes and fowls and plants;

and the world is not such that one thing has nothing to do with another, but

they are connected. For all are ordered together to one end, but it is as in a

house, where the freemen are least at liberty to act at random, but all things or

most things are already ordained for them, while the slaves and the animals

do little for the common good, and for the most part live at random; for this is

the sort of principle that constitutes the nature of each. I mean, for instance,that all must at least come to be dissolved into their elements, and there are

other functions similarly in which all share for the good of the whole.

We must not fail to observe how many impossible or paradoxical results

confront those who hold different views from our own, and what are the

views  of  the  subtler  thinkers,  and  which  views  are  attended  by  fewest

difficulties. All make all things out of contraries. But neither ‘all things’ nor

‘out of contraries’ is right; nor do these thinkers tell us how all the things in

which  the  contraries  are  present  can  be  made  out  of  the  contraries;  for

contraries are not affected by one another. Now for us this difficulty is solved

naturally by the fact that there is a third element. These thinkers however

make one of the two contraries matter; this is done for instance by those who

make the unequal matter for the equal, or the many matter for the one. But

this also is refuted in the same way; for the one matter which underlies any

pair of contraries is contrary to nothing. Further, all things, except the one,

will, on the view we are criticizing, partake of evil; for the bad itself is one of

the two elements. But the other school does not treat the good and the bad

even  as  principles;  yet  in  all  things  the  good  is  in  the  highest  degree  a

principle.  The  school  we  first  mentioned  is  right  in  saying  that  it  is  a

principle, but how the good is a principle they do not say-whether as end or

as mover or as form.

  Empedocles also has a paradoxical view; for he identifies the good with

love, but this is a principle both as mover (for it brings things together) and as

matter (for it is part of the mixture). Now even if it happens that the same

thing is a principle both as matter and as mover, still the being, at least, of the

two  is  not  the  same.  In  which  respect  then  is  love  a  principle?  It  is

paradoxical also that strife should be imperishable; the nature of his ‘evil’ is

just strife.

  Anaxagoras makes the good a motive principle; for his ‘reason’ moves

things. But it moves them for an end, which must be something other than it,

except according to our way of stating the case; for, on our view, the medical

art is in a sense health. It is paradoxical also not to suppose a contrary to the

good, i.e. to reason. But all who speak of the contraries make no use of the

contraries, unless we bring their views into shape. And why some things are

perishable and others imperishable, no one tells us; for they make all existing

things out of the same principles. Further, some make existing things out of

the nonexistent; and others to avoid the necessity of this make all things one.

  Further, why should there always be becoming, and what is the cause ofbecoming?-this no one tells us. And those who suppose two principles must

suppose another, a superior principle, and so must those who believe in the

Forms; for why did things come to participate, or why do they participate, in

the  Forms?  And  all  other  thinkers  are  confronted  by  the  necessary

consequence that there is something contrary to Wisdom, i.e. to the highest

knowledge; but we are not. For there is nothing contrary to that which is

primary; for all contraries have matter, and things that have matter exist only

potentially; and the ignorance which is contrary to any knowledge leads to an

object contrary to the object of the knowledge; but what is primary has no

contrary.

  Again,  if  besides  sensible  things  no  others  exist,  there  will  be  no  first

principle, no order, no becoming, no heavenly bodies, but each principle will

have a principle before it, as in the accounts of the theologians and all the

natural philosophers. But if the Forms or the numbers are to exist, they will

be causes of nothing; or if not that, at least not of movement. Further, how is

extension, i.e. a continuum, to be produced out of unextended parts? For

number will not, either as mover or as form, produce a continuum. But again

there cannot be any contrary that is also essentially a productive or moving

principle; for it would be possible for it not to be. Or at least its action would

be posterior to its potency. The world, then, would not be eternal. But it is;

one of these premisses, then, must be denied. And we have said how this

must be done. Further, in virtue of what the numbers, or the soul and the

body, or in general the form and the thing, are one-of this no one tells us

anything; nor can any one tell, unless he says, as we do, that the mover makes

them one. And those who say mathematical number is first and go on to

generate one kind of substance after another and give different principles for

each, make the substance of the universe a mere series of episodes (for one

substance has no influence on another by its existence or nonexistence), and

they give us many governing principles; but the world refuses to be governed

badly.


  ‘The rule of many is not good; one ruler let there be.’                                      Book XIII


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div id="section141" class="section" title="1">


1


We have stated what is the substance of sensible things, dealing in the

treatise on physics with matter, and later with the substance which has actual

existence. Now since our inquiry is whether there is or is not besides the

sensible substances any which is immovable and eternal, and, if there is, what

it is, we must first consider what is said by others, so that, if there is anything

which they say wrongly, we may not be liable to the same objections, while,

if there is any opinion common to them and us, we shall have no private

grievance against ourselves on that account; for one must be content to state

some points better than one’s predecessors, and others no worse.

Two  opinions  are  held  on  this  subject;  it  is  said  that  the  objects  of

mathematics-i.e. numbers and lines and the like-are substances, and again

that the Ideas are substances. And (1) since some recognize these as two

different  classes-the  Ideas  and  the  mathematical  numbers,  and  (2)  some

recognize  both  as  having  one  nature,  while  (3)  some  others  say  that  the

mathematical substances are the only substances, we must consider first the

objects of mathematics, not qualifying them by any other characteristic-not

asking, for instance, whether they are in fact Ideas or not, or whether they are

the principles and substances of existing things or not, but only whether as

objects of mathematics they exist or not, and if they exist, how they exist.

Then after this we must separately consider the Ideas themselves in a general

way, and only as far as the accepted mode of treatment demands; for most of

the points have been repeatedly made even by the discussions outside our

school, and, further, the greater part of our account must finish by throwing

light on that inquiry, viz. when we examine whether the substances and the

principles of existing things are numbers and Ideas; for after the discussion of

the Ideas this remans as a third inquiry.If  the  objects  of  mathematics  exist,  they  must  exist  either  in  sensible

objects, as some say, or separate from sensible objects (and this also is said

by some); or if they exist in neither of these ways, either they do not exist, or

they exist only in some special sense. So that the subject of our discussion

will be not whether they exist but how they exist.

<

div id="section142" class="section" title="2">


2


That it is impossible for mathematical objects to exist in sensible things,

and at the same time that the doctrine in question is an artificial one, has been

said already in our discussion of difficulties we have pointed out that it is

impossible for two solids to be in the same place, and also that according to

the same argument the other powers and characteristics also should exist in

sensible things and none of them separately. This we have said already. But,

further, it is obvious that on this theory it is impossible for any body whatever

to be divided; for it would have to be divided at a plane, and the plane at a

line, and the line at a point, so that if the point cannot be divided, neither can

the line, and if the line cannot, neither can the plane nor the solid. What

difference, then, does it make whether sensible things are such indivisible

entities, or, without being so themselves, have indivisible entities in them?

The result will be the same; if the sensible entities are divided the others will

be divided too, or else not even the sensible entities can be divided.

But, again, it is not possible that such entities should exist separately. For

if besides the sensible solids there are to be other solids which are separate

from them and prior to the sensible solids, it is plain that besides the planes

also  there  must  be  other  and  separate  planes  and  points  and  lines;  for

consistency requires this. But if these exist, again besides the planes and lines

and points of the mathematical solid there must be others which are separate.

(For  incomposites  are  prior  to  compounds;  and  if  there  are,  prior  to  the

sensible bodies, bodies which are not sensible, by the same argument the

planes which exist by themselves must be prior to those which are in the

motionless solids. Therefore these will be planes and lines other than those

that exist along with the mathematical solids to which these thinkers assign

separate existence; for the latter exist along with the mathematical solids,

while the others are prior to the mathematical solids.) Again, therefore, therewill be, belonging to these planes, lines, and prior to them there will have to

be, by the same argument, other lines and points; and prior to these points in

the prior lines there will have to be other points, though there will be no

others prior to these. Now (1) the accumulation becomes absurd; for we find

ourselves with one set of solids apart from the sensible solids; three sets of

planes  apart  from  the  sensible  planes-those  which  exist  apart  from  the

sensible planes, and those in the mathematical solids, and those which exist

apart from those in the mathematical solids; four sets of lines, and five sets of

points.  With  which  of  these,  then,  will  the  mathematical  sciences  deal?

Certainly not with the planes and lines and points in the motionless solid; for

science always deals with what is prior. And (the same account will apply

also to numbers; for there will be a different set of units apart from each set

of points, and also apart from each set of realities, from the objects of sense

and  again  from  those  of  thought;  so  that  there  will  be  various  classes  of

mathematical numbers.

  Again, how is it possible to solve the questions which we have already

enumerated in our discussion of difficulties? For the objects of astronomy

will exist apart from sensible things just as the objects of geometry will; but

how is it possible that a heaven and its parts-or anything else which has

movement-should  exist  apart?  Similarly  also  the  objects  of  optics  and  of

harmonics will exist apart; for there will be both voice and sight besides the

sensible or individual voices and sights. Therefore it is plain that the other

senses as well, and the other objects of sense, will exist apart; for why should

one set of them do so and another not? And if this is so, there will also be

animals existing apart, since there will be senses.

  Again,  there  are  certain  mathematical  theorems  that  are  universal,

extending  beyond  these  substances.  Here  then  we  shall  have  another

intermediate  substance  separate  both  from  the  Ideas  and  from  the

intermediates,-a  substance  which  is  neither  number  nor  points  nor  spatial

magnitude nor time. And if this is impossible, plainly it is also impossible

that the former entities should exist separate from sensible things.

  And, in general, conclusion contrary alike to the truth and to the usual

views follow, if one is to suppose the objects of mathematics to exist thus as

separate entities. For because they exist thus they must be prior to sensible

spatial magnitudes, but in truth they must be posterior; for the incomplete

spatial  magnitude  is  in  the  order  of  generation  prior,  but  in  the  order  of

substance posterior, as the lifeless is to the living.  Again, by virtue of what, and when, will mathematical magnitudes be one?

For things in our perceptible world are one in virtue of soul, or of a part of

soul,  or  of  something  else  that  is  reasonable  enough;  when  these  are  not

present, the thing is a plurality, and splits up into parts. But in the case of the

subjects of mathematics, which are divisible and are quantities, what is the

cause of their being one and holding together?

  Again, the modes of generation of the objects of mathematics show that we

are right. For the dimension first generated is length, then comes breadth,

lastly depth, and the process is complete. If, then, that which is posterior in

the order of generation is prior in the order of substantiality, the solid will be

prior to the plane and the line. And in this way also it is both more complete

and more whole, because it can become animate. How, on the other hand,

could a line or a plane be animate? The supposition passes the power of our

senses.

  Again,  the  solid  is  a  sort  of  substance;  for  it  already  has  in  a  sense

completeness. But how can lines be substances? Neither as a form or shape,

as the soul perhaps is, nor as matter, like the solid; for we have no experience

of anything that can be put together out of lines or planes or points, while if

these had been a sort of material substance, we should have observed things

which could be put together out of them.

  Grant, then, that they are prior in definition. Still not all things that are

prior in definition are also prior in substantiality. For those things are prior in

substantiality which when separated from other things surpass them in the

power of independent existence, but things are prior in definition to those

whose definitions are compounded out of their definitions; and these two

properties are not coextensive. For if attributes do not exist apart from the

substances  (e.g.  a  ‘mobile’  or  a  pale’),  pale  is  prior  to  the  pale  man  in

definition,  but  not  in  substantiality.  For  it  cannot  exist  separately,  but  is

always along with the concrete thing; and by the concrete thing I mean the

pale man. Therefore it is plain that neither is the result of abstraction prior nor

that which is produced by adding determinants posterior; for it is by adding a

determinant to pale that we speak of the pale man.

It has, then, been sufficiently pointed out that the objects of mathematics

are not substances in a higher degree than bodies are, and that they are not

prior to sensibles in being, but only in definition, and that they cannot exist

somewhere apart. But since it was not possible for them to exist in sensibles

either, it is plain that they either do not exist at all or exist in a special senseand  therefore  do  not  ‘exist’  without  qualification.  For  ‘exist’  has  many

senses.

<

div id="section143" class="section" title="3">


3


For just as the universal propositions of mathematics deal not with objects

which exist separately, apart from extended magnitudes and from numbers,

but  with  magnitudes  and  numbers,  not  however  qua  such  as  to  have

magnitude or to be divisible, clearly it is possible that there should also be

both  propositions  and  demonstrations  about  sensible  magnitudes,  not

however qua sensible but qua possessed of certain definite qualities. For as

there are many propositions about things merely considered as in motion,

apart from what each such thing is and from their accidents, and as it is not

therefore  necessary  that  there  should  be  either  a  mobile  separate  from

sensibles, or a distinct mobile entity in the sensibles, so too in the case of

mobiles there will be propositions and sciences, which treat them however

not qua mobile but only qua bodies, or again only qua planes, or only qua

lines,  or  qua  divisibles,  or  qua  indivisibles  having  position,  or  only  qua

indivisibles. Thus since it is true to say without qualification that not only

things which are separable but also things which are inseparable exist (for

instance, that mobiles exist), it is true also to say without qualification that

the objects of mathematics exist, and with the character ascribed to them by

mathematicians. And as it is true to say of the other sciences too, without

qualification, that they deal with such and such a subject-not with what is

accidental to it (e.g. not with the pale, if the healthy thing is pale, and the

science has the healthy as its subject), but with that which is the subject of

each science-with the healthy if it treats its object qua healthy, with man if

qua man:-so too is it with geometry; if its subjects happen to be sensible,

though it does not treat them qua sensible, the mathematical sciences will not

for that reason be sciences of sensibles-nor, on the other hand, of other things

separate from sensibles. Many properties attach to things in virtue of their

own  nature  as  possessed  of  each  such  character;  e.g.  there  are  attributes

peculiar to the animal qua female or qua male (yet there is no ‘female’ nor

‘male’ separate from animals); so that there are also attributes which belong

to things merely as lengths or as planes. And in proportion as we are dealingwith things which are prior in definition and simpler, our knowledge has

more  accuracy,  i.e.  simplicity.  Therefore  a  science  which  abstracts  from

spatial magnitude is more precise than one which takes it into account; and a

science is most precise if it abstracts from movement, but if it takes account

of movement, it is most precise if it deals with the primary movement, for

this is the simplest; and of this again uniform movement is the simplest form.

The  same  account  may  be  given  of  harmonics  and  optics;  for  neither

considers its objects qua sight or qua voice, but qua lines and numbers; but

the latter are attributes proper to the former. And mechanics too proceeds in

the same way. Therefore if we suppose attributes separated from their fellow

attributes and make any inquiry concerning them as such, we shall not for

this reason be in error, any more than when one draws a line on the ground

and calls it a foot long when it is not; for the error is not included in the

premisses.

Each question will be best investigated in this way-by setting up by an act

of separation what is not separate, as the arithmetician and the geometer do.

For a man qua man is one indivisible thing; and the arithmetician supposed

one indivisible thing, and then considered whether any attribute belongs to a

man qua indivisible. But the geometer treats him neither qua man nor qua

indivisible, but as a solid. For evidently the properties which would have

belonged to him even if perchance he had not been indivisible, can belong to

him even apart from these attributes. Thus, then, geometers speak correctly;

they talk about existing things, and their subjects do exist; for being has two

forms-it exists not only in complete reality but also materially.

Now since the good and the beautiful are different (for the former always

implies conduct as its subject, while the beautiful is found also in motionless

things), those who assert that the mathematical sciences say nothing of the

beautiful or the good are in error. For these sciences say and prove a great

deal about them; if they do not expressly mention them, but prove attributes

which are their results or their definitions, it is not true to say that they tell us

nothing about them. The chief forms of beauty are order and symmetry and

definiteness,  which  the  mathematical  sciences  demonstrate  in  a  special

degree. And since these (e.g. order and definiteness) are obviously causes of

many  things,  evidently  these  sciences  must  treat  this  sort  of  causative

principle also (i.e. the beautiful) as in some sense a cause. But we shall speak

more plainly elsewhere about these matters.

<div id="section144" class="section" title="4">


4


So much then for the objects of mathematics; we have said that they exist

and in what sense they exist, and in what sense they are prior and in what

sense not prior. Now, regarding the Ideas, we must first examine the ideal

theory itself, not connecting it in any way with the nature of numbers, but

treating it in the form in which it was originally understood by those who first

maintained the existence of the Ideas. The supporters of the ideal theory were

led to it because on the question about the truth of things they accepted the

Heraclitean sayings which describe all sensible things as ever passing away,

so that if knowledge or thought is to have an object, there must be some other

and permanent entities, apart from those which are sensible; for there could

be no knowledge of things which were in a state of flux. But when Socrates

was occupying himself with the excellences of character, and in connexion

with them became the first to raise the problem of universal definition (for of

the physicists Democritus only touched on the subject to a small extent, and

defined, after a fashion, the hot and the cold; while the Pythagoreans had

before  this  treated  of  a  few  things,  whose  definitions-e.g.  those  of

opportunity, justice, or marriage-they connected with numbers; but it was

natural that Socrates should be seeking the essence, for he was seeking to

syllogize, and ‘what a thing is’ is the starting-point of syllogisms; for there

was as yet none of the dialectical power which enables people even without

knowledge of the essence to speculate about contraries and inquire whether

the same science deals with contraries; for two things may be fairly ascribed

to Socrates-inductive arguments and universal definition, both of which are

concerned with the starting-point of science):-but Socrates did not make the

universals or the definitions exist apart: they, however, gave them separate

existence,  and  this  was  the  kind  of  thing  they  called  Ideas.  Therefore  it

followed for them, almost by the same argument, that there must be Ideas of

all things that are spoken of universally, and it was almost as if a man wished

to count certain things, and while they were few thought he would not be able

to count them, but made more of them and then counted them; for the Forms

are, one may say, more numerous than the particular sensible things, yet it

was in seeking the causes of these that they proceeded from them to the

Forms. For to each thing there answers an entity which has the same nameand exists apart from the substances, and so also in the case of all other

groups there is a one over many, whether these be of this world or eternal.

  Again, of the ways in which it is proved that the Forms exist, none is

convincing; for from some no inference necessarily follows, and from some

arise  Forms  even  of  things  of  which  they  think  there  are  no  Forms.  For

according to the arguments from the sciences there will be Forms of all things

of which there are sciences, and according to the argument of the ‘one over

many’ there will be Forms even of negations, and according to the argument

that thought has an object when the individual object has perished, there will

be Forms of perishable things; for we have an image of these. Again, of the

most accurate arguments, some lead to Ideas of relations, of which they say

there is no independent class, and others introduce the ‘third man’.

And  in  general  the  arguments  for  the  Forms  destroy  things  for  whose

existence the believers in Forms are more zealous than for the existence of

the Ideas; for it follows that not the dyad but number is first, and that prior to

number is the relative, and that this is prior to the absolute-besides all the

other  points  on  which  certain  people,  by  following  out  the  opinions  held

about the Forms, came into conflict with the principles of the theory.

  Again, according to the assumption on the belief in the Ideas rests, there

will be Forms not only of substances but also of many other things; for the

concept is single not only in the case of substances, but also in that of non-

substances,  and  there  are  sciences  of  other  things  than  substance;  and  a

thousand  other  such  difficulties  confront  them.  But  according  to  the

necessities of the case and the opinions about the Forms, if they can be shared

in  there  must  be  Ideas  of  substances  only.  For  they  are  not  shared  in

incidentally, but each Form must be shared in as something not predicated of

a subject. (By ‘being shared in incidentally’ I mean that if a thing shares in

‘double itself’, it shares also in ‘eternal’, but incidentally; for ‘the double’

happens to be eternal.) Therefore the Forms will be substance. But the same

names indicate substance in this and in the ideal world (or what will be the

meaning of saying that there is something apart from the particulars-the one

over many?). And if the Ideas and the things that share in them have the same

form, there will be something common: for why should ‘2’ be one and the

same in the perishable 2’s, or in the 2’s which are many but eternal, and not

the same in the ‘2 itself’ as in the individual 2? But if they have not the same

form, they will have only the name in common, and it is as if one were to call

both Callias and a piece of wood a ‘man’, without observing any communitybetween them.

But if we are to suppose that in other respects the common definitions

apply  to  the  Forms,  e.g.  that  ‘plane  figure’  and  the  other  parts  of  the

definition apply to the circle itself, but ‘what really is’ has to be added, we

must inquire whether this is not absolutely meaningless. For to what is this to

be added? To ‘centre’ or to ‘plane’ or to all the parts of the definition? For all

the elements in the essence are Ideas, e.g. ‘animal’ and ‘two-footed’. Further,

there must be some Ideal answering to ‘plane’ above, some nature which will

be present in all the Forms as their genus.

<

div id="section145" class="section" title="5">


5


  Above all one might discuss the question what in the world the Forms

contribute to sensible things, either to those that are eternal or to those that

come into being and cease to be; for they cause neither movement nor any

change in them. But again they help in no wise either towards the knowledge

of other things (for they are not even the substance of these, else they would

have been in them), or towards their being, if they are not in the individuals

which share in them; though if they were, they might be thought to be causes,

as white causes whiteness in a white object by entering into its composition.

But this argument, which was used first by Anaxagoras, and later by Eudoxus

in his discussion of difficulties and by certain others, is very easily upset; for

it is easy to collect many and insuperable objections to such a view.

But, further, all other things cannot come from the Forms in any of the

usual senses of ‘from’. And to say that they are patterns and the other things

share in them is to use empty words and poetical metaphors. For what is it

that works, looking to the Ideas? And any thing can both be and come into

being without being copied from something else, so that, whether Socrates

exists or not, a man like Socrates might come to be. And evidently this might

be so even if Socrates were eternal. And there will be several patterns of the

same thing, and therefore several Forms; e.g. ‘animal’ and ‘two-footed’, and

also ‘man-himself’, will be Forms of man. Again, the Forms are patterns not

only of sensible things, but of Forms themselves also; i.e. the genus is the

pattern  of  the  various  forms-of-a-genus;  therefore  the  same  thing  will  be

pattern and copy.  Again, it would seem impossible that substance and that whose substance

it is should exist apart; how, therefore, could the Ideas, being the substances

of things, exist apart?

In the Phaedo the case is stated in this way-that the Forms are causes both

of being and of becoming. Yet though the Forms exist, still things do not

come into being, unless there is something to originate movement; and many

other things come into being (e.g. a house or a ring) of which they say there

are no Forms. Clearly therefore even the things of which they say there are

Ideas can both be and come into being owing to such causes as produce the

things just mentioned, and not owing to the Forms. But regarding the Ideas it

is possible, both in this way and by more abstract and accurate arguments, to

collect many objections like those we have considered.

<

div id="section146" class="section" title="6">


6


  Since  we  have  discussed  these  points,  it  is  well  to  consider  again  the

results regarding numbers which confront those who say that numbers are

separable substances and first causes of things. If number is an entity and its

substance  is  nothing  other  than  just  number,  as  some  say,  it  follows  that

either (1) there is a first in it and a second, each being different in species,-

and  either  (a)  this  is  true  of  the  units  without  exception,  and  any  unit  is

inassociable with any unit, or (b) they are all without exception successive,

and  any  of  them  are  associable  with  any,  as  they  say  is  the  case  with

mathematical number; for in mathematical number no one unit is in any way

different from another. Or (c) some units must be associable and some not;

e.g. suppose that 2 is first after 1, and then comes 3 and then the rest of the

number series, and the units in each number are associable, e.g. those in the

first  2  are  associable  with  one  another,  and  those  in  the  first  3  with  one

another, and so with the other numbers; but the units in the ‘2-itself’ are

inassociable with those in the ‘3-itself’; and similarly in the case of the other

successive numbers. And so while mathematical number is counted thus-after

1, 2 (which consists of another 1 besides the former 1), and 3 which consists

of  another  1  besides  these  two),  and  the  other  numbers  similarly,  ideal

number is counted thus-after 1, a distinct 2 which does not include the first 1,

and  a  3  which  does  not  include  the  2  and  the  rest  of  the  number  seriessimilarly. Or (2) one kind of number must be like the first that was named,

one like that which the mathematicians speak of, and that which we have

named last must be a third kind.

  Again, these kinds of numbers must either be separable from things, or not

separable but in objects of perception (not however in the way which we first

considered, in the sense that objects of perception consists of numbers which

are present in them)-either one kind and not another, or all of them.

  These are of necessity the only ways in which the numbers can exist. And

of those who say that the 1 is the beginning and substance and element of all

things, and that number is formed from the 1 and something else, almost

every one has described number in one of these ways; only no one has said

all the units are inassociable. And this has happened reasonably enough; for

there  can  be  no  way  besides  those  mentioned.  Some  say  both  kinds  of

number exist, that which has a before and after being identical with the Ideas,

and mathematical number being different from the Ideas and from sensible

things,  and  both  being  separable  from  sensible  things;  and  others  say

mathematical  number  alone  exists,  as  the  first  of  realities,  separate  from

sensible things. And the Pythagoreans, also, believe in one kind of number-

the mathematical; only they say it is not separate but sensible substances are

formed out of it. For they construct the whole universe out of numbers-only

not  numbers  consisting  of  abstract  units;  they  suppose  the  units  to  have

spatial  magnitude.  But  how  the  first  1  was  constructed  so  as  to  have

magnitude, they seem unable to say.

  Another thinker says the first kind of number, that of the Forms, alone

exists, and some say mathematical number is identical with this.

The case of lines, planes, and solids is similar. For some think that those

which are the objects of mathematics are different from those which come

after the Ideas; and of those who express themselves otherwise some speak of

the objects of mathematics and in a mathematical way-viz. those who do not

make the Ideas numbers nor say that Ideas exist; and others speak of the

objects of mathematics, but not mathematically; for they say that neither is

every spatial magnitude divisible into magnitudes, nor do any two units taken

at random make 2. All who say the 1 is an element and principle of things

suppose numbers to consist of abstract units, except the Pythagoreans; but

they suppose the numbers to have magnitude, as has been said before. It is

clear  from  this  statement,  then,  in  how  many  ways  numbers  may  be

described, and that all the ways have been mentioned; and all these views areimpossible, but some perhaps more than others.

<

div id="section147" class="section" title="7">


7


First, then, let us inquire if the units are associable or inassociable, and if

inassociable, in which of the two ways we distinguished. For it is possible

that any unity is inassociable with any, and it is possible that those in the

‘itself’ are inassociable with those in the ‘itself’, and, generally, that those in

each ideal number are inassociable with those in other ideal numbers. Now

(1)  all  units  are  associable  and  without  difference,  we  get  mathematical

number-only one kind of number, and the Ideas cannot be the numbers. For

what sort of number will man-himself or animal-itself or any other Form be?

There is one Idea of each thing e.g. one of man-himself and another one of

animal-itself;  but  the  similar  and  undifferentiated  numbers  are  infinitely

many, so that any particular 3 is no more man-himself than any other 3. But if

the  Ideas  are  not  numbers,  neither  can  they  exist  at  all.  For  from  what

principles will the Ideas come? It is number that comes from the 1 and the

indefinite dyad, and the principles or elements are said to be principles and

elements  of  number,  and  the  Ideas  cannot  be  ranked  as  either  prior  or

posterior to the numbers.

But (2) if the units are inassociable, and inassociable in the sense that any

is inassociable with any other, number of this sort cannot be mathematical

number; for mathematical number consists of undifferentiated units, and the

truths proved of it suit this character. Nor can it be ideal number. For 2 will

not proceed immediately from 1 and the indefinite dyad, and be followed by

the  successive  numbers,  as  they  say  ‘2,3,4’  for  the  units  in  the  ideal  are

generated at the same time, whether, as the first holder of the theory said,

from unequals (coming into being when these were equalized) or in some

other way-since, if one unit is to be prior to the other, it will be prior also to 2

the  composed  of  these;  for  when  there  is  one  thing  prior  and  another

posterior, the resultant of these will be prior to one and posterior to the other.

Again, since the 1-itself is first, and then there is a particular 1 which is first

among the others and next after the 1-itself, and again a third which is next

after the second and next but one after the first 1,-so the units must be prior to

the numbers after which they are named when we count them; e.g. there willbe a third unit in 2 before 3 exists, and a fourth and a fifth in 3 before the

numbers 4 and 5 exist.-Now none of these thinkers has said the units are

inassociable in this way, but according to their principles it is reasonable that

they should be so even in this way, though in truth it is impossible. For it is

reasonable both that the units should have priority and posteriority if there is

a first unit or first 1, and also that the 2’s should if there is a first 2; for after

the first it is reasonable and necessary that there should be a second, and if a

second, a third, and so with the others successively. (And to say both things

at the same time, that a unit is first and another unit is second after the ideal

1, and that a 2 is first after it, is impossible.) But they make a first unit or 1,

but not also a second and a third, and a first 2, but not also a second and a

third. Clearly, also, it is not possible, if all the units are inassociable, that

there should be a 2-itself and a 3-itself; and so with the other numbers. For

whether the units are undifferentiated or different each from each, number

must be counted by addition, e.g. 2 by adding another 1 to the one, 3 by

adding another 1 to the two, and similarly. This being so, numbers cannot be

generated as they generate them, from the 2 and the 1; for 2 becomes part of

3 and 3 of 4 and the same happens in the case of the succeeding numbers, but

they say 4 came from the first 2 and the indefinite which makes it two 2’s

other than the 2-itself; if not, the 2-itself will be a part of 4 and one other 2

will be added. And similarly 2 will consist of the 1-itself and another 1; but if

this is so, the other element cannot be an indefinite 2; for it generates one

unit, not, as the indefinite 2 does, a definite 2.

  Again, besides the 3-itself and the 2-itself how can there be other 3’s and

2’s? And how do they consist of prior and posterior units? All this is absurd

and fictitious, and there cannot be a first 2 and then a 3-itself. Yet there must,

if the 1 and the indefinite dyad are to be the elements. But if the results are

impossible, it is also impossible that these are the generating principles.

If  the  units,  then,  are  differentiated,  each  from  each,  these  results  and

others  similar  to  these  follow  of  necessity.  But  (3)  if  those  in  different

numbers  are  differentiated,  but  those  in  the  same  number  are  alone

undifferentiated from one another, even so the difficulties that follow are no

less. E.g. in the 10-itself their are ten units, and the 10 is composed both of

them and of two 5’s. But since the 10-itself is not any chance number nor

composed of any chance 5’s—or, for that matter, units—the units in this 10

must differ. For if they do not differ, neither will the 5’s of which the 10

consists differ; but since these differ, the units also will differ. But if theydiffer, will there be no other 5’s in the 10 but only these two, or will there be

others? If there are not, this is paradoxical; and if there are, what sort of 10

will consist of them? For there is no other in the 10 but the 10 itself. But it is

actually necessary on their view that the 4 should not consist of any chance

2’s; for the indefinite as they say, received the definite 2 and made two 2’s;

for its nature was to double what it received.

  Again, as to the 2 being an entity apart from its two units, and the 3 an

entity apart from its three units, how is this possible? Either by one’s sharing

in the other, as ‘pale man’ is different from ‘pale’ and ‘man’ (for it shares in

these), or when one is a differentia of the other, as ‘man’ is different from

‘animal’ and ‘two-footed’.

  Again, some things are one by contact, some by intermixture, some by

position;  none  of  which  can  belong  to  the  units  of  which  the  2  or  the  3

consists; but as two men are not a unity apart from both, so must it be with

the units. And their being indivisible will make no difference to them; for

points too are indivisible, but yet a pair of them is nothing apart from the two.

But this consequence also we must not forget, that it follows that there are

prior and posterior 2 and similarly with the other numbers. For let the 2’s in

the 4 be simultaneous; yet these are prior to those in the 8 and as the 2

generated them, they generated the 4’s in the 8-itself. Therefore if the first 2

is an Idea, these 2’s also will be Ideas of some kind. And the same account

applies to the units; for the units in the first 2 generate the four in 4, so that all

the units come to be Ideas and an Idea will be composed of Ideas. Clearly

therefore those things also of which these happen to be the Ideas will be

composite, e.g. one might say that animals are composed of animals, if there

are Ideas of them.

In  general,  to  differentiate  the  units  in  any  way  is  an  absurdity  and  a

fiction; and by a fiction I mean a forced statement made to suit a hypothesis.

For neither in quantity nor in quality do we see unit differing from unit, and

number must be either equal or unequal-all number but especially that which

consists of abstract units-so that if one number is neither greater nor less than

another, it is equal to it; but things that are equal and in no wise differentiated

we take to be the same when we are speaking of numbers. If not, not even the

2 in the 10-itself will be undifferentiated, though they are equal; for what

reason will the man who alleges that they are not differentiated be able to

give?

  Again, if every unit + another unit makes two, a unit from the 2-itself andone from the 3-itself will make a 2. Now (a) this will consist of differentiated

units; and will it be prior to the 3 or posterior? It rather seems that it must be

prior;  for  one  of  the  units  is  simultaneous  with  the  3  and  the  other  is

simultaneous with the 2. And we, for our part, suppose that in general 1 and

1, whether the things are equal or unequal, is 2, e.g. the good and the bad, or

a man and a horse; but those who hold these views say that not even two

units are 2.

If  the  number  of  the  3-itself  is  not  greater  than  that  of  the  2,  this  is

surprising; and if it is greater, clearly there is also a number in it equal to the

2, so that this is not different from the 2-itself. But this is not possible, if there

is a first and a second number.

Nor will the Ideas be numbers. For in this particular point they are right

who claim that the units must be different, if there are to be Ideas; as has been

said before. For the Form is unique; but if the units are not different, the 2’s

and the 3’s also will not be different. This is also the reason why they must

say that when we count thus-’1,2’-we do not proceed by adding to the given

number;  for  if  we  do,  neither  will  the  numbers  be  generated  from  the

indefinite dyad, nor can a number be an Idea; for then one Idea will be in

another, and all Forms will be parts of one Form. And so with a view to their

hypothesis their statements are right, but as a whole they are wrong; for their

view is very destructive, since they will admit that this question itself affords

some  difficulty-whether,  when  we  count  and  say  —1,2,3-we  count  by

addition or by separate portions. But we do both; and so it is absurd to reason

back from this problem to so great a difference of essence.

<

div id="section148" class="section" title="8">


8


First of all it is well to determine what is the differentia of a number-and of

a unit, if it has a differentia. Units must differ either in quantity or in quality;

and neither of these seems to be possible. But number qua number differs in

quantity. And if the units also did differ in quantity, number would differ

from  number,  though  equal  in  number  of  units.  Again,  are  the  first  units

greater or smaller, and do the later ones increase or diminish? All these are

irrational suppositions. But neither can they differ in quality. For no attribute

can  attach  to  them;  for  even  to  numbers  quality  is  said  to  belong  afterquantity. Again, quality could not come to them either from the 1 or the dyad;

for the former has no quality, and the latter gives quantity; for this entity is

what makes things to be many. If the facts are really otherwise, they should

state  this  quite  at  the  beginning  and  determine  if  possible,  regarding  the

differentia of the unit, why it must exist, and, failing this, what differentia

they mean.

  Evidently then, if the Ideas are numbers, the units cannot all be associable,

nor can they be inassociable in either of the two ways. But neither is the way

in which some others speak about numbers correct. These are those who do

not think there are Ideas, either without qualification or as identified with

certain numbers, but think the objects of mathematics exist and the numbers

are the first of existing things, and the 1-itself is the starting-point of them. It

is paradoxical that there should be a 1 which is first of 1’s, as they say, but

not a 2 which is first of 2’s, nor a 3 of 3’s; for the same reasoning applies to

all.  If,  then,  the  facts  with  regard  to  number  are  so,  and  one  supposes

mathematical number alone to exist, the 1 is not the starting-point (for this

sort of 1 must differ from the-other units; and if this is so, there must also be

a 2 which is first of 2’s, and similarly with the other successive numbers).

But if the 1 is the starting-point, the truth about the numbers must rather be

what Plato used to say, and there must be a first 2 and 3 and numbers must

not be associable with one another. But if on the other hand one supposes

this, many impossible results, as we have said, follow. But either this or the

other must be the case, so that if neither is, number cannot exist separately.

It is evident, also, from this that the third version is the worst,-the view

ideal and mathematical number is the same. For two mistakes must then meet

in the one opinion. (1) Mathematical number cannot be of this sort, but the

holder of this view has to spin it out by making suppositions peculiar to

himself. And (2) he must also admit all the consequences that confront those

who speak of number in the sense of ‘Forms’.

The Pythagorean version in one way affords fewer difficulties than those

before  named,  but  in  another  way  has  others  peculiar  to  itself.  For  not

thinking of number as capable of existing separately removes many of the

impossible consequences; but that bodies should be composed of numbers,

and that this should be mathematical number, is impossible. For it is not true

to speak of indivisible spatial magnitudes; and however much there might be

magnitudes of this sort, units at least have not magnitude; and how can a

magnitude be composed of indivisibles? But arithmetical number, at least,consists of units, while these thinkers identify number with real things; at any

rate  they  apply  their  propositions  to  bodies  as  if  they  consisted  of  those

numbers.

If, then, it is necessary, if number is a self-subsistent real thing, that it

should exist in one of these ways which have been mentioned, and if it cannot

exist in any of these, evidently number has no such nature as those who make

it separable set up for it.

  Again, does each unit come from the great and the small, equalized, or one

from the small, another from the great? (a) If the latter, neither does each

thing contain all the elements, nor are the units without difference; for in one

there is the great and in another the small, which is contrary in its nature to

the great. Again, how is it with the units in the 3-itself? One of them is an odd

unit. But perhaps it is for this reason that they give 1-itself the middle place

in odd numbers. (b) But if each of the two units consists of both the great and

the small, equalized, how will the 2 which is a single thing, consist of the

great and the small? Or how will it differ from the unit? Again, the unit is

prior to the 2; for when it is destroyed the 2 is destroyed. It must, then, be the

Idea of an Idea since it is prior to an Idea, and it must have come into being

before it. From what, then? Not from the indefinite dyad, for its function was

to double.

  Again, number must be either infinite or finite; for these thinkers think of

number as capable of existing separately, so that it is not possible that neither

of those alternatives should be true. Clearly it cannot be infinite; for infinite

number is neither odd nor even, but the generation of numbers is always the

generation  either  of  an  odd  or  of  an  even  number;  in  one  way,  when  1

operates on an even number, an odd number is produced; in another way,

when  2  operates,  the  numbers  got  from  1  by  doubling  are  produced;  in

another way, when the odd numbers operate, the other even numbers are

produced. Again, if every Idea is an Idea of something, and the numbers are

Ideas, infinite number itself will be an Idea of something, either of some

sensible thing or of something else. Yet this is not possible in view of their

thesis any more than it is reasonable in itself, at least if they arrange the Ideas

as they do.

But if number is finite, how far does it go? With regard to this not only the

fact but the reason should be stated. But if number goes only up to 10 as

some say, firstly the Forms will soon run short; e.g. if 3 is man-himself, what

number will be the horse-itself? The series of the numbers which are theseveral things-themselves goes up to 10. It must, then, be one of the numbers

within these limits; for it is these that are substances and Ideas. Yet they will

run short; for the various forms of animal will outnumber them. At the same

time it is clear that if in this way the 3 is man-himself, the other 3’s are so

also  (for  those  in  identical  numbers  are  similar),  so  that  there  will  be  an

infinite number of men; if each 3 is an Idea, each of the numbers will be man-

himself, and if not, they will at least be men. And if the smaller number is

part of the greater (being number of such a sort that the units in the same

number are associable), then if the 4-itself is an Idea of something, e.g. of

‘horse’ or of ‘white’, man will be a part of horse, if man is It is paradoxical

also that there should be an Idea of 10 but not of 11, nor of the succeeding

numbers. Again, there both are and come to be certain things of which there

are no Forms; why, then, are there not Forms of them also? We infer that the

Forms are not causes. Again, it is paradoxical-if the number series up to 10 is

more of a real thing and a Form than 10 itself. There is no generation of the

former as one thing, and there is of the latter. But they try to work on the

assumption that the series of numbers up to 10 is a complete series. At least

they generate the derivatives-e.g. the void, proportion, the odd, and the others

of this kind-within the decade. For some things, e.g. movement and rest, good

and  bad,  they  assign  to  the  originative  principles,  and  the  others  to  the

numbers. This is why they identify the odd with 1; for if the odd implied 3

how  would  5  be  odd?  Again,  spatial  magnitudes  and  all  such  things  are

explained  without  going  beyond  a  definite  number;  e.g.  the  first,  the

indivisible, line, then the 2 &c.; these entities also extend only up to 10.

  Again, if number can exist separately, one might ask which is prior—1, or

3 or 2? Inasmuch as the number is composite, 1 is prior, but inasmuch as the

universal and the form is prior, the number is prior; for each of the units is

part of the number as its matter, and the number acts as form. And in a sense

the right angle is prior to the acute, because it is determinate and in virtue of

its definition; but in a sense the acute is prior, because it is a part and the right

angle is divided into acute angles. As matter, then, the acute angle and the

element and the unit are prior, but in respect of the form and of the substance

as expressed in the definition, the right angle, and the whole consisting of the

matter and the form, are prior; for the concrete thing is nearer to the form and

to what is expressed in the definition, though in generation it is later. How

then is 1 the starting-point? Because it is not divisiable, they say; but both the

universal,  and  the  particular  or  the  element,  are  indivisible.  But  they  arestarting-points in different ways, one in definition and the other in time. In

which way, then, is 1 the starting-point? As has been said, the right angle is

thought to be prior to the acute, and the acute to the right, and each is one.

Accordingly  they  make  1  the  starting-point  in  both  ways.  But  this  is

impossible. For the universal is one as form or substance, while the element

is one as a part or as matter. For each of the two is in a sense one-in truth

each of the two units exists potentially (at least if the number is a unity and

not like a heap, i.e. if different numbers consist of differentiated units, as they

say), but not in complete reality; and the cause of the error they fell into is

that they were conducting their inquiry at the same time from the standpoint

of mathematics and from that of universal definitions, so that (1) from the

former standpoint they treated unity, their first principle, as a point; for the

unit is a point without position. They put things together out of the smallest

parts, as some others also have done. Therefore the unit becomes the matter

of numbers and at the same time prior to 2; and again posterior, 2 being

treated as a whole, a unity, and a form. But (2) because they were seeking the

universal they treated the unity which can be predicated of a number, as in

this sense also a part of the number. But these characteristics cannot belong at

the same time to the same thing.

If  the  1-itself  must  be  unitary  (for  it  differs  in  nothing  from  other  1’s

except that it is the starting-point), and the 2 is divisible but the unit is not,

the unit must be liker the 1-itself than the 2 is. But if the unit is liker it, it

must be liker to the unit than to the 2; therefore each of the units in 2 must be

prior to the 2. But they deny this; at least they generate the 2 first. Again, if

the 2-itself is a unity and the 3-itself is one also, both form a 2. From what,

then, is this 2 produced?

<

div id="section149" class="section" title="9">


9


  Since there is not contact in numbers, but succession, viz. between the

units between which there is nothing, e.g. between those in 2 or in 3 one

might ask whether these succeed the 1-itself or not, and whether, of the terms

that succeed it, 2 or either of the units in 2 is prior.

  Similar difficulties occur with regard to the classes of things posterior to

number,-the line, the plane, and the solid. For some construct these out of thespecies of the ‘great and small’; e.g. lines from the ‘long and short’, planes

from the ‘broad and narrow’, masses from the ‘deep and shallow’; which are

species of the ‘great and small’. And the originative principle of such things

which answers to the 1 different thinkers describe in different ways, And in

these  also  the  impossibilities,  the  fictions,  and  the  contradictions  of  all

probability are seen to be innumerable. For (i) geometrical classes are severed

from one another, unless the principles of these are implied in one another in

such a way that the ‘broad and narrow’ is also ‘long and short’ (but if this is

so, the plane will be line and the solid a plane; again, how will angles and

figures  and  such  things  be  explained?).  And  (ii)  the  same  happens  as  in

regard to number; for ‘long and short’, &c., are attributes of magnitude, but

magnitude  does  not  consist  of  these,  any  more  than  the  line  consists  of

‘straight and curved’, or solids of ‘smooth and rough’.

  (All these views share a difficulty which occurs with regard to species-of-

a-genus, when one posits the universals, viz. whether it is animal-itself or

something other than animal-itself that is in the particular animal. True, if the

universal is not separable from sensible things, this will present no difficulty;

but if the 1 and the numbers are separable, as those who express these views

say, it is not easy to solve the difficulty, if one may apply the words ‘not

easy’ to the impossible. For when we apprehend the unity in 2, or in general

in a number, do we apprehend a thing-itself or something else?).

  Some, then, generate spatial magnitudes from matter of this sort, others

from the point —and the point is thought by them to be not 1 but something

like 1-and from other matter like plurality, but not identical with it; about

which principles none the less the same difficulties occur. For if the matter is

one, line and plane-and soli will be the same; for from the same elements will

come one and the same thing. But if the matters are more than one, and there

is one for the line and a second for the plane and another for the solid, they

either are implied in one another or not, so that the same results will follow

even so; for either the plane will not contain a line or it will he a line.

  Again, how number can consist of the one and plurality, they make no

attempt to explain; but however they express themselves, the same objections

arise as confront those who construct number out of the one and the indefinite

dyad. For the one view generates number from the universally predicated

plurality, and not from a particular plurality; and the other generates it from a

particular  plurality,  but  the  first;  for  2  is  said  to  be  a  ‘first  plurality’.

Therefore  there  is  practically  no  difference,  but  the  same  difficulties  willfollow,-is it intermixture or position or blending or generation? and so on.

Above all one might press the question ‘if each unit is one, what does it come

from?’ Certainly each is not the one-itself. It must, then, come from the one

itself and plurality, or a part of plurality. To say that the unit is a plurality is

impossible, for it is indivisible; and to generate it from a part of plurality

involves many other objections; for (a) each of the parts must be indivisible

(or it will be a plurality and the unit will be divisible) and the elements will

not be the one and plurality; for the single units do not come from plurality

and the one. Again, (,the holder of this view does nothing but presuppose

another number; for his plurality of indivisibles is a number. Again, we must

inquire, in view of this theory also, whether the number is infinite or finite.

For there was at first, as it seems, a plurality that was itself finite, from which

and from the one comes the finite number of units. And there is another

plurality that is plurality-itself and infinite plurality; which sort of plurality,

then,  is  the  element  which  co-operates  with  the  one?  One  might  inquire

similarly about the point, i.e. the element out of which they make spatial

magnitudes. For surely this is not the one and only point; at any rate, then, let

them say out of what each of the points is formed. Certainly not of some

distance  +  the  point-itself.  Nor  again  can  there  be  indivisible  parts  of  a

distance,  as  the  elements  out  of  which  the  units  are  said  to  be  made  are

indivisible parts of plurality; for number consists of indivisibles, but spatial

magnitudes do not.

All  these  objections,  then,  and  others  of  the  sort  make  it  evident  that

number and spatial magnitudes cannot exist apart from things. Again, the

discord about numbers between the various versions is a sign that it is the

incorrectness of the alleged facts themselves that brings confusion into the

theories. For those who make the objects of mathematics alone exist apart

from  sensible  things,  seeing  the  difficulty  about  the  Forms  and  their

fictitiousness, abandoned ideal number and posited mathematical. But those

who wished to make the Forms at the same time also numbers, but did not

see, if one assumed these principles, how mathematical number was to exist

apart from ideal, made ideal and mathematical number the same-in words,

since  in  fact  mathematical  number  has  been  destroyed;  for  they  state

hypotheses peculiar to themselves and not those of mathematics. And he who

first supposed that the Forms exist and that the Forms are numbers and that

the objects of mathematics exist, naturally separated the two. Therefore it

turns out that all of them are right in some respect, but on the whole not right.And  they  themselves  confirm  this,  for  their  statements  do  not  agree  but

conflict. The cause is that their hypotheses and their principles are false. And

it is hard to make a good case out of bad materials, according to Epicharmus:

‘as soon as ‘tis said, ‘tis seen to be wrong.’

But regarding numbers the questions we have raised and the conclusions

we have reached are sufficient (for while he who is already convinced might

be further convinced by a longer discussion, one not yet convinced would not

come any nearer to conviction); regarding the first principles and the first

causes and elements, the views expressed by those who discuss only sensible

substance have been partly stated in our works on nature, and partly do not

belong to the present inquiry; but the views of those who assert that there are

other substances besides the sensible must be considered next after those we

have been mentioning. Since, then, some say that the Ideas and the numbers

are  such  substances,  and  that  the  elements  of  these  are  elements  and

principles of real things, we must inquire regarding these what they say and

in what sense they say it.

  Those  who  posit  numbers  only,  and  these  mathematical,  must  be

considered later; but as regards those who believe in the Ideas one might

survey at the same time their way of thinking and the difficulty into which

they fall. For they at the same time make the Ideas universal and again treat

them  as  separable  and  as  individuals.  That  this  is  not  possible  has  been

argued  before.  The  reason  why  those  who  described  their  substances  as

universal combined these two characteristics in one thing, is that they did not

make  substances  identical  with  sensible  things.  They  thought  that  the

particulars  in  the  sensible  world  were  a  state  of  flux  and  none  of  them

remained,  but  that  the  universal  was  apart  from  these  and  something

different. And Socrates gave the impulse to this theory, as we said in our

earlier  discussion,  by  reason  of  his  definitions,  but  he  did  not  separate

universals from individuals; and in this he thought rightly, in not separating

them. This is plain from the results; for without the universal it is not possible

to get knowledge, but the separation is the cause of the objections that arise

with regard to the Ideas. His successors, however, treating it as necessary, if

there are to be any substances besides the sensible and transient substances,

that they must be separable, had no others, but gave separate existence to

these universally predicated substances, so that it followed that universals and

individuals were almost the same sort of thing. This in itself, then, would be

one difficulty in the view we have mentioned.<

div id="section150" class="section" title="10">


10


Let us now mention a point which presents a certain difficulty both to

those who believe in the Ideas and to those who do not, and which was stated

before,  at  the  beginning,  among  the  problems.  If  we  do  not  suppose

substances to be separate, and in the way in which individual things are said

to  be  separate,  we  shall  destroy  substance  in  the  sense  in  which  we

understand ‘substance’; but if we conceive substances to be separable, how

are we to conceive their elements and their principles?

If they are individual and not universal, (a) real things will be just of the

same number as the elements, and (b) the elements will not be knowable. For

(a) let the syllables in speech be substances, and their elements elements of

substances; then there must be only one ‘ba’ and one of each of the syllables,

since they are not universal and the same in form but each is one in number

and a ‘this’ and not a kind possessed of a common name (and again they

suppose  that  the  ‘just  what  a  thing  is’  is  in  each  case  one).  And  if  the

syllables are unique, so too are the parts of which they consist; there will not,

then, be more a’s than one, nor more than one of any of the other elements,

on the same principle on which an identical syllable cannot exist in the plural

number. But if this is so, there will not be other things existing besides the

elements, but only the elements.

(b)  Again,  the  elements  will  not  be  even  knowable;  for  they  are  not

universal, and knowledge is of universals. This is clear from demonstrations

and from definitions; for we do not conclude that this triangle has its angles

equal to two right angles, unless every triangle has its angles equal to two

right angles, nor that this man is an animal, unless every man is an animal.

But if the principles are universal, either the substances composed of them

are  also  universal,  or  non-substance  will  be  prior  to  substance;  for  the

universal is not a substance, but the element or principle is universal, and the

element  or  principle  is  prior  to  the  things  of  which  it  is  the  principle  or

element.

All these difficulties follow naturally, when they make the Ideas out of

elements and at the same time claim that apart from the substances which

have the same form there are Ideas, a single separate entity. But if, e.g. in thecase of the elements of speech, the a’s and the b’s may quite well be many

and there need be no a-itself and b-itself besides the many, there may be, so

far as this goes, an infinite number of similar syllables. The statement that an

knowledge is universal, so that the principles of things must also be universal

and  not  separate  substances,  presents  indeed,  of  all  the  points  we  have

mentioned, the greatest difficulty, but yet the statement is in a sense true,

although in a sense it is not. For knowledge, like the verb ‘to know’, means

two things, of which one is potential and one actual. The potency, being, as

matter, universal and indefinite, deals with the universal and indefinite; but

the actuality, being definite, deals with a definite object, being a ‘this’, it

deals with a ‘this’. But per accidens sight sees universal colour, because this

individual colour which it sees is colour; and this individual a which the

grammarian investigates is an a. For if the principles must be universal, what

is derived from them must also be universal, as in demonstrations; and if this

is so, there will be nothing capable of separate existence-i.e. no substance.

But evidently in a sense knowledge is universal, and in a sense it is not.                                      Book XIV


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div id="section151" class="section" title="1">


1


  Regarding this kind of substance, what we have said must be taken as

sufficient. All philosophers make the first principles contraries: as in natural

things, so also in the case of unchangeable substances. But since there cannot

be anything prior to the first principle of all things, the principle cannot be the

principle and yet be an attribute of something else. To suggest this is like

saying that the white is a first principle, not qua anything else but qua white,

but yet that it is predicable of a subject, i.e. that its being white presupposes

its being something else; this is absurd, for then that subject will be prior. But

all things which are generated from their contraries involve an underlying

subject; a subject, then, must be present in the case of contraries, if anywhere.

All contraries, then, are always predicable of a subject, and none can exist

apart,  but  just  as  appearances  suggest  that  there  is  nothing  contrary  to

substance, argument confirms this. No contrary, then, is the first principle of

all things in the full sense; the first principle is something different.

But these thinkers make one of the contraries matter, some making the

unequal which they take to be the essence of plurality-matter for the One, and

others making plurality matter for the One. (The former generate numbers out

of the dyad of the unequal, i.e. of the great and small, and the other thinker

we have referred to generates them out of plurality, while according to both it

is generated by the essence of the One.) For even the philosopher who says

the  unequal  and  the  One  are  the  elements,  and  the  unequal  is  a  dyad

composed of the great and small, treats the unequal, or the great and the

small, as being one, and does not draw the distinction that they are one in

definition,  but  not  in  number.  But  they  do  not  describe  rightly  even  the

principles which they call elements, for some name the great and the small

with the One and treat these three as elements of numbers, two being matter,one the form; while others name the many and few, because the great and the

small are more appropriate in their nature to magnitude than to number; and

others  name  rather  the  universal  character  common  to  these-’that  which

exceeds  and  that  which  is  exceeded’.  None  of  these  varieties  of  opinion

makes any difference to speak of, in view of some of the consequences; they

affect only the abstract objections, which these thinkers take care to avoid

because  the  demonstrations  they  themselves  offer  are  abstract,-with  this

exception, that if the exceeding and the exceeded are the principles, and not

the great and the small, consistency requires that number should come from

the elements before does; for number is more universal than as the exceeding

and the exceeded are more universal than the great and the small. But as it is,

they say one of these things but do not say the other. Others oppose the

different and the other to the One, and others oppose plurality to the One. But

if, as they claim, things consist of contraries, and to the One either there is

nothing contrary, or if there is to be anything it is plurality, and the unequal is

contrary to the equal, and the different to the same, and the other to the thing

itself, those who oppose the One to plurality have most claim to plausibility,

but even their view is inadequate, for the One would on their view be a few;

for plurality is opposed to fewness, and the many to the few.

  ‘The one’ evidently means a measure. And in every case there is some

underlying thing with a distinct nature of its own, e.g. in the scale a quarter-

tone, in spatial magnitude a finger or a foot  or something of the sort, in

rhythms a beat or a syllable; and similarly in gravity it is a definite weight;

and in the same way in all cases, in qualities a quality, in quantities a quantity

(and the measure is indivisible, in the former case in kind, and in the latter to

the  sense);  which  implies  that  the  one  is  not  in  itself  the  substance  of

anything. And this is reasonable; for ‘the one’ means the measure of some

plurality,  and  ‘number’  means  a  measured  plurality  and  a  plurality  of

measures. (Thus it is natural that one is not a number; for the measure is not

measures, but both the measure and the one are starting-points.) The measure

must always be some identical thing predicable of all the things it measures,

e.g. if the things are horses, the measure is ‘horse’, and if they are men,

‘man’. If they are a man, a horse, and a god, the measure is perhaps ‘living

being’, and the number of them will be a number of living beings. If the

things are ‘man’ and ‘pale’ and ‘walking’, these will scarcely have a number,

because all belong to a subject which is one and the same in number, yet the

number of these will be a number of ‘kinds’ or of some such term.  Those who treat the unequal as one thing, and the dyad as an indefinite

compound of great and small, say what is very far from being probable or

possible. For (a) these are modifications and accidents, rather than substrata,

of numbers and magnitudes-the many and few of number, and the great and

small  of  magnitude-like  even  and  odd,  smooth  and  rough,  straight  and

curved. Again, (b) apart from this mistake, the great and the small, and so on,

must be relative to something; but what is relative is least of all things a kind

of  entity  or  substance,  and  is  posterior  to  quality  and  quantity;  and  the

relative is an accident of quantity, as was said, not its matter, since something

with a distinct nature of its own must serve as matter both to the relative in

general and to its parts and kinds. For there is nothing either great or small,

many or few, or, in general, relative to something else, which without having

a nature of its own is many or few, great or small, or relative to something

else. A sign that the relative is least of all a substance and a real thing is the

fact that it alone has no proper generation or destruction or movement, as in

respect  of  quantity  there  is  increase  and  diminution,  in  respect  of  quality

alteration,  in  respect  of  place  locomotion,  in  respect  of  substance  simple

generation and destruction. In respect of relation there is no proper change;

for, without changing, a thing will be now greater and now less or equal, if

that with which it is compared has changed in quantity. And (c) the matter of

each thing, and therefore of substance, must be that which is potentially of

the  nature  in  question;  but  the  relative  is  neither  potentially  nor  actually

substance. It is strange, then, or rather impossible, to make not-substance an

element in, and prior to, substance; for all the categories are posterior to

substance. Again, (d) elements are not predicated of the things of which they

are elements, but many and few are predicated both apart and together of

number, and long and short of the line, and both broad and narrow apply to

the plane. If there is a plurality, then, of which the one term, viz. few, is

always  predicated,  e.g.  2  (which  cannot  be  many,  for  if  it  were  many,  1

would be few), there must be also one which is absolutely many, e.g. 10 is

many (if there is no number which is greater than 10), or 10,000. How then,

in view of this, can number consist of few and many? Either both ought to be

predicated of it, or neither; but in fact only the one or the other is predicated.

<

div id="section152" class="section" title="2">


2We must inquire generally, whether eternal things can consist of elements.

If they do, they will have matter; for everything that consists of elements is

composite. Since, then, even if a thing exists for ever, out of that of which it

consists it would necessarily also, if it had come into being, have come into

being, and since everything comes to be what it comes to be out of that which

is it potentially (for it could not have come to be out of that which had not

this capacity, nor could it consist of such elements), and since the potential

can be either actual or not,-this being so, however everlasting number or

anything else that has matter is, it must be capable of not existing, just as that

which is any number of years old is as capable of not existing as that which is

a day old; if this is capable of not existing, so is that which has lasted for a

time so long that it has no limit. They cannot, then, be eternal, since that

which is capable of not existing is not eternal, as we had occasion to show in

another context. If that which we are now saying is true universally-that no

substance is eternal unless it is actuality-and if the elements are matter that

underlies substance, no eternal substance can have elements present in it, of

which it consists.

  There are some who describe the element which acts with the One as an

indefinite dyad, and object to ‘the unequal’, reasonably enough, because of

the ensuing difficulties; but they have got rid only of those objections which

inevitably arise from the treatment of the unequal, i.e. the relative, as an

element; those which arise apart from this opinion must confront even these

thinkers, whether it is ideal number, or mathematical, that they construct out

of those elements.

  There are many causes which led them off into these explanations, and

especially the fact that they framed the difficulty in an obsolete form. For

they thought that all things that are would be one (viz. Being itself), if one did

not join issue with and refute the saying of Parmenides:


‘For never will this he proved, that things that are not are.’


  They thought it necessary to prove that that which is not is; for only thus-

of that which is and something else-could the things that are be composed, if

they are many.

But, first, if ‘being’ has many senses (for it means sometimes substance,

sometimes that it is of a certain quality, sometimes that it is of a certain

quantity, and at other times the other categories), what sort of ‘one’, then, areall the things that are, if non-being is to be supposed not to be? Is it the

substances that are one, or the affections and similarly the other categories as

well, or all together-so that the ‘this’ and the ‘such’ and the ‘so much’ and the

other categories that indicate each some one class of being will all be one?

But it is strange, or rather impossible, that the coming into play of a single

thing should bring it about that part of that which is is a ‘this’, part a ‘such’,

part a ‘so much’, part a ‘here’.

  Secondly,  of  what  sort  of  non-being  and  being  do  the  things  that  are

consist? For ‘nonbeing’ also has many senses, since ‘being’ has; and ‘not

being a man’ means not being a certain substance, ‘not being straight’ not

being of a certain quality, ‘not being three cubits long’ not being of a certain

quantity. What sort of being and non-being, then, by their union pluralize the

things that are? This thinker means by the non-being the union of which with

being pluralizes the things that are, the false and the character of falsity. This

is also why it used to be said that we must assume something that is false, as

geometers assume the line which is not a foot long to be a foot long. But this

cannot  be  so.  For  neither  do  geometers  assume  anything  false  (for  the

enunciation is extraneous to the inference), nor is it non-being in this sense

that the things that are are generated from or resolved into. But since ‘non-

being’ taken in its various cases has as many senses as there are categories,

and besides this the false is said not to be, and so is the potential, it is from

this that generation proceeds, man from that which is not man but potentially

man, and white from that which is not white but potentially white, and this

whether it is some one thing that is generated or many.

The question evidently is, how being, in the sense of ‘the substances’, is

many; for the things that are generated are numbers and lines and bodies.

Now it is strange to inquire how being in the sense of the ‘what’ is many, and

not how either qualities or quantities are many. For surely the indefinite dyad

or ‘the great and the small’ is not a reason why there should be two kinds of

white or many colours or flavours or shapes; for then these also would be

numbers  and  units.  But  if  they  had  attacked  these  other  categories,  they

would have seen the cause of the plurality in substances also; for the same

thing or something analogous is the cause. This aberration is the reason also

why in seeking the opposite of being and the one, from which with being and

the one the things that are proceed, they posited the relative term (i.e. the

unequal), which is neither the contrary nor the contradictory of these, and is

one kind of being as ‘what’ and quality also are.  They should have asked this question also, how relative terms are many

and not one. But as it is, they inquire how there are many units besides the

first 1, but do not go on to inquire how there are many unequals besides the

unequal. Yet they use them and speak of great and small, many and few

(from  which  proceed  numbers),  long  and  short  (from  which  proceeds  the

line), broad and narrow (from which proceeds the plane), deep and shallow

(from which proceed solids); and they speak of yet more kinds of relative

term. What is the reason, then, why there is a plurality of these?

It is necessary, then, as we say, to presuppose for each thing that which is

it potentially; and the holder of these views further declared what that is

which is potentially a ‘this’ and a substance but is not in itself being-viz. that

it  is  the  relative  (as  if  he  had  said  ‘the  qualitative’),  which  is  neither

potentially the one or being, nor the negation of the one nor of being, but one

among  beings.  And  it  was  much  more  necessary,  as  we  said,  if  he  was

inquiring  how  beings  are  many,  not  to  inquire  about  those  in  the  same

category-how there are many substances or many qualities-but how beings as

a  whole  are  many;  for  some  are  substances,  some  modifications,  some

relations. In the categories other than substance there is yet another problem

involved  in  the  existence  of  plurality.  Since  they  are  not  separable  from

substances, qualities and quantities are many just because their substratum

becomes and is many; yet there ought to be a matter for each category; only it

cannot be separable from substances. But in the case of ‘thises’, it is possible

to explain how the ‘this’ is many things, unless a thing is to be treated as both

a ‘this’ and a general character. The difficulty arising from the facts about

substances is rather this, how there are actually many substances and not one.

But further, if the ‘this’ and the quantitative are not the same, we are not

told how and why the things that are are many, but how quantities are many.

For all ‘number’ means a quantity, and so does the ‘unit’, unless it means a

measure or the quantitatively indivisible. If, then, the quantitative and the

‘what’ are different, we are not told whence or how the ‘what’ is many; but if

any one says they are the same, he has to face many inconsistencies.

One might fix one’s attention also on the question, regarding the numbers,

what justifies the belief that they exist. To the believer in Ideas they provide

some sort of cause for existing things, since each number is an Idea, and the

Idea is to other things somehow or other the cause of their being; for let this

supposition be granted them. But as for him who does not hold this view

because he sees the inherent objections to the Ideas (so that it is not for thisreason that he posits numbers), but who posits mathematical number, why

must we believe his statement that such number exists, and of what use is

such number to other things? Neither does he who says it exists maintain that

it is the cause of anything (he rather says it is a thing existing by itself), nor is

it observed to be the cause of anything; for the theorems of arithmeticians

will all be found true even of sensible things, as was said before.

<

div id="section153" class="section" title="3">


3


As for those, then, who suppose the Ideas to exist and to be numbers, by

their assumption in virtue of the method of setting out each term apart from

its instances-of the unity of each general term they try at least to explain

somehow why number must exist. Since their reasons, however, are neither

conclusive nor in themselves possible, one must not, for these reasons at

least, assert the existence of number. Again, the Pythagoreans, because they

saw many attributes of numbers belonging te sensible bodies, supposed real

things to be numbers-not separable numbers, however, but numbers of which

real things consist. But why? Because the attributes of numbers are present in

a musical scale and in the heavens and in many other things. Those, however,

who  say  that  mathematical  number  alone  exists  cannot  according  to  their

hypotheses  say  anything  of  this  sort,  but  it  used  to  be  urged  that  these

sensible things could not be the subject of the sciences. But we maintain that

they are, as we said before. And it is evident that the objects of mathematics

do not exist apart; for if they existed apart their attributes would not have

been present in bodies. Now the Pythagoreans in this point are open to no

objection; but in that they construct natural bodies out of numbers, things that

have lightness and weight out of things that have not weight or lightness, they

seem to speak of another heaven and other bodies, not of the sensible. But

those who make number separable assume that it both exists and is separable

because the axioms would not be true of sensible things, while the statements

of mathematics are true and ‘greet the soul’; and similarly with the spatial

magnitudes of mathematics. It is evident, then, both that the rival theory will

say the contrary of this, and that the difficulty we raised just now, why if

numbers are in no way present in sensible things their attributes are present in

sensible things, has to be solved by those who hold these views.  There are some who, because the point is the limit and extreme of the line,

the line of the plane, and the plane of the solid, think there must be real things

of this sort. We must therefore examine this argument too, and see whether it

is not remarkably weak. For (i) extremes are not substances, but rather all

these things are limits. For even walking, and movement in general, has a

limit, so that on their theory this will be a ‘this’ and a substance. But that is

absurd. Not but what (ii) even if they are substances, they will all be the

substances  of  the  sensible  things  in  this  world;  for  it  is  to  these  that  the

argument applied. Why then should they be capable of existing apart?

  Again, if we are not too easily satisfied, we may, regarding all number and

the objects of mathematics, press this difficulty, that they contribute nothing

to one another, the prior to the posterior; for if number did not exist, none the

less spatial magnitudes would exist for those who maintain the existence of

the objects of mathematics only, and if spatial magnitudes did not exist, soul

and sensible bodies would exist. But the observed facts show that nature is

not a series of episodes, like a bad tragedy. As for the believers in the Ideas,

this  difficulty  misses  them;  for  they  construct  spatial  magnitudes  out  of

matter and number, lines out of the number planes doubtless out of solids out

of or they use other numbers, which makes no difference. But will these

magnitudes be Ideas, or what is their manner of existence, and what do they

contribute to things? These contribute nothing, as the objects of mathematics

contribute nothing. But not even is any theorem true of them, unless we want

to change the objects of mathematics and invent doctrines of our own. But it

is not hard to assume any random hypotheses and spin out a long string of

conclusions. These thinkers, then, are wrong in this way, in wanting to unite

the objects of mathematics with the Ideas. And those who first posited two

kinds of number, that of the Forms and that which is mathematical, neither

have said nor can say how mathematical number is to exist and of what it is

to  consist.  For  they  place  it  between  ideal  and  sensible  number.  If  (i)  it

consists of the great and small, it will be the same as the other-ideal-number

(he makes spatial magnitudes out of some other small and great). And if (ii)

he names some other element, he will be making his elements rather many.

And if the principle of each of the two kinds of number is a 1, unity will be

something common to these, and we must inquire how the one is these many

things, while at the same time number, according to him, cannot be generated

except from one and an indefinite dyad.

All this is absurd, and conflicts both with itself and with the probabilities,and we seem to see in it Simonides ‘long rigmarole’ for the long rigmarole

comes into play, like those of slaves, when men have nothing sound to say.

And the very elements-the great and the small-seem to cry out against the

violence that is done to them; for they cannot in any way generate numbers

other than those got from 1 by doubling.

It is strange also to attribute generation to things that are eternal, or rather

this is one of the things that are impossible. There need be no doubt whether

the Pythagoreans attribute generation to them or not; for they say plainly that

when the one had been constructed, whether out of planes or of surface or of

seed or of elements which they cannot express, immediately the nearest part

of the unlimited began to be constrained and limited by the limit. But since

they  are  constructing  a  world  and  wish  to  speak  the  language  of  natural

science, it is fair to make some examination of their physical theorics, but to

let them off from the present inquiry; for we are investigating the principles

at work in unchangeable things, so that it is numbers of this kind whose

genesis we must study.

<

div id="section154" class="section" title="4">


4


  These  thinkers  say  there  is  no  generation  of  the  odd  number,  which

evidently implies that there is generation of the even; and some present the

even as produced first from unequals-the great and the small-when these are

equalized.  The  inequality,  then,  must  belong  to  them  before  they  are

equalized.  If  they  had  always  been  equalized,  they  would  not  have  been

unequal before; for there is nothing before that which is always. Therefore

evidently  they  are  not  giving  their  account  of  the  generation  of  numbers

merely to assist contemplation of their nature.

A  difficulty,  and  a  reproach  to  any  one  who  finds  it  no  difficulty,  are

contained in the question how the elements and the principles are related to

the good and the beautiful; the difficulty is this, whether any of the elements

is such a thing as we mean by the good itself and the best, or this is not so,

but these are later in origin than the elements. The theologians seem to agree

with  some  thinkers  of  the  present  day,  who  answer  the  question  in  the

negative, and say that both the good and the beautiful appear in the nature of

things only when that nature has made some progress. (This they do to avoida real objection which confronts those who say, as some do, that the one is a

first principle. The objection arises not from their ascribing goodness to the

first principle as an attribute, but from their making the one a principle-and a

principle in the sense of an element-and generating number from the one.)

The old poets agree with this inasmuch as they say that not those who are

first in time, e.g. Night and Heaven or Chaos or Ocean, reign and rule, but

Zeus. These poets, however, are led to speak thus only because they think of

the rulers of the world as changing; for those of them who combine the two

characters  in  that  they  do  not  use  mythical  language  throughout,  e.g.

Pherecydes and some others, make the original generating agent the Best, and

so do the Magi, and some of the later sages also, e.g. both Empedocles and

Anaxagoras, of whom one made love an element, and the other made reason

a  principle.  Of  those  who  maintain  the  existence  of  the  unchangeable

substances some say the One itself is the good itself; but they thought its

substance lay mainly in its unity.

This, then, is the problem,-which of the two ways of speaking is right. It

would  be  strange  if  to  that  which  is  primary  and  eternal  and  most  self-

sufficient this very quality—self-sufficiency and self-maintenance—belongs

primarily in some other way than as a good. But indeed it can be for no other

reason  indestructible  or  self-sufficient  than  because  its  nature  is  good.

Therefore to say that the first principle is good is probably correct; but that

this principle should be the One or, if not that, at least an element, and an

element of numbers, is impossible. Powerful objections arise, to avoid which

some have given up the theory (viz. those who agree that the One is a first

principle and element, but only of mathematical number). For on this view all

the units become identical with species of good, and there is a great profusion

of goods. Again, if the Forms are numbers, all the Forms are identical with

species of good. But let a man assume Ideas of anything he pleases. If these

are Ideas only of goods, the Ideas will not be substances; but if the Ideas are

also Ideas of substances, all animals and plants and all individuals that share

in Ideas will be good.

  These  absurdities  follow,  and  it  also  follows  that  the  contrary  element,

whether it is plurality or the unequal, i.e. the great and small, is the bad-itself.

(Hence one thinker avoided attaching the good to the One, because it would

necessarily follow, since generation is from contraries, that badness is the

fundamental nature of plurality; while others say inequality is the nature of

the bad.) It follows, then, that all things partake of the bad except one—theOne itself, and that numbers partake of it in a more undiluted form than

spatial  magnitudes,  and  that  the  bad  is  the  space  in  which  the  good  is

realized, and that it partakes in and desires that which tends to destroy it; for

contrary tends to destroy contrary. And if, as we were saying, the matter is

that which is potentially each thing, e.g. that of actual fire is that which is

potentially fire, the bad will be just the potentially good.

All these objections, then, follow, partly because they make every principle

an element, partly because they make contraries principles, partly because

they make the One a principle, partly because they treat the numbers as the

first substances, and as capable of existing apart, and as Forms.

<

div id="section155" class="section" title="5">


5


If,  then,  it  is  equally  impossible  not  to  put  the  good  among  the  first

principles and to put it among them in this way, evidently the principles are

not being correctly described, nor are the first substances. Nor does any one

conceive the matter correctly if he compares the principles of the universe to

that of animals and plants, on the ground that the more complete always

comes from the indefinite and incomplete-which is what leads this thinker to

say that this is also true of the first principles of reality, so that the One itself

is not even an existing thing. This is incorrect, for even in this world of

animals and plants the principles from which these come are complete; for it

is a man that produces a man, and the seed is not first.

It  is  out  of  place,  also,  to  generate  place  simultaneously  with  the

mathematical solids (for place is peculiar to the individual things, and hence

they are separate in place; but mathematical objects are nowhere), and to say

that they must be somewhere, but not say what kind of thing their place is.

  Those who say that existing things come from elements and that the first of

existing things are the numbers, should have first distinguished the senses in

which one thing comes from another, and then said in which sense number

comes from its first principles.

By intermixture? But (1) not everything is capable of intermixture, and (2)

that which is produced by it is different from its elements, and on this view

the one will not remain separate or a distinct entity; but they want it to be so.

By  juxtaposition,  like  a  syllable?  But  then  (1)  the  elements  must  haveposition; and (2) he who thinks of number will be able to think of the unity

and the plurality apart; number then will be this-a unit and plurality, or the

one and the unequal.

  Again, coming from certain things means in one sense that these are still to

be found in the product, and in another that they are not; which sense does

number come from these elements? Only things that are generated can come

from elements which are present in them. Does number come, then, from its

elements  as  from  seed?  But  nothing  can  be  excreted  from  that  which  is

indivisible. Does it come from its contrary, its contrary not persisting? But all

things  that  come  in  this  way  come  also  from  something  else  which  does

persist. Since, then, one thinker places the 1 as contrary to plurality, and

another places it as contrary to the unequal, treating the 1 as equal, number

must be being treated as coming from contraries. There is, then, something

else that persists, from which and from one contrary the compound is or has

come to be. Again, why in the world do the other things that come from

contraries, or that have contraries, perish (even when all of the contrary is

used to produce them), while number does not? Nothing is said about this.

Yet whether present or not present in the compound the contrary destroys it,

e.g. ‘strife’ destroys the ‘mixture’ (yet it should not; for it is not to that that is

contrary).

  Once more, it has not been determined at all in which way numbers are the

causes of substances and of being-whether (1) as boundaries (as points are of

spatial magnitudes). This is how Eurytus decided what was the number of

what (e.g. one of man and another of horse), viz. by imitating the figures of

living things with pebbles, as some people bring numbers into the forms of

triangle and square. Or (2) is it because harmony is a ratio of numbers, and so

is man and everything else? But how are the attributes-white and sweet and

hot-numbers?  Evidently  it  is  not  the  numbers  that  are  the  essence  or  the

causes of the form; for the ratio is the essence, while the number the causes

of the form; for the ratio is the essence, while the number is the matter. E.g.

the essence of flesh or bone is number only in this way, ‘three parts of fire

and two of earth’. And a number, whatever number it is, is always a number

of certain things, either of parts of fire or earth or of units; but the essence is

that there is so much of one thing to so much of another in the mixture; and

this is no longer a number but a ratio of mixture of numbers, whether these

are corporeal or of any other kind.

  Number,  then,  whether  it  be  number  in  general  or  the  number  whichconsists of abstract units, is neither the cause as agent, nor the matter, nor the

ratio and form of things. Nor, of course, is it the final cause.

<

div id="section156" class="section" title="6">


6


One might also raise the question what the good is that things get from

numbers because their composition is expressible by a number, either by one

which is easily calculable or by an odd number. For in fact honey-water is no

more wholesome if it is mixed in the proportion of three times three, but it

would do more good if it were in no particular ratio but well diluted than if it

were numerically expressible but strong. Again, the ratios of mixtures are

expressed by the adding of numbers, not by mere numbers; e.g. it is ‘three

parts to two’, not ‘three times two’. For in any multiplication the genus of the

things multiplied must be the same; therefore the product 1X2X3 must be

measurable by 1, and 4X5X6 by 4 and therefore all products into which the

same factor enters must be measurable by that factor. The number of fire,

then, cannot be 2X5X3X6 and at the same time that of water 2X3.

If all things must share in number, it must follow that many things are the

same,  and  the  same  number  must  belong  to  one  thing  and  to  another.  Is

number the cause, then, and does the thing exist because of its number, or is

this not certain? E.g. the motions of the sun have a number, and again those

of the moon,-yes, and the life and prime of each animal. Why, then, should

not some of these numbers be squares, some cubes, and some equal, others

double? There is no reason why they should not, and indeed they must move

within these limits, since all things were assumed to share in number. And it

was  assumed  that  things  that  differed  might  fall  under  the  same  number.

Therefore if the same number had belonged to certain things, these would

have been the same as one another, since they would have had the same form

of number; e.g. sun and moon would have been the same. But why need these

numbers  be  causes?  There  are  seven  vowels,  the  scale  consists  of  seven

strings, the Pleiades are seven, at seven animals lose their teeth (at least some

do, though some do not), and the champions who fought against Thebes were

seven. Is it then because the number is the kind of number it is, that the

champions  were  seven  or  the  Pleiad  consists  of  seven  stars?  Surely  the

champions  were  seven  because  there  were  seven  gates  or  for  some  otherreason, and the Pleiad we count as seven, as we count the Bear as twelve,

while other peoples count more stars in both. Nay they even say that X, Ps

and Z are concords and that because there are three concords, the double

consonants also are three. They quite neglect the fact that there might be a

thousand such letters; for one symbol might be assigned to GP. But if they

say that each of these three is equal to two of the other letters, and no other is

so, and if the cause is that there are three parts of the mouth and one letter is

in each applied to sigma, it is for this reason that there are only three, not

because the concords are three; since as a matter of fact the concords are

more than three, but of double consonants there cannot be more.

  These people are like the old-fashioned Homeric scholars, who see small

resemblances  but  neglect  great  ones.  Some  say  that  there  are  many  such

cases, e.g. that the middle strings are represented by nine and eight, and that

the epic verse has seventeen syllables, which is equal in number to the two

strings, and that the scansion is, in the right half of the line nine syllables, and

in the left eight. And they say that the distance in the letters from alpha to

omega is equal to that from the lowest note of the flute to the highest, and

that the number of this note is equal to that of the whole choir of heaven. It

may  be  suspected  that  no  one  could  find  difficulty  either  in  stating  such

analogies or in finding them in eternal things, since they can be found even in

perishable things.

But the lauded characteristics of numbers, and the contraries of these, and

generally the mathematical relations, as some describe them, making them

causes of nature, seem, when we inspect them in this way, to vanish; for none

of  them  is  a  cause  in  any  of  the  senses  that  have  been  distinguished  in

reference to the first principles. In a sense, however, they make it plain that

goodness belongs to numbers, and that the odd, the straight, the square, the

potencies  of  certain  numbers,  are  in  the  column  of  the  beautiful.  For  the

seasons  and  a  particular  kind  of  number  go  together;  and  the  other

agreements that they collect from the theorems of mathematics all have this

meaning. Hence they are like coincidences. For they are accidents, but the

things that agree are all appropriate to one another, and one by analogy. For

in each category of being an analogous term is found-as the straight is in

length, so is the level in surface, perhaps the odd in number, and the white in

colour.

  Again, it is not the ideal numbers that are the causes of musical phenomena

and the like (for equal ideal numbers differ from one another in form; foreven the units do); so that we need not assume Ideas for this reason at least.

These, then, are the results of the theory, and yet more might be brought

together. The fact that our opponnts have much trouble with the generation of

numbers and can in no way make a system of them, seems to indicate that the

objects of mathematics are not separable from sensible things, as some say,

and that they are not the first principles.                                    Part 6


                      Ethics and Politics                        Nicomachean Ethics, Book I


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div class="section" title="1">


1


  Every  art  and  every  inquiry,  and  similarly  every  action  and  pursuit,  is

thought to aim at some good; and for this reason the good has rightly been

declared to be that at which all things aim. But a certain difference is found

among ends; some are activities, others are products apart from the activities

that produce them. Where there are ends apart from the actions, it is the

nature of the products to be better than the activities. Now, as there are many

actions, arts, and sciences, their ends also are many; the end of the medical

art is health, that of shipbuilding a vessel, that of strategy victory, that of

economics  wealth.  But  where  such  arts  fall  under  a  single  capacity—as

bridle-making and the other arts concerned with the equipment of horses fall

under the art of riding, and this and every military action under strategy, in

the same way other arts fall under yet others—in all of these the ends of the

master arts are to be preferred to all the subordinate ends; for it is for the sake

of the former that the latter are pursued. It makes no difference whether the

activities themselves are the ends of the actions, or something else apart from

the activities, as in the case of the sciences just mentioned.

<

div class="section" title="2">


2


If, then, there is some end of the things we do, which we desire for its own

sake (everything else being desired for the sake of this), and if we do not

choose everything for the sake of something else (for at that rate the process

would go on to infinity, so that our desire would be empty and vain), clearly

this must be the good and the chief good. Will not the knowledge of it, then,have a great influence on life? Shall we not, like archers who have a mark to

aim at, be more likely to hit upon what is right? If so, we must try, in outline

at least, to determine what it is, and of which of the sciences or capacities it is

the object. It would seem to belong to the most authoritative art and that

which is most truly the master art. And politics appears to be of this nature;

for it is this that ordains which of the sciences should be studied in a state,

and  which  each  class  of  citizens  should  learn  and  up  to  what  point  they

should learn them; and we see even the most highly esteemed of capacities to

fall under this, e.g. strategy, economics, rhetoric; now, since politics uses the

rest of the sciences, and since, again, it legislates as to what we are to do and

what we are to abstain from, the end of this science must include those of the

others, so that this end must be the good for man. For even if the end is the

same for a single man and for a state, that of the state seems at all events

something greater and more complete whether to attain or to preserve; though

it is worth while to attain the end merely for one man, it is finer and more

godlike to attain it for a nation or for city-states. These, then, are the ends at

which our inquiry aims, since it is political science, in one sense of that term.

<

div class="section" title="3">


3


Our discussion will be adequate if it has as much clearness as the subject-

matter admits of, for precision is not to be sought for alike in all discussions,

any more than in all the products of the crafts. Now fine and just actions,

which political science investigates, admit of much variety and fluctuation of

opinion, so that they may be thought to exist only by convention, and not by

nature. And goods also give rise to a similar fluctuation because they bring

harm to many people; for before now men have been undone by reason of

their wealth, and others by reason of their courage. We must be content, then,

in speaking of such subjects and with such premisses to indicate the truth

roughly and in outline, and in speaking about things which are only for the

most part true and with premisses of the same kind to reach conclusions that

are no better. In the same spirit, therefore, should each type of statement be

received; for it is the mark of an educated man to look for precision in each

class of things just so far as the nature of the subject admits; it is evidently

equally foolish to accept probable reasoning from a mathematician and todemand from a rhetorician scientific proofs.

Now each man judges well the things he knows, and of these he is a good

judge. And so the man who has been educated in a subject is a good judge of

that subject, and the man who has received an all-round education is a good

judge in general. Hence a young man is not a proper hearer of lectures on

political science; for he is inexperienced in the actions that occur in life, but

its discussions start from these and are about these; and, further, since he

tends to follow his passions, his study will be vain and unprofitable, because

the end aimed at is not knowledge but action. And it makes no difference

whether he is young in years or youthful in character; the defect does not

depend on time, but on his living, and pursuing each successive object, as

passion directs. For to such persons, as to the incontinent, knowledge brings

no  profit;  but  to  those  who  desire  and  act  in  accordance  with  a  rational

principle knowledge about such matters will be of great benefit.

  These remarks about the student, the sort of treatment to be expected, and

the purpose of the inquiry, may be taken as our preface.

<

div class="section" title="4">


4


Let us resume our inquiry and state, in view of the fact that all knowledge

and every pursuit aims at some good, what it is that we say political science

aims at and what is the highest of all goods achievable by action. Verbally

there is very general agreement; for both the general run of men and people

of superior refinement say that it is happiness, and identify living well and

doing well with being happy; but with regard to what happiness is they differ,

and the many do not give the same account as the wise. For the former think

it is some plain and obvious thing, like pleasure, wealth, or honour; they

differ, however, from one another—and often even the same man identifies it

with different things, with health when he is ill, with wealth when he is poor;

but, conscious of their ignorance, they admire those who proclaim some great

ideal that is above their comprehension. Now some thought that apart from

these many goods there is another which is self-subsistent and causes the

goodness of all these as well. To examine all the opinions that have been held

were  perhaps  somewhat  fruitless;  enough  to  examine  those  that  are  most

prevalent or that seem to be arguable.Let  us  not  fail  to  notice,  however,  that  there  is  a  difference  between

arguments from and those to the first principles. For Plato, too, was right in

raising this question and asking, as he used to do, ‘are we on the way from or

to the first principles?’ There is a difference, as there is in a race-course

between the course from the judges to the turning-point and the way back.

For,  while  we  must  begin  with  what  is  known,  things  are  objects  of

knowledge in two sensessome to us, some without qualification. Presumably,

then, we must begin with things known to us. Hence any one who is to listen

intelligently to lectures about what is noble and just, and generally, about the

subjects of political science must have been brought up in good habits. For

the fact is the starting-point, and if this is sufficiently plain to him, he will not

at the start need the reason as well; and the man who has been well brought

up has or can easily get startingpoints. And as for him who neither has nor

can get them, let him hear the words of Hesiod:


Far best is he who knows all things himself;

  Good, he that hearkens when men counsel right;

But he who neither knows, nor lays to heart

  Another’s wisdom, is a useless wight.


<

div class="section" title="5">


5


Let  us,  however,  resume  our  discussion  from  the  point  at  which  we

digressed. To judge from the lives that men lead, most men, and men of the

most vulgar type, seem (not without some ground) to identify the good, or

happiness,  with  pleasure;  which  is  the  reason  why  they  love  the  life  of

enjoyment. For there are, we may say, three prominent types of life—that just

mentioned, the political, and thirdly the contemplative life. Now the mass of

mankind are evidently quite slavish in their tastes, preferring a life suitable to

beasts, but they get some ground for their view from the fact that many of

those in high places share the tastes of Sardanapallus. A consideration of the

prominent types of life shows that people of superior refinement and of active

disposition identify happiness with honour; for this is, roughly speaking, the

end of the political life. But it seems too superficial to be what we are lookingfor, since it is thought to depend on those who bestow honour rather than on

him who receives it, but the good we divine to be something proper to a man

and not easily taken from him. Further, men seem to pursue honour in order

that they may be assured of their goodness; at least it is by men of practical

wisdom that they seek to be honoured, and among those who know them, and

on the ground of their virtue; clearly, then, according to them, at any rate,

virtue is better. And perhaps one might even suppose this to be, rather than

honour,  the  end  of  the  political  life.  But  even  this  appears  somewhat

incomplete; for possession of virtue seems actually compatible with being

asleep, or with lifelong inactivity, and, further, with the greatest sufferings

and misfortunes; but a man who was living so no one would call happy,

unless he were maintaining a thesis at all costs. But enough of this; for the

subject has been sufficiently treated even in the current discussions. Third

comes the contemplative life, which we shall consider later.

The life of money-making is one undertaken under compulsion, and wealth

is evidently not the good we are seeking; for it is merely useful and for the

sake of something else. And so one might rather take the aforenamed objects

to be ends; for they are loved for themselves. But it is evident that not even

these are ends; yet many arguments have been thrown away in support of

them. Let us leave this subject, then.

<

div class="section" title="6">


6


We had perhaps better consider the universal good and discuss thoroughly

what is meant by it, although such an inquiry is made an uphill one by the

fact that the Forms have been introduced by friends of our own. Yet it would

perhaps  be  thought  to  be  better,  indeed  to  be  our  duty,  for  the  sake  of

maintaining the truth even to destroy what touches us closely, especially as

we  are  philosophers  or  lovers  of  wisdom;  for,  while  both  are  dear,  piety

requires us to honour truth above our friends.

The men who introduced this doctrine did not posit Ideas of classes within

which they recognized priority and posteriority (which is the reason why they

did not maintain the existence of an Idea embracing all numbers); but the

term ‘good’ is used both in the category of substance and in that of quality

and in that of relation, and that which is per se, i.e. substance, is prior innature to the relative (for the latter is like an off shoot and accident of being);

so that there could not be a common Idea set over all these goods. Further,

since ‘good’ has as many senses as ‘being’ (for it is predicated both in the

category of substance, as of God and of reason, and in quality, i.e. of the

virtues, and in quantity, i.e. of that which is moderate, and in relation, i.e. of

the useful, and in time, i.e. of the right opportunity, and in place, i.e. of the

right locality and the like), clearly it cannot be something universally present

in all cases and single; for then it could not have been predicated in all the

categories but in one only. Further, since of the things answering to one Idea

there is one science, there would have been one science of all the goods; but

as it is there are many sciences even of the things that fall under one category,

e.g. of opportunity, for opportunity in war is studied by strategics and in

disease by medicine, and the moderate in food is studied by medicine and in

exercise by the science of gymnastics. And one might ask the question, what

in the world they mean by ‘a thing itself’, is (as is the case) in ‘man himself’

and in a particular man the account of man is one and the same. For in so far

as they are man, they will in no respect differ; and if this is so, neither will

‘good itself’ and particular goods, in so far as they are good. But again it will

not be good any the more for being eternal, since that which lasts long is no

whiter than that which perishes in a day. The Pythagoreans seem to give a

more plausible account of the good, when they place the one in the column of

goods; and it is they that Speusippus seems to have followed.

But let us discuss these matters elsewhere; an objection to what we have

said, however, may be discerned in the fact that the Platonists have not been

speaking about all goods, and that the goods that are pursued and loved for

themselves are called good by reference to a single Form, while those which

tend to produce or to preserve these somehow or to prevent their contraries

are called so by reference to these, and in a secondary sense. Clearly, then,

goods must be spoken of in two ways, and some must be good in themselves,

the others by reason of these. Let us separate, then, things good in themselves

from  things  useful,  and  consider  whether  the  former  are  called  good  by

reference  to  a  single  Idea.  What  sort  of  goods  would  one  call  good  in

themselves? Is it those that are pursued even when isolated from others, such

as intelligence, sight, and certain pleasures and honours? Certainly, if we

pursue these also for the sake of something else, yet one would place them

among things good in themselves. Or is nothing other than the Idea of good

good in itself? In that case the Form will be empty. But if the things we havenamed are also things good in themselves, the account of the good will have

to appear as something identical in them all, as that of whiteness is identical

in  snow  and  in  white  lead.  But  of  honour,  wisdom,  and  pleasure,  just  in

respect of their goodness, the accounts are distinct and diverse. The good,

therefore, is not some common element answering to one Idea.

But what then do we mean by the good? It is surely not like the things that

only chance to have the same name. Are goods one, then, by being derived

from one good or by all contributing to one good, or are they rather one by

analogy? Certainly as sight is in the body, so is reason in the soul, and so on

in other cases. But perhaps these subjects had better be dismissed for the

present;  for  perfect  precision  about  them  would  be  more  appropriate  to

another branch of philosophy. And similarly with regard to the Idea; even if

there is some one good which is universally predicable of goods or is capable

of separate and independent existence, clearly it could not be achieved or

attained  by  man;  but  we  are  now  seeking  something  attainable.  Perhaps,

however, some one might think it worth while to recognize this with a view

to the goods that are attainable and achievable; for having this as a sort of

pattern we shall know better the goods that are good for us, and if we know

them shall attain them. This argument has some plausibility, but seems to

clash with the procedure of the sciences; for all of these, though they aim at

some good and seek to supply the deficiency of it, leave on one side the

knowledge  of  the  good.  Yet  that  all  the  exponents  of  the  arts  should  be

ignorant of, and should not even seek, so great an aid is not probable. It is

hard, too, to see how a weaver or a carpenter will be benefited in regard to his

own craft by knowing this ‘good itself’, or how the man who has viewed the

Idea itself will be a better doctor or general thereby. For a doctor seems not

even to study health in this way, but the health of man, or perhaps rather the

health of a particular man; it is individuals that he is healing. But enough of

these topics.

<

div class="section" title="7">


7


Let us again return to the good we are seeking, and ask what it can be. It

seems different in different actions and arts; it is different in medicine, in

strategy, and in the other arts likewise. What then is the good of each? Surelythat for whose sake everything else is done. In medicine this is health, in

strategy victory, in architecture a house, in any other sphere something else,

and in every action and pursuit the end; for it is for the sake of this that all

men do whatever else they do. Therefore, if there is an end for all that we do,

this will be the good achievable by action, and if there are more than one,

these will be the goods achievable by action.

So the argument has by a different course reached the same point; but we

must try to state this even more clearly. Since there are evidently more than

one end, and we choose some of these (e.g. wealth, flutes, and in general

instruments) for the sake of something else, clearly not all ends are final

ends; but the chief good is evidently something final. Therefore, if there is

only one final end, this will be what we are seeking, and if there are more

than one, the most final of these will be what we are seeking. Now we call

that which is in itself worthy of pursuit more final than that which is worthy

of pursuit for the sake of something else, and that which is never desirable for

the sake of something else more final than the things that are desirable both

in themselves and for the sake of that other thing, and therefore we call final

without qualification that which is always desirable in itself and never for the

sake of something else.

Now  such  a  thing  happiness,  above  all  else,  is  held  to  be;  for  this  we

choose always for self and never for the sake of something else, but honour,

pleasure, reason, and every virtue we choose indeed for themselves (for if

nothing resulted from them we should still choose each of them), but we

choose them also for the sake of happiness, judging that by means of them we

shall be happy. Happiness, on the other hand, no one chooses for the sake of

these, nor, in general, for anything other than itself.

  From the point of view of self-sufficiency the same result seems to follow;

for the final good is thought to be self-sufficient. Now by self-sufficient we

do not mean that which is sufficient for a man by himself, for one who lives a

solitary life, but also for parents, children, wife, and in general for his friends

and fellow citizens, since man is born for citizenship. But some limit must be

set to this; for if we extend our requirement to ancestors and descendants and

friends’ friends we are in for an infinite series. Let us examine this question,

however, on another occasion; the self-sufficient we now define as that which

when isolated makes life desirable and lacking in nothing; and such we think

happiness to be; and further we think it most desirable of all things, without

being  counted  as  one  good  thing  among  others—if  it  were  so  counted  itwould clearly be made more desirable by the addition of even the least of

goods; for that which is added becomes an excess of goods, and of goods the

greater is always more desirable. Happiness, then, is something final and self-

sufficient, and is the end of action.

  Presumably,  however,  to  say  that  happiness  is  the  chief  good  seems  a

platitude, and a clearer account of what it is still desired. This might perhaps

be given, if we could first ascertain the function of man. For just as for a

flute-player, a sculptor, or an artist, and, in general, for all things that have a

function  or  activity,  the  good  and  the  ‘well’  is  thought  to  reside  in  the

function, so would it seem to be for man, if he has a function. Have the

carpenter, then, and the tanner certain functions or activities, and has man

none? Is he born without a function? Or as eye, hand, foot, and in general

each of the parts evidently has a function, may one lay it down that man

similarly has a function apart from all these? What then can this be? Life

seems to be common even to plants, but we are seeking what is peculiar to

man. Let us exclude, therefore, the life of nutrition and growth. Next there

would be a life of perception, but it also seems to be common even to the

horse, the ox, and every animal. There remains, then, an active life of the

element that has a rational principle; of this, one part has such a principle in

the sense of being obedient to one, the other in the sense of possessing one

and exercising thought. And, as ‘life of the rational element’ also has two

meanings, we must state that life in the sense of activity is what we mean; for

this seems to be the more proper sense of the term. Now if the function of

man is an activity of soul which follows or implies a rational principle, and if

we say ‘so-and-so-and ‘a good so-and-so’ have a function which is the same

in kind, e.g. a lyre, and a good lyre-player, and so without qualification in all

cases,  eminence  in  respect  of  goodness  being  idded  to  the  name  of  the

function (for the function of a lyre-player is to play the lyre, and that of a

good lyre-player is to do so well): if this is the case, and we state the function

of man to be a certain kind of life, and this to be an activity or actions of the

soul implying a rational principle, and the function of a good man to be the

good and noble performance of these, and if any action is well performed

when it is performed in accordance with the appropriate excellence: if this is

the case, human good turns out to be activity of soul in accordance with

virtue, and if there are more than one virtue, in accordance with the best and

most complete.

But we must add ‘in a complete life.’ For one swallow does not make asummer, nor does one day; and so too one day, or a short time, does not make

a man blessed and happy.

Let this serve as an outline of the good; for we must presumably first

sketch it roughly, and then later fill in the details. But it would seem that any

one  is  capable  of  carrying  on  and  articulating  what  has  once  been  well

outlined, and that time is a good discoverer or partner in such a work; to

which facts the advances of the arts are due; for any one can add what is

lacking. And we must also remember what has been said before, and not look

for precision in all things alike, but in each class of things such precision as

accords with the subject-matter, and so much as is appropriate to the inquiry.

For a carpenter and a geometer investigate the right angle in different ways;

the former does so in so far as the right angle is useful for his work, while the

latter inquires what it is or what sort of thing it is; for he is a spectator of the

truth. We must act in the same way, then, in all other matters as well, that our

main task may not be subordinated to minor questions. Nor must we demand

the cause in all matters alike; it is enough in some cases that the fact be well

established, as in the case of the first principles; the fact is the primary thing

or first principle. Now of first principles we see some by induction, some by

perception, some by a certain habituation, and others too in other ways. But

each set of principles we must try to investigate in the natural way, and we

must take pains to state them definitely, since they have a great influence on

what follows. For the beginning is thought to be more than half of the whole,

and many of the questions we ask are cleared up by it.

<

div class="section" title="8">


8


We must consider it, however, in the light not only of our conclusion and

our premisses, but also of what is commonly said about it; for with a true

view all the data harmonize, but with a false one the facts soon clash. Now

goods  have  been  divided  into  three  classes,  and  some  are  described  as

external, others as relating to soul or to body; we call those that relate to soul

most properly and truly goods, and psychical actions and activities we class

as relating to soul. Therefore our account must be sound, at least according to

this view, which is an old one and agreed on by philosophers. It is correct

also in that we identify the end with certain actions and activities; for thus itfalls among goods of the soul and not among external goods. Another belief

which harmonizes with our account is that the happy man lives well and does

well; for we have practically defined happiness as a sort of good life and

good action. The characteristics that are looked for in happiness seem also, all

of them, to belong to what we have defined happiness as being. For some

identify happiness with virtue, some with practical wisdom, others with a

kind of philosophic wisdom, others with these, or one of these, accompanied

by  pleasure  or  not  without  pleasure;  while  others  include  also  external

prosperity. Now some of these views have been held by many men and men

of old, others by a few eminent persons; and it is not probable that either of

these should be entirely mistaken, but rather that they should be right in at

least some one respect or even in most respects.

  With  those  who  identify  happiness  with  virtue  or  some  one  virtue  our

account is in harmony; for to virtue belongs virtuous activity. But it makes,

perhaps, no small difference whether we place the chief good in possession or

in use, in state of mind or in activity. For the state of mind may exist without

producing any good result, as in a man who is asleep or in some other way

quite inactive, but the activity cannot; for one who has the activity will of

necessity be acting, and acting well. And as in the Olympic Games it is not

the most beautiful and the strongest that are crowned but those who compete

(for it is some of these that are victorious), so those who act win, and rightly

win, the noble and good things in life.

  Their life is also in itself pleasant. For pleasure is a state of soul, and to

each man that which he is said to be a lover of is pleasant; e.g. not only is a

horse pleasant to the lover of horses, and a spectacle to the lover of sights, but

also in the same way just acts are pleasant to the lover of justice and in

general virtuous acts to the lover of virtue. Now for most men their pleasures

are in conflict with one another because these are not by nature pleasant, but

the lovers of what is noble find pleasant the things that are by nature pleasant;

and virtuous actions are such, so that these are pleasant for such men as well

as in their own nature. Their life, therefore, has no further need of pleasure as

a sort of adventitious charm, but has its pleasure in itself. For, besides what

we have said, the man who does not rejoice in noble actions is not even good;

since no one would call a man just who did not enjoy acting justly, nor any

man liberal who did not enjoy liberal actions; and similarly in all other cases.

If this is so, virtuous actions must be in themselves pleasant. But they are also

good and noble, and have each of these attributes in the highest degree, sincethe good man judges well about these attributes; his judgement is such as we

have described. Happiness then is the best, noblest, and most pleasant thing

in the world, and these attributes are not severed as in the inscription at Delos


  Most noble is that which is justest, and best is health;

But pleasantest is it to win what we love.


For all these properties belong to the best activities; and these, or one—the

best—of these, we identify with happiness.

Yet evidently, as we said, it needs the external goods as well; for it is

impossible, or not easy, to do noble acts without the proper equipment. In

many actions we use friends and riches and political power as instruments;

and there are some things the lack of which takes the lustre from happiness,

as  good  birth,  goodly  children,  beauty;  for  the  man  who  is  very  ugly  in

appearance or ill-born or solitary and childless is not very likely to be happy,

and perhaps a man would be still less likely if he had thoroughly bad children

or friends or had lost good children or friends by death. As we said, then,

happiness seems to need this sort of prosperity in addition; for which reason

some identify happiness with good fortune, though others identify it with

virtue.

<

div class="section" title="9">


9


For  this  reason  also  the  question  is  asked,  whether  happiness  is  to  be

acquired  by  learning  or  by  habituation  or  some  other  sort  of  training,  or

comes in virtue of some divine providence or again by chance. Now if there

is any gift of the gods to men, it is reasonable that happiness should be god-

given, and most surely god-given of all human things inasmuch as it is the

best. But this question would perhaps be more appropriate to another inquiry;

happiness seems, however, even if it is not god-sent but comes as a result of

virtue and some process of learning or training, to be among the most godlike

things; for that which is the prize and end of virtue seems to be the best thing

in the world, and something godlike and blessed.

It will also on this view be very generally shared; for all who are not

maimed as regards their potentiality for virtue may win it by a certain kind ofstudy  and  care.  But  if  it  is  better  to  be  happy  thus  than  by  chance,  it  is

reasonable that the facts should be so, since everything that depends on the

action of nature is by nature as good as it can be, and similarly everything

that depends on art or any rational cause, and especially if it depends on the

best of all causes. To entrust to chance what is greatest and most noble would

be a very defective arrangement.

The answer to the question we are asking is plain also from the definition

of happiness; for it has been said to be a virtuous activity of soul, of a certain

kind. Of the remaining goods, some must necessarily pre-exist as conditions

of happiness, and others are naturally co-operative and useful as instruments.

And this will be found to agree with what we said at the outset; for we stated

the end of political science to be the best end, and political science spends

most of its pains on making the citizens to be of a certain character, viz. good

and capable of noble acts.

It is natural, then, that we call neither ox nor horse nor any other of the

animals happy; for none of them is capable of sharing in such activity. For

this reason also a boy is not happy; for he is not yet capable of such acts,

owing to his age; and boys who are called happy are being congratulated by

reason of the hopes we have for them. For there is required, as we said, not

only complete virtue but also a complete life, since many changes occur in

life, and all manner of chances, and the most prosperous may fall into great

misfortunes in old age, as is told of Priam in the Trojan Cycle; and one who

has experienced such chances and has ended wretchedly no one calls happy.

<

div class="section" title="10">


10


  Must no one at all, then, be called happy while he lives; must we, as Solon

says, see the end? Even if we are to lay down this doctrine, is it also the case

that a man is happy when he is dead? Or is not this quite absurd, especially

for us who say that happiness is an activity? But if we do not call the dead

man happy, and if Solon does not mean this, but that one can then safely call

a man blessed as being at last beyond evils and misfortunes, this also affords

matter for discussion; for both evil and good are thought to exist for a dead

man, as much as for one who is alive but not aware of them; e.g. honours and

dishonours  and  the  good  or  bad  fortunes  of  children  and  in  general  ofdescendants. And this also presents a problem; for though a man has lived

happily up to old age and has had a death worthy of his life, many reverses

may befall his descendants—some of them may be good and attain the life

they deserve, while with others the opposite may be the case; and clearly too

the  degrees  of  relationship  between  them  and  their  ancestors  may  vary

indefinitely. It would be odd, then, if the dead man were to share in these

changes and become at one time happy, at another wretched; while it would

also be odd if the fortunes of the descendants did not for some time have

some effect on the happiness of their ancestors.

But we must return to our first difficulty; for perhaps by a consideration of

it our present problem might be solved. Now if we must see the end and only

then call a man happy, not as being happy but as having been so before,

surely this is a paradox, that when he is happy the attribute that belongs to

him is not to be truly predicated of him because we do not wish to call living

men happy, on account of the changes that may befall them, and because we

have assumed happiness to be something permanent and by no means easily

changed, while a single man may suffer many turns of fortune’s wheel. For

clearly if we were to keep pace with his fortunes, we should often call the

same  man  happy  and  again  wretched,  making  the  happy  man  out  to  be

chameleon and insecurely based. Or is this keeping pace with his fortunes

quite wrong? Success or failure in life does not depend on these, but human

life, as we said, needs these as mere additions, while virtuous activities or

their opposites are what constitute happiness or the reverse.

The  question  we  have  now  discussed  confirms  our  definition.  For  no

function of man has so much permanence as virtuous activities (these are

thought to be more durable even than knowledge of the sciences), and of

these themselves the most valuable are more durable because those who are

happy spend their life most readily and most continuously in these; for this

seems to be the reason why we do not forget them. The attribute in question,

then, will belong to the happy man, and he will be happy throughout his life;

for always, or by preference to everything else, he will be engaged in virtuous

action and contemplation, and he will bear the chances of life most nobly and

altogether decorously, if he is ‘truly good’ and ‘foursquare beyond reproach’.

Now many events happen by chance, and events differing in importance;

small pieces of good fortune or of its opposite clearly do not weigh down the

scales of life one way or the other, but a multitude of great events if they turn

out well will make life happier (for not only are they themselves such as toadd beauty to life, but the way a man deals with them may be noble and

good), while if they turn out ill they crush and maim happiness; for they both

bring pain with them and hinder many activities. Yet even in these nobility

shines through, when a man bears with resignation many great misfortunes,

not through insensibility to pain but through nobility and greatness of soul.

If activities are, as we said, what gives life its character, no happy man can

become miserable; for he will never do the acts that are hateful and mean. For

the man who is truly good and wise, we think, bears all the chances life

becomingly and always makes the best of circumstances, as a good general

makes  the  best  military  use  of  the  army  at  his  command  and  a  good

shoemaker makes the best shoes out of the hides that are given him; and so

with all other craftsmen. And if this is the case, the happy man can never

become  miserable;  though  he  will  not  reach  blessedness,  if  he  meet  with

fortunes like those of Priam.

  Nor, again, is he many-coloured and changeable; for neither will he be

moved from his happy state easily or by any ordinary misadventures, but only

by many great ones, nor, if he has had many great misadventures, will he

recover his happiness in a short time, but if at all, only in a long and complete

one in which he has attained many splendid successes.

  When then should we not say that he is happy who is active in accordance

with complete virtue and is sufficiently equipped with external goods, not for

some chance period but throughout a complete life? Or must we add ‘and

who is destined to live thus and die as befits his life’? Certainly the future is

obscure to us, while happiness, we claim, is an end and something in every

way final. If so, we shall call happy those among living men in whom these

conditions are, and are to be, fulfilled—but happy men. So much for these

questions.

<

div class="section" title="11">


11


That the fortunes of descendants and of all a man’s friends should not

affect his happiness at all seems a very unfriendly doctrine, and one opposed

to the opinions men hold; but since the events that happen are numerous and

admit of all sorts of difference, and some come more near to us and others

less so, it seems a long—nay, an infinite—task to discuss each in detail; ageneral  outline  will  perhaps  suffice.  If,  then,  as  some  of  a  man’s  own

misadventures have a certain weight and influence on life while others are, as

it were, lighter, so too there are differences among the misadventures of our

friends  taken  as  a  whole,  and  it  makes  a  difference  whether  the  various

suffering befall the living or the dead (much more even than whether lawless

and terrible deeds are presupposed in a tragedy or done on the stage), this

difference also must be taken into account; or rather, perhaps, the fact that

doubt is felt whether the dead share in any good or evil. For it seems, from

these considerations, that even if anything whether good or evil penetrates to

them, it must be something weak and negligible, either in itself or for them,

or if not, at least it must be such in degree and kind as not to make happy

those who are not happy nor to take away their blessedness from those who

are. The good or bad fortunes of friends, then, seem to have some effects on

the dead, but effects of such a kind and degree as neither to make the happy

unhappy nor to produce any other change of the kind.

<

div class="section" title="12">


12


  These questions having been definitely answered, let us consider whether

happiness is among the things that are praised or rather among the things that

are prized; for clearly it is not to be placed among potentialities. Everything

that is praised seems to be praised because it is of a certain kind and is related

somehow  to  something  else;  for  we  praise  the  just  or  brave  man  and  in

general  both  the  good  man  and  virtue  itself  because  of  the  actions  and

functions involved, and we praise the strong man, the good runner, and so on,

because he is of a certain kind and is related in a certain way to something

good and important. This is clear also from the praises of the gods; for it

seems absurd that the gods should be referred to our standard, but this is done

because praise involves a reference, to something else. But if if praise is for

things such as we have described, clearly what applies to the best things is

not praise, but something greater and better, as is indeed obvious; for what

we do to the gods and the most godlike of men is to call them blessed and

happy. And so too with good things; no one praises happiness as he does

justice, but rather calls it blessed, as being something more divine and better.

  Eudoxus also seems to have been right in his method of advocating thesupremacy of pleasure; he thought that the fact that, though a good, it is not

praised indicated it to be better than the things that are praised, and that this is

what God and the good are; for by reference to these all other things are

judged. Praise is appropriate to virtue, for as a result of virtue men tend to do

noble deeds, but encomia are bestowed on acts, whether of the body or of the

soul. But perhaps nicety in these matters is more proper to those who have

made  a  study  of  encomia;  to  us  it  is  clear  from  what  has  been  said  that

happiness is among the things that are prized and perfect. It seems to be so

also from the fact that it is a first principle; for it is for the sake of this that we

all do all that we do, and the first principle and cause of goods is, we claim,

something prized and divine.

<

div class="section" title="13">


13


  Since happiness is an activity of soul in accordance with perfect virtue, we

must consider the nature of virtue; for perhaps we shall thus see better the

nature  of  happiness.  The  true  student  of  politics,  too,  is  thought  to  have

studied virtue above all things; for he wishes to make his fellow citizens good

and obedient to the laws. As an example of this we have the lawgivers of the

Cretans and the Spartans, and any others of the kind that there may have

been. And if this inquiry belongs to political science, clearly the pursuit of it

will be in accordance with our original plan. But clearly the virtue we must

study is human virtue; for the good we were seeking was human good and the

happiness human happiness. By human virtue we mean not that of the body

but that of the soul; and happiness also we call an activity of soul. But if this

is so, clearly the student of politics must know somehow the facts about soul,

as the man who is to heal the eyes or the body as a whole must know about

the eyes or the body; and all the more since politics is more prized and better

than medicine; but even among doctors the best educated spend much labour

on acquiring knowledge of the body. The student of politics, then, must study

the soul, and must study it with these objects in view, and do so just to the

extent which is sufficient for the questions we are discussing; for further

precision is perhaps something more laborious than our purposes require.

  Some things are said about it, adequately enough, even in the discussions

outside our school, and we must use these; e.g. that one element in the soul isirrational and one has a rational principle. Whether these are separated as the

parts of the body or of anything divisible are, or are distinct by definition but

by nature inseparable, like convex and concave in the circumference of a

circle, does not affect the present question.

Of the irrational element one division seems to be widely distributed, and

vegetative in its nature, I mean that which causes nutrition and growth; for it

is this kind of power of the soul that one must assign to all nurslings and to

embryos, and this same power to fullgrown creatures; this is more reasonable

than  to  assign  some  different  power  to  them.  Now  the  excellence  of  this

seems to be common to all species and not specifically human; for this part or

faculty seems to function most in sleep, while goodness and badness are least

manifest in sleep (whence comes the saying that the happy are not better off

than the wretched for half their lives; and this happens naturally enough,

since sleep is an inactivity of the soul in that respect in which it is called good

or bad), unless perhaps to a small extent some of the movements actually

penetrate to the soul, and in this respect the dreams of good men are better

than those of ordinary people. Enough of this subject, however; let us leave

the  nutritive  faculty  alone,  since  it  has  by  its  nature  no  share  in  human

excellence.

  There seems to be also another irrational element in the soul-one which in

a sense, however, shares in a rational principle. For we praise the rational

principle of the continent man and of the incontinent, and the part of their

soul that has such a principle, since it urges them aright and towards the best

objects; but there is found in them also another element naturally opposed to

the  rational  principle,  which  fights  against  and  resists  that  principle.  For

exactly as paralysed limbs when we intend to move them to the right turn on

the contrary to the left, so is it with the soul; the impulses of incontinent

people move in contrary directions. But while in the body we see that which

moves astray, in the soul we do not. No doubt, however, we must none the

less suppose that in the soul too there is something contrary to the rational

principle, resisting and opposing it. In what sense it is distinct from the other

elements does not concern us. Now even this seems to have a share in a

rational principle, as we said; at any rate in the continent man it obeys the

rational principle and presumably in the temperate and brave man it is still

more obedient; for in him it speaks, on all matters, with the same voice as the

rational principle.

  Therefore  the  irrational  element  also  appears  to  be  two-fold.  For  thevegetative element in no way shares in a rational principle, but the appetitive

and in general the desiring element in a sense shares in it, in so far as it

listens to and obeys it; this is the sense in which we speak of ‘taking account’

of one’s father or one’s friends, not that in which we speak of ‘accounting for

a  mathematical  property.  That  the  irrational  element  is  in  some  sense

persuaded by a rational principle is indicated also by the giving of advice and

by all reproof and exhortation. And if this element also must be said to have a

rational principle, that which has a rational principle (as well as that which

has not) will be twofold, one subdivision having it in the strict sense and in

itself, and the other having a tendency to obey as one does one’s father.

  Virtue too is distinguished into kinds in accordance with this difference;

for  we  say  that  some  of  the  virtues  are  intellectual  and  others  moral,

philosophic  wisdom  and  understanding  and  practical  wisdom  being

intellectual, liberality and temperance moral. For in speaking about a man’s

character we do not say that he is wise or has understanding but that he is

good-tempered or temperate; yet we praise the wise man also with respect to

his state of mind; and of states of mind we call those which merit praise

virtues.                        Nicomachean Ethics, Book II


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div class="section" title="1">


1


  Virtue, then, being of two kinds, intellectual and moral, intellectual virtue

in the main owes both its birth and its growth to teaching (for which reason it

requires experience and time), while moral virtue comes about as a result of

habit, whence also its name (ethike) is one that is formed by a slight variation

from the word ethos (habit). From this it is also plain that none of the moral

virtues arises in us by nature; for nothing that exists by nature can form a

habit contrary to its nature. For instance the stone which by nature moves

downwards cannot be habituated to move upwards, not even if one tries to

train it by throwing it up ten thousand times; nor can fire be habituated to

move downwards, nor can anything else that by nature behaves in one way be

trained to behave in another. Neither by nature, then, nor contrary to nature

do the virtues arise in us; rather we are adapted by nature to receive them, and

are made perfect by habit.

  Again, of all the things that come to us by nature we first acquire the

potentiality  and  later  exhibit  the  activity  (this  is  plain  in  the  case  of  the

senses; for it was not by often seeing or often hearing that we got these

senses, but on the contrary we had them before we used them, and did not

come to have them by using them); but the virtues we get by first exercising

them, as also happens in the case of the arts as well. For the things we have to

learn before we can do them, we learn by doing them, e.g. men become

builders by building and lyreplayers by playing the lyre; so too we become

just by doing just acts, temperate by doing temperate acts, brave by doing

brave acts.

This  is  confirmed  by  what  happens  in  states;  for  legislators  make  the

citizens  good  by  forming  habits  in  them,  and  this  is  the  wish  of  every

legislator, and those who do not effect it miss their mark, and it is in this thata good constitution differs from a bad one.

  Again, it is from the same causes and by the same means that every virtue

is both produced and destroyed, and similarly every art; for it is from playing

the  lyre  that  both  good  and  bad  lyre-players  are  produced.  And  the

corresponding statement is true of builders and of all the rest; men will be

good or bad builders as a result of building well or badly. For if this were not

so, there would have been no need of a teacher, but all men would have been

born good or bad at their craft. This, then, is the case with the virtues also; by

doing the acts that we do in our transactions with other men we become just

or unjust, and by doing the acts that we do in the presence of danger, and

being habituated to feel fear or confidence, we become brave or cowardly.

The  same  is  true  of  appetites  and  feelings  of  anger;  some  men  become

temperate  and  good-tempered,  others  self-indulgent  and  irascible,  by

behaving in one way or the other in the appropriate circumstances. Thus, in

one  word,  states  of  character  arise  out  of  like  activities.  This  is  why  the

activities we exhibit must be of a certain kind; it is because the states of

character  correspond  to  the  differences  between  these.  It  makes  no  small

difference, then, whether we form habits of one kind or of another from our

very youth; it makes a very great difference, or rather all the difference.

<

div class="section" title="2">


2


  Since, then, the present inquiry does not aim at theoretical knowledge like

the others (for we are inquiring not in order to know what virtue is, but in

order to become good, since otherwise our inquiry would have been of no

use), we must examine the nature of actions, namely how we ought to do

them; for these determine also the nature of the states of character that are

produced, as we have said. Now, that we must act according to the right rule

is a common principle and must be assumed-it will be discussed later, i.e.

both what the right rule is, and how it is related to the other virtues. But this

must  be  agreed  upon  beforehand,  that  the  whole  account  of  matters  of

conduct must be given in outline and not precisely, as we said at the very

beginning  that  the  accounts  we  demand  must  be  in  accordance  with  the

subject-matter; matters concerned with conduct and questions of what is good

for us have no fixity, any more than matters of health. The general accountbeing of this nature, the account of particular cases is yet more lacking in

exactness;  for  they  do  not  fall  under  any  art  or  precept  but  the  agents

themselves must in each case consider what is appropriate to the occasion, as

happens also in the art of medicine or of navigation.

But though our present account is of this nature we must give what help we

can. First, then, let us consider this, that it is the nature of such things to be

destroyed by defect and excess, as we see in the case of strength and of health

(for  to  gain  light  on  things  imperceptible  we  must  use  the  evidence  of

sensible things); both excessive and defective exercise destroys the strength,

and  similarly  drink  or  food  which  is  above  or  below  a  certain  amount

destroys  the  health,  while  that  which  is  proportionate  both  produces  and

increases and preserves it. So too is it, then, in the case of temperance and

courage  and  the  other  virtues.  For  the  man  who  flies  from  and  fears

everything and does not stand his ground against anything becomes a coward,

and the man who fears nothing at all but goes to meet every danger becomes

rash; and similarly the man who indulges in every pleasure and abstains from

none becomes self-indulgent, while the man who shuns every pleasure, as

boors do, becomes in a way insensible; temperance and courage, then, are

destroyed by excess and defect, and preserved by the mean.

But not only are the sources and causes of their origination and growth the

same as those of their destruction, but also the sphere of their actualization

will be the same; for this is also true of the things which are more evident to

sense, e.g. of strength; it is produced by taking much food and undergoing

much exertion, and it is the strong man that will be most able to do these

things. So too is it with the virtues; by abstaining from pleasures we become

temperate, and it is when we have become so that we are most able to abstain

from them; and similarly too in the case of courage; for by being habituated

to despise things that are terrible and to stand our ground against them we

become brave, and it is when we have become so that we shall be most able

to stand our ground against them.

<

div class="section" title="3">


3


We must take as a sign of states of character the pleasure or pain that

ensues on acts; for the man who abstains from bodily pleasures and delightsin this very fact is temperate, while the man who is annoyed at it is self-

indulgent, and he who stands his ground against things that are terrible and

delights in this or at least is not pained is brave, while the man who is pained

is a coward. For moral excellence is concerned with pleasures and pains; it is

on account of the pleasure that we do bad things, and on account of the pain

that we abstain from noble ones. Hence we ought to have been brought up in

a particular way from our very youth, as Plato says, so as both to delight in

and to be pained by the things that we ought; for this is the right education.

  Again, if the virtues are concerned with actions and passions, and every

passion and every action is accompanied by pleasure and pain, for this reason

also virtue will be concerned with pleasures and pains. This is indicated also

by the fact that punishment is inflicted by these means; for it is a kind of cure,

and it is the nature of cures to be effected by contraries.

  Again, as we said but lately, every state of soul has a nature relative to and

concerned with the kind of things by which it tends to be made worse or

better; but it is by reason of pleasures and pains that men become bad, by

pursuing and avoiding these—either the pleasures and pains they ought not or

when they ought not or as they ought not, or by going wrong in one of the

other similar ways that may be distinguished. Hence men even define the

virtues as certain states of impassivity and rest; not well, however, because

they speak absolutely, and do not say ‘as one ought’ and ‘as one ought not’

and ‘when one ought or ought not’, and the other things that may be added.

We assume, then, that this kind of excellence tends to do what is best with

regard to pleasures and pains, and vice does the contrary.

The following facts also may show us that virtue and vice are concerned

with  these  same  things.  There  being  three  objects  of  choice  and  three  of

avoidance, the noble, the advantageous, the pleasant, and their contraries, the

base, the injurious, the painful, about all of these the good man tends to go

right and the bad man to go wrong, and especially about pleasure; for this is

common to the animals, and also it accompanies all objects of choice; for

even the noble and the advantageous appear pleasant.

  Again, it has grown up with us all from our infancy; this is why it is

difficult to rub off this passion, engrained as it is in our life. And we measure

even our actions, some of us more and others less, by the rule of pleasure and

pain. For this reason, then, our whole inquiry must be about these; for to feel

delight and pain rightly or wrongly has no small effect on our actions.

  Again, it is harder to fight with pleasure than with anger, to use Heraclitus’phrase’, but both art and virtue are always concerned with what is harder; for

even the good is better when it is harder. Therefore for this reason also the

whole concern both of virtue and of political science is with pleasures and

pains; for the man who uses these well will be good, he who uses them badly

bad.

That virtue, then, is concerned with pleasures and pains, and that by the

acts from which it arises it is both increased and, if they are done differently,

destroyed,  and  that  the  acts  from  which  it  arose  are  those  in  which  it

actualizes itself—let this be taken as said.

<

div class="section" title="4">


4


The  question  might  be  asked,;  what  we  mean  by  saying  that  we  must

become just by doing just acts, and temperate by doing temperate acts; for if

men do just and temperate acts, they are already just and temperate, exactly

as, if they do what is in accordance with the laws of grammar and of music,

they are grammarians and musicians.

Or is this not true even of the arts? It is possible to do something that is in

accordance with the laws of grammar, either by chance or at the suggestion of

another. A man will be a grammarian, then, only when he has both done

something grammatical and done it grammatically; and this means doing it in

accordance with the grammatical knowledge in himself.

  Again, the case of the arts and that of the virtues are not similar; for the

products of the arts have their goodness in themselves, so that it is enough

that they should have a certain character, but if the acts that are in accordance

with the virtues have themselves a certain character it does not follow that

they  are  done  justly  or  temperately.  The  agent  also  must  be  in  a  certain

condition when he does them; in the first place he must have knowledge,

secondly he must choose the acts, and choose them for their own sakes, and

thirdly  his  action  must  proceed  from  a  firm  and  unchangeable  character.

These are not reckoned in as conditions of the possession of the arts, except

the  bare  knowledge;  but  as  a  condition  of  the  possession  of  the  virtues

knowledge has little or no weight, while the other conditions count not for a

little but for everything, i.e. the very conditions which result from often doing

just and temperate acts.  Actions, then, are called just and temperate when they are such as the just

or the temperate man would do; but it is not the man who does these that is

just and temperate, but the man who also does them as just and temperate

men do them. It is well said, then, that it is by doing just acts that the just man

is produced, and by doing temperate acts the temperate man; without doing

these no one would have even a prospect of becoming good.

But most people do not do these, but take refuge in theory and think they

are  being  philosophers  and  will  become  good  in  this  way,  behaving

somewhat like patients who listen attentively to their doctors, but do none of

the things they are ordered to do. As the latter will not be made well in body

by such a course of treatment, the former will not be made well in soul by

such a course of philosophy.

<

div class="section" title="5">


5


Next we must consider what virtue is. Since things that are found in the

soul are of three kinds—passions, faculties, states of character, virtue must be

one of these. By passions I mean appetite, anger, fear, confidence, envy, joy,

friendly feeling, hatred, longing, emulation, pity, and in general the feelings

that are accompanied by pleasure or pain; by faculties the things in virtue of

which we are said to be capable of feeling these, e.g. of becoming angry or

being pained or feeling pity; by states of character the things in virtue of

which  we  stand  well  or  badly  with  reference  to  the  passions,  e.g.  with

reference to anger we stand badly if we feel it violently or too weakly, and

well  if  we  feel  it  moderately;  and  similarly  with  reference  to  the  other

passions.

Now neither the virtues nor the vices are passions, because we are not

called good or bad on the ground of our passions, but are so called on the

ground of our virtues and our vices, and because we are neither praised nor

blamed for our passions (for the man who feels fear or anger is not praised,

nor is the man who simply feels anger blamed, but the man who feels it in a

certain way), but for our virtues and our vices we are praised or blamed.

  Again, we feel anger and fear without choice, but the virtues are modes of

choice or involve choice. Further, in respect of the passions we are said to be

moved, but in respect of the virtues and the vices we are said not to be movedbut to be disposed in a particular way.

For these reasons also they are not faculties; for we are neither called good

nor  bad,  nor  praised  nor  blamed,  for  the  simple  capacity  of  feeling  the

passions; again, we have the faculties by nature, but we are not made good or

bad by nature; we have spoken of this before. If, then, the virtues are neither

passions  nor  faculties,  all  that  remains  is  that  they  should  be  states  of

character.

  Thus we have stated what virtue is in respect of its genus.

<

div class="section" title="6">


6


We must, however, not only describe virtue as a state of character, but also

say  what  sort  of  state  it  is.  We  may  remark,  then,  that  every  virtue  or

excellence  both  brings  into  good  condition  the  thing  of  which  it  is  the

excellence and makes the work of that thing be done well; e.g. the excellence

of the eye makes both the eye and its work good; for it is by the excellence of

the eye that we see well. Similarly the excellence of the horse makes a horse

both  good  in  itself  and  good  at  running  and  at  carrying  its  rider  and  at

awaiting the attack of the enemy. Therefore, if this is true in every case, the

virtue of man also will be the state of character which makes a man good and

which makes him do his own work well.

How this is to happen we have stated already, but it will be made plain also

by the following consideration of the specific nature of virtue. In everything

that is continuous and divisible it is possible to take more, less, or an equal

amount, and that either in terms of the thing itself or relatively to us; and the

equal is an intermediate between excess and defect. By the intermediate in

the object I mean that which is equidistant from each of the extremes, which

is one and the same for all men; by the intermediate relatively to us that

which is neither too much nor too little—and this is not one, nor the same for

all. For instance, if ten is many and two is few, six is the intermediate, taken

in terms of the object; for it exceeds and is exceeded by an equal amount; this

is  intermediate  according  to  arithmetical  proportion.  But  the  intermediate

relatively  to  us  is  not  to  be  taken  so;  if  ten  pounds  are  too  much  for  a

particular person to eat and two too little, it does not follow that the trainer

will order six pounds; for this also is perhaps too much for the person who isto  take  it,  or  too  little—too  little  for  Milo,  too  much  for  the  beginner  in

athletic exercises. The same is true of running and wrestling. Thus a master

of any art avoids excess and defect, but seeks the intermediate and chooses

this—the intermediate not in the object but relatively to us.

If it is thus, then, that every art does its work well—by looking to the

intermediate and judgling its works by this standard (so that we often say of

good  works  of  art  that  it  is  not  possible  either  to  take  away  or  to  add

anything, implying that excess and defect destroy the goodness of works of

art, while the mean preserves it; and good artists, as we say, look to this in

their work), and if, further, virtue is more exact and better than any art, as

nature also is, then virtue must have the quality of aiming at the intermediate.

I mean moral virtue; for it is this that is concerned with passions and actions,

and in these there is excess, defect, and the intermediate. For instance, both

fear and confidence and appetite and anger and pity and in general pleasure

and pain may be felt both too much and too little, and in both cases not well;

but to feel them at the right times, with reference to the right objects, towards

the right people, with the right motive, and in the right way, is what is both

intermediate  and  best,  and  this  is  characteristic  of  virtue.  Similarly  with

regard to actions also there is excess, defect, and the intermediate. Now virtue

is concerned with passions and actions, in which excess is a form of failure,

and so is defect, while the intermediate is praised and is a form of success;

and  being  praised  and  being  successful  are  both  characteristics  of  virtue.

Therefore virtue is a kind of mean, since, as we have seen, it aims at what is

intermediate.

  Again, it is possible to fail in many ways (for evil belongs to the class of

the  unlimited,  as  the  Pythagoreans  conjectured,  and  good  to  that  of  the

limited), while to succeed is possible only in one way (for which reason also

one is easy and the other difficult—to miss the mark easy, to hit it difficult);

for these reasons also, then, excess and defect are characteristic of vice, and

the mean of virtue;


For men are good in but one way, but bad in many.


  Virtue, then, is a state of character concerned with choice, lying in a mean,

i.e. the mean relative to us, this being determined by a rational principle, and

by that principle by which the man of practical wisdom would determine it.

Now it is a mean between two vices, that which depends on excess and thatwhich  depends  on  defect;  and  again  it  is  a  mean  because  the  vices

respectively fall short of or exceed what is right in both passions and actions,

while  virtue  both  finds  and  chooses  that  which  is  intermediate.  Hence  in

respect of its substance and the definition which states its essence virtue is a

mean, with regard to what is best and right an extreme.

But not every action nor every passion admits of a mean; for some have

names that already imply badness, e.g. spite, shamelessness, envy, and in the

case of actions adultery, theft, murder; for all of these and suchlike things

imply by their names that they are themselves bad, and not the excesses or

deficiencies of them. It is not possible, then, ever to be right with regard to

them; one must always be wrong. Nor does goodness or badness with regard

to such things depend on committing adultery with the right woman, at the

right time, and in the right way, but simply to do any of them is to go wrong.

It  would  be  equally  absurd,  then,  to  expect  that  in  unjust,  cowardly,  and

voluptuous action there should be a mean, an excess, and a deficiency; for at

that rate there would be a mean of excess and of deficiency, an excess of

excess,  and  a  deficiency  of  deficiency.  But  as  there  is  no  excess  and

deficiency of temperance and courage because what is intermediate is in a

sense an extreme, so too of the actions we have mentioned there is no mean

nor any excess and deficiency, but however they are done they are wrong; for

in general there is neither a mean of excess and deficiency, nor excess and

deficiency of a mean.

<

div class="section" title="7">


7


We must, however, not only make this general statement, but also apply it

to the individual facts. For among statements about conduct those which are

general apply more widely, but those which are particular are more genuine,

since  conduct  has  to  do  with  individual  cases,  and  our  statements  must

harmonize with the facts in these cases. We may take these cases from our

table. With regard to feelings of fear and confidence courage is the mean; of

the people who exceed, he who exceeds in fearlessness has no name (many of

the states have no name), while the man who exceeds in confidence is rash,

and he who exceeds in fear and falls short in confidence is a coward. With

regard to pleasures and pains—not all of them, and not so much with regardto the pains—the mean is temperance, the excess self-indulgence. Persons

deficient with regard to the pleasures are not often found; hence such persons

also have received no name. But let us call them ‘insensible’.

  With  regard  to  giving  and  taking  of  money  the  mean  is  liberality,  the

excess  and  the  defect  prodigality  and  meanness.  In  these  actions  people

exceed and fall short in contrary ways; the prodigal exceeds in spending and

falls short in taking, while the mean man exceeds in taking and falls short in

spending.  (At  present  we  are  giving  a  mere  outline  or  summary,  and  are

satisfied with this; later these states will be more exactly determined.) With

regard to money there are also other dispositions—a mean, magnificence (for

the magnificent man differs from the liberal man; the former deals with large

sums, the latter with small ones), an excess, tastelessness and vulgarity, and a

deficiency, niggardliness; these differ from the states opposed to liberality,

and the mode of their difference will be stated later. With regard to honour

and dishonour the mean is proper pride, the excess is known as a sort of

‘empty vanity’, and the deficiency is undue humility; and as we said liberality

was related to magnificence, differing from it by dealing with small sums, so

there is a state similarly related to proper pride, being concerned with small

honours while that is concerned with great. For it is possible to desire honour

as one ought, and more than one ought, and less, and the man who exceeds in

his desires is called ambitious, the man who falls short unambitious, while

the intermediate person has no name. The dispositions also are nameless,

except that that of the ambitious man is called ambition. Hence the people

who are at the extremes lay claim to the middle place; and we ourselves

sometimes  call  the  intermediate  person  ambitious  and  sometimes

unambitious, and sometimes praise the ambitious man and sometimes the

unambitious. The reason of our doing this will be stated in what follows; but

now let us speak of the remaining states according to the method which has

been indicated.

  With regard to anger also there is an excess, a deficiency, and a mean.

Although  they  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  names,  yet  since  we  call  the

intermediate person good-tempered let us call the mean good temper; of the

persons at the extremes let the one who exceeds be called irascible, and his

vice irascibility, and the man who falls short an inirascible sort of person, and

the deficiency inirascibility.

  There are also three other means, which have a certain likeness to one

another,  but  differ  from  one  another:  for  they  are  all  concerned  withintercourse in words and actions, but differ in that one is concerned with truth

in  this  sphere,  the  other  two  with  pleasantness;  and  of  this  one  kind  is

exhibited in giving amusement, the other in all the circumstances of life. We

must therefore speak of these too, that we may the better see that in all things

the mean is praise-worthy, and the extremes neither praiseworthy nor right,

but worthy of blame. Now most of these states also have no names, but we

must try, as in the other cases, to invent names ourselves so that we may be

clear and easy to follow. With regard to truth, then, the intermediate is a

truthful sort of person and the mean may be called truthfulness, while the

pretence which exaggerates is boastfulness and the person characterized by it

a  boaster,  and  that  which  understates  is  mock  modesty  and  the  person

characterized by it mock-modest. With regard to pleasantness in the giving of

amusement the intermediate person is ready-witted and the disposition ready

wit, the excess is buffoonery and the person characterized by it a buffoon,

while the man who falls short is a sort of boor and his state is boorishness.

With regard to the remaining kind of pleasantness, that which is exhibited in

life in general, the man who is pleasant in the right way is friendly and the

mean is friendliness, while the man who exceeds is an obsequious person if

he has no end in view, a flatterer if he is aiming at his own advantage, and the

man who falls short and is unpleasant in all circumstances is a quarrelsome

and surly sort of person.

  There are also means in the passions and concerned with the passions;

since shame is not a virtue, and yet praise is extended to the modest man. For

even  in  these  matters  one  man  is  said  to  be  intermediate,  and  another  to

exceed, as for instance the bashful man who is ashamed of everything; while

he who falls short or is not ashamed of anything at all is shameless, and the

intermediate person is modest. Righteous indignation is a mean between envy

and spite, and these states are concerned with the pain and pleasure that are

felt  at  the  fortunes  of  our  neighbours;  the  man  who  is  characterized  by

righteous indignation is pained at undeserved good fortune, the envious man,

going beyond him, is pained at all good fortune, and the spiteful man falls so

far short of being pained that he even rejoices. But these states there will be

an opportunity of describing elsewhere; with regard to justice, since it has not

one simple meaning, we shall, after describing the other states, distinguish its

two kinds and say how each of them is a mean; and similarly we shall treat

also of the rational virtues.

<div class="section" title="8">


8


  There are three kinds of disposition, then, two of them vices, involving

excess and deficiency respectively, and one a virtue, viz. the mean, and all

are in a sense opposed to all; for the extreme states are contrary both to the

intermediate state and to each other, and the intermediate to the extremes; as

the equal is greater relatively to the less, less relatively to the greater, so the

middle states are excessive relatively to the deficiencies, deficient relatively

to the excesses, both in passions and in actions. For the brave man appears

rash relatively to the coward, and cowardly relatively to the rash man; and

similarly the temperate man appears self-indulgent relatively to the insensible

man, insensible relatively to the self-indulgent, and the liberal man prodigal

relatively to the mean man, mean relatively to the prodigal. Hence also the

people at the extremes push the intermediate man each over to the other, and

the brave man is called rash by the coward, cowardly by the rash man, and

correspondingly in the other cases.

  These states being thus opposed to one another, the greatest contrariety is

that of the extremes to each other, rather than to the intermediate; for these

are further from each other than from the intermediate, as the great is further

from the small and the small from the great than both are from the equal.

Again, to the intermediate some extremes show a certain likeness, as that of

rashness to courage and that of prodigality to liberality; but the extremes

show the greatest unlikeness to each other; now contraries are defined as the

things that are furthest from each other, so that things that are further apart

are more contrary.

To the mean in some cases the deficiency, in some the excess is more

opposed; e.g. it is not rashness, which is an excess, but cowardice, which is a

deficiency, that is more opposed to courage, and not insensibility, which is a

deficiency, but self-indulgence, which is an excess, that is more opposed to

temperance. This happens from two reasons, one being drawn from the thing

itself; for because one extreme is nearer and liker to the intermediate, we

oppose not this but rather its contrary to the intermediate. E.g. since rashness

is thought liker and nearer to courage, and cowardice more unlike, we oppose

rather the latter to courage; for things that are further from the intermediate

are thought more contrary to it. This, then, is one cause, drawn from the thingitself; another is drawn from ourselves; for the things to which we ourselves

more naturally tend seem more contrary to the intermediate. For instance, we

ourselves tend more naturally to pleasures, and hence are more easily carried

away  towards  self-indulgence  than  towards  propriety.  We  describe  as

contrary to the mean, then, rather the directions in which we more often go to

great lengths; and therefore self-indulgence, which is an excess, is the more

contrary to temperance.

<

div class="section" title="9">


9


That moral virtue is a mean, then, and in what sense it is so, and that it is a

mean between two vices, the one involving excess, the other deficiency, and

that  it  is  such  because  its  character  is  to  aim  at  what  is  intermediate  in

passions and in actions, has been sufficiently stated. Hence also it is no easy

task to be good. For in everything it is no easy task to find the middle, e.g. to

find the middle of a circle is not for every one but for him who knows; so,

too, any one can get angry—that is easy—or give or spend money; but to do

this to the right person, to the right extent, at the right time, with the right

motive,  and  in  the  right  way,  that  is  not  for  every  one,  nor  is  it  easy;

wherefore goodness is both rare and laudable and noble.

  Hence he who aims at the intermediate must first depart from what is the

more contrary to it, as Calypso advises


  Hold the ship out beyond that surf and spray.


For of the extremes one is more erroneous, one less so; therefore, since to

hit the mean is hard in the extreme, we must as a second best, as people say,

take the least of the evils; and this will be done best in the way we describe.

But we must consider the things towards which we ourselves also are easily

carried away; for some of us tend to one thing, some to another; and this will

be  recognizable  from  the  pleasure  and  the  pain  we  feel.  We  must  drag

ourselves away to the contrary extreme; for we shall get into the intermediate

state by drawing well away from error, as people do in straightening sticks

that are bent.

Now in everything the pleasant or pleasure is most to be guarded against;for we do not judge it impartially. We ought, then, to feel towards pleasure as

the elders of the people felt towards Helen, and in all circumstances repeat

their saying; for if we dismiss pleasure thus we are less likely to go astray. It

is by doing this, then, (to sum the matter up) that we shall best be able to hit

the mean.

But this is no doubt difficult, and especially in individual cases; for or is

not easy to determine both how and with whom and on what provocation and

how long one should be angry; for we too sometimes praise those who fall

short and call them good-tempered, but sometimes we praise those who get

angry  and  call  them  manly.  The  man,  however,  who  deviates  little  from

goodness is not blamed, whether he do so in the direction of the more or of

the less, but only the man who deviates more widely; for he does not fail to

be noticed. But up to what point and to what extent a man must deviate

before he becomes blameworthy it is not easy to determine by reasoning, any

more than anything else that is perceived by the senses; such things depend

on particular facts, and the decision rests with perception. So much, then, is

plain, that the intermediate state is in all things to be praised, but that we must

incline sometimes towards the excess, sometimes towards the deficiency; for

so shall we most easily hit the mean and what is right.                        Nicomachean Ethics, Book III


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div class="section" title="1">


1


  Since  virtue  is  concerned  with  passions  and  actions,  and  on  voluntary

passions  and  actions  praise  and  blame  are  bestowed,  on  those  that  are

involuntary pardon, and sometimes also pity, to distinguish the voluntary and

the involuntary is presumably necessary for those who are studying the nature

of virtue, and useful also for legislators with a view to the assigning both of

honours  and  of  punishments.  Those  things,  then,  are  thought-involuntary,

which  take  place  under  compulsion  or  owing  to  ignorance;  and  that  is

compulsory of which the moving principle is outside, being a principle in

which nothing is contributed by the person who is acting or is feeling the

passion, e.g. if he were to be carried somewhere by a wind, or by men who

had him in their power.

But with regard to the things that are done from fear of greater evils or for

some noble object (e.g. if a tyrant were to order one to do something base,

having one’s parents and children in his power, and if one did the action they

were to be saved, but otherwise would be put to death), it may be debated

whether  such  actions  are  involuntary  or  voluntary.  Something  of  the  sort

happens also with regard to the throwing of goods overboard in a storm; for

in the abstract no one throws goods away voluntarily, but on condition of its

securing the safety of himself and his crew any sensible man does so. Such

actions, then, are mixed, but are more like voluntary actions; for they are

worthy of choice at the time when they are done, and the end of an action is

relative to the occasion. Both the terms, then, ‘voluntary’ and ‘involuntary’,

must be used with reference to the moment of action. Now the man acts

voluntarily; for the principle that moves the instrumental parts of the body in

such actions is in him, and the things of which the moving principle is in a

man himself are in his power to do or not to do. Such actions, therefore, arevoluntary, but in the abstract perhaps involuntary; for no one would choose

any such act in itself.

For  such  actions  men  are  sometimes  even  praised,  when  they  endure

something base or painful in return for great and noble objects gained; in the

opposite case they are blamed, since to endure the greatest indignities for no

noble end or for a trifling end is the mark of an inferior person. On some

actions praise indeed is not bestowed, but pardon is, when one does what he

ought not under pressure which overstrains human nature and which no one

could  withstand.  But  some  acts,  perhaps,  we  cannot  be  forced  to  do,  but

ought rather to face death after the most fearful sufferings; for the things that

‘forced’ Euripides Alcmaeon to slay his mother seem absurd. It is difficult

sometimes to determine what should be chosen at what cost, and what should

be endured in return for what gain, and yet more difficult to abide by our

decisions; for as a rule what is expected is painful, and what we are forced to

do is base, whence praise and blame are bestowed on those who have been

compelled or have not.

  What  sort  of  acts,  then,  should  be  called  compulsory?  We  answer  that

without  qualification  actions  are  so  when  the  cause  is  in  the  external

circumstances  and  the  agent  contributes  nothing.  But  the  things  that  in

themselves are involuntary, but now and in return for these gains are worthy

of choice, and whose moving principle is in the agent, are in themselves

involuntary, but now and in return for these gains voluntary. They are more

like  voluntary  acts;  for  actions  are  in  the  class  of  particulars,  and  the

particular acts here are voluntary. What sort of things are to be chosen, and in

return for what, it is not easy to state; for there are many differences in the

particular cases.

But  if  some  one  were  to  say  that  pleasant  and  noble  objects  have  a

compelling  power,  forcing  us  from  without,  all  acts  would  be  for  him

compulsory; for it is for these objects that all men do everything they do. And

those who act under compulsion and unwillingly act with pain, but those who

do acts for their pleasantness and nobility do them with pleasure; it is absurd

to make external circumstances responsible, and not oneself, as being easily

caught by such attractions, and to make oneself responsible for noble acts but

the pleasant objects responsible for base acts. The compulsory, then, seems to

be that whose moving principle is outside, the person compelled contributing

nothing.

  Everything that is done by reason of ignorance is not voluntary; it is onlywhat produces pain and repentance that is involuntary. For the man who has

done something owing to ignorance, and feels not the least vexation at his

action, has not acted voluntarily, since he did not know what he was doing,

nor yet involuntarily, since he is not pained. Of people, then, who act by

reason of ignorance he who repents is thought an involuntary agent, and the

man who does not repent may, since he is different, be called a not voluntary

agent; for, since he differs from the other, it is better that he should have a

name of his own.

Acting by reason of ignorance seems also to be different from acting in

ignorance; for the man who is drunk or in a rage is thought to act as a result

not of ignorance but of one of the causes mentioned, yet not knowingly but in

ignorance.

Now every wicked man is ignorant of what he ought to do and what he

ought to abstain from, and it is by reason of error of this kind that men

become unjust and in general bad; but the term ‘involuntary’ tends to be used

not if a man is ignorant of what is to his advantage—for it is not mistaken

purpose that causes involuntary action (it leads rather to wickedness), nor

ignorance  of  the  universal  (for  that  men  are  blamed),  but  ignorance  of

particulars, i.e. of the circumstances of the action and the objects with which

it is concerned. For it is on these that both pity and pardon depend, since the

person who is ignorant of any of these acts involuntarily.

  Perhaps it is just as well, therefore, to determine their nature and number.

A man may be ignorant, then, of who he is, what he is doing, what or whom

he is acting on, and sometimes also what (e.g. what instrument) he is doing it

with, and to what end (e.g. he may think his act will conduce to some one’s

safety), and how he is doing it (e.g. whether gently or violently). Now of all

of these no one could be ignorant unless he were mad, and evidently also he

could not be ignorant of the agent; for how could he not know himself? But

of what he is doing a man might be ignorant, as for instance people say ‘it

slipped out of their mouths as they were speaking’, or ‘they did not know it

was a secret’, as Aeschylus said of the mysteries, or a man might say he ‘let it

go off when he merely wanted to show its working’, as the man did with the

catapult. Again, one might think one’s son was an enemy, as Merope did, or

that a pointed spear had a button on it, or that a stone was pumicestone; or

one might give a man a draught to save him, and really kill him; or one might

want to touch a man, as people do in sparring, and really wound him. The

ignorance may relate, then, to any of these things, i.e. of the circumstances ofthe action, and the man who was ignorant of any of these is thought to have

acted involuntarily, and especially if he was ignorant on the most important

points; and these are thought to be the circumstances of the action and its end.

Further, the doing of an act that is called involuntary in virtue of ignorance of

this sort must be painful and involve repentance.

  Since that which is done under compulsion or by reason of ignorance is

involuntary,  the  voluntary  would  seem  to  be  that  of  which  the  moving

principle  is  in  the  agent  himself,  he  being  aware  of  the  particular

circumstances  of  the  action.  Presumably  acts  done  by  reason  of  anger  or

appetite  are  not  rightly  called  involuntary.  For  in  the  first  place,  on  that

showing none of the other animals will act voluntarily, nor will children; and

secondly, is it meant that we do not do voluntarily any of the acts that are due

to appetite or anger, or that we do the noble acts voluntarily and the base acts

involuntarily? Is not this absurd, when one and the same thing is the cause?

But it would surely be odd to describe as involuntary the things one ought to

desire; and we ought both to be angry at certain things and to have an appetite

for certain things, e.g. for health and for learning. Also what is involuntary is

thought to be painful, but what is in accordance with appetite is thought to be

pleasant. Again, what is the difference in respect of involuntariness between

errors committed upon calculation and those committed in anger? Both are to

be avoided, but the irrational passions are thought not less human than reason

is, and therefore also the actions which proceed from anger or appetite are the

man’s actions. It would be odd, then, to treat them as involuntary.

<

div class="section" title="2">


2


Both the voluntary and the involuntary having been delimited, we must

next discuss choice; for it is thought to be most closely bound up with virtue

and to discriminate characters better than actions do.

  Choice,  then,  seems  to  be  voluntary,  but  not  the  same  thing  as  the

voluntary; the latter extends more widely. For both children and the lower

animals share in voluntary action, but not in choice, and acts done on the spur

of the moment we describe as voluntary, but not as chosen.

  Those who say it is appetite or anger or wish or a kind of opinion do not

seem to be right. For choice is not common to irrational creatures as well, butappetite and anger are. Again, the incontinent man acts with appetite, but not

with choice; while the continent man on the contrary acts with choice, but not

with  appetite.  Again,  appetite  is  contrary  to  choice,  but  not  appetite  to

appetite. Again, appetite relates to the pleasant and the painful, choice neither

to the painful nor to the pleasant.

  Still less is it anger; for acts due to anger are thought to be less than any

others objects of choice.

But neither is it wish, though it seems near to it; for choice cannot relate to

impossibles, and if any one said he chose them he would be thought silly; but

there may be a wish even for impossibles, e.g. for immortality. And wish may

relate to things that could in no way be brought about by one’s own efforts,

e.g. that a particular actor or athlete should win in a competition; but no one

chooses such things, but only the things that he thinks could be brought about

by his own efforts. Again, wish relates rather to the end, choice to the means;

for instance, we wish to be healthy, but we choose the acts which will make

us healthy, and we wish to be happy and say we do, but we cannot well say

we choose to be so; for, in general, choice seems to relate to the things that

are in our own power.

For this reason, too, it cannot be opinion; for opinion is thought to relate to

all kinds of things, no less to eternal things and impossible things than to

things in our own power; and it is distinguished by its falsity or truth, not by

its badness or goodness, while choice is distinguished rather by these.

Now with opinion in general perhaps no one even says it is identical. But it

is not identical even with any kind of opinion; for by choosing what is good

or bad we are men of a certain character, which we are not by holding certain

opinions. And we choose to get or avoid something good or bad, but we have

opinions about what a thing is or whom it is good for or how it is good for

him; we can hardly be said to opine to get or avoid anything. And choice is

praised  for  being  related  to  the  right  object  rather  than  for  being  rightly

related to it, opinion for being truly related to its object. And we choose what

we best know to be good, but we opine what we do not quite know; and it is

not the same people that are thought to make the best choices and to have the

best opinions, but some are thought to have fairly good opinions, but by

reason of vice to choose what they should not. If opinion precedes choice or

accompanies  it,  that  makes  no  difference;  for  it  is  not  this  that  we  are

considering, but whether it is identical with some kind of opinion.

  What, then, or what kind of thing is it, since it is none of the things wehave mentioned? It seems to be voluntary, but not all that is voluntary to be

an  object  of  choice.  Is  it,  then,  what  has  been  decided  on  by  previous

deliberation? At any rate choice involves a rational principle and thought.

Even the name seems to suggest that it is what is chosen before other things.

<

div class="section" title="3">


3


Do we deliberate about everything, and is everything a possible subject of

deliberation,  or  is  deliberation  impossible  about  some  things?  We  ought

presumably to call not what a fool or a madman would deliberate about, but

what a sensible man would deliberate about, a subject of deliberation. Now

about eternal things no one deliberates, e.g. about the material universe or the

incommensurability of the diagonal and the side of a square. But no more do

we deliberate about the things that involve movement but always happen in

the same way, whether of necessity or by nature or from any other cause, e.g.

the solstices and the risings of the stars; nor about things that happen now in

one way, now in another, e.g. droughts and rains; nor about chance events,

like the finding of treasure. But we do not deliberate even about all human

affairs; for instance, no Spartan deliberates about the best constitution for the

Scythians. For none of these things can be brought about by our own efforts.

We deliberate about things that are in our power and can be done; and

these are in fact what is left. For nature, necessity, and chance are thought to

be causes, and also reason and everything that depends on man. Now every

class  of  men  deliberates  about  the  things  that  can  be  done  by  their  own

efforts.  And  in  the  case  of  exact  and  self-contained  sciences  there  is  no

deliberation, e.g. about the letters of the alphabet (for we have no doubt how

they should be written); but the things that are brought about by our own

efforts,  but  not  always  in  the  same  way,  are  the  things  about  which  we

deliberate, e.g. questions of medical treatment or of money-making. And we

do so more in the case of the art of navigation than in that of gymnastics,

inasmuch as it has been less exactly worked out, and again about other things

in the same ratio, and more also in the case of the arts than in that of the

sciences; for we have more doubt about the former. Deliberation is concerned

with things that happen in a certain way for the most part, but in which the

event is obscure, and with things in which it is indeterminate. We call in